Physical Distinction between Noise and Music—A Musical Tone Produced by Periodic, Noise Produced by Unperiodic, Impulses—Production of Musical Sounds by Taps—Production of Musical Sounds by Puffs—Definition of Pitch in Music—Vibrations of a Tuning-Fork; their Graphic Representation on Smoked Glass—Optical Expression of the Vibrations of a Tuning-Fork—Description of the Siren—Limits of the Ear; Highest and Deepest Tones—Rapidity of Vibration Determined by the Siren—Determination of the Lengths of Sonorous Waves—Wave-Lengths of the Voice in Man and Woman—Transmission of Musical Sounds through Liquids and Solids

IN OUR last chapter we considered the propagation through air of a sound of momentary duration. We have to-day to consider continuous sounds, and to make ourselves in the first place acquainted with the physical distinction between noise and music. As far as sensation goes, everybody knows the difference between these two things. But we have now to inquire into the causes of sensation, and to make ourselves acquainted with the condition of the external air which in one case resolves itself into music and in another into noise.

We have already learned that what is loudness in our sensations is outside of us nothing more than width of swing, or amplitude, of the vibrating air-particles. Every other real sonorous impression of which we are conscious has its correlative without, as a mere form or state of the atmosphere. Were our organs sharp enough to see the motions of the air through which an agreeable voice is passing, we might see stamped upon that air the conditions of motion on which the sweetness of the voice depends. In ordinary conversation, also, the physical precedes and arouses the psychical; the spoken language, which is to give us pleasure or pain, which is to rouse us to anger or soothe us to peace, existing for a time, between us and the speaker, as a purely mechanical condition of the intervening air.

Noise affects us as an irregular succession of shocks. We are conscious while listening to it of a jolting and jarring of the auditory nerve, while a musical sound flows smoothly and without asperity or irregularity. How is this smoothness secured? By rendering the impulses received by the tympanic membrane perfectly periodic. A periodic motion is one that repeats itself. The motion of a common pendulum, for example, is periodic, but its vibrations are far too sluggish to excite sonorous waves. To produce a musical tone we must have a body which vibrates with the unerring regularity of the pendulum, but which can impart much sharper and quicker shocks to the air.

Imagine the first of a series of pulses following each other at regular intervals, impinging upon the tympanic membrane. It is shaken by the shock; and a body once shaken cannot come instantaneously to rest. The human ear, indeed, is so constructed that the sonorous motion vanishes with extreme rapidity, but its disappearance is not instantaneous; and if the motion imparted to the auditory nerve by each individual pulse of our series continues until the arrival of its successor, the sound will not cease at all. The effect of every shock will be renewed before it vanishes, and the recurrent impulses will link themselves together to a continuous musical sound. The pulses, on the contrary, which produce noise, are of irregular strength and recurrence. The action of noise upon the ear has been well compared to that of a flickering light upon the eye, both being painful through the sudden and abrupt changes which they impose upon their respective nerves.

The only condition necessary to the production of a musical sound is that the pulses should succeed each other in the same interval of time. No matter what its origin may be, if this condition be fulfilled the sound becomes musical. If a watch, for example, could be caused to tick with sufficient rapidity—say one hundred times a second—the ticks would lose their individuality and blend to a musical tone. And if the strokes of a pigeon’s wings could be accomplished at the same rate, the progress of the bird through the air would be accompanied by music. In the humming-bird the necessary rapidity is attained; and when we pass on from birds to insects, where the vibrations are more rapid, we have a musical note as the ordinary accompaniment of the insects’ flight. The puffs of a locomotive at starting follow each other slowly at first, but they soon increase so rapidly as to be almost incapable of being counted. If this increase could continue up to fifty or sixty puffs a second, the approach of the engine would be heralded by an organ-peal of tremendous power.

Footnote: According to Burmeister, through the injection and ejection of air into and from the cavity of the chest.

Musical Sounds produced by Taps

Galileo produced a musical sound by passing a knife over the edge of a piastre. The minute serration of the coin indicated the periodic character of the motion, which consisted of a succession of taps quick enough to produce sonorous continuity. Every schoolboy knows how to produce a note with his slate-pencil. I will not call it

[Figure 15]

musical, because this term is usually associated with pleasure, and the sound of the pencil is not pleasant.

The production of a musical sound by taps is usually effected by causing the teeth of a rotating wheel to strike in quick succession against a card. This was first illustrated by the celebrated Robert Hooke, and nearer our own day by the eminent French experimenter Savart. We will confine ourselves to homelier modes of illustration. This gyroscope is an instrument consisting mainly of a heavy brass ring, d, Fig. 15, loading the circumference of a disk, through which and at right angles to its surface, passes a steel axis, delicately supported at its two ends. By coiling a string round the axis, and drawing it vigorously out, the ring is caused to spin rapidly; and along with it rotates a small-toothed wheel, w. On touching this wheel with the edge of a card c, a musical sound of exceeding shrillness is produced. I place my thumb for a moment against the ring; the rapidity of its rotation is thereby diminished, and this is instantly announced by a lowering of the pitch of the note. By checking the motion still more, the pitch is lowered still further. We are here made acquainted with the important fact that the pitch of a note depends upon the rapidity of its pulses. At the end of the experiment you hear the separate taps of the teeth against the card, their succession not being quick enough to produce that continuous flow of sound which is the essence of music. A screw with a milled head attached to a whirling table, and caused to rotate, produces by its taps against a card a note almost as clear and pure as that obtained from the toothed wheel of the gyroscope.

Footnote: On July 27, 1681, “Mr. Hooke showed an experiment of making musical and other sounds by the help of teeth of brass wheels; which teeth were made of equal bigness for musical sounds, but of unequal for vocal sounds.”—Birch’s “History of the Royal Society,” p. 96, published in 1757. The following extract is taken from the “Life of Hooke,” which precedes his “Posthumous Works,” published in 1705, by Richard Waller, Secretary of the Royal Society: “In July the same year he (Dr. Hooke) showed a way of making musical and other sounds by the striking of the teeth of several brass wheels, proportionally cut as to their numbers, and turned very fast round, in which it was observable that the equal or proportional strokes of the teeth, that is, 2 to 1, 4 to 3, etc., made the musical notes, but the unequal strokes of the teeth more answered the sound of the voice in speaking.”

Footnote: Galileo, finding the number of notches on his metal to be great when the pitch of the note was high, inferred that the pitch depended on the rapidity of the impulses.

The production of a musical sound by taps may also be pleasantly illustrated in the following way: In this vise are fixed vertically two pieces of sheet-lead, with their horizontal edges a quarter of an inch apart. I lay a bar of brass across them, permitting it to rest upon the edges, and, tilting the bar a little, set it in oscillation like a see-saw. After a time, if left to itself, it comes to rest. But suppose the bar on touching the lead to be always tilted upward by a force issuing from the lead itself, it is plain that the vibrations would then be rendered permanent. Now such a force is brought into play when the bar is heated. On its then touching the lead the heat is communicated, a sudden jutting upward of the lead at the point of contact being the result. Hence an incessant tilting of the bar from side to side, so long as it continues sufficiently hot. Substituting for the brass bar the heated fire-shovel shown in Fig. 16, the same effect is produced.

[Figure 16]

In its descent upon the lead the bar taps it gently, the taps being so slow that you may readily count them. But a mass of metal differently shaped may be caused to vibrate more briskly, and the taps to succeed each other more rapidly. When such a heated rocker, Fig. 17, is placed upon a block of lead, the taps hasten to a loud rattle. When, with the point of a file, the rocker is pressed against the lead, the vibrations are rendered more rapid, and the taps link themselves together to a deep musical tone. A second rocker, which oscillates more quickly than the last, produces music without any other pressure than that due to its own weight. Pressing it, however, with the file, the pitch rises, until a note of singular force and purity fills the room. Relaxing the pressure, the pitch instantly falls; resuming the pressure, it again rises; and thus by the alternation of the pressure we obtain great variations of tone. Nor are such rockers essential. Allowing one face of the clean, square end of a heated poker to rest upon the block of lead, a rattle is heard; causing another face to rest upon the block, a clear musical note is obtained. The two faces have been bevelled differently by a file, so as to secure different rates of vibration. This curious effect was discovered by Schwartz and Trevelyan.

Footnote: When a rough tide rolls in upon a pebble beach, as at Blackgang Chine or Freshwater Gate in the Isle of Wight the rounded stones are carried up the slope by the impetus of the water and when the wave retreats the pebbles are dragged down. Innumerable collisions thus ensue of irregular intensity and recurrence. The union of these shocks impresses us as a kind of scream. Hence the line in Tennyson’s “Maud” “Now to the scream of a maddened beach dragged down by the wave.” The height of the note depends in some measure upon the size of the pebble, varying from a kind of roar—heard when the stones are large—to a scream; from a scream to a noise resembling that of frying bacon; and from this, when the pebbles are so small as to approach the state of gravel, to a mere hiss. The roar of the breaking wave itself is mainly due to the explosion of bladders of air.

[Figure 17]

Musical Sounds produced by Puffs

Prof. Robison was the first to produce a musical sound by a quick succession of puffs of air. His device was the first form of an instrument which will soon be introduced to you under the name of the siren. Robison describes his experiment in the following words: “A stop-cock was so constructed that it opened and shut the passage of a pipe 720 times in a second. The apparatus was fitted to the pipe of a conduit leading from the bellows to the wind-chest of an organ. The air was simply allowed to pass gently along this pipe by the opening of the cock. When this was repeated 720 times in a second, the sound g in alt was most smoothly uttered, equal in sweetness to a clear female voice. When the frequency was reduced to 360, the sound was that of a clear but rather a harsh man’s voice. The cock was now altered in such a manner that it never shut the hole entirely, but left about one-third of it open. When this was repeated 720 times in a second, the sound was uncommonly smooth and sweet. When reduced to 360, the sound was more mellow than any man’s voice of the same pitch.”

[Figure 18]

But the difficulty of obtaining the necessary speed renders another form of the experiment preferable. A disk of Bristol board, B, Fig. 18, twelve inches in diameter, is perforated at equal intervals along a circle near its circumference. The disk, being strengthened by a backing of tin, can be attached to a whirling table, and caused to rotate rapidly. The individual holes then disappear, blending themselves into a continuous shaded circle. Immediately over this circle is placed a bent tube, m, connected with a pair of acoustic bellows. The disk is now motionless, the lower end of the tube being immediately over one of the perforations of the disk. If, therefore, the bellows be worked, the wind will pass from m through the hole underneath. But if the disk be turned a little, an unperforated portion of the disk comes under the tube, the current of air being then intercepted. As the disk is slowly turned, successive perforations are brought under the tube, and whenever this occurs a puff of air gets through. On rendering the rotation rapid, the puffs succeed each other in very quick succession, producing pulses in the air which blend to a continuous musical note, audible to you all. Mark how the note varies. When the whirling table is turned rapidly the sound is shrill; when its motion is slackened the pitch immediately falls. If instead of a single glass tube there were two of them, as far apart as two of our orifices, so that whenever the one tube stood over an orifice, the other should stand over another, it is plain that if both tubes were blown through, we should, on turning the disk, get a puff through two holes at the same time. The intensity of the sound would be thereby augmented, but the pitch would remain unchanged. The two puffs issuing at the same instant would act in concert, and produce a greater effect than one upon the ear. And if instead of two tubes we had ten of them, or better still, if we had a tube for every orifice in the disk, the puffs from the entire series would all issue, and would be all cut off at the same time. These puffs would produce a note of far greater intensity than that obtained by the alternate escape and interruption of the air from a single tube. In the arrangement now before you, Fig. 19, there are nine tubes through which the air is urged—through nine apertures, therefore, puffs escape at once. On turning the whirling table, and alternately increasing and relaxing its speed, the sound rises and falls like the loud wail of a changing wind.
