[Figure 19]

Musical Sounds produced by a Tuning-fork

Various other means may be employed to throw the air into a state of periodic motion. A stretched string pulled aside and suddenly liberated imparts vibrations to the air which succeed each other in perfectly regular intervals. A tuning-fork does the same. When a bow is drawn across the prongs of this tuning-fork, Fig. 20, the resin of the bow enables the hairs to grip the prong, which is thus pulled aside. But the resistance of the prong soon becomes too strong, and it starts suddenly back; it is, however, immediately laid hold of again by the bow, to start back once more as soon as its resistance becomes great enough. This rhythmic process, continually repeated during the passage of the bow, finally throws the fork into a state of intense vibration, and the result is a musical note. A person close at hand could see the fork vibrating; a deaf person bringing his hand sufficiently near would feel the shivering of the air. Or causing its vibrating prong to touch a card, taps against the card link themselves, as in the case of the gyroscope, to a musical sound, the fork coming rapidly to rest. What we call silence expresses this absence of motion.

[Figure 20]

When the tuning-fork is first excited the sound issues from it with maximum loudness, becoming gradually feebler as the fork continues to vibrate. A person close to the fork can notice at the same time that the amplitude, or space through which the prongs oscillate, becomes gradually less and less. But the most expert ear in this assembly can detect no change in the pitch of the note. The lowering of the intensity of a note does not therefore imply the lowering of its pitch. In fact, though the amplitude changes, the rate of vibration remains the same. Pitch and intensity must therefore be held distinctly apart; the latter depends solely upon the amplitude, the former solely upon the rapidity of vibration.

This tuning-fork may be caused to write the story of its own motion. Attached to the side of one of its prongs, F, Fig. 21, is a thin strip of sheet-copper which tapers to a point. When the tuning-fork is excited it vibrates, and the strip of metal accompanies it in its vibration. The point of the strip being brought gently down upon a piece of smoked glass, it moves to and fro over the smoked surface, leaving a clear line behind. As long as the hand is kept motionless, the point merely passes to and fro over the same line; but it is plain that we have only to draw the fork along the glass to produce a sinuous line, Fig. 21.

[Figure 21]

When this process is repeated without exciting the fork afresh, the depth of the indentations diminishes. The sinuous line approximates more and more to a straight one. This is the visual expression of decreasing amplitude. When the sinuosities entirely disappear, the amplitude has become zero, and the sound, which depends upon the amplitude, ceases altogether.

[Figure 22]

To M. Lissajous we are indebted for a very beautiful method of giving optical expression to the vibrations of a tuning-fork. Attached to one of the prongs of a very large fork is a small metallic mirror, F, Fig. 22, the other prong being loaded with a piece of metal to establish equilibrium. Permitting a slender beam of intense light to fall upon the mirror, the beam is thrown back by reflection. In my hands is held a small looking-glass, which receives the reflected beam, and from which it is again reflected to the screen, forming a small luminous disk upon the white surface. The disk is perfectly motionless, but the moment the fork is set in vibration the reflected beam is tilted rapidly up and down, the disk describing a band of light three feet long. The length of the band depends on the amplitude of the vibration, and you see it gradually shorten as the motion of the fork is expended. It remains, however, a straight line as long as the glass is held in a fixed position. But on suddenly turning the glass so as to make the beam travel from left to right over the screen, you observe the straight line instantly resolved into a beautiful luminous ripple m n. A luminous impression once made upon the retina lingers there for the tenth of a second; if then the time required to transfer the elongated image from side to side of the screen be less than the tenth of a second, the wavy line of light will occupy for a moment the whole width of the screen. Instead of permitting the beam from the lamp to issue through a single aperture, it may be caused to issue through two apertures, about half an inch asunder, thus projecting two disks of light, one above the other, upon the screen. When the fork is excited and the mirror turned, we have a brilliant double sinuous line running over the dark surface, Fig. 23. turning the diaphragm so as to place the two disks beside each other, on exciting the fork and moving the mirror we obtain a beautiful interlacing of the two sinuous lines, Fig. 24.

[Figure 23]

[Figure 24]

The Waves of Sound

How are we to picture to ourselves the condition of the air through which this musical sound is passing? Imagine one of the prongs of the vibrating fork swiftly advancing; it compresses the air immediately in front of it, and when it retreats it leaves a partial vacuum behind, the process being repeated by every subsequent advance and retreat. The whole function of the tuning-fork is to carve the air into these condensations and rarefactions, and they, as they are formed, propagate themselves in succession through the air. A condensation with its associated rarefaction constitutes, as already stated, a sonorous wave. In water the length of a wave is measured from crest to crest; while, in the case of sound, the wave-length is the distance between two successive condensations. The condensation of the sound-wave corresponds to the crest, while the rarefaction of the sound-wave corresponds to the sinus, or depression, of the water-wave. Let the dark spaces, a, b, c, d, Fig. 25, represent the condensations, and the light ones, a′, b′, c′, d′, the rarefactions of the waves issuing from the fork a b: the wave-length would then be measured from a to b, from b to c, or from c to d.

[Figure 25]

Definition of Pitch: Determination of Rates of Vibration

When two notes from two distinct sources are of the same pitch, their rates of vibration are the same. If, for example, a string yield the same note as a tuning-fork, it is because they vibrate with the same rapidity; and if a fork yield the same note as the pipe of an organ or the tongue of a concertina, it is because the vibrations of the fork in the one case are executed in precisely the same time as the vibrations of the column of air, or of the tongue, in the other. The same holds good for the human voice. If a string and a voice yield the same note, it is because the vocal chords of the singer vibrate in the same time as the string vibrates. Is there any way of determining the actual number of vibrations corresponding to a musical note? Can we infer from the pitch of a string, of an organ-pipe, of a tuning-fork, or of the human voice, the number of waves which it sends forth in a second? This very beautiful problem is capable of the most complete solution.

The Siren: Analysis of the Instrument

By the rotation of a perforated pasteboard disk, it has been proved to you that a musical sound is produced by a quick succession of puffs. Had we any means of registering the number of revolutions accomplished by that disk in a minute, we should have in it a means of determining the number of puffs per minute due to a note of any determinate pitch. The disk, however, is but a cheap substitute for a far more perfect apparatus, which requires no whirling table, and which registers its own rotations with the most perfect accuracy.

I will take the instrument asunder, so that you may see its various parts. A brass tube, t, Fig. 26, leads into a round box, C, closed at the top by a brass plate a b. This plate is perforated with four series of holes, placed along four concentric circles. The innermost series contains 8, the next 10, the next 12, and the outermost 16 orifices. When we blow into the tube t, the air escapes through the orifices, and the problem now before us is to convert these continuous currents into discontinuous puffs. This is accomplished by means of a brass disk d e, also perforated with 8, 10, 12, and 16 holes, at the same distances from the centre and with the same intervals between them as those in the top of the box C. Through the centre of the disk passes a steel axis, the two ends of which are smoothly bevelled off to points at p and p′. My object now is to cause this perforated disk to rotate over the perforated top a b of the box C. You will understand how this is done by observing how the instrument is put together.

[Figure 26]

[Figure 27]

In the centre of a b, Fig. 26, is a depression x sunk in steel, smoothly polished and intended to receive the end p′ of the axis. I place the end p′ in this depression, and, holding the axis upright, bring down upon its upper end p a steel cap, finely polished within, which holds the axis at the top, the pressure both at top and bottom being so gentle, and the polish of the touching surfaces so perfect, that the disk can rotate with an exceedingly small amount of friction. At c, Fig. 27, is the cap which fits on to the upper end of the axis p p′. In this figure the disk d e is shown covering the top of the cylinder C. You may neglect for the present the wheel-work of the figure. Turning the disk d e slowly round, its perforations may be caused to coincide or not coincide with those of the cylinder underneath. As the disk turns, its orifices come alternately over the perforations of the cylinder and over the spaces between the perforations. Hence it is plain that if air were urged into C, and if the disk could be caused to rotate at the same time, we should accomplish our object, and carve into puffs the streams of air. In this beautiful instrument the disk is caused to rotate by the very air currents which it renders intermittent. This is done by the simple device of causing the perforations to pass obliquely through the top of the cylinder C, and also obliquely, but oppositely inclined, through the rotating disk d e. The air is thus caused to issue from C, not vertically, but in side currents, which impinge against the disk and drive it round. In this way, by its passage through the siren, the air is molded into sonorous waves.

Another moment will make you acquainted with the recording portion of the instrument. At the upper part of the steel axis p p′, Fig. 27, is a screw s, working into a pair of toothed wheels (seen when the back of the instrument is turned toward you). As the disk and its axis turn, these wheels rotate. In front you simply

[Figure 28]

see two graduated dials, Fig. 28, each furnished with an index like the hand of a clock. These indexes record the number of revolutions executed by the disk in any given time. By pushing the button a or b the wheel-work is thrown into or out of action, thus starting or suspending, in a moment, the process of recording. Finally, by the pins m, n, o, p, Fig. 27, any series of orifices in the top of the cylinder C can be opened or closed at pleasure. By pressing m, one series is opened; by pressing n, another. By pressing two keys, two series of orifices are opened; by pressing three keys, three series; and by pressing all the keys, puffs are caused to issue from the four series simultaneously. The perfect instrument is now before you, and your knowledge of it is complete.

This instrument received the name of siren from its inventor, Cagniard de la Tour. The one now before you is the siren as greatly improved by Dove. The pasteboard siren, whose performance you have already heard, was devised by Seebeck, who gave the instrument various interesting forms, and executed with it many important experiments. Let us now make the siren sing. By pressing the key m, the outer series of apertures in the cylinder C is opened, and by working the bellows, the air is caused to impinge against the disk. It begins to rotate, and you hear a succession of puffs which follow each other so slowly that they may be counted. But as the motion augments, the puffs succeed each other with increasing rapidity, and at length you hear a deep musical note. As the velocity of rotation increases the note rises in pitch; it is now very clear and full, and as the air is urged more vigorously, it becomes so shrill as to be painful. Here we have a further illustration of the dependence of pitch on rapidity of vibration. I touch the side of the disk and lower its speed; the pitch falls instantly. Continuing the pressure the tone continues to sink, ending in the discontinuous puffs with which it began.

Were the blast sufficiently powerful and the siren sufficiently free from friction, it might be urged to higher and higher notes, until finally its sound would become inaudible to human ears. This, however, would not prove the absence of vibratory motion in the air; but would rather show that our auditory apparatus is incompetent to take up and translate into sound vibrations whose rapidity exceeds a certain limit. The ear, as we shall immediately learn, is in this respect similar to the eye.
