By means of this siren we can determine with extreme accuracy the rapidity of vibration of any sonorous body. It may be a vibrating string, an organ-pipe, a reed, or the human voice. Operating delicately, we might even determine from the hum of an insect the number of times it flaps its wings in a second. I will illustrate the subject by determining in your presence a tuning-fork’s rapidity of vibration. From the acoustic bellows I urge the air through the siren, and, at the same time, draw my bow across the fork. Both now sound together, the tuning-fork yielding at present the highest note. But the pitch of the siren gradually rises, and at length you hear the “beats” so well known to musicians, which indicate that the two notes are not wide apart in pitch. These beats become slower and slower; now they entirely vanish, both notes blending as it were to a single stream of sound.

All this time the clockwork of the siren has remained out of action. As the second-hand of a watch crosses the number 60, the clockwork is set going by pushing the button a. We will allow the disk to continue its rotation for a minute, the tuning-fork being excited from time to time to assure you that the unison is preserved. The second-hand again approaches 60; as it passes that number the clockwork is stopped by pushing the button b; and then, recorded on the dials, we have the exact number of revolutions performed by the disk. The number is 1,440. But the series of holes open during the experiment numbers 16; for every revolution, therefore, we had 16 puffs of air, or 16 waves of sound. Multiplying 1,440 by 16, we obtain 23,040 as the number of vibrations executed by the tuning-fork in a minute. Dividing this by 60, we find the number of vibrations executed in a second to be 384.

Determination of Wave-lengths: Time of Vibration

Having determined the rapidity of vibration, the length of the corresponding sonorous wave is found with the utmost facility. Imagine a tuning-fork vibrating in free air. At the end of a second from the time it commenced its vibrations the foremost wave would have reached a distance of 1,090 feet in air of the freezing temperature. In the air of a room which has a temperature of about 15° C., it would reach a distance of 1,120 in a second. In this distance, therefore, are embraced 384 sonorous waves. Dividing 1,120 by 384, we find the length of each wave to be nearly 3 feet. Determining in this way the rates of vibration of the four tuning-forks now before you, we find them to be 256, 320, 384, and 512; these numbers corresponding to wave-lengths of 4 feet 4 inches, 3 feet 6 inches, 2 feet 11 inches, and 2 feet 2 inches respectively. The waves generated by a man’s voice in common conversation are from 8 to 12 feet, those of a woman’s voice are from 2 to 4 feet in length. Hence a woman’s ordinary pitch in the lower sounds of conversation is more than an octave above a man’s; in the higher sounds it is two octaves.

And here it is important to note that by the term vibrations is meant complete ones; and by the term sonorous wave is meant a condensation and its associated rarefaction. By a vibration an excursion to and fro of the vibrating body is to be understood. Every wave generated by such a vibration bends the tympanic membrane once in and once out. These are the definitions of a vibration and of a sonorous wave employed in England and Germany. In France, however, a vibration consists of an excursion of the vibrating body in one direction, whether to or fro. The French vibrations, therefore, are only the halves of ours, and we therefore call them semi-vibrations. In all cases throughout these chapters, when the word vibration is employed without qualification, it refers to complete vibrations.

During the time required by each of those sonorous waves to pass entirely over a particle of air, that particle accomplishes one complete vibration. It is at one moment pushed forward into the condensation, while at the next moment it is urged back into the rarefaction. The time required by the particle to execute a complete oscillation is, therefore, that required by the sonorous wave to move through a distance equal to its own length. Supposing the length of the wave to be eight feet, and the velocity of sound in air of our present temperature to be 1,120 feet a second, the wave in question will pass over its own length of air in, 1/140th of a second: this is the time required by every air-particle that it passes to complete an oscillation.

In air of a definite density and elasticity a certain length of wave always corresponds to the same pitch. But supposing the density or elasticity not to be uniform; supposing, for example, the sonorous waves from one of our tuning-forks to pass from cold to hot air: an instant augmentation of the wave-length would occur, without any change of pitch, for we should have no change in the rapidity with which the waves would reach the ear. Conversely with the same length of wave the pitch would be higher in hot air than in cold, for the succession of the waves would be quicker. In an atmosphere of hydrogen, waves of a certain length would produce a note nearly two octaves higher than waves of the same length in air; for, in consequence of the greater rapidity of propagation, the number of impulses received in a given time in the one case would be nearly four times the number received in the other.

Definition of an Octave

Opening the innermost and outermost series of the orifices of our siren, and sounding both of them, either together or in succession, the musical ears present at once detect the relationship of the two sounds. They notice immediately that the sound which issues from the circle of sixteen orifices is the octave of that which issues from the circle of eight. But for every wave sent forth by the latter, two waves are sent forth by the former. In this way we prove that the physical meaning of the term “octave” is, that it is a note produced by double the number of vibrations of its fundamental. By multiplying the vibrations of the octave by two, we obtain its octave, and by a continued multiplication of this kind we obtain a series of numbers answering to a series of octaves. Starting, for example, from a fundamental note of 100 vibrations, we should find, by this continual multiplication, that a note five octaves above it would be produced by 3,200 vibrations. Thus:

    100   Fundamental note.
    2
    200   1st octave.
    2
    400   2d octave.
    2
    800   3d octave.
    2
    1600  4th octave.
    2
    3200  5th octave.

This result is more readily obtained by multiplying the vibrations of the fundamental note by the fifth power of two. In a subsequent chapter we shall return to this question of musical intervals. For our present purpose it is only necessary to define an octave.

Limits of the Ear; and of Musical Sounds

The ear’s range of hearing is limited in both directions. Savart fixed the lower limit at eight complete vibrations a second; and to cause these slowly recurring vibrations to link themselves together he was obliged to employ shocks of great power. By means of a toothed wheel and an associated counter, he fixed the upper limit of hearing at 24,000 vibrations a second. Helmholtz has recently fixed the lower limit at 16 vibrations, and the higher at 38,000 vibrations, a second. By employing very small tuning-forks, the late M. Depretz showed that a sound corresponding to 38,000 vibrations a second is audible. Starting from the note 16, and multiplying continually by 2, or more compendiously raising 2 to the 11th power, and multiplying this by 16, we should find that at 11 octaves above the fundamental note the number of vibrations would be 32,768. Taking, therefore, the limit assigned by Helmholtz, the entire range of the human ear embraces about eleven octaves. But all the notes comprised within these limits cannot be employed in music. The practical range of musical sounds is comprised between 40 and 4,000 vibrations a second, which amounts, in round numbers, to seven octaves.

Footnote: The error of Savart consists, according to Helmholtz, in having adopted an arrangement in which overtones (described in Chapter III.) were mistaken for the fundamental one.

Footnote: “The deepest tone of orchestra instruments is the E of the double-bass, with 41-1/4 vibrations. The new pianos and organs go generally as far as C1, with 33 vibrations; new grand pianos may reach A11, with 27-1/2 vibrations. In large organs a lower octave is introduced, reaching to C11, with 16-1/2 vibrations. But the musical character of all these tones under E is imperfect, because they are near the limit where the power of the ear to unite the vibrations to a tone ceases. In height the pianoforte reaches to aiv, with 3,520 vibrations, or sometimes to cv, with 4,224 vibrations. The highest note of the orchestra is probably the dv of the piccolo flute, with 4,752 vibrations.”—Helmholtz, “Tonempfindungen,” p. 30. In this notation we start from C, with 66 vibrations, calling the first lower octave C1, and the second C11; and calling the first highest octave c, the second c1, the third c11, the fourth c12, etc. In England the deepest tone, Mr. Macfarren informs me, is not E, but A, a fourth above it.

The limits of hearing are different in different persons. While endeavoring to estimate the pitch of certain sharp sounds, Dr. Wollaston remarked in a friend a total insensibility to the sound of a small organ-pipe, which, in respect to acuteness, was far within the ordinary limits of hearing. The sense of hearing of this person terminated at a note four octaves above the middle E of the pianoforte. The squeak of the bat, the sound of a cricket, even the chirrup of the common house-sparrow, are unheard by some people who for lower sounds possess a sensitive ear. A difference of a single note is sometimes sufficient to produce the change from sound to silence. “The suddenness of the transition,” writes Wollaston, “from perfect hearing to total want of perception, occasions a degree of surprise which renders an experiment of this kind with a series of small pipes among several persons rather amusing. It is curious to observe the change of feeling manifested by various individuals of the party, in succession, as the sounds approach and pass the limits of their hearing. Those who enjoy a temporary triumph are often compelled, in their turn, to acknowledge to how short a distance their little superiority extends.” “Nothing can be more surprising,” writes Sir John Herschel, “than to see two persons, neither of them deaf, the one complaining of the penetrating shrillness of a sound, while the other maintains there is no sound at all. Thus, while one person mentioned by Dr. Wollaston could but just hear a note four octaves above the middle E of the pianoforte, others have a distinct perception of sounds full two octaves higher. The chirrup of the sparrow is about the former limit; the cry of the bat about an octave above it; and that of some insects probably another octave.” In “The Glaciers of the Alps” I have referred to a case of short auditory range, noticed by myself in crossing the Wengern Alps in company with a friend. The grass at each side of the path swarmed with insects, which to me rent the air with their shrill chirruping. My friend heard nothing of this, the insect-music lying beyond his limit of audition.

Drum of the Ear. The Eustachian Tube

Behind the tympanic membrane exists a cavity—the drum of the ear—in part crossed by a series of bones, and in part occupied by air. This cavity communicates with the mouth by means of a duct called the Eustachian tube. This tube is generally closed, the air-space behind the tympanic membrane being thus shut off from the external air. If, under these circumstances, the external air becomes denser, it will press the tympanic membrane inward. If, on the other hand, the air outside becomes rarer, while the Eustachian tube remains closed, the membrane will be pressed outward. Pain is felt in both cases, and partial deafness is experienced. I once crossed the Stelvio Pass by night in company with a friend who complained of acute pain in the ears. On swallowing his saliva the pain instantly disappeared. By the act of swallowing, the Eustachian tube is opened, and thus equilibrium is established between the external and internal pressure.

It is possible to quench the sense of hearing of low sounds by stopping the nose and mouth, and trying to expand the chest, as in the act of inspiration. This effort partially exhausts the space behind the tympanic membrane, which is then thrown into a state of tension by the pressure of the outward air. A similar deafness to low sounds is produced when the nose and mouth are stopped, and a strong effort is made to expire. In this case air is forced through the Eustachian tube into the drum of the ear, the tympanic membrane being distended by the pressure of the internal air. The experiment may be made in a railway carriage, when the low rumble will vanish or be greatly enfeebled, while the sharper sounds are heard with undiminished intensity. Dr. Wollaston was expert in closing the Eustachian tube, and leaving the space behind the tympanic membrane occupied by either compressed or rarefied air. He was thus able to cause his deafness to continue for any required time without effort on his part, always, however, abolishing it by the act of swallowing. A sudden concussion may produce deafness by forcing air either into or out of the drum of the ear, and this may account for a fact noticed by myself in one of my Alpine rambles. In the summer of 1858, jumping from a cliff on to what was supposed to be a deep snowdrift, I came into rude collision with a rock which the snow barely covered. The sound of the wind, the rush of the glacier-torrents, and all the other noises which a sunny day awakes upon the mountains, instantly ceased. I could hardly hear the sound of my guide’s voice. This deafness continued for half an hour; at the end of which time the blowing of the nose opened, I suppose, the Eustachian tube, and restored, with the quickness of magic, the innumerable murmurs which filled the air around me.
