Light, like sound, is excited by pulses or waves; and lights of different colors, like sounds of different pitch, are excited by different rates of vibration. But in its width of perception the ear exceedingly transcends the eye; for while the former ranges over eleven octaves, but little more than a single octave is possible to the latter. The quickest vibrations which strike the eye, as light, have only about twice the rapidity of the slowest; whereas the quickest vibrations which strike the ear, as a musical sound, have more than two thousand times the rapidity of the slowest.

Footnote: It is hardly necessary to remark that the quickest vibrations and shortest waves correspond to the extreme violet, while the slowest vibrations and longest waves correspond to the extreme red, of the spectrum.

Helmholtz’s Double Siren

Prof. Dove, as we have seen, extended the utility of the siren of Cagniard de la Tour, by providing it with four series of orifices instead of one. By doubling all its parts, Helmholtz has recently added vastly to the power of the instrument. The double siren, as it is called, is now before you, Fig. 29 (next page). It is composed of two of Dove’s sirens, C and C′, one turned upside down. You will recognize in the lower siren the instrument with which you are already acquainted. The disks of the two sirens have a common axis, so that when one disk rotates the other rotates with it. As in the former case, the number of revolutions is recorded by clockwork (omitted in the figure). When air is urged through the tube t′ the upper siren alone sounds; when urged through t, the lower one only sounds; when it is urged simultaneously through t′ and t, both the sirens sound. With this instrument, therefore, we are able to introduce much more varied combinations than with the former one. Helmholtz has also contrived a means by which not only the disk of the upper siren, but the box C′ above the disk, can be caused to rotate. This is effected by a toothed wheel and pinion, turned by a handle. Underneath the handle is a dial with an index, the use of which will be subsequently illustrated.

[Figure 29]

Let us direct our attention for the present to the upper siren. By means of an India-rubber tube, the orifice t′ is connected with an acoustic bellows, and air is urged into C′. Its disk turns round, and we obtain with it all the results already obtained with Dove’s siren. The pitch of the note is uniform. Turning the handle above, so as to cause the orifices of the cylinder C′ to meet those of the disk, the two sets of apertures pass each other more rapidly than when the cylinder stood still. An instant rise of pitch is the result. By reversing the motion, the orifices are caused to pass each other more slowly than when C′ is motionless, and in this case you notice an instant fall of pitch when the handle is turned. Thus, by imparting in quick alternation a right-handed and left-handed motion to the handle, we obtain successive rises and falls of pitch. An extremely instructive effect of this kind may be observed at any railway station on the passage of a rapid train. During its approach the sonorous waves emitted by the whistle are virtually shortened, a greater number of them being crowded into the ear in a given time. During its retreat we have a virtual lengthening of the sonorous waves. The consequence is, that, when approaching, the whistle sounds a higher note, and when retreating it sounds a lower note, than if the train were still. A fall of pitch, therefore, is perceived as the train passes the station. This is the basis of Doppler’s theory of the colored stars. He supposes that all stars are white, but that some of them are rapidly retreating from us, thereby lengthening their luminiferous waves and becoming red. Others are rapidly approaching us, thereby shortening their waves, and becoming green or blue. The ingenuity of this theory is extreme, but its correctness is more than doubtful.

Footnote: Experiments on this subject were first made by M. Buys Ballot on the Dutch railway, and subsequently by Mr. Scott Russell in this country. Doppler’s idea is now applied to determine, from changes of wave-length, motions in the sun and fixed stars.

Transmission of Musical Sounds by Liquids and Solids

We have thus far occupied ourselves with the transmission of musical sounds through air. They are also transmitted by liquids and solids. When a tuning-fork screwed into a little wooden foot vibrates, nobody, except the persons closest to it, hears its sound. On dipping the foot into a glass of water a musical sound is audible: the vibrations having been transmitted through the water to the air. The tube M N, Fig. 30, three feet long, is set upright upon a wooden tray A B. The tube ends in a funnel at the top, and is now filled with water to the brim. The fork F is thrown into vibration, and on dipping its foot into the funnel at the top of the tube, a musical sound swells out. I must so far forestall matters as to remark that in this experiment the tray is the real sounding body. It has been thrown into vibration by the fork, but the vibrations have been conveyed to the tray by the water. Through the same medium vibrations

[Figure 30]

are communicated to the auditory nerve, the terminal filaments of which are immersed in a liquid: substituting mercury for water, a similar result is obtained.

The siren has received its name from its capacity to sing under water. A vessel now in front of the table is half filled with water, in which a siren is wholly immersed. When a cock is turned, the water from the pipes which supply the house forces itself through the instrument. Its disk is now rotating, and a sound of rapidly augmenting pitch issues from the vessel. The pitch rises thus rapidly because the heavy and powerfully pressed water soon drives the disk up to its maximum speed of rotation. When the supply is lessened, the motion relaxes and the pitch falls. Thus, by alternately opening and closing the cock, the song of the siren is caused to rise and fall in a wild and melancholy manner. You would not consider such a sound likely to woo mariners to their doom.

The transmission of musical sounds through solid bodies is also capable of easy and agreeable illustration. Before you is a wooden rod, thirty feet long, passing from the table through a window in the ceiling, into the open air above. The lower end of the rod rests upon a wooden tray, to which the musical vibrations of a body applied to the upper end of the rod are to be transferred. An assistant is above, with a tuning-fork in his hand. He strikes the fork against a pad; it vibrates, but you hear nothing. He now applies the stem of the fork to the end of the rod, and instantly the wooden tray upon the table is rendered musical. The pitch of the sound, moreover, is exactly that of the tuning-fork; the wood has been passive as regards pitch, transmitting the precise vibrations imparted to it without any alteration. With another fork a note of another pitch is obtained. Thus fifty forks might be employed instead of two, and 300 feet of wood instead of 30; the rod would transmit the precise vibrations imparted to it, and no other.

We are now prepared to appreciate an extremely beautiful experiment, for which we are indebted to Sir Charles Wheatstone. In a room underneath this, and separated from it by two floors, is a piano. Through the two floors passes a tin tube 2-1/2 inches in diameter, and along the axis of this tube passes a rod of deal, the end of which emerges from the floor in front of the lecture-table. The rod is clasped by India-rubber bands, which entirely close the tin tube. The lower end of the rod rests upon the sound-board of the piano, its upper end being exposed before you. An artist is at this moment engaged at the instrument, but you hear no sound. When, however, a violin is placed upon the end of the rod, the instrument becomes instantly musical, not, however, with the vibrations of its own strings, but with those of the piano. When the violin is removed, the sound ceases; putting in its place a guitar, the music revives. For the violin and guitar we may substitute a plain wooden tray, which is also rendered musical. Here, finally, is a harp, against the sound-board of which the end of the deal rod is caused to press; every note of the piano is reproduced before you. On lifting the harp so as to break the connection with the piano, the sound vanishes; but the moment the sound-board is caused to press upon the rod the music is restored. The sound of the piano so far resembles that of the harp that it is hard to resist the impression that the music you hear is that of the latter instrument. An uneducated person might well believe that witchcraft or “spiritualism” is concerned in the production of this music.

What a curious transference of action is here presented to the mind! At the command of the musician’s will, the fingers strike the keys; the hammers strike the strings, by which the rude mechanical shock is converted into tremors. The vibrations are communicated to the sound-board of the piano. Upon that board rests the end of the deal rod, thinned off to a sharp edge to make it fit more easily between the wires. Through the edge, and afterward along the rod, are poured with unfailing precision the entangled pulsations produced by the shocks of those ten agile fingers. To the sound-board of the harp before you the rod faithfully delivers up the vibrations of which it is the vehicle. This second sound-board transfers the motion to the air, carving it and chasing it into forms so transcendently complicated that confusion alone could be anticipated from the shock and jostle of the sonorous waves. But the marvellous human ear accepts every feature of the motion, and all the strife and struggle and confusion melt finally into music upon the brain.

Footnote: An ordinary musical box may be substituted for the piano in this experiment.

Summary of Chapter II

A musical sound is produced by sonorous shocks which follow each other at regular intervals with a sufficient rapidity of succession.

Noise is produced by an irregular succession of sonorous shocks.

A musical sound may be produced by taps which rapidly and regularly succeed each other. The taps of a card against the cogs of a rotating wheel are usually employed to illustrate this point.

A musical sound may also be produced by a succession of puffs. The siren is an instrument by which such puffs are generated.

The pitch of a musical note depends solely on the number of vibrations concerned in its production. The more rapid the vibrations, the higher the pitch.

By means of the siren the rate of vibration of any sounding body may be determined. It is only necessary to render the sound of the siren and that of the body identical in pitch to maintain both sounds in unison for a certain time, and to ascertain, by means of the counter of the siren, how many puffs have issued from, the instrument in that time. This number expresses the number of vibrations executed by the sounding body.

When a body capable of emitting a musical sound—a tuning-fork, for example—vibrates, it molds the surrounding air into sonorous waves, each of which consists of a condensation and a rarefaction.

The length of the sonorous wave is measured from condensation to condensation, or from rarefaction to rarefaction.

The wave-length is found by dividing the velocity of sound per second by the number of vibrations executed by the sounding body in a second.

Thus a tuning-fork which vibrates 256 times in a second produces in air of 15° C., where the velocity is 1,120 feet a second, waves 4 feet 4 inches long. While two other forks, vibrating respectively 320 and 384 times a second, generate waves 3 feet 6 inches, and 2 feet 11 inches long.

A vibration, as defined in England and Germany, comprises a motion to and fro. It is a complete vibration. In France, on the contrary, a vibration comprises a movement to or fro. The French vibrations are with us semi-vibrations.

The time required by a particle of air over which a sonorous wave passes to execute a complete vibration is that required by the wave to move through a distance equal to its own length.

The higher the temperature of the air, the longer is the sonorous wave corresponding to any particular rate of vibration. Given the wave-length and the rate of vibration, we can readily deduce the temperature of the air.

The human ear is limited in its range of hearing musical sounds. If the vibrations number less than 16 a second, we are conscious only of the separate shocks. If they exceed 38,000 a second, the consciousness of sound ceases altogether. The range of the best ear covers about 11 octaves, but an auditory range limited to 6 or 7 octaves is not uncommon.

The sounds available in music are produced by vibrations comprised between the limits of 40 and 4,000 a second. They embrace 7 octaves.

The range of the ear far transcends that of the eye, which hardly exceeds an octave.

By means of the Eustachian tube, which is opened in the act of swallowing, the pressure of the air on both sides of the tympanic membrane is equalized.

By either condensing or rarefying the air behind the tympanic membrane, deafness to sounds of low pitch may be produced.

On the approach of a railway train the pitch of the whistle is higher, on the retreat of the train the pitch is lower, than it would be if the train were at rest.

Musical sounds are transmitted by liquids and solids. Such sounds may be transferred from one room to another; from the ground-floor to the garret of a house of many stories, for example, the sound being unheard in the rooms intervening between both, and rendered audible only when the vibrations are communicated to a suitable sound-board.
