Vibration of Strings—How employed in Music—Influence of Sound-Boards—Laws of Vibrating Strings—Combination of Direct and Reflected Pulses—Stationary and Progressive Waves—Nodes and Ventral Segments—Application of Results to the Vibrations of Musical Strings—Experiments of Melde—Strings set in Vibration by Tuning-Forks—Laws of Vibration thus demonstrated—Harmonic Tones of Strings—Definitions of Timbre or Quality, or Overtones and Clang—Abolition of Special Harmonics—Conditions which affect the Intensity of the Harmonic Tones—Optical Examination of the Vibrations of a Piano-Wire.

Vibrations of Strings: Use of Sound-Boards

WE HAVE to begin our studies to-day with the vibrations of strings or wires; to learn how bodies of this form are rendered available as sources of musical sounds, and to investigate the laws of their vibrations.

To enable a musical string to vibrate transversely, or at right angles to its length, it must be stretched between two rigid points. Before you, Fig. 31 (next page), is an instrument employed to stretch strings, and to render their vibrations audible. From the pin p, to which one end of it is firmly attached, a string passes across the two bridges B and B′, being afterward carried over the wheel H, which moves with great freedom. The string is finally stretched by a weight W, of 28 lbs., attached to its extremity. The bridges B and B′, which constitute the real ends of the string, are fastened on to the long wooden box M N. The whole instrument is called a monochord, or sonometer.

[Figure 31]

Taking hold of the stretched string B B′ at its middle and plucking it aside, it springs back to its first position, passes it, returns, and thus vibrates for a time to and fro across its position of equilibrium. You hear a sound, but the sonorous waves which at present strike your ears do not proceed immediately from the string. The amount of wave-motion generated by so thin a body is too small to be sensible at any distance. But the string is drawn tightly over the two bridges B B′; and when it vibrates, its tremors are communicated through these bridges to the entire mass of the box M N, and to the air within the box, which thus become the real sounding bodies.

That the vibrations of the string alone are not sufficient to produce the sound may be thus experimentally demonstrated: A B, Fig. 32 (next page), is a piece of wood placed across an iron bracket C. From each end of the piece of wood depends a rope ending in a loop, while stretching across from loop to loop is an iron bar m n. From the middle of the iron bar hangs a steel wire s s′, stretched by a weight W, of 28 lbs. By this

[Figure 32]

arrangement the wire is detached from all large surfaces to which it could impart its vibrations. Plucking the wire s s′, it vibrates vigorously, but even those nearest to it do not hear any sound. The agitation imparted to the air is too inconsiderable to affect the auditory nerve at any distance. A second wire t t′, Fig. 33 (next page), of the same length, thickness, and material as s s′, has one of its ends attached to the wooden tray A B. This wire also carries a weight W, of 28 lbs. Finally, passing over the bridges B B′ of the sonometer, Fig. 31, is our third wire, in every respect like the two former, and, like them, stretched by a weight W, of 28 lbs. When the wire t t′, Fig. 33, is caused to vibrate, you hear its sound distinctly. Though one end only of the wire is connected with the tray A B, the vibrations transmitted to it are sufficient to convert the tray into a sounding body. Finally, when the wire of the sonometer M N, Fig. 31, is plucked, the sound is loud and full, because the instrument is specially constructed to take up the vibrations of the wire.

The importance of employing proper sounding apparatus in stringed instruments is rendered manifest by

[Figure 33]

these experiments. It is not the strings of a harp, or a lute, or a piano, or a violin, that throw the air into sonorous vibrations. It is the large surfaces with which the strings are associated, and the air inclosed by these surfaces. The goodness of such instruments depends almost wholly upon the quality and disposition of their sound-boards.

Footnote: To show the influence of a large vibrating surface in communicating sonorous motion to the air, Mr. Kilburn incloses a musical box within cases of thick felt. Through the cases a wooden rod, which rests upon the box, issues. When the box plays a tune, it is unheard as long as the rod only emerges; but when a thin disk of wood is fixed on the rod, the music becomes immediately audible.

Take the violin as an example. It is, or ought to be, formed of wood of the most perfect elasticity. Imperfectly elastic wood expends the motion imparted to it in the friction of its own molecules; the motion is converted into heat, instead of sound. The strings of the violin pass from the “tail-piece” of the instrument over the “bridge,” being thence carried to the “pegs,” the turning of which regulates the tension of the strings. The bow is drawn across at a point about one-tenth of the length of the string from the bridge. The two “feet” of the bridge rest upon the most yielding portion of the “belly” of the violin, that is, the portion that lies between the two f-shaped orifices. One foot is fixed over a short rod, the “sound post,” which runs from belly to back through the interior of the violin. This foot of the bridge is thereby rendered rigid, and it is mainly through the other foot, which is not thus supported, that the vibrations are conveyed to the wood of the instrument, and thence to the air within and without. The sonorous quality of the wood of a violin is mellowed by age. The very act of playing also has a beneficial influence, apparently constraining the molecules

[Figure 34]

of the wood, which in the first instance might be refractory, to conform at last to the requirements of the vibrating strings.

This is the place to make the promised reference (page 38) to Prof. Stokes’s explanation of the action of sound-boards. Although the amplitude of the vibrating board may be very small, still its larger area renders the abolition of the condensations and rarefactions difficult. The air cannot move away in front nor slip in behind before it is sensibly condensed and rarefied. Hence with such vibrating bodies sound-waves may be generated, and loud tones produced, while the thin strings that set them in vibration, acting alone, are quite inaudible.

The increase of sound, produced by the stoppage of lateral motion, has been experimentally illustrated by Prof. Stokes. Let the two black rectangles in Fig. 34 represent the section of a tuning-fork. After it has been made to vibrate, place a sheet of paper, or the blade of a broad knife, with its edge parallel to the axis of the fork, and as near to the fork as may be without touching. If the obstacle be so placed that the section of it is A or B, no effect is produced; but if it be placed at C, so as to prevent the reciprocating to-and-fro movement of the air, which tends to abolish the condensations and rarefactions, the sound becomes much stronger.

Laws of Vibrating Strings

Having thus learned how the vibrations of strings are rendered available in music, we have next to investigate the laws of such vibrations. I pluck at its middle point the string B B′, Fig. 31. The sound heard is the fundamental or lowest note of the string, to produce which it swings, as a whole, to and fro. By placing a movable bridge under the middle of the string, and pressing the string against the bridge, it is divided into two equal parts. Plucking either of those at its centre, a musical note is obtained, which many of you recognize as the octave of the fundamental note. In all cases, and with all instruments, the octave of a note is produced by doubling the number of its vibrations. It can, moreover, be proved, both by theory and by the siren, that this half string vibrates with exactly twice the rapidity of the whole. In the same way it can be proved that one-third of the string vibrates with three times the rapidity, producing a note a fifth above the octave, while one-fourth of the string vibrates with four times the rapidity, producing the double octave of the whole string. In general terms, the number of vibrations is inversely proportional to the length of the string.

Again, the more tightly a string is stretched the more rapid is its vibration. When this comparatively slack string is caused to vibrate, you hear its low fundamental note. By turning a peg, round which one end of it is coiled, the string is tightened, and the pitch rendered higher. Taking hold with my left hand of the weight w, attached to the wire B B′ of our sonometer, and plucking the wire with the fingers of my right, I alternately press upon the weight and lift it. The quick variations of tension are expressed by a varying wailing tone. Now, the number of vibrations executed in the unit of time bears a definite relation to the stretching force. Applying different weights to the end of the wire B B′, and determining in each case the number of vibrations executed in a second, we find the numbers thus obtained to be proportional to the square roots of the stretching weights. A string, for example, stretched by a weight of one pound, executes a certain number of vibrations per second; if we wish to double this number, we must stretch it by a weight of four pounds; if we wish to treble the number, we must apply a weight of nine pounds, and so on.

The vibrations of a string also depend upon its thickness. Preserving the stretching weight, the length, and the material of the string constant, the number of vibrations varies inversely as the thickness of the string. If, therefore, of two strings of the same material, equally long and equally stretched, the one has twice the diameter of the other, the thinner string will execute double the number of vibrations of its fellow in the same time. If one string be three times as thick as another, the latter will execute three times the number of vibrations, and so on.

Finally, the vibrations of a string depend upon the density of the matter of which it is composed. A platinum wire and an iron wire, for example, of the same length and thickness, stretched by the same weight, will not vibrate with the same rapidity. For, while the specific gravity of iron, or in other words its density, is 7·8, that of platinum is 21·5. All other conditions remaining the same, the number of vibrations is inversely proportional to the square root of the density of the string. If the density of one string, therefore, be one-fourth that of another of the same length, thickness, and tension, it will execute its vibrations twice as rapidly; if its density be one-ninth that of the other, it will vibrate with three times the rapidity, and so on. The last two laws, taken together, may be expressed thus: The number of vibrations is inversely proportional to the square root of the weight of the string.

In the violin and other stringed instruments we avail ourselves of thickness instead of length to obtain the deeper tones. In the piano we not only augment the thickness of the wires intended to produce the bass notes, but we load them by coiling round them an extraneous substance. They resemble horses heavily jockeyed, and move more slowly on account of the greater weight imposed upon the force of tension.

Mechanical Illustrations of Vibrations. Progressive and Stationary Waves. Ventral Segments and Nodes

These, then, are the four laws which regulate the transverse vibrations of strings. We now turn to certain allied phenomena, which, though they involve mechanical

[Figure 35]

considerations of a rather complicated kind, may be completely mastered by an average

[Figure 36]

amount of attention. And they must be mastered if we would thoroughly comprehend the philosophy of stringed instruments.

From the ceiling c, Fig. 35, of this room hangs an India-rubber tube twenty-eight feet long. The tube is filled with sand to render its motions slow and more easily followed by the eye. I take hold of its free end a, stretch the tube a little, and by properly timing my impulses cause it to swing to and fro as a whole, as shown in the figure. It has its definite period of vibration dependent on its length, weight, thickness, and tension, and my impulses must synchronize with that period.

I now stop the motion, and by a sudden jerk raise a hump upon the tube, which runs along it as a pulse toward its fixed end; here the hump reverses itself, and runs back to my hand. At the fixed end of the tube, in obedience to the law of reflection, the pulse reversed both its position and the direction of its motion. Supposing c, Fig. 36, to be the fixed end of the tube, and a the end held in the hand: if the pulse on reaching c have the position shown in (1), after reflection it will have the position shown in (2). The arrows mark the direction of progression. The time required for the pulse to pass from the hand to the fixed end and back is exactly that required to accomplish one complete vibration of the tube as a whole. It is indeed the addition of such impulses which causes the tube to continue to vibrate as a whole.

[Figure 37]

If, instead of a single jerk, a succession of jerks be imparted, thereby sending a series of pulses along the tube, every one of them will be reflected above, and we have now to inquire how the direct and reflected pulses behave toward each other.

Let the time required by the pulse to pass from my hand to the fixed end be one second; at the end of half a second it occupies the position a b (1), Fig. 37, its foremost point having reached the middle of the tube. At the end of a whole second it would have the position b c (2), its foremost point having reached the fixed end c of the tube. At the moment when reflection begins at c, let another jerk be imparted at a. The reflected pulse from c moving with the same velocity as this direct one from a, the foremost points of both will arrive at the centre b (3) at the same moment. What must occur? The hump a b wishes to move on to c, and to do so must move the point b to the right. The hump c b wishes to move toward a, and to do so must move the point b to the left. The point b, urged by equal forces in two opposite directions at the same time, will not move in either direction. Under these circumstances, the two halves, a b, b c of the tube will oscillate as if they were independent of each other (4). Thus by the combination of two progressive pulses, the one direct and the other reflected, we produce two stationary pulses on the tube a c.

The vibrating parts a b and b c are called ventral segments; the point of no vibration b is called a node.

The term “pulse” is here used advisedly, instead of the more usual term wave. For a wave embraces two of these pulses. It embraces both the hump and the depression which follows the hump. The length of a wave, therefore, is twice that of a ventral segment.

[Figure 38]

Supposing the jerks to be so timed as to cause each hump to be one-third of the tube’s length. At the end of one-third of a second from starting the pulse will be in the position a b (1), Fig. 38. In two-thirds of a second it will have reached the position b b′ (2), Fig. 38. At this moment let a new pulse be started at a; after the lapse of an entire second from the commencement we shall have two humps upon the tube, one occupying the position a b (3), the other the position b′ c (3). It is here manifest that the end of the reflected pulse from c, and the end of the direct one from a, will reach the point b′ at the same moment. We shall therefore have the state of things represented in (4), where b b′ wishes to move upward, and c b′ to move downward. The action of both upon the point b′ being in opposite directions, that point will remain fixed. And from it, as if it were a fixed point, the pulse b b′ will be reflected, while the segment b′ c will oscillate as an independent string. Supposing that at the moment b b′ (4) begins to be reflected at b′ we start another pulse from a, it will reach b at the same moment the pulse reflected from b′ reaches it. The pulses will neutralize each other at b, and we shall have there a second node. Thus, by properly timing our jerks, we divide the rope into three ventral segments, separated from each other by two nodal points. As long as the agitation continues the tube will vibrate as in (6).
