There is no theoretic limit to the number of nodes and ventral segments that may be thus produced. By the quickening of the impulses, the tube is divided into four ventral segments separated by three nodes; quickening still more we have five ventral segments and four nodes. With this particular tube the hand may be caused to vibrate sufficiently quick to produce ten ventral segments, as shown in Fig. 38 (7). When the stretching force is constant, the number of ventral segments is proportional to the rapidity of the hand’s vibration. To produce 2, 3, 4, 10 ventral segments requires twice, three times, four times, ten times the rapidity of vibration necessary to make the tube swing as a whole. When the vibration is very rapid the ventral segments appear like a series of shadowy spindles, separated from each other by dark motionless nodes. The experiment is a beautiful one, and it is easily performed.

If, instead of moving the hand to-and fro, it be caused to describe a small circle, the ventral segments become “surfaces of revolution.” Instead of the hand, moreover, we may employ a hook turned by a whirling-table. Before you is a cord more rigid than the India-rubber tube, 25 feet long, with one of its ends attached to a freely-moving swivel fixed in the ceiling of the room. By turning the whirling-table to which the other end is attached, this cord may be divided into as many as 20 ventral segments, separated from each other by their appropriate nodes. In another arrangement a string of catgut 12 feet long, with silvered beads strung along it, is stretched horizontally between a vertical wheel and a free swivel fixed in a rigid stand. On turning the wheel, and properly regulating both the tension and the rapidity of rotation, the beaded cord may be caused to rotate as a whole, and to divide itself successively into 2, 3, 4, or 5 ventral segments. When we envelop the cord in a luminous beam, every spot of light on every bead describes a brilliant circle, and a very beautiful experiment is the result.

Mechanical Illustrations of Damping Various Points of Vibrating Cord

The subject of stationary waves was first experimentally treated by the Messrs. Weber, in their excellent researches on wave-motion. It is a subject which will well repay your attention by rendering many of the most difficult phenomena of musical strings perfectly intelligible. It will make the connection of both classes of vibrations more obvious if we vary our last experiments. Before you is a piece of India-rubber tubing, 10 or 12 feet long, stretched from c to a, Fig. 39, and made fast to two pins at c and a. The tube is blackened, and behind it is placed a surface of white paper, to render its motions more visible. Encircling the tube at its centre b (1) by the thumb and forefinger of my left hand, and taking the middle of the lower half b a of the tube in my right, I pluck it aside. Not only does the lower half swing, but the upper half also is thrown into vibration. Withdrawing the hands wholly from the tube, its two halves a b and b c continue to vibrate, being separated from each other by a node b at the centre (2).

[Figure 39]

I now encircle the tube at a point b (3) one-third of its length from its lower end a, and, taking hold of a b at its centre, pluck it aside; the length b c above my hand instantly divides into two vibrating segments. Withdrawing the hands wholly, you see the entire tube divided into three ventral segments, separated from each other by two motionless nodes, b and b′ (4). I pass on to the point b (5), which marks off one-fourth of the length of the tube, encircle it, and pluck the shorter segment aside. The longer segment above my hand divides itself immediately into three vibrating parts. So that, on withdrawing the hand, the whole tube appears before you divided into four ventral segments, separated from each other by three nodes b b′ b″ (6). In precisely the same way the tube may be divided into five vibrating segments with four nodes.

This sudden division of the long upper segment of the tube, without any apparent cause, is very surprising; but if you grant me your attention for a moment, you will find that these experiments are essentially similar to those which illustrated the coalescence of direct and reflected undulations. Reverting for a moment to the latter, you observed that the to-and-fro motion of the hand through the space of a single inch was sufficient to make the middle points of the ventral segments vibrate through a foot or eighteen inches. By being properly timed the impulses accumulated, until the amplitude of the vibrating segments exceeded immensely that of the hand which produced them. The hand, in fact, constituted a nodal point, so small was its comparative motion. Indeed, it is usual, and correct, to regard the ends of the tube also as nodal points.

Consider now the case represented in (1), Fig. 39, where the tube was encircled at its middle, the lower segment a b being thrown into the vibration corresponding to its length and tension. The circle formed by the finger and thumb permitted the tube to oscillate at the point b through the space of an inch; and the vibrations at that point acted upon the upper half b c exactly as my hand acted when it caused the tube suspended from the ceiling to swing as a whole, as in Fig. 35. Instead of the timid vibrations of the hand, we have now the timid vibrations of the lower half of the tube; and these, though narrowed to an inch at the place clasped by the finger and thumb, soon accumulate, and finally produce an amplitude, in the upper half, far exceeding their own. The same reasoning applies to all the other cases of subdivision. If, instead of encircling a point by the finger and thumb, and plucking the portion of the tube below it aside, that same point were taken hold of by the hand and agitated in the period proper to the lower segment of the tube, precisely the same effect would be produced. We thus reduce both effects to one and the same cause; namely, the combination of direct and reflected undulations.

And here let me add that, when the tube was divided by the timid impulses of the hand, not one of its nodes was, strictly speaking, a point of no motion; for were the nodes not capable of vibrating through a very small amplitude, the motion of the various segments of the tube could not be maintained.

Stationary Water-waves

What is true of the undulations of an India-rubber tube applies to all undulations whatsoever. Water-waves, for example, obey the same laws, and the coalescence of direct and reflected waves exhibits similar phenomena. This long and narrow vessel with glass sides, Fig. 40, is a copy of the wave-canal of the brothers Weber. It is filled to the level A B with colored water. By tilting the end A suddenly, a wave is generated, which moves on to B, and is there reflected. By sending forth fresh waves at the proper intervals, the surface is divided into two stationary undulations. Making the succession of impulses more rapid we can subdivide the surface into three, four (shown in the figure), or more stationary undulations, separated from each other by nodes. The step of a water-carrier is sometimes so timed as to throw the surface of the water in his vessel into stationary waves, which may augment in height until the water splashes over the brim. Practice has taught the water-carrier what to do; he changes his step, alters the period of his impulses, and thus stops the accumulation of the motion.

[Figure 40]

In travelling recently in the coupé of a French railway carriage, I had occasion to place a bottle half filled with water on one of the little coupé tables. It was interesting to observe it. At times it would be quite still; at times it would oscillate violently. To the passenger within the carriage there was no sensible change in the motion of the train to which the difference could be ascribed. But in the one case the tremor of the carriage contained no vibrations synchronous with the oscillating period of the water, while in the other case such vibrations were present. Out of the confused assemblage of tremors the water selected the particular constituent which belonged to itself, and declared its presence when the traveller was utterly unconscious of its introduction.

Application of Mechanical Illustrations to Musical Strings

From these comparatively gross, but by no means unbeautiful, mechanical vibrations, we pass to those of a sounding string. In the experiments with our monochord, when the wire was to be shortened, a movable bridge was employed, against which the wire was pressed so as to deprive the point resting on the bridge of all possibility of motion. This strong pressure, however, is not necessary. Placing the feather-end of a goose-quill lightly against the middle of the string, and drawing a violin-bow over one of its halves, the string yields the octave of the note yielded by the whole string. The mere damping of the string at the centre, by the light touch of the feather, is sufficient to cause the string to divide into two vibrating segments. Nor is it necessary to hold the feather there throughout the experiment: after having drawn the bow, the feather may be removed; the string will continue to vibrate, emitting the same note as before. We have here a case exactly analogous to that in which the central point of our stretched India-rubber tube was damped, by encircling it with the finger and thumb as in Fig. 39 (1). Not only did the half plucked aside vibrate, but the other half vibrated also. We can, in fact, reproduce, with the vibrating string, every effect obtained with the tube. This, however, is a point of such importance as to demand full experimental illustration.

To prove that when the centre is damped, and the bow drawn across one of the halves of the string, the other half vibrates, I place across the middle of the untouched half a little rider of red paper. Damping the centre and drawing the bow, the string shivers, and the rider is overthrown, Fig. 41.

[Figure 41]

[Figure 42]

When the string is damped at a point which cuts off one-third of its length, and the bow drawn across the shorter section, not only is this section thereby thrown into vibration, but the longer section divides itself into two ventral segments with a node between them. This is proved by placing small riders of red paper on the ventral segments, and a rider of blue paper at the node. Passing the bow across the short segment you observe a fluttering of the red riders, and now they are completely tossed off, while the blue rider which crosses the node is undisturbed, Fig. 42.

[Figure 43]

Damping the string at the end of one-fourth of its length, the bow is drawn across the shorter section; the remaining three-fourths divide themselves into three ventral segments, with two nodes between them. This is proved by the unhorsing of the three riders placed astride the ventral segments, the two at the nodes keeping their places undisturbed, Fig. 43.

[Figure 44]

Finally, damping the string at the end of one-fifth of its length, and arranging, as before, the red riders on the ventral segments and the blue ones on the nodes, by a single sweep of the bow the four red riders are unhorsed, and the three blue ones left undisturbed, Fig. 44. In this way we perform with a sounding string the same series of experiments that were formerly executed with a stretched India-rubber tube, the results in both cases being identical.

Footnote: Chladni remarks (“Akustik,” p. 55) that it is usual to ascribe to Sauveur the discovery, in 1701, of the nodes of vibration corresponding to the higher tones of strings; but that Noble and Pigott had made the discovery in Oxford in 1676, and that Sauveur declined the honor of the discovery when he found that others had made the observation before him.

To make, if possible, this identity still more evident to you, a stout steel wire 28 feet in length is stretched behind the table from side to side of the room. I take the central point of this wire between my finger and thumb, and allow my assistant to pluck one-half of it aside. It vibrates, and the vibrations transmitted to the other half are sufficiently powerful to toss into the air a large sheet of paper placed astride the wire. With this long wire, and with riders not of one-eighth of a square inch, but of 30, 40, or 50 square inches in area, we may repeat all the experiments which you have witnessed with the musical string. The sheets of paper placed across the nodes remain always in their places, while those placed astride the ventral segments are tossed simultaneously into the air when the shorter segment of the wire is set in vibration. In this case, when close to it, you can actually see the division of the wire.

Melde’s Experiments

It is now time to introduce to your notice some recent experiments on vibrating strings, which appeal to the eye with a beauty and a delicacy far surpassing anything attainable with our monochord. To M. Melde, of Marburg, we are indebted for this new method of exhibiting the vibrations of strings. The scale of the experiments will be here modified so as to suit our circumstances.

[Figure 45]

First, then, you observe here a large tuning-fork T, Fig. 45, with a small screw fixed into the top of one of its prongs, by which a silk string can be firmly attached to the prong. From the fork the string passes round a distant peg P, by turning which it may be stretched to any required extent. When the bow is drawn across the fork, an irregular flutter of the string is the only result. On tightening it, however, when at the proper tension it expands into a beautiful gauzy spindle six feet long, more than six inches across at its widest part, and shining with a kind of pearly lustre. The stretching force at the present moment is such that the string swings to and fro as a whole, its vibrations being executed in a vertical plane.

Relaxing the string gradually, when the proper tension has been reached, it suddenly divides into two ventral segments, separated from each other by a sharply-defined and apparently motionless node.

While the fork continues vibrating, if the string be relaxed still further, it divides into three vibrating parts. Slackening it still more, it divides into four vibrating parts. And thus we might continue to subdivide the string into ten, or even twenty ventral segments, separated from each other by the appropriate number of nodes.

[Figure 46]

When white-silk strings vibrate thus, the nodes appear perfectly fixed, while the ventral segments form spindles of the most delicate beauty. Every protuberance of the twisted string, moreover, writes its motion in a more or less luminous line on the surface of the aërial gauze. The four nodes of vibration just illustrated are represented in Fig. 46, 1, 2, 3, 4.

Footnote: The first experiment really made in the lecture was with a bar of steel 62 inches long, 1-1/2 inch wide, and 1/2 an inch thick, bent into the shape of a tuning-fork, with its prongs 2 inches apart, and supported on a heavy stand. The cord attached to it was 9 feet long and a quarter of an inch thick. The prongs were thrown into vibration by striking them briskly with two pieces of lead covered with pads and held one in each hand. The prongs vibrated transversely to the cord. The vibrations produced by a single stroke were sufficient to carry the cord through several of its subdivisions and back to a single ventral segment. That is to say, by striking the prongs and causing the cord to vibrate as a whole, it could, by relaxing the tension, be caused to divide into two, three, or four vibrating segments; and then, by increasing the tension, to pass back through four, three, and two divisions, to one, without renewing the agitation of the prongs. The cord was of such a character that, instead of oscillating to and fro in the same plane, each of its points described a circle. The ventral segments, therefore, instead of being flat surfaces were surfaces of revolution, and were equally well seen from all parts of the room. The tuning-forks employed in the subsequent illustrations were prepared for me by that excellent acoustic mechanician, König, of Paris, being such as are usually employed in the projection of Lissajou’s experiments.
