When the synchronism between fork and string is perfect, the vibrations of the string are steady and long-continued. A slight departure from synchronism, however, introduces unsteadiness, and the ventral segments, though they may show themselves for a time, quickly disappear.

[Figure 47]

In the experiments just executed the fork vibrated in the direction of the length of the string. Every forward stroke of the fork raised a protuberance, which ran to the fixed end of the string, and was there reflected; so that when the longitudinal impulses were properly timed they produced a transverse vibration. Let us consider this further. One end of this heavy cord is attached to a hook A, Fig. 47, fixed in the wall. Laying hold of the other end I stretch the cord horizontally, and then move my hand to and fro in the direction of the cord. It swings as a whole, and you may notice that always, when the cord is at the limit of its swing, the hand is in its most forward position. If it vibrate in a vertical plane, the hand, in order to time the impulses properly, must be at its forward limit at the moment the cord reaches the upper boundary, and also at the moment it reaches the lower boundary of its excursion. A little reflection will make it plain that, in order to accomplish this, the hand must execute a complete vibration while the cord executes a semi-vibration; in other words, the vibrations of the hand must be twice as rapid as those of the cord.

Precisely the same is true of our tuning-fork. When the fork vibrates in the direction of the string, the number of vibrations which it executes in a certain time is twice the number executed by the string itself. And if, while arranged thus, a fork and string vibrate with sufficient rapidity to produce musical notes, the note of the fork will be an octave above that of the string.

But if, instead of the hand being moved to and fro in the direction of this heavy cord, it is moved at right angles to that direction, then every upward movement of the hand coincides with an upward movement of the cord; every downward movement of the hand with a downward movement of the cord. In fact, the vibrations of hand and string, in this case, synchronize perfectly; and if the hand could emit a musical note, the cord would, emit a note of the same pitch. The same holds good when a vibrating fork is substituted for the vibrating hand.

Hence, if the string vibrate as a whole when the vibrations of the fork are along it, it will divide into two ventral segments when the vibrations are across it; or, more generally expressed, preserving the tension constant, whatever be the number of ventral segments produced by the fork when its vibrations are in the direction of the string, twice that number will be produced when the vibrations are transverse to the string. The string A B, for example, Figs. 48 and 49, passing over a pulley B, is stretched by a definite weight (not shown in the figure). When the tuning-fork vibrates along it, as in Fig. 48, the string divides into two equal ventral segments. When the fork is turned so that it shall vibrate at right angles to the string, the number of ventral segments is four, Fig. 49, or double the former number. Attaching two strings of the same length to the same fork, the one parallel and the other perpendicular to the direction of vibration, and stretching both with equal weights, when the fork is caused to vibrate, one of them divides itself into twice the number of ventral segments exhibited by the other.

[Figure 48]

[Figure 49]

A number of exquisite effects may be obtained with these vibrating cords. The path described by any point of any one of them may be studied, after the manner of Dr. Young, by illuminating that point, and watching the line of light which it describes. This is well illustrated by a flat burnished silver wire, twisted so as to form a spiral surface, from which, at regular intervals, the light flashes when the wire is illuminated. When the vibration is steady, the luminous spots describe straight lines of sunlike brilliancy. On slackening the wire, but not so much as to produce its next higher subdivision, upon the larger motion of the wire are superposed a host of minor motions, the combination of all producing scrolls of marvellous complication and of indescribable splendor.

In reflecting on the best means of rendering these effects visible, the thought occurred to me of employing a fine platinum wire heated to redness by an electric current. Such a wire now stretches from a tuning-fork over a bridge of copper, and then passes round a peg. The copper bridge on the one hand and the tuning-fork on the other are the poles of a voltaic battery, from which a current passes through the wire and causes it to glow. On drawing the bow across the fork, the wire vibrates as a whole; its two ends are brilliant, while its middle is dark, being chilled by its rapid passage through the air. Thus you have a shading off of incandescence from the ends to the centre of the wire. On relaxing the tension, the wire divides itself into two ventral segments; on relaxing still further, we obtain three; still further, and the wire divides into four ventral segments, separated from each other by three brilliant nodes. Right and left from every node the incandescence shades away until it disappears. You notice also, when the wire settles into steady vibration, that the nodes shine out with greater brilliancy than that possessed by the wire before the vibration commenced. The reason is this. Electricity passes more freely along a cold wire than along a hot one. When, therefore, the vibrating segments are chilled by their swift passage through the air, their conductivity is improved, more electricity passes through the vibrating than through the motionless wire, and hence the augmented glow of the nodes. If, previous to the agitation of the fork, the wire be at a bright-red heat, when it vibrates its nodes may be raised to the temperature of fusion.

New Mode of determining the Laws of Vibration

We may extend the experiments of M. Melde to the establishment of all the laws of vibrating strings. Here are four tuning-forks, which we may call a, b, c, d, whose rates of vibration are to each other as the numbers 1, 2, 4, 8. To the largest fork is attached a string, a, stretched by a weight, which causes it to vibrate as a whole. Keeping the stretching weight the same, I determine the lengths of the same string, which, when attached to the other three forks, b, c, d, swing as a whole. The lengths in the four respective cases are as the numbers 8, 4, 2, 1.

From this follows the first law of vibration, already established (p. 126) by another method; viz., the length of the string is inversely proportional to the rapidity of vibration.

Footnote: A string steeped in a solution of the sulphate of quinine, and illuminated by the violet rays of the electric lamp, exhibits brilliant fluorescence. When the fork to which it is attached vibrates, the string divides itself into a series of spindles, and separated from each other by more intensely luminous nodes, emitting a light of the most delicate greenish-blue.

In this case the longest string vibrates as a whole when attached to the fork a. I now transfer the string to b, still keeping it stretched by the same weight. It vibrates when b vibrates; but how? By dividing into two equal ventral segments. In this way alone can it accommodate itself to the swifter vibrating period of b. Attached to c, the same string separates into four, while when attached to d, it divides into eight ventral segments. The number of the ventral segments is proportional to the rapidity of vibration. It is evident that we have here, in a more delicate form, a result which we have already established in the case of our India-rubber tube set in motion by the hand. It is also plain that this result might be deduced theoretically from our first law.

We may extend the experiment. Here are two tuning-forks separated from each other by the musical interval called a fifth. Attaching a string to one of the forks, I stretch the string until it divides into two ventral segments: attached to the other fork, and stretched by the same weight, it divides instantly into three segments when the fork is set in vibration. Now, to form the interval of a fifth, the vibrations of the one fork must be to those of the other in the ratio of 2:3. The division of the string, therefore, declares the interval. In, the same way the division of the string in relation to all other musical intervals may be illustrated.

Footnote: The subject of musical intervals will be treated in a subsequent lecture.

Again. Here are two tuning-forks, a and b, one of which (a) vibrates twice as rapidly as the other. A string of silk is attached to a, and stretched until it synchronizes with the fork, and vibrates as a whole. Here is a second string of the same length, formed by laying four strands of the first one side by side. I attach this compound thread to b, and, keeping the tension the same as in the last experiment, set b in vibration. The compound thread synchronizes with b, and swings as a whole. Hence, as the fork b vibrates with half the rapidity of a, by quadrupling the weight of the string we halved its rapidity of vibration. In the same simple way it might be proved that by augmenting the weight of the string nine times we reduce the number of its vibrations to one-third. We thus demonstrate the law:

The rapidity of vibration is inversely proportional to the square root of the weight of the string.

An instructive confirmation of this result is thus obtained: Attached to this tuning-fork is a silk string six feet long. Two feet of the string are composed of four strands of the single thread, placed side by side; the remaining four feet are a single thread. A stretching force is applied, which causes the string to divide into two ventral segments. But how does it divide? Not at its centre, as is the case when the string is of uniform thickness throughout, but at the precise point where the thick string terminates. This thick segment, two feet long, is now vibrating at the same rate as the thin segment four feet long, a result which follows by direct deduction from the two laws already established.

Here again are two strings of the same length and thickness. One of them is attached to the fork a, the other to the fork b, which vibrates with twice the rapidity of a. Stretched by a weight of 20 grains, the string attached to b vibrates as a whole. Substituting b for a, a weight of 80 grains causes the string to vibrate as a whole. Hence, to double the rapidity of vibration, we must quadruple the stretching weight. In the same way it might be proved that to treble the rapidity of vibration we should have to make the stretching weight ninefold. Hence our third law:

The rapidity of vibration is proportional to the square root of the tension.

[Figure 50]

Let us vary this experiment. This silk cord is carried from the tuning-fork over the pulley, and stretched by a weight of 80 grains. The string vibrates as a whole as at A, Fig. 50. By diminishing the weight the string is relaxed, and finally divides sharply into two ventral segments, as at B, Fig. 50. What is now the stretching weight?—20 grains, or one-fourth of the first. With a stretching weight of almost exactly 9 grains it divides into three segments, as at C; while with a stretching weight of 5 grains it divides into four segments, as at D. Thus then, a tension of one-fourth doubles, a tension of one-ninth trebles, and a tension of one-sixteenth quadruples the number of ventral segments. In general terms, the number of segments is inversely proportional to the square root of the tension. This result may be deduced by reasoning from our first and third laws, and its realization here confirms their correctness.

Thus, by a series of reasonings and experiments totally different from those formerly employed, we arrive at the self-same laws. In science, different lines of reasoning often converge upon the same truth; and if we only follow them faithfully, we are sure to reach that truth at last. We may emerge, and often do emerge, from our reasoning with a contradiction in our hands; but on retracing our steps, we infallibly find the cause of the contradiction to be due, not to any lack of constancy in Nature, but of accuracy in man. It is the millions of experiences of this kind which science furnishes that give us our present faith in the stability of Nature.

Harmonic Sounds or Overtones

Timbre; Klangfarbe; Clang-tint

We now approach a portion of our subject which will subsequently prove to be of the very highest importance. It has been shown by the most varied experiments that a stretched string can either vibrate as a whole, or divide itself into a number of equal parts, each of which vibrates as an independent string. Now it is not possible to sound the string as a whole without at the same time causing, to a greater or less extent, its subdivision; that is to say, superposed upon the vibrations of the whole string we have always, in a greater or less degree, the vibrations of its aliquot parts. The higher notes produced by these latter vibrations are called the harmonics of the string. And so it is with other sounding bodies; we have in all cases a coexistence of vibrations. Higher tones mingle with the fundamental one, and it is their intermixture which determines what, for want of a better term, we call the quality of the sound. The French call it timbre, and the Germans call it Klangfarbe. It is this union of high and low tones that enables us to distinguish one musical instrument from another. A clarinet and a violin, for example, though tuned to the same fundamental note, are not confounded; the auxiliary tones of the one are different from those of the other, and these latter tones, uniting themselves to the fundamental tones of the two instruments, destroy the identity of the sounds.

Footnote: “This quality of sound, sometimes called its register, color, or timbre.”—Thomas Young, “Essay on Music.”

All bodies and instruments, then, employed for producing musical sounds emit, besides their fundamental tones, others due to higher orders of vibration. The Germans embrace all such sounds under the general term Obertöne. I think it will be an advantage if we in England adopt the term overtones as the equivalent of the term employed in Germany. One has occasion to envy the power of the German language to adapt itself to requirements of this nature. The term Klangfarbe, for example, employed by Helmholtz is exceedingly expressive, and we need its equivalent also. Color depends upon rapidity of vibration, blue light bearing to red the same relation that a high tone does to a low one. A simple color has but one rate of vibration, and it may be regarded as the analogue of a simple tone in music. A tone, then, may be defined as the product of a vibration which cannot be decomposed into more simple ones. A compound color, on the contrary, is produced by the admixture of two or more simple ones, and an assemblage of tones, such as we obtain when the fundamental tone and the harmonics of a string sound together, is called by the Germans a Klang. May we not employ the English word clang to denote the same thing, and thus give the term a precise scientific meaning akin to its popular one? And may we not, like Helmholtz, add the word color or tint, to denote the character of the clang, using the term clang-tint as the equivalent of Klangfarbe?
