With your permission I shall henceforth employ these terms; and now it becomes our duty to look a little more closely than we have hitherto done into the subdivision of a string into its harmonic segments. Our monochord with its stretched wire is before you. The scale of the instrument is divided into 100 equal parts. At the middle point of the wire stands the number 50; at a point almost exactly one-third of its length from its end stands the number 33; while at distances equal to one-fourth and one-fifth of its length from its end stand the numbers 25 and 20 respectively. These numbers are sufficient for our present purpose. When the wire is plucked at 50 you hear its clang, rather hollow and dull. When plucked at 33, the clang is different. When plucked at 25, the clang is different from either of the former. As we retreat from the centre of the string, the clang-tint becomes more “brilliant,” the sound more brisk and sharp. What is the reason of these differences in the sound of the same wire?

The celebrated Thomas Young, once professor in this Institution, enables us to solve the question. He proved that when any point of a string is plucked, all the higher tones which require that point for a node vanish from the clang. Let me illustrate this experimentally. I pluck the point 50, and permit the string to sound. It may be proved that the first overtone, which corresponds to a division of the string into two vibrating parts, is now absent from the clang. If it were present, the damping of the point 50 would not interfere with it, for this point would be its node. But on damping the point 50 the fundamental tone is quenched, and no octave of that tone is heard. Along with the octave its whole progeny of overtones, with rates of vibration four times, six times, eight times—all even numbers of times—the rate of the fundamental tone, disappear from the clang. All these tones require that a node should exist at the centre, where, according to the principle of Young, it cannot now be formed. Let us pluck some other point, say 25, and damp 50 as before. The fundamental tone is now gone, but its octave, clear and full, rings in your ears. The point 50 in this case not being the one plucked, a node can form there; it has formed, and the two halves of the string continue to vibrate after the vibrations of the string as a whole have been extinguished. Plucking the point 33, the second harmonic or overtone is absent from the clang. This is proved by damping the point 33. If the second harmonic were on the string this would not affect it, for 33 is its node. The fundamental is quenched, but no tone corresponding to a division of the string into three vibrating parts is now heard. The tone is not heard because it was never there.

All the overtones which depend on this division, those with six times, nine times, twelve times the rate of vibration of the fundamental one, are also withdrawn from the clang. Let us now pluck 20, damping 33 as before. The second harmonic is not extinguished, but continues to sound clearly and fully after the extinction of the fundamental tone. In this case the point 33 not being that plucked, a node can form there, and the string can divide itself into three parts accordingly. In like manner, if 25 be plucked and then damped, the third harmonic is not heard; but when a point between 25 and the end of the wire is plucked, and the point 25 damped, the third harmonic is plainly heard. And thus we might proceed, the general rule enunciated by Young, and illustrated by these experiments, being, that when any point of a string is plucked or struck, or, as Helmholtz adds, agitated with a bow, the harmonic which requires that point for a node vanishes from the general clang of the string.

Mingling of Overtones with Fundamental. The Æolian Harp

You are now in a condition to estimate the influence which these higher vibrations must have upon the quality of the tone emitted by the string. The sounds which ring in your ears so plainly after the fundamental tone is quenched mingled with that note before it was extinguished. It seems strange that tones of such power could be so masked by the fundamental one that even the disciplined ear of a musician is unable to separate the one from the other. But Helmholtz has shown that this is due to want of practice and attention. The musician’s faculties were never exercised in this direction. There are numerous effects which the musician can distinguish, because his art demands the habit of distinguishing them. But it is no necessity of his art to resolve the clang of an instrument into its constituent tones. By attention, however, even the unaided ear can accomplish this, particularly if the mind be informed beforehand what the ear has to bend itself to find.

And this reminds me of an occurrence which took place in this room at the beginning of my acquaintance with Faraday. I wished to show him a peculiar action of an electro-magnet upon a crystal. Everything was arranged, when just before the magnet was excited he laid his hand upon my arm and asked, “What am I to look for?” Amid the assemblage of impressions connected with an experiment, even this prince of experimenters felt the advantage of having his attention directed to the special point to be illustrated. Such help is the more needed when we attempt to resolve into its constituent parts an effect so intimately blended as the composite tones of a clang. When we desire to isolate a particular tone, one way of helping the attention is to sound that tone feebly on a string of the proper length. Thus prepared, the ear glides more readily from the single tone to that of the same pitch in a composite clang, and detaches it more readily from its companions. In the experiments executed a moment ago, where our aim in each respective case was to bring out the higher tone of the string in all its power, we entirely extinguished its fundamental tone. It may, however, be enfeebled without being destroyed. I pluck this string at 33, and lay the feather lightly for a moment on the string at 50. The fundamental tone is thereby so much lowered that its octave can make itself plainly heard. By again touching the string at 50, the fundamental tone is lowered still more; so that now its first harmonic is more powerful than itself. You hear the sound of both, and you might have heard them in the first instance by a sufficient stretch of attention.

The harmonics of a string may be augmented or subdued within wide limits. They may, as we have seen, be masked by the fundamental tone, and they may also effectually mask it. A stroke with a hard body is favorable, while a stroke with a soft body is unfavorable to their development. They depend, moreover, on the promptness with which the body striking the string retreats after striking. Thus they are influenced by the weight and elasticity of the hammers in the pianoforte. They also depend upon the place at which the shock is imparted. When, for example, a string is struck in the centre, the harmonics are less powerful than when it is struck near one end.

Helmholtz, who is equally eminent as a mathematician and as an experimental philosopher, has calculated the theoretic intensity of the harmonics developed in various ways; that is to say, the actual vis viva or energy of the vibration, irrespective of its effects upon the ear. A single example given by him will suffice to illustrate this subject. Calling the intensity of the fundamental tone, in each case, 100, that of the second harmonic, when the string was simply pulled aside at a point one-seventh of its length from its end and then liberated, was found to be 56·1, or a little better than one-half. When the string was struck with the hammer of a pianoforte, whose contact with the string endured for three-sevenths of the period of vibration of the fundamental tone, the intensity of the same tone was 9. In this case the second harmonic was nearly quenched. When, however, the duration of contact was diminished to three-twentieths of the period of the fundamental, the intensity of the harmonic rose to 357; while, when the string was sharply struck with a very hard hammer, the intensity mounted to 505, or to more than quintuple that of the fundamental tone. Pianoforte manufacturers have found that the most pleasing tone is excited by the middle strings of their instruments, when the point against which the hammer strikes is from one-seventh to one-ninth of the length of the wire from its extremity.

Footnote: “Lehre von den Tonempfindungen,” p. 135.

Why should this be the case? Helmholtz has given the answer. Up to the tones which require these points as nodes the overtones all form chords with the fundamental; but the sixth and eighth overtones of the wire do not enter into such chords; they are dissonant tones, and hence the desirability of doing away with them. This is accomplished by making the point at which a node is required that on which the hammer falls. The possibility of the tone forming is thereby shut out, and its injurious effect is avoided.

The strings of the Æolian harp are divided into harmonic parts by a current of air passing over them. The instrument is usually placed in a window between the sash and frame, so as to leave no way open to the entrance of the air except over the strings. Sir Charles Wheatstone recommends the stretching of a first violin-string at the bottom of a door which does not closely fit. When the door is shut, the current of air entering beneath sets the string in vibration, and when a fire is in the room, the vibrations are so intense that a great variety of sounds are simultaneously produced. A gentleman in Basel once constructed with iron wires a large instrument which he called the weather-harp or giant-harp, and which, according to its maker, sounded as the weather changed. Its sounds were also said to be evoked by changes of terrestrial magnetism. Chladni pointed out the error of these notions, and reduced the action of the instrument to that of the wind upon its strings.

Footnote: The action of such a string is substantially the same as that of the siren. The string renders intermittent the current of air. Its action also resembles that of a reed. See Lecture V.

Young’s Optical Illustrations

Finally, with regard to the vibrations of a wire, the experiments of Dr. Young, who was the first to employ optical methods in such experiments, must be mentioned. He allowed a sheet of sunlight to cross a pianoforte-wire, and obtained thus a brilliant dot. Striking the wire he caused it to vibrate, the dot described a luminous line like that produced by the whirling of a burning coal in the air, and the form of this line revealed the character of the vibration. It was rendered manifest by these experiments that the oscillations of the wire were not confined to a single plane, but that it described in its vibrations curves of greater or less complexity. Superposed upon the vibration of the whole string were partial vibrations, which revealed themselves as loops and sinuosities. Some of the lines observed by Dr. Young are given in Fig. 51. Every one of these figures corresponds to a distinct impression made by the wire upon the surrounding air. The form of the sonorous wave is affected by these superposed vibrations, and thus they influence the clang-tint or quality of the sound.

[Figure 51]

Summary of Chapter III

The amount of motion communicated by a vibrating string to the air is too small to be perceived as sound, even at a small distance from the string.

When a broad surface vibrates in air, condensations and rarefactions are more readily formed than when the vibrating body is of small dimensions like a string. Hence, when strings are employed as sources of musical sounds, they are associated with surfaces of larger area which take up their vibrations, and transfer them to the surrounding air.

Thus the tone of a harp, a piano, a guitar, or a violin, depends mainly upon the sound-board of the instrument.

The following four laws regulate the vibrations of strings: The rate of vibrations is inversely proportional to the length; it is inversely proportional to the diameter; it is directly proportional to the square root of the stretching weight or tension; and it is inversely proportional to the square root of the density of the string.

When strings of different diameters and densities are compared, the law is, that the rate of vibration is inversely proportional to the square root of the weight of the string.

When a stretched rope, or an India-rubber tube filled with sand, with one of its ends attached to a fixed object, receives a jerk at the other end, the protuberance raised upon the tube runs along it as a pulse to the fixed end, and, being there reflected, returns to the hand by which the jerk was imparted.

The time required for the pulse to travel from the hand to the fixed end of the tube and back is that required by the whole tube to execute a complete vibration.

When a series of pulses are sent in succession along the tube, the direct and reflected pulses meet, and by their coalescence divide the tube into a series of vibrating parts, called ventral segments, which are separated from each other by points of apparent rest called nodes.

The number of ventral segments is directly proportional to the rate of vibration at the free end of the tube.

The hand which produces these vibrations may move through less than an inch of space; while by the accumulation of its impulses the amplitude of the ventral segments may amount to several inches, or even to several feet.

If an India-rubber tube, fixed at both ends, be encircled at its centre by the finger and thumb, when either of its halves is pulled aside and liberated, both halves are thrown into a state of vibration.

If the tube be encircled at a point one-third, one-fourth, or one-fifth of its length from one of its ends, on pulling the shorter segment aside and liberating it, the longer segment divides itself into two, three, or four vibrating parts, separated from each other by nodes.

The number of vibrating segments depends upon the rate of vibration at the point encircled by the finger and thumb.

Here also the amplitude of vibration at the place encircled by the finger and thumb may not be more than a fraction of an inch, while the amplitude of the ventral segments may amount to several inches.

A musical string damped by a feather at a point one-half, one-third, one-fourth, one-fifth, etc., of its length from one of its ends, and having its shorter segment agitated, divides itself exactly like the India-rubber tube. Its division may be rendered apparent by placing little paper riders across it. Those placed at the ventral segments are thrown off, while those placed at the nodes retain their places.

The notes corresponding to the division of a string into its aliquot parts are called the harmonics of the string.

When a string vibrates as a whole, it usually divides at the same time into its aliquot parts. Smaller vibrations are superposed upon the larger; the tones corresponding to those smaller vibrations, and which we have agreed to call overtones, mingling at the same time with the fundamental tone of the string.

The addition of these overtones to the fundamental tone determines the timbre or quality of the sound, or, as we have agreed to call it, the clang-tint.

It is the addition of such overtones to fundamental tones of the same pitch which enables us to distinguish the sound of a clarionet from that of a flute, and the sound of a violin from both. Could the pure fundamental tones of these instruments be detached, they would be indistinguishable from each other; but the different admixture of overtones in the different instruments renders their clang-tints diverse, and therefore distinguishable.

Instead of the heavy India-rubber tube in the experiment above referred to, we may employ light silk strings, and, instead of the vibrating hand, we may employ vibrating tuning-forks, and cause the strings to swing as a whole, or to divide themselves into any number of ventral segments. Effects of great beauty are thus obtained, and by experiments of this character all the laws of vibrating strings may be demonstrated.

When a stretched string is plucked aside or agitated by a bow, all the overtones which require the agitated point for a node vanish from the clang of the string.

The point struck by the hammer of the piano is from one-seventh to one-ninth of the length of the string from its end: by striking this point, the notes which require it as a node cannot be produced, a source of dissonance being thus avoided.
