Vibrations of a Rod fixed at Both Ends: its Subdivisions and Corresponding Overtones—Vibrations of a Rod fixed at One End—The Kaleidophone—The Iron Fiddle and Musical Box—Vibrations of a Rod free at Both Ends—The Claque-bois and Glass Harmonica—Vibrations of a Tuning-Fork: its Subdivisions and Overtones—Vibrations of Square Plates—Chladni’s Discoveries—Wheatstone’s Analysis of the Vibrations of Plates—Chladni’s Figures—Vibrations of Disks and Bells—Experiments of Faraday and Strehlke

Transverse Vibrations of a Rod fixed at Both Ends

[Figure 52]

OUR last chapter was devoted to the transverse vibrations of strings. This one I propose devoting to the transverse vibrations of rods, plates, and bells, commencing with the case of a rod fixed at both ends. Its modes of vibration are exactly those of a string. It vibrates as a whole, and can also divide itself into two, three, four, or more vibrating parts. But, for a reason to be immediately assigned, the laws which regulate the pitch of the successive notes are entirely different in the two cases. Thus, when a string divides into two equal parts, each of its halves vibrates with twice the rapidity of the whole; while, in the case of the rod, each of its halves vibrates with nearly three times the rapidity of the whole. With greater strictness, the ratio of the two rates of vibration is as 9 is to 25, or as the square of 3 to the square of 5. In Fig. 52, a a′, c c′, b b′, d d′, are sketched the first four modes of vibration of a rod fixed at both ends: the successive rates of vibration, in the four cases bear to each other the following relation:

    Number of nodes       0  1   2   3
    Number of vibrations  9  25  49  81

the last row of figures being the squares of the odd numbers 3, 5, 7, 9.

In the case of a string, the vibrations are maintained by a tension externally applied; in the case of a rod, the vibrations are maintained by the elasticity of the rod itself. The modes of division are in both cases the same, but the forces brought into play are different, and hence also the successive rates of vibration.

Transverse Vibrations of a Rod fixed at One End

Let us now pass on to the case of a rod fixed at one end and free at the other. Here also it is the elasticity of the material, and not any external tension, that sustains the vibrations. Approaching, as usual, sonorous vibrations through more grossly mechanical ones, I fix this long rod of iron, n o, Fig. 53, in a vise, draw it aside, and liberate it. To make its vibrations more evident, its shadow is thrown upon a screen. The rod oscillates as a whole to and fro, between the points p p′. But it is capable of other modes of vibration. Damping it at the point a, by holding it gently there between the finger and thumb, and striking it sharply between a and o, the rod divides into two vibrating parts, separated by a node as shown in Fig. 54. You see upon the screen a shadowy spindle between a and the vise below, and a shadowy fan above a, with a black node between both. The division may be effected without damping a, by merely imparting a sufficiently sharp shock to the rod between a and o. In this case, however, besides oscillating in parts, the rod oscillates as a whole, the partial oscillations being superposed upon the large one.

[Figure 53]

[Figure 54]

[Figure 55]

You notice, moreover, that the amplitude of the partial oscillations depends upon the promptness of the stroke. When the stroke is sluggish, the partial division is but feebly pronounced, the whole oscillation being most marked. But when the shock is sharp and prompt, the whole oscillation is feeble, and the partial oscillations are executed with vigor. If the vibrations of this rod were rapid enough to produce a musical sound, the oscillation of the rod as a whole would correspond to its fundamental tone, while the division of the rod into two vibrating parts would correspond to the first of its overtones. If, moreover, the rod vibrated as a whole and as a divided rod at the same time, the fundamental tone and the overtone would be heard simultaneously. By damping the proper point and imparting the proper shock, we can still further subdivide the rod, as shown in Fig. 55.

Chladni’s Tonometer: the Iron Fiddle, Musical Box, and the Kaleidophone

And now let us shorten our rod, so as to bring its vibrations into proper relation to our ears. When it is about four inches long, it emits a low musical sound. When further shortened, the tone is higher; and, by continuing to shorten the rod, the speed of vibration is augmented, until finally the sound becomes painfully acute. These musical vibrations differ only in rapidity from the grosser oscillations which a moment ago appealed to the eye.

The increase in the rate of vibrations here observed is ruled by a definite law; the number of vibrations executed at a given time is inversely proportional to the square of the length of the vibrating rod. You hear the sound of this strip of brass, two inches long, as the fiddle-bow is passed over its end. Making the length of the strip one inch, the sound is the double octave of the last one; the rate of vibration is augmented four times. Thus, by doubling the length of the vibrating strip, we reduce its rate of vibration to one-fourth; by trebling the length, we reduce the rate of vibration to one-ninth; by quadrupling the length, we reduce the vibrations to one-sixteenth, and so on. It is plain that, by proceeding in this way, we should finally reach a length where the vibrations would be sufficiently slow to be counted. Or, it is plain that, beginning with a long strip whose vibrations could be counted, we might, by shortening, not only make the strip sound, but also determine the rates of vibration corresponding to its different tones. Supposing we start with a strip 36 inches long, which vibrates once in a second, the strip reduced to 12 inches would, according to the above law, execute 9 vibrations a second; reduced to 6 inches, it would execute 36, to 3 inches, 144; while, if reduced to 1 inch in length, it would execute 1,296 vibrations in a second. It is easy to fill the spaces between the lengths here given, and thus to determine the rate of vibration corresponding to any particular tone. This method was proposed and carried out by Chladni.

A musical instrument may be formed of short rods. Into this common wooden tray a number of pieces of stout iron wire of different lengths are fixed, being ranged in a semicircle. When the fiddle-bow is passed over the series, we obtain a succession of very pleasing notes. A competent performer could certainly extract very tolerable music from a sufficient number of these iron pins. The iron fiddle (violon de fer) is thus formed. The notes of the ordinary musical box are also produced by the vibrations of tongues of metal fixed at one end. Pins are fixed in a revolving, cylinder, the free ends of the tongues are lifted by these pins and then suddenly let go. The tongues vibrate, their length and strength being so arranged as to produce in each particular case the proper rapidity of vibration.

Sir Charles Wheatstone has devised a simple and ingenious optical method for the study of vibrating rods fixed at one end. Attaching light glass beads, silvered within, to the end of a metal rod, and allowing the light of a lamp or candle to fall upon the bead, he obtained a small spot intensely illuminated. When the rod vibrated, this spot described a brilliant line which showed the character of the vibration. A knitting-needle, fixed in a vise with a small bead stuck on to it by marine glue, answers perfectly as an illustration. In Wheatstone’s more complete instrument, which he calls a kaleidophone, the vibrating rods are firmly screwed into a massive stand. Extremely beautiful figures are obtained by this simple contrivance, some of which may now be projected on a magnified scale upon the screen before you.

Fixing the rod horizontally in the vise, a condensed beam is permitted to fall upon the silvered bead, a spot of sunlike brilliancy being thus obtained. Placing a lens in front of the bead, a bright image of the spot is thrown upon the screen, the needle is then drawn aside, and suddenly liberated. The spot describes a ribbon of light, at first straight, but speedily opening out into an ellipse, passing into a circle, and then again through a second ellipse back to a straight line. This is due to the fact that a rod held thus in a vise vibrates not only in the direction in which it is drawn aside, but also at right angles to this direction. The curve is due to the combination of two rectangular vibrations. While the rod is thus swinging as a whole, it may also divide itself into vibrating parts. By properly drawing a violin-bow across the needle, this serrated circle, Fig. 56, is obtained, a number of small undulations being superposed upon the large one. You moreover hear a musical tone, which you did not hear when the rod vibrated as a whole only; its oscillations, in fact, were then too slow to excite such a tone. The vibrations which produce these sinuosities, and which correspond to the first division of the rod, are executed with about 6-1/4 times the rapidity of the vibrations of the rod swinging as a whole. Again I draw the bow; the note rises in pitch, the serrations run more closely together, forming on the screen a luminous ripple more minute and, if possible, more beautiful than the last one, Fig. 57. Here we have the second division of the rod, the sinuosities of which correspond to 17-13/36 times its rate of vibration as a whole. Thus every change in the sound of the rod is accompanied by a change of the figure upon the screen.

Footnote: Chladni also observed this compounding of vibrations, and executed a series of experiments, which, in their developed form, are those of the kaleidophone. The composition of vibrations will be studied at some length in a subsequent lecture.

[Figure 56]

[Figure 57]

The rate of vibration of the rod, as a whole, is to the rate corresponding to its first division nearly as the square of 2 is to the square of 5, or as 4:25. From the first division onward the rates of vibration are approximately proportional to the squares of the series of odd numbers 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, etc. Supposing the vibrations of the rod as a whole to number 36, then the vibrations corresponding to this and to its successive divisions would be expressed approximately by the following series of number’s:

36, 225, 625, 1225, 2025, etc.

In Fig. 58, a, b, c, d, e, are shown the modes of division corresponding to this series of numbers. You will not fail to observe that these overtones of a vibrating rod rise far more rapidly in pitch than the harmonics of a string.

[Figure 58]

Other forms of vibration may be obtained by smartly striking the rod with the finger near its fixed end. In fact, an almost infinite variety of luminous scrolls can be thus produced, the beauty of which may be inferred from the subjoined figures (see next page) first obtained by Sir C. Wheatstone. They may be produced by illuminating the bead with sunlight, or with the light of a lamp or candle. The scrolls, moreover, may be doubled by employing two candles instead of one. Two spots of light then appear, each of which describes its own luminous line when the knitting-needle is set in vibration. In a subsequent lecture we shall become acquainted with Wheatstone’s application of his method to the study of rectangular vibrations.

[Figure 59]

Transverse Vibrations of a Rod free at Both Ends. The Claque-bois and Glass Harmonica

[Figure 60]

From a rod or bar fixed at one end, we will now pass to rods or bars free at both ends; for such an arrangement has also been employed in music. By a method afterward to be described, Chladni, the father of modern acoustics, determined experimentally the modes of vibration possible to such bars. The simplest mode of division in this case occurs when the rod is divided by two nodes into three vibrating parts. This division is easily illustrated by a flexible box ruler, six feet long. Holding it at about twelve inches from its two ends between the forefinger and thumb of each hand, and shaking it, or causing its centre to be struck, it vibrates, the middle segment forming a shadowy spindle, and the two ends forming fans. The shadow of the ruler on the screen renders the mode of vibration very evident. In this case the distance of each node from the end of the ruler is about one-fourth of the distance between the two nodes. In its second mode of vibration the rod or ruler is divided into four vibrating parts by three nodes. In Fig. 60, 1 and 2, these respective modes of division are shown. Looking at the edge of the ruler 1, the dotted lines cutting a a′, b b′, show the manner in which the segments bend up and down when the first division occurs, while c c′, d d′, show the mode of vibration corresponding to the second division. The deepest tone of a rod free at both ends is higher than the deepest tone of a rod fixed at one end in the proportion of 4:25. Beginning with the first two nodes, the rates of vibration of the free bar rise in the following proportion:

    Number of nodes                         2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
    Numbers to the squares of which the  }  3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13
    pitch is approximately proportional

Here, also, we have a similarly rapid rise of pitch to that noticed in the last two cases.

[Figure 61]

For musical purposes the first division only of a free rod has been employed. When bars of wood of different lengths, widths, and depths, are strung along a cord which passes through the nodes, we have the claque-bois of the French, an instrument now before you, A B, Fig. 61. Supporting the cord at one end by a hook k and holding it at the other in the left hand, I run the hammer h along the series of bars, and produce an agreeable succession of musical tones. Instead of using the cord, the bars may rest at their nodes on cylinders of twisted straw; hence the name “straw-fiddle,” sometimes applied to this instrument. Chladni informs us that it is introduced as a play of bells (Glockenspiel) into Mozart’s opera of “Die Zauberflöte.” If, instead of bars of wood, we employ strips of glass, we have the glass harmonica.

Vibrations of a Tuning-fork

From the vibrations of a bar free at both ends it is easy to pass to the vibrations of a tuning-fork, as analyzed by Chladni. Supposing a a, Fig. 62, to represent a straight steel bar, with the nodal points corresponding to its first mode of division marked by the transverse dots. Let the bar be bent to the form b b; the two nodal points still remain, but they have approached nearer to each other. The tone of the bent bar is also somewhat lower than that of the straight one. Passing through various stages of bending, c c, d d, we at length convert the bar into a tuning-fork e e, with parallel prongs; it still retains its two nodal points, which, however, are much closer together than when the bar was straight.
