[Figure 62]

[Figure 63]

When such a fork sounds its deepest note, its free ends oscillate as in Fig. 63, where the prongs vibrate between the limits b and n, and f and m, and where p and q are the nodes. There is no division of a tuning-fork corresponding to the division of a straight bar by three nodes. In its second mode of division, which corresponds to the first overtone of the fork, we have a node on each prong, and two at the bottom. The principle of Young, referred to at page 155, extends also to tuning-forks. To free the fundamental tone from an overtone, you draw your bow across the fork at the place where the node is required to form the latter. In the third mode of division there are two nodes on each prong and one at the bottom; in the fourth division there are two nodes on each prong and two at the bottom; while in the fifth division there are three nodes on each prong and one at the bottom. The first overtone of the fork requires, according to Chladni, 6-1/4 times the number of vibrations of the fundamental tone.

It is easy to elicit the overtones of tuning-forks. Here, for example, is our old series, vibrating respectively 256, 320, 384, and 512 times in a second. In passing from the fundamental tone to the first overtone of each you notice that the interval is vastly greater than that between the fundamental tone and the first overtone of a stretched string. From the numbers just mentioned we pass at once to 1,600, 2,000, 2,400, and 3,200 vibrations a second. Chladni’s numbers, however, though approximately correct, are not always rigidly verified by experiment. A pair of forks, for example, may have their fundamental tones in perfect unison and their overtones discordant. Two such forks are now before you. When the fundamental tones of both are sounded, the unison is perfect; but when the first overtones of both are sounded, they are not in unison. You hear rapid “beats,” which grate upon the ear. By loading one of the forks with wax, the two overtones may be brought into unison; but now the fundamental tones produce loud beats when sounded together. This could not occur if the first overtone of each fork was produced by a number of vibrations exactly 6-1/4 times the rate of its fundamental. In a series of forks examined by Helmholtz, the number of vibrations of the first overtone varied from 5·6 to 6·6 times that of the fundamental.

Starting from the first overtone, and including it, the rates of vibration of the whole series of overtones are as the squares of the numbers 3, 5, 7, 9, etc. That is to say, in the time required by the first overtone to execute 9 vibrations, the second executes 25, the third 49, the fourth 81, and so on. Thus the overtones of the fork rise with far greater rapidity than those of a string. They also vanish more speedily, and hence adulterate to a less extent the fundamental tone by their admixture.

Chladni’s Figures

The device of Chladni for rendering these sonorous vibrations visible has been of immense importance to the science of acoustics. Lichtenberg had made the experiment of scattering an electrified powder over an electrified resin-cake, the arrangement of the powder revealing the electric condition of the surface. This experiment suggested to Chladni the idea of rendering sonorous vibrations visible by means of sand strewed upon the surface of the vibrating body. Chladni’s own account of his discovery is of sufficient interest to justify its introduction here:

“As an admirer of music, the elements of which I had begun to learn rather late, that is, in my nineteenth year, I noticed that the science of acoustics was more neglected than most other portions of physics. This excited in me the desire to make good the defect, and by new discovery to render some service to this part of science. In 1785 I had observed that a plate of glass or metal gave different sounds when it was struck at different places, but I could nowhere find any information regarding the corresponding modes of vibration. At this time there appeared in the journals some notices of an instrument made in Italy by the Abbé Mazzochi, consisting of bells, to which one or two violin-bows were applied. This suggested to me the idea of employing a violin-bow to examine the vibrations of different sonorous bodies. When I applied the bow to a round plate of glass fixed at its middle it gave different sounds, which, compared with each other, were (as regards the number of their vibrations) equal to the squares of 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.; but the nature of the motions to which these sounds corresponded, and the means of producing each of them at will, were yet unknown to me. The experiments on the electric figures formed on a plate of resin, discovered and published by Lichtenberg, in the memoirs of the Royal Society of Göttingen, made me presume that the different vibratory motions of a sonorous plate might also present different appearances, if a little sand or some other similar substance were spread over the surface. On employing this means, the first figure that presented itself to my eyes upon the circular plate already mentioned resembled a star with ten or twelve rays, and the very acute sound, in the series alluded to, was that which agreed with the square of the number of diametrical lines.”

Vibrations of Square Plates: Nodal Lines

I will now illustrate the experiments of Chladni, commencing with a square plate of glass held by a suitable clamp at its centre. The plate might be held with the finger and thumb, if they could only reach far enough. Scattering fine sand over the plate, the middle point of one of its edges is damped by touching it with the finger-nail, and a bow is drawn across the edge of the plate, near one of its corners. The sand is tossed away from certain parts of the surface, and collects along two nodal lines which divide the large square into four smaller ones, as in Fig. 64. This division of the plate corresponds to its deepest tone.

[Figure 64]

[Figure 65]

[Figure 66]

The signs + and - employed in these figures denote that the two squares on which they occur are always moving in opposite directions. When the squares marked + are above the average level of the plate those marked - are below it; and when those marked - are above the average level those marked + are below it. The nodal lines mark the boundaries of these opposing motions. They are the places of transition from the one motion to the other, and are therefore unaffected by either.

Scattering sand once more over its surface, I damp one of the corners of the plate, and excite it by drawing the bow across the middle of one of its sides. The sand dances over the surface, and finally ranges itself in two sharply-defined ridges along its diagonals, Fig. 65. The note here produced is a fifth above the last. Again damping two other points, and drawing the bow across the centre of the opposite side of the plate, we obtain a far shriller note than in either of the former cases, and the manner in which the plate vibrates to produce this note is represented in Fig. 66.

[Figure 67]

Thus far plates of glass have been employed held by a clamp at the centre. Plates of metal are still more suitable for such experiments. Here is a plate of brass, 12 inches square, and supported on a suitable stand. Damping it with the finger and thumb of my left hand at two points of its edge, and drawing the bow with my right across a vibrating portion of the opposite edge, the complicated pattern represented in Fig. 67 is obtained.

[Figure 68]

The beautiful series of patterns shown on page 182 were obtained by Chladni, by damping and exciting square plates in different ways. It is not only interesting but startling to see the suddenness with which these sharply-defined figures are formed by the sweep of the bow of a skilful experimenter.

Wheatstone’s Analysis of the Vibrations of Square Plates

And now let us look a little more closely into the mechanism of these vibrations. The manner in which a bar free at both ends divides itself when it vibrates transversely has been already explained. Rectangular pieces of glass or of sheet metal—the glass strips of

[Figure 69]

the harmonica, for example—also obey the laws of free rods and bars. In Fig. 69 is drawn a rectangle a, with the nodes corresponding to its first division marked upon it, and underneath it is placed a figure showing the manner in which the rectangle, looked at edgewise, bends up and down when it is set in vibration. For the sake of plainness the bending is greatly exaggerated. The figures b and c indicate that the vibrating parts of the plate alternately rise above and fall below the average level of the plate. At one moment, for example, the centre of the plate is above the level and its ends below it, as at b; while at the next moment its centre is below and its two ends above the average level, as at c. The vibrations of the plate consist in the quick successive assumption of these two positions. Similar remarks apply to all other modes of division.

Footnote: I copy this figure from Sir C. Wheatstone’s memoir; the nodes, however, ought to be nearer the ends, and the free terminal portions of the dotted lines ought not to be bent upward or downward. The nodal lines in the next two figures are also drawn too far from the edge of the plates.

Now suppose the rectangle gradually to widen, till it becomes a square. There then would be no reason why the nodal lines should form parallel to one pair of sides rather than to the other. Let us now examine what would be the effect of the coalescence of two such systems of vibrations.

To keep your conceptions clear, take two squares of glass and draw upon each of them the nodal lines belonging to a rectangle. Draw the lines on one plate in white, and on the other in black; this will help you to keep the plates distinct in your mind as you look at them. Now lay one square upon the other so that their nodal lines shall coincide, and then realize with perfect mental clearness both plates in a state of vibration. Let us assume, in the first instance, that the vibrations of the two plates are concurrent; that the middle segment and the end segments of each rise and fall together; and now suppose the vibrations of one plate transferred to the other. What would be the result? Evidently vibrations of a double amplitude on the part of the plate which has received this accession. But suppose the vibrations of the two plates, instead of being concurrent, to be in exact opposition to each other—that when the middle segment of the one rises the middle segment of the other falls—what would be the consequence of adding them together? Evidently a neutralization of all vibration.

Instead of placing the plates so that their nodal lines coincide, set these lines at right angles to each other. That is to say, push A over A′, Fig. 70. In these figures the letter P means positive, indicating, in the section where it occurs, a motion of the plate upward; while N means negative, indicating, where it occurs, a motion downward. You have now before you a kind of check pattern, as shown in the third square, consisting of a square s in the middle, a smaller square b at each corner, and four rectangles at the middle portions of the four sides. Let the plates vibrate, and let the vibrations of their corresponding sections be concurrent, as indicated by the letters P and N; and then suppose the vibrations of one of them transferred to the other. What must result? A moment’s reflection will show you that the big middle square s will vibrate with augmented energy; the same is true of the four smaller squares b, b, b, b, at the four corners; but you will at once convince yourselves that the vibrations in the four rectangles are in opposition, and that where their amplitudes are equal they will destroy each other. The middle point of each side of the plate of glass would therefore be a point of rest; the points where the nodal lines of the two plates cross each other would also be points of rest. Draw a line through every three of these points and you will obtain a second square inscribed in the first. The sides of this square are lines of no motion.

[Figure 70]

We have thus far been theorizing. Let us now clip a square plate of glass at a point near the centre of one of its edges, and draw the bow across the adjacent corner of the plate. When the glass is homogeneous, a close approximation to this inscribed square is obtained. The reason is that when the plate is agitated in this manner the two sets of vibrations which we have been considering actually coexist in the plate, and produce the figure due to their combination.

Again, place the squares of glass one upon the other exactly as in the last case; but now, instead of supposing them to concur in their vibrations, let their corresponding sections oppose each other: that is, let A cover A′, Fig. 71. Then it is manifest that on superposing the vibrations the middle point of our middle square must be a point of rest; for here the vibrations are equal and opposite. The intersections of the nodal lines are also points of rest, and so also is every corner of the plate itself, for here the added vibrations are also equal and opposite. We have thus fixed four points of rest on each diagonal of the square. Draw the diagonals, and they will represent the nodal lines consequent on the superposition of the two vibrations.

[Figure 71]

These two systems actually coexist in the same plate when the centre is clamped and one of the corners touched, while the fiddle-bow is drawn across the middle of one of the sides. In this case the sand which marks the lines of rest arranges itself along the diagonals. This, in its simplest possible form, is Sir C. Wheatstone’s analysis of these superposed vibrations.

Vibrations of Circular Plates

Passing from square plates to round ones, we also obtain various beautiful effects. This disk of brass is supported horizontally upon an upright stand: it is blackened, and fine white sand is scattered lightly over it. The disk is capable of dividing itself in various ways, and of emitting notes of various pitch. I sound the lowest fundamental note of the disk by touching its edge at a certain point and drawing the bow across the edge at a point 45° distant from the damped one. You hear the note and you see the sand. It quits the four quadrants of the disk, and ranges itself along two of the diameters, Fig. 72, A (next page). When a disk divides itself thus into four vibrating segments, it sounds its deepest note. I stop the vibration, clear the disk, and once more scatter sand over it. Damping its edge, and drawing the bow across it at a point 30° distant from the damped one, the sand immediately arranges itself in a star. We have here six vibrating segments, separated from each other by their appropriate nodal lines, Fig. 72, B. Again I damp a point, and agitate another nearer to the damped one than in the last instance; the disk divides itself into eight vibrating segments with lines of sand between them, Fig. 72, C. In this way the disk may be subdivided into ten, twelve, fourteen, sixteen sectors, the number of sectors being always an even one. As the division becomes more minute the vibrations become more rapid, and the pitch consequently more high. The note emitted by the sixteen segments into which the disk is now divided is so acute as to be almost painful to the ear. Here you have Chladni’s first discovery. You can understand his emotion on witnessing this wonderful effect, “which no mortal had previously seen.” By rendering the centre of the disk free, and damping appropriate points of the surface, nodal circles and other curved lines may be obtained.
