[Figure 72]

The rate of vibration of a disk is directly proportional to its thickness, and inversely proportional to the square of its diameter. Of these three disks two have the same diameter, but one is twice as thick as the other; two of them are of the same thickness, but one has half the diameter of the other. According to the law just enunciated, the rules of vibration of the disks are as the numbers 1, 2, 4. When they are sounded in succession, the musical ears present can testify that they really stand to each other in the relation of a note, its octave, and its double octave.

Strehlke and Faraday’s Experiments: Deportment of Light Powders

The actual movement of the sand toward the nodal lines may be studied by clogging the sand with a semi-fluid substance. When gum is employed to retard the motion of the particles, the curves which they individually describe are very clearly drawn upon the plates. M. Strehlke has sketched these appearances, and from him the patterns A, B, C, Fig. 73, are borrowed.

[Figure 73]

[Figure 74]

[Figure 75]

[Figure 76]

An effect of vibrating plates which long perplexed experimenters is here to be noticed. When with the sand strewed over a plate a little fine dust is mingled, say the fine seed of lycopodium, this light substance, instead of collecting along the nodal lines, forms little heaps at the places of most violent motion. It is heaped at the four corners of the plate, Fig. 74, at the four sides of the plate, Fig. 75, and lodged between the nodal lines of the plate, Fig. 76. These three figures represent the three states of vibration illustrated in Figs. 64, 65, and 66. The dust chooses in all cases the place of greatest agitation. Various explanations of this effect had been given, but it was reserved for Faraday to assign its extremely simple cause. The light powder is entangled by the little whirlwinds of air produced by the vibrations of the plate: it cannot escape from the little cyclones, though the heavier sand particles are readily driven through them. When, therefore, the motion ceases, the light powder settles down at the places where the vibration was a maximum. In vacuo no such effect is observed: here all powders, light and heavy, move to the nodal lines.

Vibration of Bells: Means of rendering them visible

The vibrating segments and nodes of a bell are similar to those of a disk. When a bell sounds its deepest note, the coalescence of its pulses causes it to divide into four vibrating segments, separated from each other by four nodal lines, which run up from the sound-bow to the

[Figure 77]

crown of the bell. The place where the hammer strikes is always the middle of a vibrating segment; the point diametrically opposite is also the middle of such a segment. Ninety degrees from these points, we have also vibrating segments, while at 45 degrees right and left of them we come upon the nodal lines. Supposing the strong, dark circle in Fig. 77 to represent the circumference of the bell in a state of quiescence, then when the hammer falls on any one of the segments a, c, b, or d, the sound-bow passes periodically through the changes indicated by the dotted lines. At one moment it is an oval, with a b for its longest diameter; at the next moment it is an oval, with c d for its longest diameter. The changes from one oval to the other constitute, in fact, the vibrations of the bell. The four points n, n, n, n, where the two ovals intersect each other, are the nodes. As in the case of a disk, the number of vibrations executed by a bell in a given time varies directly as the thickness, and inversely as the square of the bell’s diameter.

Like a disk, also, a bell can divide itself into any even number of vibrating segments, but not into an odd number. By damping proper points in succession the bell can be caused to divide into 6, 8, 10, and 12 vibrating parts. Beginning with the fundamental note, the number of vibrations corresponding to the respective divisions of a bell, as of a disk, is as follows:

    Number of divisions                          4, 6, 8, 10, 12
    Numbers the squares of which express the  }  2, 3, 4, 5, 6
    rates of vibration

Thus, if the vibrations of the fundamental tone be 40, that of the next higher tone will be 90, the next 160, the next 250, the next 360, and so on. If the bell be thin, the tendency to subdivision is so great that it is almost impossible to bring out the pure fundamental tone without the admixture of the higher ones.

I will now repeat before you a homely, but an instructive experiment. This common jug, when a fiddle-bow is drawn across its edge, divides into four vibrating segments exactly like a bell. The jug is provided with a handle; and you are to notice the influence of this handle upon the tone. When the fiddle-bow is drawn across the edge at a point diametrically opposite to the handle, a certain note is heard. When it is drawn at a point 90° from the handle, the same note is heard. In both these cases the handle occupies the middle of a vibrating segment, loading that segment by its weight. But I now draw the bow at an angular distance of 45° from the handle; the note is sensibly higher than before. The handle in this experiment occupies a node; it no longer loads a vibrating segment, and hence the elastic force, having to cope with less weight, produces a more rapid vibration. Chladni executed with a teacup the experiment here made with a jug. Now bells often exhibit round their sound-bows an absence of uniform thickness tantamount to the want of symmetry in the case of our jug; and we shall learn subsequently that the intermittent sound of many bells, noticed more particularly when their tones are dying out, is produced by the combination of two distinct rates of vibration, which have this absence of uniformity for their origin.

There are no points of absolute rest in a vibrating bell, for the nodes of the higher tones are not those of the fundamental one. But it is easy to show that the various parts of the sound-bow, when the fundamental tone is predominant, vibrate with very different degrees of intensity. Suspending a little ball of sealing-wax a, Fig. 78 (next page), by a string, and allowing it to rest gently against the interior surface of an inverted bell, it is tossed to and fro when the bell is thrown into vibration. But the rattling of the sealing-wax ball is far more violent when it rests against the vibrating segments than when it rests against the nodes. Permitting the ivory bob of a short pendulum to rest in succession against a vibrating segment and against a node of the “Great Bell” of Westminster, I found that in the former position it was driven away five inches, in the latter only two inches and three-quarters, when the hammer fell upon the bell.

[Figure 78]

Could the “Great Bell” be turned upside down and filled with water, on striking it the vibrations would express themselves in beautiful ripples upon the liquid surface. Similar ripples may be obtained with smaller bells, or even with finger and claret glasses, but they would be too minute for our present purpose. Filling a large hemispherical glass with water, and passing the fiddle-bow across its edge, large crispations immediately cover its surface. When the bow is vigorously drawn, the water rises in spray from the four vibrating segments. Projecting, by means of a lens, a magnified image of the illuminated water-surface upon the screen, pass the bow gently across the edge of the glass, or rub the finger gently along the edge. You hear this low sound, and at the same time observe the ripples breaking, as it were, in visible music over the four sectors of the figure.

You know the experiment of Leidenfrost which proves that, if water be poured into a red-hot silver basin, it rolls about upon its own vapor. The same effect is produced if we drop a volatile liquid, like ether, on the surface of warm water. And, if a bell-glass be filled with ether or with alcohol, a sharp sweep of the bow over the edge of the glass detaches the liquid spherules, which, when they fall back, do not mix with the liquid, but are driven over the surface on wheels of vapor to the nodal lines. The warming of the liquid, as might be expected, improves the effect. M. Melde, to whom we are indebted for this beautiful experiment, has given the drawings, Figs. 79 and 80, representing what occurs when the surface is divided into four and into six vibrating parts. With a thin wineglass and strong brandy the effect may also be obtained.

Footnote: Under the shoulder of the Wetterhorn I found in 1867 a pool of clear water into which a driblet fell from a brow of overhanging limestone rock. The rebounding water-drops, when they fell back, rolled in myriads over the surface. Almost any fountain, the spray of which falls into a basin, will exhibit the same effect.

[Figure 79]

[Figure 80]

The glass and the liquid within it vibrate here together, and everything that interferes with the perfect continuity of the entire mass disturbs the sonorous effect. A crack in the glass passing from the edge downward extinguishes its sounding power. A rupture in the continuity of the liquid has the same effect. When a glass containing a solution of carbonate of soda is struck with a bit of wood, you hear a clear musical sound. But when a little tartaric acid is added to the liquid, it foams, and a dry, unmusical collision takes the place of the musical sound. As the foam disappears, the sonorous power returns, and now that the liquid is once more clear, you hear the musical ring as before.

[Figure 81]

The ripples of the tide leave their impressions upon the sand over which they pass. The ripples produced by sonorous vibrations have been proved by Faraday competent to do the same. Attaching a plate of glass to a long flexible board, and pouring a thin layer of water over the surface of the glass, on causing the board to vibrate its tremors chase the water into a beautiful mosaic of ripples. A thin stratum of sand strewed upon the plate is acted upon by the water, and carved into patterns, of which Fig. 81 is a reduced specimen.

Summary of Chapter IV

A rod fixed at both ends and caused to vibrate transversely divides itself in the same manner as a string vibrating transversely.

But the succession of its overtones is not the same as those of a string, for while the series of tones emitted by the string is expressed by the natural numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc., the series of tones emitted by the rod is expressed by the squares of the odd numbers 3, 5, 7, 9, etc.

A rod fixed at one end can also vibrate as a whole, or can divide itself into vibrating segments separated from each other by nodes.

In this case the rate of vibration of the fundamental tone is to that of the first overtone as 4:25, or as the square of 2 to the square of 5. From the first division onward the rates of vibration are proportional to the squares of the odd numbers 3, 5, 7, 9, etc.

With rods of different lengths the rate of vibration is inversely proportional to the square of the length of the rod.

Attaching a glass bead silvered within to the free end of the rod, and illuminating the bead, the spot of light reflected from it describes curves of various forms when the rod vibrates. The kaleidophone of Wheatstone is thus constructed.

The iron fiddle and the musical box are instruments whose tones are produced by rods, or tongues, fixed at one end and free at the other.

A rod free at both ends can also be rendered a source of sonorous vibrations. In its simplest mode of division it has two nodes, the subsequent overtones correspond to divisions by 3, 4, 5, etc., nodes. Beginning with its first mode of division, the tones of such a rod are represented by the squares of the odd numbers 3, 5, 7, 9, etc.

The claque-bois, straw-fiddle, and glass harmonica are instruments whose tones are those of rods or bars free at both ends, and supported at their nodes.

When a straight bar, free at both ends, is gradually bent at its centre, the two nodes corresponding to its fundamental tone gradually approach each other. It finally assumes the shape of a timing-fork which, when it sounds its fundamental note, is divided by two nodes near the base of its two prongs into three vibrating parts.

There is no division of a tuning-fork by three nodes.

In its second mode of division, which corresponds to the first overtone of the fork, there is a node on each prong and two others at the bottom of the fork.

The fundamental tone of the fork is to its first overtone approximately as the square of 2 is to the square of 5. The vibrations of the first overtone are, therefore, about 6-1/4 times as rapid as those of the fundamental. From the first overtone onward the successive rates of vibration are as the squares of the odd numbers 3, 5, 7, 9, etc.

We are indebted to Chladni for the experimental investigation of all these points. He was enabled to conduct his inquiries by means of the discovery that, when sand is scattered over a vibrating surface, it is driven from the vibrating portions of the surface, and collects along the nodal lines.

Chladni embraced in his investigations plates of various forms. A square plate, for example, clamped at the centre, and caused to emit its fundamental tone, divides itself into four smaller squares by lines parallel to its sides.

The same plate can divide itself into four triangular vibrating parts, the nodal lines coinciding with the diagonals. The note produced in this case is a fifth above the fundamental note of the plate.

The plate may be further subdivided, sand-figures of extreme beauty being produced; the notes rise in pitch as the subdivision of the plate becomes more minute.

These figures may be deduced from the coalescence of different systems of vibration.

When a circular plate clamped at its centre sounds its fundamental tone, it divides into four vibrating parts, separated by four radial nodal lines.

The next note of the plate corresponds to a division into six vibrating sectors, the next note to a division into eight sectors; such a plate can divide into any even number of vibrating sectors, the sand-figures assuming beautiful stellar forms.

The rates of vibration corresponding to the divisions of a disk are represented by the squares of the numbers 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. In other words, the rates of vibration are proportional to the squares of the numbers representing the sectors into which the disk is divided.

When a bell sounds its deepest note it is divided into four vibrating parts separated from each other by nodal lines, which run upward from the sound-bow and cross each other at the crown.

It is capable of the same subdivisions as a disk; the succession of its tones being also the same.

The rate of vibration of a disk or bell is directly proportional to the thickness and inversely proportional to the square of the diameter.
