Longitudinal Vibrations of a Wire—Relative Velocities of Sound in Brass and Iron—Longitudinal Vibrations of Rods fixed at One End—Of Rods free at Both Ends—Divisions and Overtones of Rods vibrating longitudinally—Examination of Vibrating Bars by Polarized Light—Determination of Velocity of Sound in Solids—Resonance—Vibrations of Stopped Pipes: their Divisions and Overtones—Relation of the Tones of Stopped Pipes to those of Open Pipes—Condition of Column of Air within a Sounding Organ-Pipe—Reeds and Reed-Pipes—The Voice—Overtones of the Vocal Chords—The Vowel Sounds—Kundt’s Experiments—New Methods of determining the Velocity of Sound

Longitudinal Vibrations of Wires and Rods: Conversion of Longitudinal into Transverse Vibrations

WE HAVE thus far occupied ourselves exclusively with transversal vibrations; that is to say, vibrations executed at right angles to the lengths of the strings, rods, plates, and bells subjected to examination. A string is also capable of vibrating in the direction of its length, but here the power which enables it to vibrate is not a tension applied externally, but the elastic force of its own molecules. Now this molecular elasticity is much greater than any that we can ordinarily develop by stretching the string, and the consequence is that the sounds produced by the longitudinal vibrations of a string are, as a general rule, much more acute than those produced by its transverse vibrations. These longitudinal vibrations may be excited by the oblique passage of a fiddle-bow; but they are more easily produced by passing briskly along the string a bit of cloth or leather on which powdered resin has been strewed. The resined fingers answer the same purpose.

When the wire of our monochord is plucked aside, you hear the sound produced by its transverse vibrations. When resined leather is rubbed along the wire, a note much more piercing than the last is heard. This is due to the longitudinal vibrations of the wire. Behind the table is stretched a stout iron wire 23 feet long. One end of it is firmly attached to an immovable wooden tray, the other end is coiled round a pin fixed firmly into one of our benches. With a key this pin can be turned, and the wire stretched so as to facilitate the passage of the rubber. Clasping the wire with the resined leather, and passing the hand to and fro along it, a rich, loud musical sound is heard. Halving the wire at its centre, and rubbing one of its halves, the note heard is the octave of the last: the vibrations are twice as rapid. When the wire is clipped at one-third of its length and the shorter segment rubbed, the note is a fifth above the octave. Taking one-fourth of its length and rubbing as before, the note yielded is the double octave of that of the whole wire, being produced by four times the number of vibrations. Thus, in longitudinal as well as in transverse vibrations, the number of vibrations executed in a given time is inversely proportional to the length of the wire.

And notice the surprising power of these sounds when the wire is rubbed vigorously. With a shorter length, the note is so acute, and at the same time so powerful, as to be hardly bearable. It is not the wire itself which produces this intense sound; it is the wooden tray at its end to which its vibrations are communicated. And, the vibrations of the wire being longitudinal, those of the tray, which is at right angles to the wire, must be transversal. We have here, indeed, an instructive example of the conversion of longitudinal into transverse vibrations.

Longitudinal Pulses in Iron and Brass: their Relative Velocities determined

Causing the wire to vibrate again longitudinally through its entire length, my assistant shall at the same time turn the key at the end, thus changing the tension. You notice no variation of the note. The longitudinal vibrations of the wire, unlike the transverse ones, are independent of the tension. Beside the iron wire is stretched a second, of brass, of the same length and thickness. I rub them both. Their tones are not the same; that of the iron wire is considerably the higher of the two. Why? Simply because the velocity of the sound-pulse is greater in iron than in brass. The pulses in this case pass to and fro from end to end of the wire. At one moment the wire pushes the tray at its end; at the next moment it pulls the tray, this pushing and pulling being due to the passage of the pulse to and fro along the whole wire. The time required for a pulse to run from one end to the other and back is that of a complete vibration. In that time the wire imparts one push and one pull to the wooden tray at its end; the wooden tray imparts one complete vibration to the air, and the air bends once in and once out the tympanic membrane. It is manifest that the rapidity of vibration, or, in other words, the pitch of the note, depends upon the velocity with which the sound-pulse is transmitted through the wire.

And now the solution of a beautiful problem falls of itself into our hands. By shortening the brass wire we cause it to emit a note of the same pitch as that emitted by the other. You hear both notes now sounding in unison, and the reason is that the sound-pulse travels through these 23 feet of iron wire, and through these 15 feet 6 inches of brass wire, in the same time. These lengths are in the ratio of 11:17, and these two numbers express the relative velocities of sound in brass and iron. In fact, the former velocity is 11,000 feet, and the latter 17,000 feet a second. The same method is of course applicable to many other metals.

[Figure 82]

When a wire or string, vibrating longitudinally, emits its lowest note, there is no node whatever upon it; the pulse, as just stated, runs to and fro along the whole length. But, like a string vibrating transversely, it can also subdivide itself into ventral segments separated by nodes. By damping the centre of the wire we make that point a node. The pulses here run from both ends, meet in the centre, recoil from each other, and return to the ends, where they are reflected as before. The note produced is the octave of the fundamental note. The next higher note corresponds to the division of the wire into three vibrating segments, separated from each other by two nodes. The first of these three modes of vibration is shown in Fig. 82, a and b; the second at c and d; the third at e and f; the nodes being marked by dotted transverse lines, and the arrows in each case pointing out the direction in which the pulse moves. The rates of vibration follow the order of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc., just as in the case of a wire vibrating transversely.

A rod or bar of wood or metal, with its two ends fixed, and vibrating longitudinally, divides itself in the same manner as the wire. The succession of tones is also the same in both cases.

Longitudinal Vibrations of Rods fixed at One End: Musical Instruments formed on this Principle

Rods and bars with one end fixed are also capable of vibrating longitudinally. A smooth wooden or metal rod, for example, with one of its ends fixed in a vise, yields a musical note, when the resined fingers are passed along it. When such a note yields its lowest note, it simply elongates and shortens in quick alternation; there is, then, no node upon the rod. The pitch of the note is

[Figure 83]

inversely proportional to the length of the rod. This follows necessarily from the fact that the time of a complete vibration is the time required for the sonorous pulse to run twice to and fro over the rod. The first overtone of a rod, fixed at one end, corresponds to its division by a node at a point one-third of its length from its free end. Its second overtone corresponds to a division by two nodes, the highest of which is at a point one-fifth of the length of the rod from its free end, the remainder of the rod being divided into two equal parts by the second node. In Fig. 83, a and b, c and d, e and f, are shown the conditions of the rod answering to its first three modes of vibration: the nodes,

[Figure 84]

as before, are marked by dotted lines, the arrows in the respective cases marking the direction of the pulses.

The order of the tones of a rod fixed at one end and vibrating longitudinally is that of the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, etc. It is easy to see that this must be the case. For the time of vibration of c or d is that of the segment above the dotted line: and the length of this segment being only one-third that of the whole rod, its vibrations must be three times as rapid. The time of vibration in e or f is also that of its highest segment, and as this segment is one-fifth of the length of the whole rod, its vibrations must be five times as rapid. Thus the order of the tones must be that of the odd numbers.

Before you, Fig. 84, is a musical instrument, the sounds of which are due to the longitudinal vibrations of a number of deal rods of different lengths. Passing the resined fingers over the rods in succession, a series of notes of varying pitch is obtained. An expert performer might render the tones of this instrument very pleasant to you.

Vibrations of Rods free at Both Ends

[Figure 85]

Rods with both ends free are also capable of vibrating longitudinally, and producing musical tones. The investigation of this subject will lead us to exceedingly important results. Clasping a long glass tube exactly at its centre, and passing a wetted cloth over one of its halves, a clear musical sound is the result. A solid glass rod of the same length would yield the same note. In this case the centre of the tube is a node, and the two halves elongate and shorten in quick alternation. M. König, of Paris, has provided us with an instrument which will illustrate this action. A rod of brass, a b, Fig. 85, is held at its centre by the clamp s, while an ivory ball, suspended by two strings from the points, m and n, of a wooden frame, is caused to rest against the end, b, of the brass rod. Drawing gently a bit of resined leather over the rod near a, it is thrown into longitudinal vibration. The centre, s, is a node; but the uneasiness of the ivory ball shows you that the end, b, is in a state of tremor. I apply the rubber still more briskly. The ball, b, rattles, and now the vibration is so intense that the ball is rejected with violence whenever it comes into contact with the end of the rod.

Fracture of Glass Tube by Sonorous Vibrations

When the wetted cloth is passed over the surface of a glass tube the film of liquid left behind by the cloth is seen forming narrow tremulous rings all along the rod. Now this shivering of the liquid is due to the shivering of the glass underneath it, and it is possible so to augment the intensity of the vibration that the glass shall actually go to pieces. Savart was the first to show this. Twice in this place I have repeated this experiment, sacrificing in each case a fine glass tube 6 feet long and 2 inches in diameter. Seizing the tube at its centre C, Fig. 86, I swept my hand vigorously to and fro along C D, until finally the half most distant from my hand was shivered into annular fragments. On examining these it was found that, narrow as they were, many of them were marked by circular cracks indicating a still more minute subdivision.

In this case also the rapidity of vibration is inversely proportional to the length of the rod. A rod of half the length vibrates longitudinally with double the rapidity, a rod of one-third the length with treble the rapidity, and so on. The time of a complete vibration being that required by the pulse to travel to and fro over the rod, and that time being directly proportional to the length of the rod, the rapidity of vibration must, of necessity, be in the inverse proportion.

[Figure 86]

[Figure 87]

This division of a rod by a single node at its centre corresponds to the deepest tone produced by its longitudinal vibration. But, as in all other cases hitherto examined, such rods can subdivide themselves further. Holding the long glass rod a e, Fig. 87, at a point b, midway between its centre and one of its ends, and rubbing its short section, a b, with a wet cloth, the point b becomes a node, a second node, d, being formed at the same distance from the opposite end of the rod. Thus we have the rod divided into three vibrating parts, consisting of one whole ventral segment, b d, and two half ones, a b and d e. The sound corresponding to this division of the rod is the octave of its fundamental note.

You have now a means of checking me. For, if the second mode of division just described produces the octave of the fundamental note, and if a rod of half the length produces the same octave, then the whole rod held at a point one-fourth of its length from one of its ends ought to emit the same note as the half rod held in the middle. When both notes are sounded together they are heard to be identical in pitch.

[Figure 88]

Fig. 88, a and b, c and d, e and f, shows the three first divisions of a rod free at both ends and vibrating longitudinally. The nodes, as before, are marked by transverse dots, the direction of the pulses being shown by arrows. The order of the tones is that of the numbers, 1, 3, 4, etc.

Action of Sonorous Vibrations on Polarized Light

When a tube or rod vibrating longitudinally yields its fundamental tone, its two ends are in a state of free vibration, the glass there suffering neither strain nor pressure. The case at the centre is exactly the reverse; here there is no vibration, but a quick alternation of tension and compression. When the sonorous pulses meet at the centre they squeeze the glass; when they recoil they strain it. Thus while at the ends we have the maximum of vibration, but no change of density, at the centre we have the maximum changes of density, but no vibration.

We have now cleared the way for the introduction of a very beautiful experiment made many years ago by Biot, but never, to my knowledge, repeated on the scale here presented to you. The beam from our electric lamp, L, Fig. 89, being sent through a prism, B, of bi-refracting spar, a beam of polarized light is obtained. This beam impinges on a second prism of spar, n, but, though both prisms are perfectly transparent, the light which has passed through the first cannot get through the second. By introducing a piece of glass between the two prisms, and subjecting the glass to either strain or pressure, the light is enabled to pass through the entire system.
