[Figure 89]

I now introduce between the prisms B and n a rectangle, s s′, of plate glass, 6 feet long, 2 inches wide, and one-third of an inch thick, which is to be thrown into longitudinal vibration. The beam from L passes through the glass at a point near its centre, which is held in a vise, c, so that when a wet cloth is passed over one of the halves, c s′, of the strip, the centre will be a node. During its longitudinal vibration the glass near the centre is, as already explained, alternately strained and compressed; and this successive strain and pressure so changes the condition of the light as to enable it to pass through the second prism. The screen is now dark; but on passing the wetted cloth briskly over the glass a brilliant disk of light, three feet in diameter, flashes out upon the screen. The vibration quickly subsides, and the luminous disk as quickly disappears, to be, however, revived at will by the passage of the wetted cloth along the glass.

The light of this disk appears to be continuous, but it is really intermittent, for it is only when the glass is under strain or pressure that the light can get through. In passing from strain to pressure, and from pressure to strain, the glass is for a moment in its natural state, which, if it continued, would leave the screen dark. But the impressions of brightness, due to the strains and pressures, remain far longer upon the retina than is necessary to abolish the intervals of darkness; hence the screen appears illuminated by a continuous light. When the glass rectangle is shifted so as to cause the beam of polarized light to pass through it close to its end, s, the longitudinal vibrations of the glass have no effect whatever upon the polarized beam.

Thus, by means of this subtile investigator, we demonstrate that, while the centre of the glass, where the vibration is nil, is subjected to quick alternations of strain and pressure, the ends of the rectangle, where the vibration is a maximum, suffer neither.

Footnote: This experiment succeeds almost equally well with a glass tube.

Vibrations of Rods of Wood: Determination of Relative Velocities in Different Woods

Rods of wood and metal also yield musical tones when they vibrate longitudinally. Here, however, the rubber employed is not a wet cloth, but a piece of leather covered with powdered resin. The resined fingers also elicit the music of the rods. The modes of vibration here are those already indicated, the pitch, however, varying with the velocity of the sonorous pulse in the respective substances. When two rods of the same length, the one of deal, the other of Spanish mahogany, are sounded together, the pitch of the one is much lower than that of the other. Why? Simply because the sonorous pulses pass more slowly through the mahogany than through the deal. Can we find the relative velocity of sound through both? With the greatest ease. We have only to carefully shorten the mahogany rod till it yields the same note as the deal one. The notes, rendered approximate by the first trials, are now identical. Through this rod of mahogany 4 feet long, and through this rod of deal 6 feet long, the sound-pulse passes in the same time, and these numbers express the relative velocities of sound through the two substances.

Modes of investigation, which could only be hinted at in our earlier lectures, are now falling naturally into our hands. When in the first lecture the velocity of sound in air was spoken of, many possible methods of determining this velocity must have occurred to your minds, because here we have miles of space to operate upon. Its velocity through wood or metal, where such distances are out of the question, is determined in the simple manner just indicated. From the notes which they emit when suitably prepared, we may infer with certainty the relative velocities of sound through different solid substances; and determining the ratio of the velocity in any one of them to its velocity in air, we are able to draw up a table of absolute velocities. But how is air to be introduced into the series? We shall soon be able to answer this question, approaching it, however, through a number of phenomena with which, at first sight, it appears to have no connection.

Resonance

Experiments with Resonant Jars. Analysis and Explanation

The series of tuning-forks now before you have had their rates of vibration determined by the siren. One, you will remember, vibrates 256 times in a second, the length of its sonorous wave being 4 feet 4 inches. It is detached from its case, so that when struck against a pad you hardly hear it. When held over this glass jar, A B, Fig. 90, 18 inches deep, you still fail to hear the sound of the fork. Preserving the fork in its position, I pour water with the least possible noise into the jar. The column of air underneath the fork shortens, the sound augments in intensity, and when the water has reached a certain level it bursts forth with extraordinary power. A greater quantity of water causes the sound to sink, and become finally inaudible, as at first. By pouring the water carefully out, a point is reached where the reinforcement of the sound again occurs. Experimenting thus, we learn that there is one particular length of the column of air which, when the fork is placed above it, produces a maximum augmentation of the sound. This reinforcement of the sound is named resonance.

Operating in the same way with all the forks in succession, a column of air is found for each, which yields a maximum resonance. These columns become shorter as the rapidity of vibration increases. In Fig. 91 the series

[Figure 90]

of jars is represented, the number of vibrations to which each resounds being placed above it.

What is the physical meaning of this very wonderful effect? To solve this question we must revive our knowledge of the relation of the motion of the fork itself to the motion of the sonorous wave produced by the fork. Supposing a prong of this fork, which executes 256 vibrations in a second, to vibrate between the points a and b, Fig. 92, in its motion from a to b the fork generates half a sonorous wave, and

[Figure 91]

as the length of the whole wave emitted by this fork is 4 feet 4 inches, at the moment the prong reaches b the foremost point of the sonorous wave will be at C, 2 feet 2 inches distant from the fork. The motion of the wave, then, is vastly greater than that of the fork. In fact, the distance a b is, in this case, not more than one-twentieth of an inch, while the wave has passed over a distance of 26 inches. With forks of lower pitch the difference would be still greater.

[Figure 92]

Our next question is, what is the length of the column of air which resounds to this fork? By measurement with a two-foot rule it is found to be 13 inches. But the length of the wave emitted by the fork is 52 inches; hence the length of the column of air which resounds to the fork is equal to one-fourth of the length of the sound-wave produced by the fork. This rule is general, and might be illustrated by any other of the forks instead of this one.

[Figure 93]

Let the prong, vibrating between the limits a and b, be placed over its resonant jar, A B, Fig. 93. In the time required by the prong to move from a to b, the condensation it produces runs down to the bottom of the jar, is there reflected, and, as the distance to the bottom and back is 26 inches, the reflected wave will reach the fork at the moment when it is on the point of returning from b to a. The rarefaction of the wave is produced by the retreat of the prong from b to a. This rarefaction will also run to the bottom of the jar and back, overtaking the prong just as it reaches the limit, a, of its excursion. It is plain from this analysis that the vibrations of the fork are perfectly synchronous with the vibrations of the aërial column A B; and in virtue of this synchronism the motion accumulates in the jar, spreads abroad in the room, and produces this vast augmentation of the sound.

When we substitute for the air in one of these jars a gas of different elasticity, we find the length of the resounding column to be different. The velocity of sound through coal-gas is to its velocity in air about as 8:5. Hence, to synchronize with our fork, a jar filled with coal-gas must be deeper than one filled with air. I turn this jar, 18 inches long, upside down, and hold close to its open mouth our agitated tuning-fork. It is scarcely audible. The jar, with air in it, is 5 inches too deep for this fork. Let coal-gas now enter the jar. As it ascends the note at a certain point swells out, proving that for the more elastic gas a depth of 18 inches is not too great. In fact, it is not great enough; for if too much gas be allowed to enter the jar the resonance is weakened. By suddenly turning the jar upright, still holding the fork close to its mouth, the gas escapes, and at the point of proper admixture of gas and air the note swells out again.

Footnote: This experiment is more easily executed with hydrogen than with coal-gas.

Reinforcement of Bell by Resonance

This fine, sonorous bell, Fig. 94, is thrown into intense vibration by the passage of a resined bow across its edge. You hear its sound, pure, but not very forcible. When, however, the open mouth of this large tube, which is closed at one end, is brought close to one of the vibrating segments of the bell, the tone swells into a musical roar. As the tube is alternately withdrawn and advanced, the sound sinks and swells in this extraordinary manner.

[Figure 94]

The second tube, open at both ends, is capable of being lengthened and shortened by a telescopic slider. When brought near the vibrating bell, the resonance is feeble. On lengthening the tube by drawing out the slider at a certain point, the tone swells out as before. If the tube be made longer, the resonance is again enfeebled. Note the fact, which shall be explained presently, that the open tube which gives the maximum resonance is exactly twice the length of the closed one. For these fine experiments we are indebted to Savart.

Expenditure of Motion in Resonance

With the India-rubber tube employed in our third chapter it was found necessary to time the impulses properly, so as to produce the various ventral segments. I could then feel that the muscular work performed, when the impulses were properly timed, was greater than when they were irregular. The same truth may be illustrated by a claret-glass half filled with water. Endeavor to move your hand to and fro, in accordance with the oscillating period of the water: when you have thoroughly established synchronism, the work thrown upon the hand apparently augments the weight of the water. So likewise with our tuning-fork; when its impulses are timed to the vibrations of the column of air contained in this jar, its work is greater than when they are not so timed. As a consequence of this the tuning-fork comes sooner to rest when it is placed over the jar than when it is permitted to vibrate either in free air, or over a jar of a depth unsuited to its periods of vibration.

Footnote: Only an extremely small fraction of the fork’s motion is, however, converted into sound. The remainder is expended in overcoming the internal friction of its own particles. In other words, nearly the whole of the motion is converted into heat.

Reflecting on what we have now learned, you would have little difficulty in solving the following beautiful problem: You are provided with a tuning-fork and a siren, and are required by means of these two instruments to determine the velocity of sound in air. To solve this problem you lack, if anything, the mere power of manipulation which practice imparts. You would first determine, by means of the siren, the number of vibrations executed by the tuning-fork in a second; you would then determine the length of the column of air which resounds to the fork. This length multiplied by 4 would give you, approximately, the wave-length of the fork, and the wave-length multiplied by the number of vibrations in a second would give you the velocity in a second. Without quitting your private room, therefore, you could solve this important problem. We will go on, if you please, in this fashion, making our footing sure as we advance.

Resonators of Helmholtz

[Figure 94a]

Helmholtz has availed himself of the principle of resonance in analyzing composite sounds. He employs little hollow spheres, called resonators, one of which is shown in Fig. 94a. The small projection b, which has an orifice, is placed in the ear, while the sound-waves enter the hollow sphere through the wide aperture at a. Reinforced by the resonance of such a cavity, and rendered thereby more powerful than its companions, a particular note of a composite clang may be in a measure isolated and studied alone.

Organ-Pipes

Principles of Resonance applied to Organ-Pipes

Thus disciplined we are prepared to consider the subject of organ-pipes, which is one of great importance. Before me on the table are two resonant jars, and in my right hand and my left are held two tuning-forks. I agitate both, and hold them over this jar. One of them only is heard. Held over the other jar, the other fork alone is heard. Each jar selects that fork whose periods of vibration synchronize with its own. And instead of two forks suppose several of them to be held over the jar; from the confused assemblage of pulses thus generated, the jar would select and reinforce that one which corresponds to its own period of vibration.

When I blow across the open mouth of the jar, or, better still, for the jar is too wide for this experiment, when I blow across the open end of a glass tube, t u, Fig. 95, of the same length as the jar, a fluttering of the air is thereby produced, an assemblage of pulses at the open mouth of the tube being generated. And what is the consequence? The tube selects that pulse of the flutter which is in synchronism with itself, and raises it to a musical sound. The sound, you perceive, is precisely that obtained when the proper tuning-fork is placed over the tube. The column of air within the tube has, in this case, virtually created its own tuning-fork; for by the reaction of its pulses upon the sheet of air issuing from the lips it has compelled that sheet to vibrate in synchronism with itself, and made it thus act the part of the tuning-fork.

[Figure 95]

Selecting for each of the other tuning-forks a resonant tube, in every case, on blowing across the open end of the tube, a tone is produced identical in pitch with that obtained through resonance.
