In Fig. 103, a and b (at the bottom) represent the division of an open pipe corresponding to its fundamental tone; c and d represent the division corresponding to its first, e and f the division corresponding to its second overtone, the dots marking the nodes. The distance m n is one-half, o p is one-fourth, and s t is one-sixth of the whole length of the pipe. But the pitch of a is that of a stopped pipe equal in length to m n; the pitch of c is that of a stopped pipe of the length o p; while the pitch of e is that of a stopped pipe of the length s t. Hence, as these lengths are in the ratio of 1/2:1/4:1/6, or as 1:1/2:1/3, the rates of vibration must be as the reciprocals of these, or as 3:2:1. From the mere inspection, therefore, of the respective modes of vibration, we can draw the inference that the succession of tones of an open pipe must correspond to the series of natural numbers.

The pipe a, Fig. 103, has been purposely drawn twice the length of a, Fig. 93 (p. 215). It is perfectly manifest that to complete a vibration the pulse has to pass over the same distance in both pipes, and hence that the pitch of the two pipes must be the same. The open pipe, a n, consists virtually of two stopped ones, with the central nodal surface at m as their common base. This shows the relation of a stopped pipe to an open one to be that which experiment establishes.

Velocity of Sound in Gases, Liquids, and Solids determined by Musical Vibrations

We have already learned that the relative velocities of sound in different solid bodies may be determined from the notes which they emit when thrown into longitudinal vibration. It was remarked at the time that to draw up a table of absolute velocities we only required the accurate comparison of the velocity in any one of those solids with the velocity in air. We are now in a condition to supply this comparison. For we have learned that the vibrations of the air in an organ-pipe open at both ends are executed precisely as those of a rod free at both ends. Any difference of rapidity, therefore, between the vibrations of a rod and of an open organ-pipe of the same length must be due solely to the different velocities with which the sonorous pulses are propagated through them. Take therefore an organ-pipe of a certain length, emitting a note of a certain pitch, and find the length of a rod of pine which yields the same note. This length would be ten times that of the organ-pipe, which would prove the velocity of sound in pine to be ten times its velocity in air. But the absolute velocity in air is 1,090 feet a second; hence the absolute velocity in pine is 10,900 feet a second, which is that given in our first chapter (p. 74). To the celebrated Chladni we are indebted for this beautiful mode of determining the velocity of sound in solid bodies.

We had also in our first lecture a table of the velocities of sound in other gases than air. I am persuaded that you could tell me, after due reflection, how this table was constructed. It would only be necessary to find a series of organ-pipes which, when filled with the different gases, yield the same note; the lengths of these pipes would give the relative velocities of sound through the gases. Thus we should find the length of a pipe filled with hydrogen to be four times that of a pipe filled with oxygen, yielding the same note, and this would prove the velocity of sound in the former to be four times its velocity in the latter.

But we had also a table of velocities through various liquids. How was it constructed? By forcing the liquids through properly constructed organ-pipes, and comparing their musical tones. Thus, in water it requires a pipe a little better than four feet long to produce the note of an air-pipe one foot long; and this proves the velocity of sound in water to be somewhat more than four times its velocity in air. My object here is to give you a clear notion of the way in which scientific knowledge enables us to cope with these apparently insurmountable problems. It is not necessary to go into the niceties of these measurements. You will, however, readily comprehend that all the experiments with gases might be made with the same organ-pipe, the velocity of sound in each respective gas being immediately deduced from the pitch of its note. With a pipe of constant length the pitch, or, in other words, the number of vibrations, would be directly proportional to the velocity. Thus, comparing oxygen with hydrogen, we should find the note of the latter to be the double octave of that of the former, whence we should infer the velocity of sound in hydrogen to be four times its velocity in oxygen. The same remark applies to experiments with liquids. Here also the same pipe may be employed throughout, the velocities being inferred from the notes produced by the respective liquids.

In fact, the length of an open pipe being, as already explained, one-half the length of its sonorous wave, it is only necessary to determine, by means of the siren, the number of vibrations executed by the pipe in a second, and to multiply this number by twice the length of the pipe, in order to obtain the velocity of sound in the gas or liquid within the pipe. Thus, an open pipe 26 inches long and filled with air executes 256 vibrations in a second. The length of its sonorous wave is twice 26 inches, or 4-1/3 feet: multiplying 256 by 4-1/3 we obtain 1,120 feet per second as the velocity of sound through air of this temperature. Were the tube filled with carbonic-acid gas, its vibrations would be slower: were it filled with hydrogen, its vibrations would be quicker; and applying the same principle, we should find the velocity of sound in both these gases.

So likewise the length of a solid rod free at both ends, and sounding its fundamental note, is half that of the sonorous wave in the substance of the solid. Hence we have only to determine the rate of vibration of such a rod, and multiply it by twice the length of the rod, to obtain the velocity of sound in the substance of the rod. You can hardly fail to be impressed by the power which physical science has given us over these problems; nor will you refuse your admiration to that famous old investigator, Chladni, who taught us how to master them experimentally.

Reeds and Reed-Pipes

The construction of the siren and our experiments with that instrument are, no doubt, fresh in your recollection. Its musical sounds are produced by the cutting up into puffs of a series of air-currents. The same purpose is effected by a vibrating reed, as employed in the accordion, the concertina, and the harmonica. In these instruments it is not the vibrations of the reed itself which, imparted to the air, and transmitted through it to our organs of hearing, produce the music; the function of the reed is constructive, not generative; it molds into a series of discontinuous puffs that which without it would be a continuous current of air.

[Figure 104]

Reeds, if associated with organ-pipes, sometimes command, and are sometimes commanded by, the vibrations of the column of air. When they are stiff they rule the column; when they are flexible the column rules them. In the former case, to derive any advantage from the air-column, its length ought to be so regulated that either its fundamental tone or one of its overtones shall correspond to the rate of vibration of the reed. The metal reed commonly employed in organ-pipes is shown in Fig. 104, A and b, both in perspective and in section. It consists of a long and flexible strip of metal, V V, placed in a rectangular orifice, through which the current of air enters the pipe. The manner in which the reed and pipe are associated is shown in Fig. 105. The front, b c, of the space containing the flexible tongue is of glass, so that you may see the tongue within it. A conical pipe, A B, surmounts the reed. The wire w i, shown pressing

[Figure 105]

against the reed, is employed to lengthen or shorten it, and thus to vary within certain limits its rate of vibration. At one time in the practice of music the reed closed the aperture by simply falling against its sides; every stroke of the reed produced a tap, and these linked themselves together to an unpleasant, screaming sound, which materially injured that of the associated organ-pipe. This was mitigated, but not removed, by permitting the reed to strike against soft leather; but the reed now employed is the free reed, which vibrates to and fro between the sides of the aperture, almost, but not quite, filling it. In this way the unpleasantness referred to is avoided. When reed and pipe synchronize perfectly, the sound is most pure and forcible; a certain latitude, however, is possible on both sides of perfect synchronism. But if the discordance be pushed too far, the pipe ceases to be of any use. We then obtain the sound due to the vibrations of the reed alone.

Footnote: The clear illustrations of organ-pipes and reeds introduced here, and at page 226, have been substantially copied from the excellent work of Helmholtz. Pipes opening with hinges, so as to show their inner parts, were shown in the lecture.

Flexible wooden reeds, which can accommodate themselves to the requirements of the pipes above them, are also employed in organ-pipes. Perhaps the simplest illustration of the action of the reed commanded by its aërial column is furnished by a common wheaten straw. At about an inch from a knot, at r, I bury my penknife in this straw, s r′, Fig. 106, to a depth of about one-fourth of the straw’s diameter, and, turning the blade flat, pass it upward toward the knot, thus raising a strip of the straw nearly an inch in length. This strip, r r′, is to be our reed, and the straw itself is to be our pipe. It is now eight inches long. When blown into, it emits this decidedly musical sound. When cut so as to make its length six inches, the pitch is higher; with a length of four inches, the pitch is higher still; and with a length of two inches, the sound is very shrill indeed. In these experiments the reed was compelled to accommodate itself throughout to the requirements of the vibrating column of air.

[Figure 106]

The clarinet is a reed-pipe. It has a single broad tongue, with which a long, cylindrical tube is associated. The reed-end of the instrument is grasped by the lips, and by their pressure the slit between the reed and its frame is narrowed to the required extent. The overtones of a clarinet are different from those of a flute. A flute is an open pipe, a clarinet a stopped one, the end at which the reed is placed answering to the closed end of the pipe. The tones of a flute follow the order of the natural numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., or of the even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, etc.; while the tones of a clarinet follow the order of the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, etc. The intermediate notes are supplied by opening the lateral orifices of the instrument. Sir C. Wheatstone was the first to make known this difference between the flute and clarinet, and his results agree with the more thorough investigations of Helmholtz. In the hautboy and bassoon we have two reeds inclined to each other at a sharp angle, with a slit between them, through which the air is urged. The pipe of the hautboy is conical, and its overtones are those of an open pipe—different, therefore, from those of a clarinet. The pulpy end of a straw of green corn may be split by squeezing it, so as to form a double reed of this kind, and such a straw yields a musical tone. In the horn, trumpet, and serpent, the performer’s lips play the part of the reed. These instruments are formed of long, conical tubes, and their overtones are those of an open organ-pipe. The music of the older instruments of this class was limited to their overtones, the particular tone elicited depending on the force of the blast and the tension of the lips. It is now usual to fill the gaps between the successive overtones by means of keys, which enable the performer to vary the length of the vibrating column of air.

The Voice

The most perfect of reed instruments is the organ of voice. The vocal organ in man is placed at the top of the trachea or wind-pipe, the head of which is adjusted for the attachment of certain elastic bands which almost close the aperture. When the air is forced from the lungs through the slit which separates these vocal chords, they are thrown into vibration; by varying their tension, the rate of vibration is varied, and the sound changed in pitch. The vibrations of the vocal chords are practically unaffected by the resonance of the mouth, though we shall afterward learn that this resonance, by reinforcing one or the other of the tones of the vocal chords, influences in a striking manner the quality of the voice. The sweetness and smoothness of the voice depend on the perfect closure of the slit of the glottis at regular intervals during the vibration.

[Figure 107]

The vocal chords may be illuminated and viewed in a mirror, placed suitably at the back of the mouth. Varied experiments of this kind have been executed by Sig. Garcia. I once sought to project the larynx of M. Czermak upon a screen in this room, but with only partial success. The organ may, however, be viewed directly in the laryngoscope; its motions, in singing, speaking, and coughing, being strikingly visible. It is represented at rest in Fig. 107. The roughness of the voice in colds is due, according to Helmholtz, to mucous flocculi, which get into the slit of the glottis, and which are seen by means of the laryngoscope. The squeaking falsetto voice, with which some persons are afflicted, Helmholtz thinks, may be produced by the drawing aside of the mucous layer which ordinarily lies under and loads the vocal chords. Their edges thus become sharper and their weight less; while, their elasticity remaining the same, they are shaken into more rapid tremors. The promptness and accuracy with which the vocal chords can change their tension, their form, and the width of the slit between them, to which must be added the elective resonance of the cavity of the mouth, render the voice the most perfect of musical instruments.

Footnote: I owe it to this eminent artist to direct attention to his experiments communicated to the Royal Society in May, 1855, and recorded in the “Philosophical Magazine” for 1855, vol. x., page 218.
