[Figure 108]

The celebrated comparative anatomist, John Müller, imitated the action of the vocal chords by means of bands of India-rubber. He closed the open end of a glass tube by two strips of this substance, leaving a slit between them. On urging air through the slit, the bands were thrown into vibration, and a musical tone produced. Helmholtz recommends the form shown in Fig. 108, where the tube, instead of ending in a section at right angles to its axis, terminates in two oblique sections, over which the bands of India-rubber are drawn. The easiest mode of obtaining sounds from reeds of this character is to roll round the end of a glass tube a strip of thin India-rubber, leaving about an inch of the substance projecting beyond the end of the tube. Taking two opposite portions of the projecting rubber in the fingers, and stretching it, a slit is formed, the blowing through which produces a musical sound, which varies in pitch, as the sides of the slit vary in tension.

Vowel Sounds

The formation of the vowel sounds of the human voice excited long ago philosophic inquiry. We can distinguish one vowel sound from another, while assigning to both the same pitch and intensity. What, then, is the quality which renders the distinction possible? In the year 1779 this was made a prize question by the Academy of St. Petersburg, and Kratzenstein gained the prize for the successful manner in which he imitated the vowel sounds by mechanical arrangements. At the same time Von Kempelen, of Vienna, made similar and more elaborate experiments. The question was subsequently taken up by Mr. Willis, who succeeded beyond all his predecessors in the experimental treatment of the subject. The true theory of vowel sounds was first stated by Sir C. Wheatstone, and quite recently they have been made the subject of exhaustive inquiry by Helmholtz. You will find little difficulty in comprehending their origin.

Mounted on the acoustic bellows, without any pipe associated with it, when air is urged through its orifice, a free reed speaks in this forcible manner. When upon the frame of the reed a pyramidal pipe is fixed, you notice a change in the sound; and by pushing my flat hand over the open end of the pipe, the similarity between the sound produced and that of the human voice is unmistakable. Holding the palm of the hand over the end of the pipe so as to close it altogether, and then raising the hand twice in quick succession, the word “mamma” is heard as plainly as if it were uttered by an infant. For this pyramidal tube I now substitute a shorter one, and with it make the same experiment. The “mamma” now heard is exactly such as would be uttered by a child with a stopped nose. Thus, by associating with a vibrating reed a suitable pipe, we can impart to the sound the qualities of the human voice.

In the organ of voice, the reed is formed by the vocal chords, and associated with this reed is the resonant cavity of the mouth, which can so alter its shape as to resound, at will, either to the fundamental tone of the vocal chords or to any of their overtones. With the aid of the mouth, therefore, we can mix together the fundamental tone and the overtones of the voice in different proportions. Different vowel sounds are due to different admixtures of this kind. Striking one of this series of tuning-forks, and placing it before my mouth, I adjust the size of that cavity until it resounds forcibly to the fork. Then, without altering in the least the shape or size of my mouth, I urge air through the glottis. The vowel sound “U” (oo in hoop) is produced, and no other. I strike another fork, and, placing it in front of the mouth, adjust the cavity to resonance. Then removing the fork and urging air through the glottis, the vowel sound “O,” and it only, is heard. I strike a third fork, adjust my mouth to it, and then urge air through the larynx; the vowel sound ah! and no other, is heard. In all these cases the vocal chords have been in the same constant condition. They have generated throughout the same fundamental tone and the same overtones, the changes of sound which you have heard being due solely to the fact that different tones in the different cases were reinforced by the resonance of the mouth. Donders first proved that the mouth resounded differently for the different vowels.

In the formation of the different vowel sounds the resonant cavity of the mouth undergoes, according to Helmholtz, the following changes:

For the production of the sound “U” (oo in hoop), the lips must be pushed forward, so as to make the cavity of the mouth as deep as possible, and the orifice of the mouth, by the contraction of the lips, as small as possible. This arrangement corresponds to the deepest resonance of which the mouth is capable. The fundamental tone itself of the vocal chords is here reinforced, while the higher tones retreat.

The vowel “O” requires a somewhat wider opening of the mouth. The overtones which lie in the neighborhood of the middle b of the soprano come out strongly in the case of this vowel.

When “Ah” is sounded, the mouth assumes the shape of a funnel, widening outward. It is thus tuned to a note an octave higher than in the case of the vowel “O.” Hence, in sounding “Ah,” those overtones are most strengthened which lie near the higher b of the soprano. As the mouth is in this case wide open, all the other overtones are also heard, though feebly.

In sounding “A” and “E,” the hinder part of the mouth is deepened, while the front of the tongue rises against the gums and forms a tube; this yields a higher resonance-tone, rising gradually from “A” to “E,” while the hinder hollow space yields a lower resonance-tone, which is deepest when “E” is sounded.

These examples sufficiently illustrate the subject of vowel sounds. We may blend in various ways the elementary tints of the solar spectrum, producing innumerable composite colors by their admixture. Out of violet and red we produce purple, and out of yellow and blue we produce white. Thus also may elementary sounds be blended so as to produce all possible varieties of clang-tint. After having resolved the human voice into its constituent tones, Helmholtz was able to imitate these tones by tuning-forks, and, by combining them appropriately together, to produce the sounds of all the vowels.

Kundt’s Experiments: New Modes of determining Velocity of Sound

Unwilling to interrupt the continuity of our reasonings and experiments on the sound of organ-pipes, and their relations to the vibrations of solid rods, I have reserved for the conclusion of this discourse some reflections and experiments which, in strictness, belong to an earlier portion of the chapter. You have already heard the tones, and made yourselves acquainted with the various modes of division of a glass tube, free at both ends, when thrown into longitudinal vibration. When it sounds its fundamental tone, you know that the two halves of such a tube lengthen and shorten in quick alternation. If the tube were stopped at its ends, the closed extremities would throw the air within the tube into a state of vibration; and if the velocity of sound in air were equal to its velocity in glass, the air of the tube would vibrate in synchronism with the tube itself. But the velocity of sound in air is far less than its velocity in glass, and hence, if the column of air is to synchronize with the vibrations of the tube, it can only do so by dividing itself into vibrating segments of a suitable length. In an investigation of great interest, recently published in “Poggendorff’s Annalen,” M. Kundt, of Berlin, has taught us how these segments may be rendered visible. Into this six-foot tube is introduced the light powder of lycopodium, being shaken all over the interior surface. A small quantity of the powder clings to that surface. Stopping the ends of the tube, holding its centre by a fixed clamp, and sweeping a wet cloth briskly over one of its halves, instantly the powder, which a moment ago clung to its interior surface, falls to the bottom of the tube in the forms shown in Fig. 109, the arrangement of the lycopodium marking the manner in which the column of air has been divided. Every node here is encircled by a ring of dust, while from node to node the dust arranges itself in transverse streaks along the ventral segments.

[Figure 109]

You will have little difficulty in seeing that we perform here, with air, substantially the same experiment as that of M. Melde with a vibrating string. When the string was too long to vibrate as a whole, it met the requirements of the tuning-fork to which it was attached by dividing into ventral segments. Now, in all cases, the length from a node to its next neighbor is half that of the sonorous wave: how many such half-waves then have we in our tube in the present instance? Sixteen (the figure shows only four of them). But the length of our glass tube vibrating thus longitudinally is also half that of the sonorous wave in glass. Hence, in the case before us, with the same rate of vibration, the length of the semi-wave in glass is sixteen times the length of the semi-wave in air. In other words, the velocity of sound in glass is sixteen times its velocity in air. Thus, by a single sweep of the wet rubber, we solve a most important problem. But, as M. Kundt has shown, we need not confine ourselves to air. Introducing any other gas into the tube, a single stroke of our wet cloth enables us to determine the relative velocity of sound in that gas and in glass. When hydrogen is introduced, the number of ventral segments is less than in air; when carbonic acid is introduced, the number is greater.

From the known velocity of sound in air, coupled with the length of one of these dust segments, we can immediately deduce the number of vibrations executed in a second by the tube itself. Clasping a glass tube at its centre and drawing my wetted cloth over one of its halves, I elicit this shrill note. The length of every dust segment, now within the tube, is 3 inches. Hence the length of the aërial sonorous wave corresponding to this note is 6 inches. But the velocity of sound in air of our present temperature is 1,120 feet per second; a distance which would embrace 2,240 of our sonorous waves. This number, therefore, expresses the number of vibrations per second executed by the glass tube now before us.

Instead of damping the centre of the tube, and making it a nodal point, we may employ any other of its subdivisions. Laying hold of it, for example, at a point midway between its centre and one of its ends, and rubbing it properly, it divides into three vibrating parts, separated by two nodes. We know that in this division the note elicited is the octave of that heard when a single node is formed at the middle of the tube; for the vibrations are twice as rapid. If therefore we divide the tube, having air within it, by two nodes instead of one, the number of ventral segments revealed by the lycopodium dust will be thirty-two instead of sixteen. The same remark applies, of course, to all other gases.

Filling a series of four tubes with air, carbonic acid, coal-gas, and hydrogen, and then rubbing each so as to produce two nodes, M. Kundt found the number of dust segments formed within the tube in the respective cases to be as follows:

    Air            32  dust segments
    Carbonic acid  40  dust segments
    Coal-gas       20  dust segments
    Hydrogen       9   dust segments

Calling the velocity in air unity, the following fractions express the ratio of this velocity to those in the other gases:

                   32
    Carbonic acid  —   = 0·8
                   40
                   32
    Coal-gas       —   = 1·6
                   20
                   32
    Hydrogen       —   = 3·56
                   9

[Figure 110]

Referring to a table introduced in our first chapter, we learn that Dulong by a totally different mode of experiment found the velocity in carbonic acid to be 0.86, and in hydrogen 3·8 times the velocity in air. The results of Dulong were deduced from the sounds of organ-pipes filled with the various gases; but here, by a process of the utmost simplicity, we arrive at a close approximation to his results. Dusting the interior surfaces of our tubes, filling them with the proper gases, and sealing their ends, they may be preserved for an indefinite time. By properly shaking one of them at any moment, its inner surface becomes thinly coated with the dust; and afterward a single stroke of the wet cloth produces the division from which the velocity of sound in the gas may be immediately inferred. Savart found that a spiral nodal line is formed round a tube or rod when it vibrates longitudinally, and Seebeck showed that this line was produced, not by longitudinal, but by secondary transverse vibrations. Now this spiral nodal line tends to complicate the division of the dust in our present experiments. It is, therefore, desirable to operate in a manner which shall altogether avoid the formation of this line; M. Kundt has accomplished this, by exciting the longitudinal vibrations in one tube, and producing the division into ventral segments in another, into which the first fits like a piston. Before you is a tube of glass, Fig. 110, seven feet long, and two inches internal diameter. One end of this tube is filled by the movable stopper b. The other end, K K, is also stopped by a cork, through the centre of which passes the narrower tube A a, which is firmly clasped at its middle by the cork, K K. The end of the interior tube, A a, is also closed with a projecting stopper, a, almost sufficient to fill the larger tube, but still fitting into it so loosely that the friction of a against the interior surface is too slight to interfere practically with its vibrations. The interior surface between a and b being lightly coated with the lycopodium dust, a wet cloth is passed briskly over A K; instantly the dust between a and b divides into a number of ventral segments. When the length of the column of air, a b, is equal to that of the glass tube, A a, the number of ventral segments is sixteen. When, as in the figure, a b is only one-half the length of A a, the number of ventral segments is eight.

But here you must perceive that the method of experiment is capable of great extension. Instead of the glass tube, A a, we may employ a rod of any other solid substance—of wood or metal, for example, and thus determine the relative velocity of sound in the solid and in air. In the place of the glass tube, for example, a rod of brass of equal length may be employed. Rubbing its external half by a resined cloth, it divides the column a b into the number of ventral segments proper to the metal’s rate of vibrations. In this way M. Kundt operated with brass, steel, glass, and copper, and his results prove the method to be capable of great accuracy. Calling, as before, the velocity of sound in air unity, the following numbers expressive of the ratio of the velocity of sound in brass to its velocity in air were obtained in three different series of experiments:

    1st experiment  10·87
    2d experiment   10·87
    3d experiment   10·86
