The coincidence is here extraordinary. To illustrate the possible accuracy of the method, the length of the individual dust segments was measured. In a series of twenty-seven experiments, this length was found to vary between 43 and 44 millimètres (each millimètre 1/25th of an inch), never rising so high as the latter and never falling so low as the former. The length of the metal rod, compared with that of one of the segments capable of this accurate measurement, gives us at once the velocity of sound in the metal, as compared with its velocity in air.

Three distinct experiments, performed in the same manner on steel, gave the following velocities, the velocity through air, as before, being regarded as unity:

    1st experiment  15·34
    2d experiment   15·33
    3d experiment   15·34

Here the coincidence is quite as perfect as in the case of brass.

In glass, by this new mode of experiment, the velocity was found to be

15·25.

Footnote: The velocity in glass varies with the quality; the result of each experiment has therefore reference only to the particular kind of glass employed in the experiment.

Finally, in copper the velocity was found to be

11·96.

These results agree extremely well with those obtained by other methods. Wertheim, for example, found the velocity of sound in steel wire to be 15·108; M. Kundt finds it to be 15·34: Wertheim also found the velocity in copper to be 11·17; M. Kundt finds it to be 11·96. The differences are not greater than might be produced by differences in the materials employed by the two experimenters.

[Figure 111]

The length of the aërial column may or may not be an exact multiple of the wave-length, corresponding to the rod’s rate of vibration. If not, the dust segments usually take the form shown in Fig. 111. But if, by means of the stopper, b, the column of air be made an exact multiple of the wave-length, then the dust quits the vibrating segments altogether, and forms, as in Fig. 112, little isolated heaps at the nodes.

Explanation of a Difficulty

And here a difficulty presents itself. The stopped end b of the tube Fig. 110 is, of course, a place of no vibration, where in all cases a nodal dust-heap is formed; but, whenever the column of air was an exact multiple of the wave-length, M. Kundt always found a dust-heap close to the end a of the vibrating rod also. Thus the point from which all the vibration emanated seemed itself to be a place of no vibration.

[Figure 112]

This difficulty was pointed out by M. Kundt, but he did not attempt its solution. We are now in a condition to explain it. In Lecture III. it was remarked that in strictness a node is not a place of no vibration; that it is a place of minimum vibration; and that, by the addition of the minute pulses which the node permits, vibrations of vast amplitude may be produced. The ends of M. Kundt’s tube are such points of minimum motion, the lengths of the vibrating segments being such that, by the coalescence of direct and reflected pulses, the air at a distance of half a ventral segment from the end of the tube vibrates much more vigorously than that at the end of the tube itself. This addition of impulses is more perfect when the aërial column is an exact multiple of the wave-length, and hence it is that, in this case, the vibrations become sufficiently intense to sweep the dust altogether away from the vibrating segments. The same point is illustrated by M. Melde’s tuning-forks, which, though they are the sources of all the motion, are themselves nodes.

An experiment of Helmholtz’s is here capable of instructive application. Upon the string of the sonometer described in our third lecture I place the iron stem of this tuning-fork, which executes 512 complete vibrations in a second. At present you hear no augmentation of the sound of the fork; the string remains quiescent. But on moving the fork along the string, at the number 33, a loud, swelling note issues from the string. At this particular tension the length 33 exactly synchronizes with the vibrations of the fork. By the intermediation of the string, therefore, the fork is enabled to transfer its motion to the sonometer, and through it to the air. The sound continues as long as the fork vibrates, but the least movement to the right or to the left from this point causes a sudden fall of the sound. Tightening the string, the note disappears; for it requires a greater length of this more highly tensioned string to respond to the fork. But, on moving the fork further away, at the number 36 the note again bursts forth. Tightening still more, 40 is found to be the point of maximum power. When the string is slackened, it must, of course, be shortened in order to make it respond to the fork. Moving the fork now toward the end of the string, at the number 25 the note is found as before. Again, shifting the fork to 35, nothing is heard; but, by the cautious turning of the key, the point of synchronism, if I may use the term, is moved further from the end of the string. It finally reaches the fork, and at that moment a clear, full note issues from the sonometer. In all cases, before the exact point is attained, and immediately in its vicinity, we hear “beats,” which, as we shall afterward understand, are due to the coalescence of the sound of the fork with that of the string, when they are nearly, but not quite, in unison with each other.

In these experiments, though the fork was the source of all the motion, the point on which it rested was a nodal point. It constituted the comparatively fixed extremity of the wire, whose vibrations synchronized with those of the fork. The case is exactly analogous to that of the hand holding the India-rubber tube, and to the tuning-fork in the experiments of M. Melde. It is also an effect precisely the same in kind as that observed by M. Kundt, where the part of the column of air in contact with the end of his vibrating rod proved to be a node instead of the middle of a ventral segment.

Addendum Regarding Resonance

The resonance of caves and of rocky inclosures is well known. Bunsen notices the thunder-like sound produced when one of the steam jets of Iceland breaks out near the mouth of a cavern. Most travellers in Switzerland have noticed the deafening sound produced by the fall of the Reuss at the Devil’s Bridge. The sound heard when a hollow shell is placed close to the ear is a case of resonance. Children think they hear in it the sound of the sea. The noise is really due to the reinforcement of the feeble sounds with which even the stillest air is pervaded, and also in part to the noise produced by the pressure of the shell against the ear itself. By using tubes of different lengths, the variation of the resonance with the length of the tube may be studied. The channel of the ear itself is also a resonant cavity. When a poker is held by two strings, and when the fingers of the hands holding the poker are thrust into the ears on striking the poker against a piece of wood, a sound is heard as deep and sonorous as that of a cathedral bell. When open, the channel of the ear resounds to notes whose periods of vibration are about 3,000 per second. This has been shown by Helmholtz, and Madame Seiler has found that dogs which howl to music are particularly sensitive to the same notes. We may expect from Mr. Francis Galton interesting results in connection with this subject.

Summary of Chapter V

When a stretched wire is suitably rubbed, in the direction of its length, it is thrown into longitudinal vibrations: the wire can either vibrate as a whole or divide itself into vibrating segments separated from each other by nodes.

The tones of such a wire follow the order of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

The transverse vibrations of a rod fixed at both ends do not follow the same order as the transverse vibrations of a stretched wire; for here the forces brought into play, as explained in Lecture IV., are different. But the longitudinal vibrations of a stretched wire do follow the same order as the longitudinal vibrations of a rod fixed at both ends, for here the forces brought into play are the same, being in both cases the elasticity of the material.

A rod fixed at one end vibrates longitudinally as a whole, or it divides into two, three, four, etc., vibrating parts, separated from each other by nodes. The order of the tones of such a rod is that of the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, etc.

A rod free at both ends can also vibrate longitudinally. Its lowest note corresponds to a division of the rod into two vibrating parts by a node at its centre. The overtones of such a rod correspond to its division into three, four, five, etc., vibrating parts, separated from each other by two, three, four, etc., nodes. The order of the tones of such a rod is that of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

We may also express the order by saying that while the tones of a rod fixed at both ends follow the order of the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, etc., the tones of a rod free at both ends follow the order of the even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, etc.

At the points of maximum vibration the rod suffers no change of density; at the nodes, on the contrary, the changes of density reach a maximum. This may be proved by the action of the rod upon polarized light.

Columns of air of definite length resound to tuning-forks of definite rates of vibration.

The length of a tube filled with air, and closed at one end, which resounds to a fork is one-fourth of the length of the sonorous wave produced by the fork.

This resonance is due to the synchronism which exists between the vibrating period of the fork and that of the column of air.

By blowing across the mouth of a tube closed at one end, we produce a flutter of the air, and some pulse of this flutter may be raised by the resonance of the tube to a musical sound.

The sound is the same as that obtained when a tuning-fork, whose rate of vibration is that of the tube, is placed over the mouth of the tube.

When a tube closed at one end—a stopped organ-pipe, for example—sounds its lowest note, the column of air within it is undivided by a node. The overtones of such a column correspond to its division into parts, like those of a rod fixed at one end and vibrating longitudinally. The order of its tones is that of the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, etc. That this must be the order follows from the manner in which the column is divided.

In organ-pipes the air is agitated by causing it to issue from a narrow slit, and to strike upon a cutting edge. Some pulse of the flutter thus produced is raised by the resonance of the pipe to a musical sound.

When, instead of the aërial flutter, a tuning-fork of the proper rate of vibration is placed at the embouchure of an organ-pipe, the pipe speaks in response to the fork. In practice, the organ-pipe virtually creates its own tuning-fork, by compelling the sheet of air at its embouchure to vibrate in periods synchronous with its own.

An open organ-pipe yields a note an octave higher than that of a closed pipe of the same length. This relation is a necessary consequence of the respective modes of vibration.

When, for example, a stopped organ-pipe sounds its deepest note, the column of air, as already explained, is undivided. When an open pipe sounds its deepest note, the column is divided by a node at its centre. The open pipe in this case virtually consists of two stopped pipes with a common base. Hence it is plain that the fundamental note of an open pipe must be the same as that of a stopped pipe of half its length.

The length of a stopped pipe is one-fourth that of the sonorous wave which it produces, while the length of an open pipe is one-half that of its sonorous wave.

The order of the tones of an open pipe is that of the even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, etc., or of the natural numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

In both stopped and open pipes the number of vibrations executed in a given time is inversely proportional to the length of the pipe.

The places of maximum vibration in organ-pipes are places of minimum changes of density; while at the places of minimum vibration the changes of density reach a maximum.

The velocities of sound in gases, liquids, and solids may be inferred from the tones which equal lengths of them produce; or they may be inferred from the lengths of these substances which yield equal tones.

Reeds, or vibrating tongues, are often associated with vibrating columns of air. They consist of flexible laminæ, which vibrate to and fro in a rectangular orifice, thus rendering intermittent the air-current passing through the orifice.

The action of the reed is the same as that of the siren.

The flexible wooden reeds sometimes associated with organ-pipes are compelled to vibrate in unison with the column of air in the pipe; other reeds are too stiff to be thus controlled by the vibrating air. In this latter case the column of air is taken of such a length that its vibrations synchronize with those of the reed.

By associating suitable pipes with reeds we impart to their tones the qualities of the human voice.

The vocal organ in man is a reed instrument, the vibrating reed in this case being elastic bands placed at the top of the trachea, and capable of various degrees of tension.

The rate of vibration of these vocal chords is practically uninfluenced by the resonance of the mouth; but the mouth, by changing its shape, can be caused to resound to the fundamental tone, or to any of the overtones of the vocal chords.

By the strengthening of particular tones through the resonance of the mouth, the clang-tint of the voice is altered.

The different vowel-sounds are produced by different admixtures of the fundamental tone and the overtones of the vocal chords.

When the solid substance of a tube stopped at one, or at both ends, is caused to vibrate longitudinally, the air within it is also thrown into vibration.

By covering the interior surface of the tube with a light powder, the manner in which the aërial column divides itself may be rendered apparent. From the division of the column the velocity of sound in the substance of the tube, compared with its velocity in air, may be inferred.

Other gases may be employed instead of air, and the velocity of sound in these gases, compared with its velocity in the substance of the tube, may be determined.

The end of a rod vibrating longitudinally may be caused to agitate a column of air contained in a tube, compelling the air to divide itself into ventral segments. These segments may be rendered visible by light powders, and from them the velocity of sound in the substance of the vibrating rod, compared with its velocity in air, may be inferred.

In this way the relative velocities of sound in all solid substances capable of being formed into rods, and of vibrating longitudinally, may be determined.
