Singing Flames—Influence of the Tube surrounding the Flame—Influence of Size of Flame—Harmonic Notes of Flames—Effect of Unisonant Notes on Singing Flames—-Action of Sound on Naked Flames—Experiments with Fish-Tail and Bat’s-Wing Burners—Experiments on Tall Flames—Extraordinary Delicacy of Flames as Acoustic Reagents—The Vowel-Flame—Action of Conversational Tones upon Flames—Action of Musical Sounds on Smoke-Jets—Constitution of Water-Jets—Plateau’s Theory of the Resolution of a Liquid Vein into Drops—Action of Musical Sounds on Water-Jets—A Liquid Vein may compete in Point of Delicacy with the Ear

Rhythm of Friction: Musical Flow of a Liquid through a Small Aperture

FRICTION is always rhythmic. When a resined bow is passed across a string, the tension of the string secures the perfect rhythm of the friction. When the wetted finger is moved round the edge of a glass, the breaking up of the friction into rhythmic pulses expresses itself in music. Savart’s beautiful experiments on the flow of liquids through small orifices bear immediately upon this question. We have here the means of verifying his results. The tube A B, Fig. 113, is filled with water, its extremity, B, being closed by a plate of brass, which is pierced by a circular orifice of a diameter equal to the thickness of the plate. Removing a little peg which stops the orifice, the water issues from it, and as it sinks in the tube a musical note of great sweetness issues from the liquid column. This note is due to the intermittent flow of the liquid through the orifice, by which the whole column above it is thrown into vibration. The tendency to this effect shows itself when tea is poured from a teapot, in the circular ripples that cover the falling liquid. The same intermittence is observed in the black, dense smoke which rolls in rhythmic rings from the funnel of a steamer. The unpleasant noise of unoiled machinery is also a declaration of the fact that the friction is not uniform, but is due to the alternate “bite” and release of the rubbing surfaces.

[Figure 113]

Where gases are concerned, friction is of the same intermittent character. A rifle-bullet sings in its passage through the air; while to the rubbing of the wind against the boles and branches of the trees are to be ascribed the “waterfall tones” of an agitated pine-wood. Pass a steadily-burning candle rapidly through the air; an indented band of light, declaring intermittence, is often the consequence, while the almost musical sound which accompanies the appearance of this band is the audible expression of the rhythm. On the other hand, if you blow gently against a candle-flame, the fluttering noise announces a rhythmic action. We have already learned what can be done when a pipe is associated with such a flutter; we have learned that the pipe selects a special pulse from the flutter, and raises it by resonance to a musical sound. In a similar manner the noise of a flame may be turned to account. The blow-pipe flame of our laboratory, for example, when inclosed within an appropriate tube, has its flutter raised to a roar. The special pulse first selected soon reacts upon the flame so as to abolish in a great degree the other pulses, compelling the flame to vibrate in periods answering to the selected one. And this reaction can become so powerful—the timed shock of the reflected pulses may accumulate to such an extent—as to beat the flame, even when very large, into extinction.

Musical Flames

Nor is it necessary to produce this flutter by any extraneous means. When a gas-flame is simply inclosed within a tube, the passage of the air over it is usually sufficient to produce the necessary rhythmic action, so as to cause the flame to burst spontaneously into song. This flame-music may be rendered exceedingly intense. Over a flame issuing from a ring burner with twenty-eight orifices, I place a tin tube 5 feet long and 2-1/2 inches in diameter. The flame flutters at first, but it soon chastens its impulses into perfect periodicity, and a deep and clear musical tone is the result. By lowering the gas the note now sounded is caused to cease, but, after a momentary interval of silence, another note, which is the octave of the last, is yielded by the flame. The first note was the fundamental note of the surrounding tube; this second note is its first harmonic. Here, as in the case of open organ-pipes, we have the aërial column dividing itself into vibrating segments, separated from each other by nodes.

[Figure 114]

A still more striking effect is obtained with this larger tube, a b, Fig. 114, 15 feet long and 4 inches wide, which was made for a totally different purpose. It is supported by a steady stand, s s′, and into it is lifted the tall burner, shown enlarged at B. You hear the incipient flutter: you now hear the more powerful sound. As the flame is lifted higher the action becomes more violent, until finally a storm of music issues from the tube. And now all has suddenly ceased; the reaction of its own pulses upon the flame has beaten it into extinction. I relight the flame and make it very small. When raised within the tube, the flame again sings, but it is one of the harmonics of the tube that you now hear. On turning the gas fully on, the note ceases—all is silent for a moment; but the storm is brewing, and soon it bursts forth, as at first in a kind of hurricane of sound. By lowering the flame the fundamental note is abolished, and now you hear the first harmonic of the tube. Making the flame still smaller, the first harmonic disappears, and the second is heard. Your ears being disciplined to the apprehension of these sounds, I turn the gas once more fully on. Mingling with the deepest note you notice the harmonics, as if struggling to be heard amid the general uproar of the flame. With a large Bunsen’s rose burner, the sound of this tube becomes powerful enough to shake the floor and seats, and the large audience that occupies the seats of this room, while the extinction of the flame, by the reaction of the

[Figure 115]

sonorous pulses, announces itself by an explosion almost as loud as a pistol-shot. It must occur to you that a chimney is a tube of this kind upon a large scale, and that the roar of a flame in a chimney is simply a rough attempt at music.

Let us now pass on to shorter tubes and smaller flames. Placing tubes of different lengths over eight small flames, each of them starts into song, and you notice that as the tubes lengthen the tones deepen. The lengths of these tubes are so chosen that they yield in succession the eight notes of the gamut. Round some of them you observe a paper slider, s, Fig. 115, by which the tube can be lengthened or shortened. If while the flame is sounding the slider be raised, the pitch instantly falls; if lowered, the pitch rises. These experiments prove the flame to be governed by the tube. By the reaction of the pulses, reflected back upon the flame, its flutter is rendered perfectly periodic, the length of that period being determined, as in the case of organ-pipes, by the length of the tube.

The fixed stars, especially those near the horizon, shine with an unsteady light, sometimes changing color as they twinkle. I have often watched at night, upon the plateaux of the Alps, the alternate flash of ruby and emerald in the lower and larger stars. If you place a piece of looking-glass so that you can see in it the image of such a star, on tilting the glass quickly to and

[Figure 116]

fro, the line of light obtained will not be continuous, but will form a string of colored beads of extreme beauty. The same effect is obtained when an opera-glass is pointed to the star and shaken. This experiment shows that in the act of twinkling the light of the star is quenched at intervals; the dark spaces between the bright beads corresponding to the periods of extinction. Now, our singing flame is a twinkling flame. When it begins to sing you observe a certain quivering motion which may be analyzed with a looking-glass, or an opera-glass, as in the case of the star. I can now see the image of this flame in a small looking-glass. On tilting the glass, so as to cause the image to form a circle of light, the luminous band is not seen to be continuous, as it would be if the flame were perfectly steady; it is resolved into a beautiful chain of flames, Fig. 116.

Footnote: This experiment was first made with a hydrogen-flame by Sir C. Wheatstone.

Experimental Analysis of Musical Flame

[Figure 117]

With a larger, brighter, and less rapidly-vibrating flame, you may all see this intermittent action. Over this gas-flame, f, Fig. 117, is placed a glass tube, A B, 6 feet long and 2 inches in diameter. The back of the tube is blackened, so as to prevent the light of the flame from falling directly upon the screen, which it is now desirable to have as dark as possible. In front of the tube is placed a concave mirror, M, which forms upon the screen an enlarged image of the flame. I turn the mirror with my hand and cause the image to pass over the screen. Were the flame silent and steady, we should obtain a continuous band of light; but it quivers, and emits at the same time a deep and powerful note. On twirling the mirror, therefore, we obtain, instead of a continuous band, a luminous chain of images. By fast turning, these images are drawn more widely apart; by slow turning, they are caused to close up, the chain of flames passing through the most beautiful variations. Clasping the lower end, B, of the tube with my hand, I so impede the air as to stop the flame’s vibration; a continuous band is the consequence. Observe the suddenness with which this band breaks up into a rippling line of images the moment my hand is removed and the current of air is permitted to pass over the flame.

Rate of Vibration of Flame: Toepler’s Experiment

When a small vibrating coal-gas flame is carefully examined by the rotating mirror, the beaded line is a series of yellow-tipped flames, each resting upon a base of the richest blue. In some cases I have been unable to observe any union of one flame with another; the spaces between the flames being absolutely dark to the eye. But if dark, the flame must have been totally extinguished at intervals, a residue of heat, however, remaining sufficient to reignite the gas. This is at least possible, for gas may be ignited by non-luminous air. By means of the siren, we can readily determine the number of times this flame extinguishes and relights itself in a second. As the note of the instrument approaches that of the flame, unison is preceded by these well-known beats, which become gradually less rapid, and now the two notes melt into perfect unison. Maintaining the siren at this pitch for a minute, at the end of that time I find recorded upon our dials 1,700 revolutions. But the disk being perforated by 16 holes, it follows that every revolution corresponds to 16 pulses. Multiplying 1,700 by 16, we find the number of pulses in a minute to be 27,200. This number of times did our little flame extinguish and rekindle itself during the continuance of the experiment; that is to say, it was put out and relighted 453 times in a second.

Footnote: A gas-jet, for example, can be ignited five inches above the tip of a visible gas-flame, where platinum-leaf shows no redness.

A flash of light, though instantaneous, makes an impression upon the retina which endures for the tenth of a second or more. A flying rifle-bullet, illuminated by a single flash of lightning, would seem to stand still in the air for the tenth of a second. A black disk with radial white strips, when rapidly rotated, causes the white and black to blend to an impure gray; while a spark of electricity, or a flash of lightning, reduces the disk to apparent stillness, the white radial strips being for a time plainly seen. Now, the singing flame is a flashing flame, and M. Toepler has shown that by causing a striped disk to rotate at the proper speed in the presence of such a flame it is brought to apparent stillness, the white stripes being rendered plainly visible. The experiment is both easy and interesting.

Harmonic Sounds of Flame

A singing flame yields so freely to the pulses falling upon it that it is almost wholly governed by the surrounding tube; almost, but not altogether. The pitch of the note depends in some measure upon the size of the flame. This is readily proved, by causing two flames to emit the same note, and then slightly altering the size of either of them. The unison is instantly disturbed by beats. By altering the size of a flame we can also, as already illustrated, draw forth the harmonic overtones of the tube which surrounds it. This experiment is best performed with hydrogen, its combustion being much more vigorous than that of ordinary gas. When a glass tube 7 feet long is placed over a large hydrogen-flame, the fundamental note of the tube is obtained, corresponding to a division of the column of air within it by a single node at the centre. Placing a second tube, 3 feet 6 inches long, over the same flame, no musical sound whatever is obtained; the large flame, in fact, is not able to accommodate itself to the vibrating period of the shorter tube. But, on lessening the flame, it soon bursts into vigorous song, its note being the octave of that yielded by the longer tube. I now remove the shorter tube, and once more cover the flame with the longer one. It no longer sounds its fundamental notes, but the precise note of the shorter tube. To accommodate itself to the vibrating period of the diminished flame, the longer column of air divides itself like an open organ-pipe when it yields its first harmonic. By varying the size of the flame, it is possible, with the tube now before you, to obtain a series of notes whose rates of vibration are in the ratio of the numbers 1:2:3:4:5; that is to say, the fundamental tone and its first four harmonics.

These sounding flames, though probably never before raised to the intensity in which they have been exhibited here to-day, are of old standing. In 1777, the sounds of a hydrogen-flame were heard by Dr. Higgins. In 1802, they were investigated to some extent by Chladni, who also refers to an incorrect account of them given by De Luc. Chladni showed that the tones are those of the open tube which surrounds the flame, and he succeeded in obtaining the first two harmonics. In 1802, G. De la Rive experimented on this subject. Placing a little water in the bulb of a thermometer, and heating it, he showed that musical tones of force and sweetness could be produced by the periodic condensation of the vapor in the stem of the thermometer. He accordingly referred the sounds of flames to the alternate expansion and condensation of the aqueous vapor produced by the combustion. We can readily imitate his experiments. Holding, with its stem oblique, a thermometer-bulb containing water in the flame of a spirit-lamp the sounds are heard soon after the water begins to boil. In 1818, however, Faraday showed that the tones are produced when the tube surrounding the flame is placed in air of a temperature higher than 100° C., condensation being then impossible. He also showed that the tones could be obtained from flames of carbonic oxide, where aqueous vapor is entirely out of the question.

Action of Extraneous Sounds on Flame: Experiments of Schaffgotsch and Tyndall

After these experiments, the first novel acoustic observation on flames was made in Berlin by the late Count Schaffgotsch, who showed that when an ordinary gas-flame was surmounted by a short tube, a strong falsetto voice pitched to the note of the tube, or to its higher octave, caused the flame to quiver. In some cases when the note of the tube was high, the flame could even be extinguished by the voice.

In the spring of 1857, this experiment came to my notice. No directions were given in the short account of the observation published in “Poggendorff’s Annalen”; but, in endeavoring to ascertain the conditions of success, a number of singular effects forced themselves upon my attention. Meanwhile, Count Schaffgotsch also followed up the subject. To a great extent we travelled over the same ground, neither of us knowing how the other was engaged; but, so far as the experiments then executed are common to us both, to Count Schaffgotsch belongs the priority.
