Let me here repeat his first observation. Within this tube, 11 inches long, burns a small gas-flame, bright and silent. The note of the tube has been ascertained, and now, standing at some distance from the flame, I sound that note; the flame quivers. To obtain the extinction of the flame it is necessary to employ a burner with a very narrow aperture, from which the gas issues under considerable pressure. On gently sounding the note of the tube surrounding such a flame, it quivers; but on throwing more power into the voice the flame is extinguished.

The cause of the quivering of the flame will be best revealed by an experiment with the siren. As the note of the siren approaches that of the flame you hear beats, and at the same time you observe a dancing of the flame synchronous with the beats. The jumps succeed each other more slowly as unison is approached. They cease when the unison is perfect, and they begin again as soon as the siren is urged beyond unison, becoming more rapid as the discordance is increased. The cause of the quiver observed by M. Schaffgotsch was revealed to me. The flame jumped because the note of the tube surrounding it was nearly, but not quite, in unison with the voice of the experimenter.

That the jumping of the flame proceeds in exact accordance with the beats is well shown by a tuning-fork, which yields the same note as the flame. Loading such a fork with a bit of wax, so as to throw it slightly out of unison, and bringing it, when agitated, near the tube in which the flame is singing, the beats and the leaps of the flame occur at the same intervals. When the fork is placed over a resonant jar, all of you can hear the beats, and see at the same time the dancing of the flame. By changing the load upon the tuning-fork, or by slightly altering the size of the flame, the rate at which the beats succeed each other may be altered; but in all cases the jumps address the eye at the moments when the beats address the ear.

While executing these experiments I noticed that, on raising my voice to the proper pitch, a flame which had been burning silently in its tube began to sing. The same observation had, without my knowledge, been made a short time previously by Count Schaffgotsch. A tube, 12 inches long, is placed over this flame, which occupies a position about an inch and a half from the lower end of the tube. When the proper note is sounded the flame trembles, but it does not sing. When the tube is lowered until the flame is three inches from its end, the song is spontaneous. Between these two positions there is a third, at which, if the flame be placed, it will burn silently; but if it be excited by the voice it will sing, and continue to sing.

[Figure 118]

Even when the back is turned toward the flame the sonorous pulses run round the body, reach the tube, and call forth the song. A pitch-pipe, or any other instrument which yields a note of the proper height, produces the same effect. Mounting a series of tubes, capable of emitting all the notes of the gamut, over suitable flames, with an instrument sufficiently powerful, and from a distance of 20 or 30 yards, a musician, by running over the scale, might call forth all the notes in succession, the whole series of flames finally joining in the song.

When a silent flame, capable of being excited in the manner here described, is looked at in a moving mirror, it produces there a continuous band of light. Nothing can be more beautiful than the sudden breaking up of this band into a string of richly-luminous pearls at the instant the voice is pitched to the proper note.

One singing flame may be caused to effect the musical ignition of another. Before you are two small flames, f′ and f, Fig. 118 (p. 273), the tube over f′ being 10-1/2 inches, that over f 12 inches long. The shorter tube is clasped by a paper slider, s. The flame f′ is now singing, but the flame f, in the longer tube, is silent. I raise the paper slider which surrounds f′, so as to lengthen the tube, and on approaching the pitch of the tube surrounding f, that flame sings. The experiment may be varied by making f the singing flame and f′ the silent one at starting. Raising the telescopic slider, a point is soon attained where the flame f′ commences its song. In this way one flame may excite another through considerable distances. It is also possible to silence the singing flame by the proper management of the voice.

Sensitive Naked Flames

Discovery of Sensitive Flames by Le Conte

We have hitherto dealt with flames surrounded by resonant tubes; and none of these flames, if naked, would respond in any way to such noise or music as could be here applied. Still it is possible to make naked flames thus sympathetic. This action of musical sounds upon naked flames was first observed by Prof. Le Conte at a musical party in the United States. His observation is thus described: “Soon after the music commenced, I observed that the flame exhibited pulsations which were exactly synchronous with the audible beats. This phenomenon was very striking to every one in the room, and especially so when the strong notes of the violoncello came in. It was exceedingly interesting to observe how perfectly even the trills of this instrument were reflected on the sheet of flame. A deaf man might have seen the harmony. As the evening advanced, and the diminished consumption of gas in the city increased the pressure, the phenomenon became more conspicuous. The jumping of the flame gradually increased, became somewhat irregular, and, finally, it began to flare continuously, emitting the characteristic sound, indicating the escape of a greater amount of gas than could be properly consumed. I then ascertained, by experiment, that the phenomenon did not take place unless the discharge of gas was so regulated that the flame approximated to the condition of flaring. I likewise determined, by experiment, that the effects were not produced by jarring or shaking the floor and walls of the room by means of repeated concussions. Hence it is obvious that the pulsations of the flame were not owing to indirect vibrations propagated through the medium of the walls of the room to the burning-apparatus, but must have been produced by the direct influence of aërial sonorous pulses on the burning jet.”

Footnote: “Philosophical Magazine,” March, 1858, p. 235. In the Appendix Prof. Le Conte’s interesting paper is given in extenso. Some years subsequently Mr. (now Professor) Barrett, while preparing some experiments for my lectures, observed the action of a musical sound upon a flame, and by the selection of suitable burners he afterward succeeded in rendering the flame extremely sensitive. Le Conte, of whose discovery I informed Mr. Barrett, was my own starting-point.

The significant remark, that the jumping of the flame was not observed until it was near flaring, suggests the means of repeating the experiments of Dr. Le Conte; while a more intimate knowledge of the conditions of success enables us to vary and exalt them in a striking degree. Before you burns a bright candle-flame, but no sound that can be produced here has any effect upon it. Though sonorous waves of great power be sent through the air, the candle-flame remains insensible.

[Figure 119]

[Figure 120]

But by proper precautions even a candle-flame may be rendered sensitive. Urging from a small blow-pipe a narrow stream of air through such a flame, an incipient flutter is produced. The flame then jumps visibly to the sound of a whistle, or to a chirrup. The experiment may be so arranged that, when the whistle sounds, the flame shall be either restored almost to its pristine brightness, or that the small amount of light it still possesses shall disappear.

The blow-pipe flame of our laboratory is totally unaffected by the sound of the whistle as long as no air is urged through it. By properly tempering the force of the blast, a flame is obtained of the shape shown in Fig. 119. On sounding the whistle the erect portion of the flame drops down, and while the sound continues the flame maintains the form shown in Fig. 120.

Experiments on Fish-tail and Bat’s-wing Flames

We now pass on to a thin sheet of flame, issuing from a common fish-tail burner, Fig. 121. You might sing to this flame, varying the pitch of your voice; no shiver of the flame would be visible. You might employ pitch-pipes, tuning-forks, bells, and trumpets, with a like absence of all effect. A barely perceptible motion of the interior of the flame may be noticed when a shrill whistle is blown close to it. But by turning the cock more fully on, the flame is brought to the verge of flaring. And now, when the whistle is blown, the flame thrusts suddenly out seven quivering tongues, Fig. 122. The moment the sound ceases, the tongues disappear, and the flame becomes quiescent.

[Figure 121]

[Figure 122]

Passing from a fish-tail to a bat’s-wing burner, we obtain a broad, steady flame, Fig. 123. It is quite insensible to the loudest sound which would be tolerable here. The flame is fed from a small gas-holder. Increasing gradually the pressure, a slight flutter of the edge of the flame at length answers to the sound of the whistle. Turning on the gas until the flame is on the point of roaring, and blowing the whistle, it roars, and suddenly assumes the form shown in Fig. 124.

Footnote: A gas-bag properly weighted also answers for these experiments.

When a distant anvil is struck with a hammer, the flame instantly responds by thrusting forth its tongues.

[Figure 123]

[Figure 124]

An essential condition to entire success in these experiments disclosed itself in the following manner: I was operating on two fish-tail flames, one of which jumped to a whistle while the other did not. The gas of the non-sensitive flame was turned off, additional pressure being thereby thrown upon the other flame. It flared, and its cock was turned so as to lower the flame; but it now proved non-sensitive, however close it might be brought to the point of flaring. The narrow orifice of the half-turned cock interfered with the action of the sound. When the gas was turned fully on, the flame being lowered by opening the cock of the other burner, it became again sensitive. Up to this time a great number of burners had been tried, but with many of them the action was nil. Acting, however, upon the hint conveyed by this observation, the cocks which fed the flames were more widely opened, and our most refractory burners thus rendered sensitive.

In this way the observation of Dr. Le Conte is easily and strikingly illustrated; in our subsequent, and far more delicate, experiments the precaution just referred to is still more essential.

Experiments on Flames from Circular Apertures

A long flame may be shortened and a short one lengthened, according to circumstances, by sonorous vibrations. The flame shown in Fig. 125 is long, straight, and smoky; that in Fig. 126 is short, forked, and brilliant. On sounding the whistle, the long flame becomes short, forked, and brilliant, as in Fig. 127; while the forked flame becomes long and smoky, as in Fig. 128. As regards, therefore, their response to the sound of the whistle, one of these flames is the complement of the other.

In Fig. 129 is represented another smoky flame which, when the whistle sounds, breaks up into the form shown in Fig. 130.

When a brilliant sensitive flame illuminates an otherwise dark room, in which a suitable bell is caused to strike, a series of periodic quenchings of the light by the sound occurs. Every stroke of the bell is accompanied by a momentary darkening of the room.

The foregoing experiments illustrate the lengthening and shortening of flames by sonorous vibrations. They may also produce rotation. From some of our homemade burners issue flat flames, about ten inches high, and three inches across at their widest part. When the whistle sounds, the plane of each flame turns ninety degrees round, and continues in its new position as long as the sound continues.

[Figure 125]

[Figure 126]

[Figure 127]

[Figure 128]

[Figure 129]

[Figure 130]

A flame of admirable steadiness and brilliancy now burns before you. It issues from a single circular orifice in a common iron nipple. This burner, which requires great pressure to make its flame flare, has been specially chosen for the purpose of enabling you to observe, with distinctness, the gradual change from apathy to sensitiveness. The flame, now 4 inches high, is quite indifferent to sound. On increasing the pressure its height becomes 6 inches; but it is still indifferent. When its length is 12 inches, a barely perceptible quiver responds to the whistle. When 16 or 17 inches high, it jumps briskly the moment an anvil is tapped or the whistle sounded. When the flame is 20 inches long you observe a quivering at intervals, which announces that it is near roaring. A slight increase of pressure causes it to roar, and shorten at the same time to 8 inches.

Diminishing the pressure a little, the flame is again 20 inches long, but it is on the point of roaring and shortening. Like the singing flames which were started by the voice, it stands on the brink of a precipice. The proper note pushes it over. It shortens when the whistle sounds, exactly as it did when the pressure is in excess. The action reminds one of the story of the Swiss muleteers, who are said to tie up their bells at certain places lest the tinkle should bring an avalanche down. The snow must be very delicately poised before this could occur. It probably never did occur, but our flame illustrates the principle. We bring it to the verge of falling, and the sonorous pulses precipitate what was already imminent. This is the simple philosophy of all these sensitive flames.

When the flame flares, the gas in the orifice of the burner is in a state of vibration; conversely, when the gas in the orifice is thrown into vibration, the flame, if sufficiently near the flaring point, will flare. Thus the sonorous vibrations, by acting on the gas in the passage of the burner, become equivalent to an augmentation of pressure in the holder. In fact, we have here revealed to us the physical cause of flaring through excess of pressure, which, common as it is, has never been hitherto explained. The gas encounters friction in the orifice of the burner, which, when the force of transfer is sufficiently great, throws the issuing stream into the state of vibration that produces flaring. It is because the flaring is thus caused that an infinitesimal amount of energy in the form of vibrations of the proper period can produce an effect equivalent to a considerable increase of pressure.

Seat of Sensitiveness

[Figure 131]

That the external vibrations act upon the gas in the orifice of the burner, and not first upon the burner itself, the tube leading to it, or the flame above it, is thus proved. A glass funnel R, Fig. 131, is attached to a tube 3 feet long and half an inch in diameter. A sensitive flame b is placed at the open end T of the tube, while a small high-pitched reed is placed in the funnel at R. When the sound is converged upon the root of the flame, as in Fig. 131, the action is violent; when converged on a point half an inch above the burner, as in Fig. 132, or at half an inch below the burner, as in Fig. 133, there is no action. The glass tube may be dispensed with and the funnel alone employed, if care be taken to screen off all sound, save that which passes through the shank of the funnel.

Footnote: In the actions described in the case of the blow-pipe and candle-flames, it was the jet of air issuing from the blow-pipe, and not the flame itself, that was directly acted on by the external vibrations.

Influence of Pitch

[Figure 132]

[Figure 133]

All sounds are not equally effective on the flame; waves of special periods are required to produce the maximum effect. The effectual periods are those which synchronize with the waves produced by the friction of the gas itself against the sides of its orifice. With some of these flames a low deep whistle is more effective than a shrill one. With others the exciting tremors must be very rapid, and the sound consequently shrill. Not one of these four tuning-forks, which vibrate 256 times, 320 times, 384 times, and 512 times respectively in a second, has any effect upon the flame from our iron nipple. But, besides their fundamental tones, these forks, as you know, can be caused to yield a series of overtones of very high pitch. The vibrations of this series are 1,600, 2,000, 2,400, and 3,200 per second, respectively. The flame jumps in response to each of these sounds; the response to that of the highest pitch being the most prompt and energetic of all.
