To the tap of a hammer upon a board the flame responds; but to the tap of the same hammer upon an anvil the response is much more brisk and animated. The reason is, that the clang of the anvil is rich in the higher tones to which the flame is most sensitive. The powerful tone obtained when our inverted bell is reinforced by its resonant tube has no power over this flame. But when a halfpenny is brought into contact with the vibrating surface the flame instantly shortens, flutters, and roars. I send an assistant with a smaller bell, worked by clockwork, to the most distant part of the gallery. He there detaches the hammer; the strokes follow each other in rhythmic succession, and at every stroke the flame falls from a height of 20 to a height of 8 inches, roaring as it falls.

[Figure 134-135]

The rapidity with which sound is propagated through air is well illustrated by these experiments. There is no sensible interval between the stroke of the bell and the ducking of the flame.

When the sound acting on the flame is of very short duration a curious and instructive effect is observed. The sides of the flame half-way down, and lower, are seen suddenly fringed by luminous tongues, the central flame remaining apparently undisturbed in both height and thickness. The flame in its normal state is shown in Fig. 134, and with its fringes in Fig. 135. The effect is due to the retention of the impression upon the retina. The flame actually falls as low as the fringes, but its recovery is so quick that to the eye it does not appear to shorten at all.

Footnote: Numerous modifications of these experiments are possible. Other inflammable gases than coal-gas may be employed. Mixtures of gases have also been found to yield beautiful and striking results. An infinitesimal amount of mechanical impurity has been found to exert a powerful influence.

The Vowel-flame

A flame of astonishing sensitiveness now burns before you. It issues from the single orifice of a steatite burner, and reaches a height of 24 inches. The slightest tap on a distant anvil reduces its height to 7 inches. When a bunch of keys is shaken the flame is violently agitated, and emits a loud roar. The dropping of a sixpence into a hand already containing coin, at a distance of 20 yards, knocks the flame down. It is not possible to walk across the floor without agitating the flame. The creaking of boots sets it in violent commotion. The crumpling, or tearing of paper, or the rustle of a silk dress, does the same. It is startled by the patter of a rain-drop. I hold a watch near the flame: nobody hears its ticks; but you all see their effect upon the flame. At every tick it falls and roars. The winding up of the watch also produces tumult. The twitter of a distant sparrow shakes the flame; the note of a cricket would do the same. A chirrup from a distance of 30 yards causes it to fall and roar. I repeat a passage from Spenser:

“Her ivory forehead full of bounty brave, Like a broad table did itself dispread; For love his lofty triumphs to engrave, And write the battles of his great godhead. All truth and goodness might therein be read, For there their dwelling was, and when she spake, Sweet words, like dropping honey she did shed; And through the pearls and rubies softly brake A silver sound, which heavenly music seemed to make.”

“Her ivory forehead full of bounty brave, Like a broad table did itself dispread; For love his lofty triumphs to engrave, And write the battles of his great godhead. All truth and goodness might therein be read, For there their dwelling was, and when she spake, Sweet words, like dropping honey she did shed; And through the pearls and rubies softly brake A silver sound, which heavenly music seemed to make.”

“Her ivory forehead full of bounty brave, Like a broad table did itself dispread; For love his lofty triumphs to engrave, And write the battles of his great godhead. All truth and goodness might therein be read, For there their dwelling was, and when she spake, Sweet words, like dropping honey she did shed; And through the pearls and rubies softly brake A silver sound, which heavenly music seemed to make.”

“Her ivory forehead full of bounty brave,

Like a broad table did itself dispread;

For love his lofty triumphs to engrave,

And write the battles of his great godhead.

All truth and goodness might therein be read,

For there their dwelling was, and when she spake,

Sweet words, like dropping honey she did shed;

And through the pearls and rubies softly brake

A silver sound, which heavenly music seemed to make.”

[Figure 136]

The flame selects from the sounds those to which it can respond. It notices some by the slightest nod, to others it bows more distinctly, to some its obeisance is very profound, while to many sounds it turns an entirely deaf ear.

In Fig. 136, this wonderful flame is represented. On chirruping to it, or on shaking a bunch of keys within a few yards of it, it falls to the size shown in Fig. 137, the whole length, a b, of the flame being suddenly abolished. The light at the same time is practically destroyed, a pale and almost non-luminous residue of it alone remaining. These figures are taken from photographs of the flame.

[Figure 137]

To distinguish it from the others I have called this the “vowel-flame,” because the different vowel-sounds affect it differently. A loud and sonorous U does not move the flame; on changing the sound to O, the flame quivers; when E is sounded, the flame is strongly affected. I utter the words boot, boat, and beat, in succession. To the first there is no response; to the second, the flame starts; by the third, is thrown into greater commotion; the sound Ah! is still more powerful. Did we not know the constitution of vowel-sounds this deportment would be an insoluble enigma. As it is, however, the flame illustrates the theory of vowel-sounds. It is most sensitive to sounds of high pitch; hence we should infer that the sound Ah! contains higher notes than the sound E; that E contains higher notes than O; and O higher notes than U. I need not say that this agrees perfectly with the analysis of Helmholtz.

[Figure 138]

This flame is peculiarly sensitive to the utterance of the letter S. A hiss contains the elements that most forcibly affect the flame. The gas issues from its burner with a hiss, and an external sound of this character is therefore exceedingly effective. From a metal box containing compressed air I allow a puff to escape; the flame instantly ducks down not by any transfer of air from the box to the flame, for the distance between both utterly excludes this idea—it is the sound that affects the flame. From the most distant part of the gallery my assistant permits the compressed air to issue in puffs from the box; at every puff the flame suddenly falls. The hiss of the issuing air at the one orifice precipitates the tumult of the flame at the other.

When a musical-box is placed on the table, and permitted to play, the flame behaves like a sentient and motor creature—bowing slightly to some tones, and courtesying deeply to others.

Mr. Philip Harry’s Sensitive Flame

Mr. Philip Barry has discovered a new and very effective form of sensitive flame, which he thus describes in a letter to myself: “It is the most sensitive of all the flames that I am acquainted with, though from its smaller size it is not so striking as your vowel-flame. It possesses the advantage that the ordinary pressure in the gas-mains is quite sufficient to produce it. The method of producing it consists in igniting the gas (ordinary coal-gas) not at the burner but some inches above it, by interposing between the burner and the flame a piece of wire-gauze.”

I give a sketch of the arrangement adopted in Fig. 138. The space between the burner and gauze was 2 inches. The gauze was about 7 inches square, resting on the ring of a retort-stand. It had 32 meshes to the lineal inch. The burner was Sugg’s steatite pinhole burner, the same as used for the vowel-flame.

The flame is a slender cone about four inches high, the upper portion giving a bright-yellow light, the base being a non-luminous blue flame. At the least noise this flame roars, sinking down to the surface of the gauze, becoming at the same time invisible. It is very active in its responses, and, being rather a noisy flame, its sympathy is apparent to the ear as well as the eye.

“To the vowel-sounds it does not appear to answer so discriminately as the vowel-flame. It is extremely sensitive to A, very slightly to E, more so to I, entirely non-sensitive to O, but slightly sensitive to U.

“It dances in the most perfect manner to a small musical snuff-box, and is highly sensitive to most of the sonorous vibrations which affect the vowel-flames.”

Sensitive Smoke-jets

It is not to the flame, as such, that we owe the extraordinary phenomena which have been just described. Effects substantially the same are obtained when a jet of unignited gas, of carbonic acid, hydrogen, or even air itself, issues from an orifice under proper pressure. None of these gases, however, can be seen in its passage through air, and, therefore, we must associate with them some substance which, while sharing their motions, will reveal them to the eye. The method employed from time to time in this place of rendering aërial vortices visible is well known to many of you. By tapping a membrane which closes the mouth of a large funnel filled with smoke, we obtain beautiful smoke-rings, which reveal the motion of the air. By associating smoke with our gas-jets, in the present instance, we can also trace their course, and, when this is done, the unignited gas proves as sensitive as the flames. The smoke-jets jump, shorten, split into forks, or lengthen into columns, when the proper notes are sounded.

Underneath this gas-holder are placed two small basins, the one containing hydrochloric acid, and the other ammonia. Fumes of sal-ammoniac are thus copiously formed, and mingle with the gas contained in the holder. We may, as already stated, operate with coal-gas, carbonic acid, air, or hydrogen; each of them yields good effects. From our excellent steatite burner now issues a thin column of smoke. On sounding the whistle, which was so effective with the flames, it is found ineffective. When, moreover, the highest notes of a series of Pandean pipes are sounded, they are also ineffective. Nor will the lowest notes answer. But when a certain pipe, which stands about the middle of the series, is sounded, the smoke-column falls, forming a short stem with a thick, bushy head. It is also pressed down, as if by a vertical wind, by a knock upon the table. At every tap it drops. A stroke on an anvil, on the contrary, produces little or no effect. In fact, the notes here effective are of a much lower pitch than those which were most efficient in the case of the flames.

[Figure 139]

The amount of shrinkage exhibited by some of these smoke-columns, in proportion to their length, is far greater than that of the flames. A tap on the table causes a smoke-jet eighteen inches high to shorten to a bushy bouquet, with a stem not more than an inch in height. The smoke-column, moreover, responds to the voice. A cough knocks it down; and it dances to the tune of a musical-box. Some notes cause the mere top of the smoke-column to gather itself up into a bunch; at other notes the bunch is formed midway down; while notes of more suitable pitch cause the column to contract itself to a cumulus not much more than an inch above the end of the burner. Various forms of the dancing smoke-jet are shown in Fig. 139. As the music continues, the action of the smoke-column consists of a series of rapid leaps from one of these forms to another.

In a perfectly still atmosphere these slender smoke-columns rise sometimes to a height of nearly two feet, apparently vanishing into air at the summit. When this is the case, our most sensitive flames fall far behind them in delicacy; and though less striking than the flames, the smoke-wreaths are often more graceful. Not only special words, but every word, and even every syllable, of the foregoing stanza from Spenser, tumbles a really sensitive smoke-jet into confusion. To produce such effects, a perfectly tranquil atmosphere is necessary. Flame-experiments, in fact, are possible in an atmosphere where smoke-jets are utterly unmanageable.

Footnote: Referring to these effects, Helmholtz says: “Die erstaunliche Empfindlichkeit eines mit Rauch imprägnirten cylindrischen Luftstrahls gegen Schall ist von Herrn Tyndall beschrieben worden; ich habe dieselbe bestätigt gefunden. Es ist dies offenbar eine Eigenschaft der Trennungsflächen die für das Anblasen der Pfeifen von grösster Wichtigkeit ist.”—“Discontinuirliche Luftbewegung,” Monatsbericht, April, 1868.

Constitution of Liquid Veins: Sensitive Water-jets

[Figure 140-141-142]

We have thus far confined our attention to jets of ignited and unignited coal-gas—of carbonic acid, hydrogen, and air. We will now turn to jets of water. And here a series of experiments, remarkable for their beauty, has long existed, which claim relationship to those just described. These are the experiments of Felix Savart on liquid veins. If the bottom of a vessel containing water be pierced by a circular orifice, the descending liquid vein will exhibit two parts unmistakably distinct. The part of the vein nearest the orifice is steady and limpid, presenting the appearance of a solid glass rod. It decreases in diameter as it descends, reaches a point of maximum contraction, from which point downward it appears turbid and unsteady. The course of the vein, moreover, is marked by periodic swellings and contractions. Savart has represented these appearances as in Fig. 140. The part a n nearest the orifice is limpid and steady, while all the part below n is in a state of quivering motion. This lower part of the vein appears continuous to the eye; but the finger can be sometimes passed through it without being wetted. This, of course, could not be the case if the vein were really continuous. The upper portion of the vein, moreover, intercepts vision; the lower portion, even when the liquid is mercury, does not. In fact, the vein resolves itself, at n, into liquid spherules, its apparent continuity being due to the retention of the impressions made by the falling drops upon the retina. If, while looking at the disturbed portion of the vein, the head be suddenly lowered, the descending column will be resolved for a moment into separate drops. Perhaps the simplest way of reducing the vein to its constituent spherules is to illuminate the vein, in a dark room, by a succession of electric flashes. Every flash reveals the drops, as if they were perfectly motionless in the air.

Could the appearance of the vein illuminated by a single flash be rendered permanent, it would be that represented in Fig. 141. And here we find revealed the cause of those swellings and contractions which the disturbed portion of the vein exhibits. The drops, as they descend, are continually changing their forms. When first detached from the end of the limpid portion of the vein, the drop is a spheroid with its longest axis vertical. But a liquid cannot retain this shape, if abandoned to the forces of its own molecules. The spheroid seeks to become a sphere—the longer diameter, therefore, shortens; but, like a pendulum which seeks to return to its position of rest, the contraction of the vertical diameter goes too far, and the drop becomes a flattened spheroid. Now, the contractions of the jet are formed at those places where the longest axis of the drop is vertical, while the swellings appear where the longest axis is horizontal. It will be noticed that between every two of the larger drops is a third one of much smaller dimensions. According to Savart, their appearance is invariable.

I wish to make the constitution of a liquid vein evident to you by a simple but beautiful experiment. The condensing lens has been removed from our electric lamp, the light being permitted to pass through a vertical slit directly from the carbon-points. The slice of light thus obtained is so divergent that it illuminates, from top to bottom, a liquid vein several feet long, and placed at some distance from the lamp. Immediately in front of the camera is a large disk of zinc with six radial slits, about ten inches long and an inch wide. By the rotation of the disk the light is caused to fall in flashes upon the jet; and, when the suitable speed of rotation has been attained, the vein is resolved into its constituent spherules. Receiving the shadow of the vein upon a white screen, its constitution is rendered clearly visible to all here present.
