This breaking-up of a liquid vein into drops has been a subject of frequent experiment and much discussion. Savart traced the pulsations to the orifice, but he did not think that they were produced by friction. They are powerfully influenced by sonorous vibrations. In the midst of a large city it is hardly possible to obtain the requisite tranquillity for the full development of the continuous, portion of the vein; still, Savart was so far able to withdraw his vein from the influence of such irregular vibrations that its limpid portion became elongated to the extent shown in Fig. 142. It will be understood that Fig. 141 represents a vein exposed to the irregular vibrations of the city of Paris, while Fig. 142 represents one produced under precisely the same conditions, but withdrawn from those vibrations.

The drops into which the vein finally resolves itself are incipient even in its limpid portion, announcing themselves there as annular protuberances, which become more and more pronounced, until finally they separate. Their birthplace is near the orifice itself, and under even moderate pressure they succeed each other with sufficient rapidity to produce a feeble musical note. By permitting the drops to fall upon a membrane, the pitch of this note may be fixed; and now we come to the point which connects the phenomena of liquid veins with those of sensitive flames and smoke-jets. If a note in unison with that of the vein be sounded near it, the limpid portion instantly shortens; the pitch may vary to some extent, and still cause a shortening; but the unisonant note is the most effectual. Savart’s experiments on vertically-descending veins have been recently repeated in our laboratory with striking effect. From a distance of thirty yards the limpid portion of the vein has been shortened by the sound of an organ-pipe of the proper pitch and of moderate intensity.

I have also recently gone carefully, not merely by reading, but by experiment, over Plateau’s account of the resolution of a liquid vein into drops. In his researches on the figures of equilibrium of bodies withdrawn from the action of gravity, he finds that a liquid cylinder is stable as long as its length does not exceed three times its diameter; or, more accurately, as long as the ratio between them does not exceed that of the diameter of a circle to its circumference, or 3.1416. If this be a little exceeded the cylinder begins to narrow at some point or other of its length; nips itself together, breaks, and forms immediately two spheres. If the ratio of the length of the cylinder to its diameter greatly exceed 3.1416, then, instead of breaking up into two spheres, it breaks up into several.

A liquid cylinder may be obtained by introducing olive-oil into a mixture of alcohol and water, of the same density as the oil. The latter forms a sphere. Two disks of smaller diameter than the sphere are brought into contact with it, and then drawn apart; the oil clings to the disks, and the sphere is transformed into a cylinder. If the quantity of oil be insufficient to produce the maximum length of cylinder, more may be added by a pipette. In making this experiment it will be noticed that, when the proper length is exceeded, the nipped portion of the cylinder elongates, and exists for a moment as a very thin liquid cylinder uniting the two incipient spheres; and that, when rupture occurs, the thin cylinder, which has also exceeded its proper length, breaks so as to form a small spherule between the two larger ones. This is a point of considerable significance in relation to our present question.

Now, Plateau contends that the play of the molecular forces in a liquid cylinder is not suspended by its motion of translation. The first portion of a vein of water quitting an orifice is a cylinder, to which the laws which he has established regarding motionless cylinders apply. The moment the descending vein exceeds the proper length it begins to pinch itself so as to form drops; but urged forward as it is by the pressure above it, and by its own gravity, in the time required for the rounding of the drop it reaches a certain distance from the orifice. At this distance, the pressure remaining constant, and the vein being withdrawn from external disturbance, rupture invariably occurs. And the rupture is accompanied by the phenomenon which has just been called significant. Between every two succeeding large drops a small spherule is formed, as shown in Fig. 141.

Permitting a vein of oil to fall from an orifice, not through the air, but through a mixture of alcohol and water of the proper density, the continuous portion of the vein, its resolution into drops, and the formation of the small spherule between each liberated drop and the end of the liquid cylinder which it has just quitted, may be watched with the utmost deliberation. The effect of this and other experiments upon the mind will be to produce the conviction that the very beautiful explanation offered by Plateau is also the true one. The various laws established experimentally by Savart all follow immediately from Plateau’s theory.

In a small paper published more than twenty years ago I drew attention to the fact that when a descending vein intersects a liquid surface above the point of rupture, if the pressure be not too great, it enters the liquid silently; but when the surface intersects the vein below the point of rupture a rattle is immediately heard, and bubbles are copiously produced. In the former case, not only is there no violent dashing aside of the liquid, but round the base of the vein, and in opposition to its motion, the liquid collects in a heap, by its surface tension or capillary attraction. This experiment can be combined with two other observations of Savart’s, in a beautiful and instructive manner. In addition to the shortening of the continuous portion by sound, Savart found that, when he permitted his membrane to intersect the vein at one of its protuberances, the sound was louder than when the intersection occurred at the contracted portion.

I permitted a vein to descend, under scarcely any pressure, from a tube three-quarters of an inch in diameter, and to enter silently a basin of water placed nearly 20 inches below the orifice. On sounding vigorously a Ut2 tuning-fork the pellucid jet was instantly broken, and as many as three of its swellings were seen above the surface. The rattle of air-bubbles was instantly heard, and the basin was seen to be filled with them. The sound was allowed slowly to die out; the continuous portion of the vein lengthened, and a series of alternations in the production of the bubbles was observed. When the swellings of the vein cut the surface of the water, the bubbles were copious and loud; when the contracted portions crossed the surface, the bubbles were scanty and scarcely audible.

Removing the basin, placing an iron tray in its place, and exciting the fork, the vein, which at first struck silently upon the tray, commenced a rattle which rose and sank with the dying out of the sound, according as the swellings or contractions of the jet impinged upon the surface. This is a simple and beautiful experiment.

[Figure 143-144-145]

Savart also caused his vein to issue horizontally and at various inclinations to the horizon, and found that, in certain cases, sonorous vibrations were competent to cause a jet to divide into two or three branches. In these experiments the liquid was permitted to issue through an orifice in a thin plate. Instead of this, however, we will resort to our favorite steatite burner; for with water also it asserts the same mastery over its fellows that it exhibited with flames and smoke-jets. It will, moreover, reveal to us some entirely novel results. By means of an India-rubber tube the burner is connected with the water-pipes of the Institution, and, by pointing it obliquely upward, we obtain a fine parabolic jet (Fig. 143). At a certain distance from the orifice, the vein resolves itself into beautiful spherules, whose motions are not rapid enough to make the vein appear continuous. At the vertex of the parabola the spray of pearls is more than an inch in width, and, further on, the drops are still more widely scattered. On sweeping a fiddle-bow across a tuning-fork which executes 512 vibrations in a second, the scattered drops, as if drawn together by their mutual attractions, instantly close up, and form an apparently continuous liquid arch several feet in height and span (shown in Fig. 144). As long as the proper note is maintained the vein looks like a frozen band, so motionless does it appear. On stopping the fork the arch is shaken asunder, and we have the same play of liquid pearls as before. Every sweep of the bow, however, causes the drops to fall into a common line of march.

A pitch-pipe, or an organ-pipe yielding the note of this tuning-fork, also powerfully controls the vein. The voice does the same. On pitching it to a note of moderate intensity, it causes the wandering drops to gather themselves together. At a distance of twenty yards, the voice is, to all appearance, as powerful in curbing the vein, and causing its drops to close up, as it is when close to the issuing jet.

The effect of “beats” upon the vein is also beautiful and instructive. They may be produced either by organ-pipes or by tuning-forks. When two forks vibrate, the one 512 times and the other 508 times in a second, you will learn in our next lecture that they produce four beats in a second. When the forks are sounded the beats are heard, and the liquid vein is seen to gather up its pearls, and scatter them in synchronism with the beats. The sensitiveness of this vein is astounding; it rivals that of the ear itself. Placing the two tuning-forks on a distant table, and permitting the beats to die gradually out, the vein continues its rhythm almost as long as hearing is possible. A more sensitive vein might actually prove superior to the ear—a very surprising result, considering the marvellous delicacy of this organ.

Footnote: When these two tuning-forks were placed in contact with a vessel from which a liquid vein issued, the visible action on the vein continued long after the forks had ceased to be heard.

By introducing a Leyden-jar into the circuit of a powerful induction-coil, a series of dense and dazzling flashes of light, each of momentary duration, is obtained. Every such flash in a darkened room renders the drops distinct, each drop being transformed into a little star of intense brilliancy. If the vein be then acted on by a sound of the proper pitch, it instantly gathers its drops together into a necklace of inimitable beauty.

In these experiments the whole vein gathers itself into a single arched band when the proper note is sounded; but, by varying the conditions, it may be caused to divide into two or more such bands, as shown in Fig. 145. Drawings, however, are ineffectual here; for the wonder of these experiments depends mainly on the sudden transition of the vein from one state to the other. In the motion dwells the surprise, and this no drawing can render.

Footnote: The experiments on sounding flames have been recently considerably extended by my assistant, Mr. Cottrell. By causing flame to rub against flame, various musical sounds can be obtained—some resembling those of a trumpet, others those of a lark. By the friction of unignited gas-jets, similar though less intense effects are produced. When the two flames of a fish-tail burner are permitted to impinge upon a plate of platinum, as in Scholl’s “perfectors,” the sounds are trumpet-like, and very loud. Two ignited gas-jets may be caused to flatten out like Savart’s water-jets. Or they may be caused to roll themselves into two hollow horns, forming a most instructive example of the Wirbelflächen of Helmholtz. The carbon-particles liberated in the flame rise through the horns in continuous red-hot or white-hot spirals, which are extinguished at a height of some inches from their place of generation.

Summary of Chapter VI

When a gas-flame is placed in a tube, the air in passing over the flame is thrown into vibration, musical sounds being the consequence.

Making allowance for the high temperature of the column of air associated with the flame, the pitch of the note is that of an open organ-pipe of the length of the tube surrounding the flame.

The vibrations of the flame, while the sound continues, consist of a series of periodic extinctions, total or partial, between every two of which the flame partially recovers its brightness.

The periodicity of the phenomenon may be demonstrated by means of a concave mirror which forms an image of the vibrating flame upon a screen. When the image is sharply defined, the rotation of the mirror reduces the single image to a series of separate images of the flame. The dark spaces between the images correspond to the extinctions of the flame, while the images themselves correspond to its periods of recovery.

Besides the fundamental note of the associated tube, the flame can also be caused to excite the higher overtones of the tube. The successive divisions of the column of air are those of an open organ-pipe when its harmonic tones are sounded.

On sounding a note nearly in unison with a tube containing a silent flame, the flame jumps; and if the position of the flame in the tube be rightly chosen, the extraneous sound will cause the flame to sing.

While the flame is singing, a note nearly in unison with its own produces beats, and the flame is seen to jump in synchronism with the beats. The jumping is also observed when the position of the flame within its tube is not such as to enable it to sing.

Naked Flames

When the pressure of the gas which feeds a naked flame is augmented, the flame, up to a certain point, increases in size. But if the pressure be too great, the flame roars or flares.

The roaring or flaring of the flame is caused by the state of vibration into which the gas is thrown in the orifice of the burner, when the pressure which urges it through the orifice is excessive.

If the vibrations in the orifice of the burner be super-induced by an extraneous sound, the flame will flare under a pressure less than that which, of itself, would produce flaring.

The gas under excessive pressure has vibrations of a definite period impressed upon it as it passes through the burner. To operate with a maximum effect upon the flame the external sound must contain vibrations synchronous with those of the issuing gas.

When such a sound is chosen, and when the flame is brought sufficiently near its flaring-point, it furnishes an acoustic reagent of unexampled delicacy.

At a distance of 30 yards, for example, the chirrup of a house-sparrow would be competent to throw the flame into commotion.

It is not to the flame, as such, that we are to ascribe these effects. Effects substantially similar are produced when we employ jets of unignited coal-gas, carbonic acid, hydrogen, or air. These jets may be rendered visible by smoke, and the smoke jets show a sensitiveness to sonorous vibrations even greater than that of the flames.

When a brilliant sensitive flame illuminates an otherwise dark room, in which a suitable bell is caused to strike, a series of periodic quenchings of the light by the sound occurs. Every stroke of the bell is accompanied by a momentary darkening of the room.

A jet of water descending from a circular orifice is composed of two distinct portions, the one pellucid and calm; the other in commotion. When properly analyzed the former portion is found continuous; the latter being a succession of drops.

If these drops be received upon a membrane, a musical sound is produced. When an extraneous sound of this particular pitch is produced in the neighborhood of the vein, the continuous portion is seen to shorten.

The continuous portion of the vein presents a series of swellings and contractions, in the former of which the drops are flattened, and in the latter elongated. The sound produced by the flattened drops on striking the membrane is louder than that produced by the elongated ones.

Above its point of rupture a vein of water may be caused to enter water silently; but on sounding a suitable note, the rattle of bubbles is immediately heard; the discontinuous part of the vein rises above the surface, and as the sound dies out the successive swellings and contractions produce alternations of the quantity and sound of the bubbles.

In veins propelled obliquely, the scattered water-drops may be called together by a suitable sound, so as to form an apparently continuous liquid arch.

Liquid veins may be analyzed by the electric spark, or by a succession of flashes illuminating the veins.
