Part I

RESEARCHES ON THE ACOUSTIC TRANSPARENCY OF THE ATMOSPHERE IN RELATION TO THE QUESTION OF FOG-SIGNALLING

Introduction—Instruments and Observations—Contradictory Results from the 19th of May to the 1st of July inclusive—Solution of Contradictions—Aërial Reflection and its Causes—Aërial Echoes—Acoustic Clouds—Experimental Demonstration of Stoppage of Sound by Aërial Reflection

Introduction

WE ARE now fully equipped for the investigation of an important practical problem. The cloud produced by the puff of a locomotive can quench the rays of the noonday sun; it is not, therefore, surprising that in dense fogs our most powerful coast-lights, including even the electric light, should become useless to the mariner.

Disastrous shipwrecks are the consequence. During the last ten years no less than two hundred and seventy-three vessels have been reported as totally lost on our own coasts in fog or thick weather. The loss, I believe, has been far greater on the American seaboard, where trade is more eager, and fogs more frequent, than they are here. No wonder, then, that earnest efforts should be made to find a substitute for light in sound-signals, powerful enough to give warning and guidance to mariners while still at a safe distance from the shore.

Such signals have been established to some extent upon our own coasts, and to a still greater extent along the coasts of Canada and the United States. But the evidence as to their value and performance is of the most conflicting character, and no investigation sufficiently thorough to clear up the uncertainty has hitherto been made. In fact, while the velocity of sound has formed the subject of refined and repeated experiment by the ablest philosophers, the publication of Dr. Derham’s celebrated paper in the “Philosophical Transactions” for 1708 marks the latest systematic inquiry into the causes which affect the intensity of sound in the atmosphere.

Jointly with the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House, and as their scientific adviser, I have recently had the honor of conducting an inquiry designed to fill the blank here indicated.

One or two brief references will suffice to show the state of the question when this investigation began. “Derham,” says Sir John Herschel, “found that fogs and falling rain, but more especially snow, tend powerfully to obstruct the propagation of sound, and that the same effect was produced by a coating of fresh-fallen snow on the ground, though when glazed and hardened at the surface by freezing it had no such influence.”

Footnote: “Essay on Sound,” par. 21.

In a very clear and able letter, addressed to the President of the Board of Trade in 1863, Dr. Robinson, of Armagh, thus summarizes our knowledge of fog-signals: “Nearly all that is known about fog-signals is to be found in the ‘Report on Lights and Beacons’; and of it much is little better than conjecture. Its substance is as follows:

Footnote: “Report of the British Association for 1863,” page 105.

“‘Light is scarcely available for this purpose. Blue lights are used in the Hooghly; but it is not stated at what distance they are visible in fog; their glare may be seen further than their flame. It might, however, be desirable to ascertain how far the electric light, or its flash, can be traced.

Footnote: A very sagacious remark, as observation proves.

Footnote: Powerful electric lights have since been established and found ineffectual.

“‘Sound is the only known means really effective; but about it testimonies are conflicting, and there is scarcely one fact relating to its use as a signal which can be considered as established. Even the most important of all, the distance at which it ceases to be heard, is undecided.

“‘Up to the present time all signal-sounds have been made in air, though this medium has grave disadvantages: its own currents interfere with the sound-waves, so that a gun or bell which is heard several miles down the wind is inaudible more than a few furlongs up it. A still greater evil is that it is least effective when most needed; for fog is a powerful damper of sound.’”

Dr. Robinson here expresses the universally-prevalent opinion, and he then assigns the theoretic cause. “Fog,” he says, “is a mixture of air and globules of water, and at each of the innumerable surfaces where these two touch, a portion of the vibration is reflected and lost. ... Snow produces a similar effect, and one still more injurious.”

Footnote: This is also Sir John Herschel’s way of regarding the subject. “Essay on Sound,” par. 38.

Reflection being thus considered to take place at the surfaces of the suspended particles, it followed that the greater the number of particles, or, in other words, the denser the fog, the more injurious would be its action upon sound. Hence optic transparency came to be considered a measure of acoustic transparency. On this point Dr. Robinson, in the letter referred to, expresses himself thus: “At the outset, it is obvious that, to make experiments comparable, we must have some measure of the fog’s power of stopping sound, without attending to which the most anomalous results may be expected. It seems probable that this will bear some simple relation to its opacity to light, and that the distance at which a given object, as a flag or pole, disappears may be taken as the measure.” “Still, clear air” was regarded in this letter as the best vehicle of sound, the alleged action of fogs, rain, and snow being ascribed to their rendering the atmosphere “a discontinuous medium.”

Prior to the investigation now to be described, the views here enunciated were those universally entertained. That sound is unable to penetrate fogs was taken to be “a matter of common observation.” The bells and horns of ships were affirmed “not to be heard so far in fogs as in clear weather.” In the fogs of London the noise of the carriage-wheels was reported to be so much diminished that “they seem to be at a distance where really close by.” My knowledge does not inform me of the existence of any other source for these opinions regarding the deadening power of fog than the paper of Derham, published one hundred and sixty-seven years ago. In consequence of their à priori probability, his conclusions seem to have been transmitted unquestioned from generation to generation of scientific men.

Instruments and Observations

On the 19th of May, 1873, this inquiry began. The South Foreland, near Dover, was chosen as the signal-station, steam-power having been already established there to work two powerful magneto-electro lights. The observations for the most part were made afloat, one of the yachts of the Trinity Corporation being usually employed for this purpose. Two stations had been established, the one at the top, the other at the bottom, of the South Foreland Cliff; and at each of them trumpets, air-whistles, and steam-whistles of great size were mounted. The whistles first employed were of English manufacture. To these was afterward added a large United States whistle, and also a Canadian whistle, of great reputed power.

On the 8th of October another instrument, which has played a specially important part in these observations, was introduced. This was a steam-siren, constructed and patented by Mr. Brown of New York, and introduced by Prof. Henry into the lighthouse system of the United States. As an example of international courtesy worthy of imitation, I refer with pleasure to the fact that when informed by Major Elliot of the United States Army that our experiments had begun, the Lighthouse Board at Washington, of their own spontaneous kindness, forwarded to us for trial a very noble instrument of this description, which was immediately mounted at the South Foreland.

In the steam-siren, as in the ordinary one, described in Chapter II., a fixed disk and a rotating disk are employed, but radial slits are used instead of circular apertures. One disk is fixed vertically across the throat of a conical trumpet 16-1/2 feet long, 5 inches in diameter where the disk crosses it, and gradually opening out till at the other extremity it reaches a diameter of 2 feet 3 inches. Behind the fixed disk is the rotating one, which is driven by separate mechanism. The trumpet is connected with a boiler. In our experiments steam of 70 lbs. pressure was for the most part employed. Just as in the ordinary siren, when the radial slits of the two disks coincide, and then only, a strong puff of steam escapes. Sound-waves of great intensity are thus sent through the air, the pitch of the note depending on the velocity of rotation. (A drawing of the steam-siren constitutes our frontispiece.)

To the siren, trumpets, and whistles were added three guns—an 18-pounder, a 5-1/2-inch howitzer, and a 13-inch mortar. In our summer experiments all three were fired; but the howitzer having shown itself superior to the other guns it was chosen in our autumn experiments as not only a fair but a favorable representative of this form of signal. The charges fired were for the most part those now employed at Holyhead, Lundy Island, and the Kish light-vessel; namely, 3 lbs. of powder. Gongs and bells were not included in this inquiry, because previous observations had clearly proved their inferiority to the trumpets and whistles.

On the 19th of May the instruments tested were:

On the top of the cliff:

a. Two brass trumpets or horns, 11 feet 2 inches long, 2 inches in diameter at the mouth-piece, and opening out at the other end to a diameter of 22-1/2 inches. They were provided with vibrating steel reeds 9 inches long, 2 inches wide, and 1/4 inch thick, and were sounded by air of 18 lbs. pressure.

b. A whistle, shaped like that of a locomotive, 6 inches in diameter, also sounded by air of 18 lbs. pressure.

c. A steam-whistle, 12 inches in diameter, attached to a boiler, and sounded by steam of 64 lbs. pressure.

At the bottom of the cliff:

d. Two trumpets or horns, of the same size and arrangement as those above, and sounded by air of the same pressure. They were mounted vertically on the reservoir of compressed air; but within about two feet of their extremities they were bent at a right angle, so as to present their mouths to the sea.

e. A 6-inch air-whistle, similar to the one above, and sounded by the same means.

The upper instruments were 235 feet above high-water mark, the lower ones 40 feet. A vertical distance of 195 feet, therefore, separated the instruments. A shaft, provided with a series of twelve ladders, led from the one to the other.

Numerous comparative experiments made at the outset gave a slight advantage to the upper instruments. They, therefore, were for the most part employed throughout the subsequent inquiry.

Our first observations were a preliminary discipline rather than an organized effort at discovery. On May 19th the maximum distance reached by the sound was about three and a half miles. The wind, however, was high and the sea rough, so that local noises interfered to some extent with our appreciation of the sound.

Footnote: In all cases nautical miles are meant.

Mariners express the strength of the wind by a series of numbers extending from 0 = calm to 12 = a hurricane, a little practice in common producing a remarkable unanimity between different observers as regards the force of the wind. Its force on May 19th was 6, and it blew at right angles to the direction of the sound.

The same instruments on May 20th covered a greater range of sound; but not much greater, though the disturbance due to local noises was absent. At 4 miles’ distance in the axes of the horns they were barely heard, the air at the time being calm, the sea smooth, and all other circumstances exactly those which have been hitherto regarded as most favorable to the transmission of sound. We crept a little further away, and by stretched attention managed to hear at intervals, at a distance of 6 miles, the faintest hum of the horns. A little further out we again halted; but though local noises were absent, and though we listened intently, we heard nothing.

This position, clearly beyond the range of whistles and trumpets, was expressly chosen with the view of making what might be considered a decisive comparative experiment between horns and guns as instruments for fog-signalling. The distinct report of the 12 o’clock gun fired at Dover on the 19th suggested this comparison, and through the prompt courtesy of General Sir A. Horsford we were enabled to carry it out. At 12.30 precisely the puff of an 18-pounder, with a 3-lb. charge, was seen at Dover Castle, which was about a mile further off than the South Foreland. Thirty-six seconds afterward the loud report of the gun was heard, its complete superiority over the trumpets being thus, to all appearance, demonstrated.

We clinched this observation by steaming out to a distance of 8-1/2 miles, where the report of a second gun was well heard by all of us. At a distance of 10 miles the report of a third gun was heard by some, and at 9·7 miles the report of a fourth gun was heard by all.

The result seemed perfectly decisive. Applying the law of inverse squares, the sound of the gun at a distance of 6 miles from the Foreland must have had more than two and a half times the intensity of the sound of the trumpets. It would not have been rash under the circumstances to have reported without qualification the superiority of the gun as a fog-signal. No single experiment is, to my knowledge, on record to prove that a sound once predominant would not be always predominant, or that the atmosphere on different days would show preferences to different sounds. On many subsequent occasions, however, the sound of the horns proved distinctly superior to that of the gun. This selective power of the atmosphere revealed itself more strikingly in our autumn experiments than in our summer ones; and it was sometimes illustrated within a few hours of the same day: of two sounds, for example, one might have the greatest range at 10 A.M., and the other the greatest range at 2 P.M.

In the experiments on May 19th and 20th the superiority of the trumpets over the whistles was decided; and indeed, with few exceptions, this superiority was maintained throughout the inquiry. But there were exceptions. On June 2d, for example, the whistles rose in several instances to full equality with, and on rare occasions subsequently even surpassed, the horns. The sounds were varied from day to day, and various shiftings of the horns and reeds were resorted to, with a view of bringing out their maximum power. On the date last mentioned a single horn was sounded, two were sounded, and three were sounded together; but the utmost range of the loudest sound, even with the paddles stopped, did not exceed 6 miles. With the view of concentrating their power, the axes of the horns had been pointed in the same direction, and, unless stated to the contrary, this in all subsequent experiments was the case.

On June 3d the three guns already referred to were permanently mounted at the South Foreland. They were ably served by gunners from Dover Castle.

On the same day dense clouds quite covered the firmament, some of them particularly black and threatening, but a marked advance was observed in the transmissive power of the air. At a distance of 6 miles the horn-sounds were not quite quenched by the paddle-noises; at 8 miles the whistles were heard, and the horns better heard; while at 9 miles, with the paddles stopped, the horn-sounds alone were fairly audible. During the day’s observations a remarkable and instructive phenomenon was observed. Over us rapidly passed a torrential shower of rain, which, according to Derham, is a potent damper of sound. We could, however, notice no subsidence of intensity as the shower passed. It is even probable that, had our minds been free from bias, we should have noticed an augmentation of the sound, such as occurred with the greatest distinctness on various subsequent occasions during violent rain.

The influence of “beats” was tried on June 3d, by throwing the horns slightly out of unison; but though the beats rendered the sound characteristic, they did not seem to augment the range. At a distance from the station curious fluctuations of intensity were noticed. Not only did the different blasts vary in strength, but sudden swellings and fallings off, even of the same blast, were observed. This was not due to any variation on the part of the instruments, but purely to the changes of the medium traversed by the sound. What these changes were shall be indicated subsequently.

The range of our best horns on June 10th was 8-3/4 miles. The guns at this distance were very feeble. That the loudness of the sound depends on the shape of the gun was proved by the fact that thus far the howitzer, with a 3-lb. charge, proved more effective than the other guns.
