Not only do gases of different densities act thus upon sound, but atmospheric air in layers of different temperatures does the same. Across a tunnel resembling t t′, Fig. 146, sixty-six platinum wires were stretched, all of them being in metallic connection. The bell, in its padded box, was placed at one end of the tunnel, and the sensitive flame k, near its flaring-point, at the other. When the bell rang the flame flared. A current from a strong voltaic battery being sent through the platinum wires, they became heated: layers of warm air rose from them through the tunnel, and immediately the agitation of the flame was stilled. On stopping the current, the agitation recommenced. In this experiment the platinum wires had not reached a red heat. Employing half the number and the same battery, they were raised to a red heat, the action in this case upon the sound-waves being also energetic. Employing one-third of the number of wires, and the same strength of battery, the wires were raised to a white heat. Here also the flame was immediately rendered tranquil by the stoppage of the sound.

Reflection from Vapors

But not only do gases of different densities, and air of different temperatures, act thus upon sound, but air saturated, in different degrees, with the vapors of volatile liquids can be shown by experiment to produce the same effect. Into the path pursued by the carbonic acid in our first experiment a flask, which I have frequently employed to charge air with vapor, was introduced. Through a volatile liquid, partially filling the flask, air was forced into the tunnel t t′, which was thus divided into spaces of air saturated with the vapor, and other spaces in their ordinary condition. The action of such a medium upon the sound-waves issuing from the bell is very energetic, instantly reducing the violently-agitated flame to stillness and steadiness. The removal of the heterogeneous medium instantly restores the noisy flaring of the flame.

A few illustrations of the action of non-homogeneous atmospheres, produced by the saturation of layers of air with the vapors of volatile liquids, may follow here:

Bisulphide of Carbon.—Flame very sensitive, and noisily responsive to the sound. The action of the non-homogeneous atmosphere was prompt and strong, stilling the agitated flame.

Chloroform.—Flame still very sensitive; action similar to the last.

Iodide of Methyl.—Action prompt and energetic.

Amylene.—Very fine action; a short and violently-agitated flame was immediately rendered tall and quiescent.

Sulphuric Ether.—Action prompt and energetic.

The vapor of water at ordinary temperatures is so small in quantity and so attenuated that it requires special precautions to bring out its action. But with such precautions it was found competent to reduce to quiescence the sensitive flame.

As the skill and knowledge of the experimenter augment he is often able to simplify his experimental combinations. Thus, in the present instance, by the suitable arrangement of the source of sound and the sensitive flame, it was found that not only twenty-five layers, but three or four layers of coal-gas and carbonic acid sufficed to still the agitated flame. Nay, with improved manipulation, the action of a single layer of either gas was rendered perfectly sensible. So also as regards heated layers of air, not only were sixty-six or twenty-two heated platinum wires found sufficient, but the heated air from two or three candle-flames, or even from a single flame, or a heated poker, was found perfectly competent to stop the flame’s agitation. The same remark applies to vapors. Three or four heated layers of air, saturated with the vapor of a volatile liquid, stilled the flame; and, by improved manipulation, the action of a single saturated layer could be rendered sensible. In all these cases, moreover, a small, high-pitched reed might be substituted for the bell.

My assistant has devised the simple apparatus sketched in Fig. 147, for showing reflection by gases, vapors, and heated air. At the end A of the square pipe A B is a small vibrating reed of high pitch, the sound of which violently agitates the sensitive flame f. To the horizontal tube g g′ are attached four small burners, and above them four chimneys, through which the heated gases from the flames can ascend into A B. When the coverings of the chimneys are removed and the gas is ignited, the air within A B is rendered rapidly non-homogeneous, and immediately stills the agitated flame.

[Figure 147]

The pipe A B may be turned upside down, an orifice seen between A and B fitting on to the stand which supports the tube. The conduit t leads into a shallow rectangular box, which communicates by a series of transverse apertures with A B. When air, saturated with the vapor of a volatile liquid, is forced through these apertures, the atmosphere in A B is immediately rendered heterogeneous, the agitated flame being as rapidly stilled.

[Figure 148]

In the experiments at the South Foreland, not only was it proved that the acoustic clouds stopped the sound; but, in the proper position, the sounds which had been refused transmission were received by reflection. I wished very much to render this echoed sound evident experimentally; and stated to my assistant that we ought to be able to accomplish this. Mr. Cottrell met my desire by the following beautiful experiment, which has been thus described before the Royal Society:

A vibrating reed B (Fig. 148) was placed so as to send sound-waves through a tin tube, 38 inches long, and 1-3/4 inch diameter, in the direction B A, the action of the sound being rendered manifest by its causing a sensitive flame placed at F′ to become violently agitated.

“The invisible heated layer immediately above the luminous portion of an ignited coal-gas flame issuing from an ordinary bat’s-wing burner was allowed to stream upward across the end A of the tin tube. A portion of the sound issuing from the tube was reflected at the limiting surfaces of the heated layer; the part transmitted being now only competent to slightly agitate the sensitive flame at F′.

“The heated layer was then placed at such an angle that the reflected portion of the sound was sent through a second tin tube, A F (of the same dimensions as B A). Its action was rendered visible by causing a second sensitive flame placed at the end of the tube at F to become violently affected. This echo continued active as long as the heated layer intervened; but upon its withdrawal the sensitive flame placed at F′, receiving the whole of the direct pulse, became again violently agitated, and at the same moment the sensitive flame at F, ceasing to be affected by the echo, resumed its former tranquillity.

“Exactly the same action takes place when the luminous portion of a gas-flame is made the reflecting layer; but in the experiments above described the invisible layer above the flame only was used. By proper adjustment of the pressure of the gas the flame at F′ can be rendered so moderately sensitive to the direct sound-wave that the portion transmitted through the reflecting layer shall be incompetent to affect the flame. Then by the introduction and withdrawal of the bat’s-wing flame the two sensitive flames can be rendered alternately quiescent and strongly agitated.

“An illustration is here afforded of the perfect analogy between light and sound; for if a beam of light be projected from B to F′, and a plate of glass be introduced at A in the exact position of the reflecting layer of gas, the beam will be divided, one portion being reflected in the direction A F, and the other portion transmitted through the glass toward F′, exactly as the sound-wave is divided into a reflected and transmitted portion by the layer of heated gas or flame.”

Thus far, therefore, we have placed our subject in the firm grasp of experiment; nor shall we find this test failing us further on.

Part II

INVESTIGATION OF THE CAUSES WHICH HAVE HITHERTO BEEN SUPPOSED EFFECTIVE IN PREVENTING THE TRANSMISSION OF SOUND THROUGH THE ATMOSPHERE

Action of Hail and Rain—Action of Snow—Action of Fog; Observations in London—Experiments on Artificial Fogs—Observations on Fogs at the South Foreland—Action of Wind—Atmospheric Selection—Influence of Sound-Shadow

Action of Hail and Rain

In the first part of this chapter it was demonstrated that the optic transparency and acoustic transparency of our atmosphere were by no means necessarily coincident; that on days of marvellous optical clearness the atmosphere may be filled with impervious acoustic clouds, while days optically turbid may be acoustically clear. We have now to consider, in detail, the influence of various agents which have hitherto been considered potent in reference to the transmission of sound through the atmosphere.

Derham, and after him all other writers, considered that falling rain tended powerfully to obstruct sound. An observation on June 3d has been already referred to as tending to throw doubt on this conclusion. Two other crucial instances will suffice to show its untenability. On the morning of October 8th, at 7.45 A.M., a thunderstorm accompanied by heavy rain broke over Dover. But the clouds subsequently cleared away, and the sun shone strongly on the sea. For a time the optical clearness of the atmosphere was extraordinary, but it was acoustically opaque. At 2.30 P.M. a densely-black scowl again overspread the heavens to the W.S.W. The distance being 6 miles, and all hushed on board, the horn was heard very feebly, the siren more distinctly, while the howitzer was better than either, though not much superior to the siren.

A squall approached us from the west. In the Alps or elsewhere I have rarely seen the heavens blacker. Vast cumuli floated to the N.E. and S.E.; vast streamers of rain descended in the W.N.W.; huge scrolls of cloud hung in the N.; but spaces of blue were to be seen to the N.N.E.

At 7 miles’ distance the siren and horn were both feeble, while the gun sent us a very faint report. A dense shower now enveloped the Foreland.

The rain at length reached us, falling heavily all the way between us and the Foreland; but the sound, instead of being deadened, rose perceptibly in power. Hail was now added to the rain, and the shower reached a tropical violence, the hailstones floating thickly on the flooded deck. In the midst of this furious squall both the horns and the siren were distinctly heard; and as the shower lightened, thus lessening the local pattering, the sounds so rose in power that we heard them at a distance of 7-1/2 miles distinctly louder than they had been heard through the rainless atmosphere at 5 miles.

At 4 P.M. the rain had ceased and the sun shone clearly through the calm air. At 9 miles’ distance the horn was heard feebly, the siren clearly, while the howitzer sent us a loud report. All the sounds were better heard at this distance than they had previously been at 5-1/2 miles; from which, by the law of inverse squares, it follows that the intensity of the sound at 5-1/2 miles’ distance must have been augmented at least threefold by the descent of the rain.

On the 23d of October our steamer had forsaken us for shelter, and I sought to turn the weather to account by making other observations on both sides of the fog-signal station. Mr. Douglass, the chief engineer of the Trinity House, was good enough to undertake the observations N.E. of the Foreland; while Mr. Ayers, the assistant engineer, walked in the other direction. At 12.50 P.M. the wind blew a gale, and broke into a thunderstorm with violent rain. Inside and outside the Cornhill Coast-guard Station, a mile from the instruments in the direction of Dover, Mr. Ayers heard the sound of the siren through the storm; and after the rain had ceased, all sounds were heard distinctly louder than before. Mr. Douglass had sent a fly before him to Kingsdown, and the driver had been waiting for fifteen minutes before he arrived. During this time no sound had been heard, though 40 blasts had been blown in the interval; nor had the coast-guard man on duty, a practiced observer, heard any of them throughout the day. During the thunderstorm, and while the rain was actually falling with a violence which Mr. Douglass describes as perfectly torrential, the sounds became audible and were heard by all.

To rain, in short, I have never been able to trace the slightest deadening influence upon sound. The reputed barrier offered by “thick weather” to the passage of sound was one of the causes which tended to produce hesitation in establishing sound-signals on our coasts. It is to be hoped that the removal of this error may redound to the advantage of coming generations of seafaring men.

Action of Snow

Falling snow, according to Derham, is the most serious obstacle of all to the transmission of sound. We did not extend our observations at the South Foreland into snowy weather; but a previous observation of my own bears directly upon this point. On Christmas night, 1859, I arrived at Chamouni, through snow so deep as to obliterate the road-fences, and to render the labor of reaching the village arduous in the extreme. On the 26th and 27th it fell heavily. On the 27th, during a lull in the storm, I reached the Montavert, sometimes breast deep in snow. On the 28th, with great difficulty, two lines of stakes were set out across the glacier, with the view of determining its winter motion. On the 29th the entry in my journal, written in the morning, is: “Snow, heavy snow; it must have descended through the entire night, the quantity freshly fallen is so great.”

Under these circumstances I planted my theodolite beside the Mer de Glace, having waded to my position through snow, which, being dry, reached nearly to my breast. Assistants were sent across the glacier with instructions to measure the displacement of a transverse line of stakes planted previously in the snow. A storm drifted up the valley, darkening the air as it approached. It reached us, the snow falling more heavily than I had ever seen it elsewhere. It soon formed a heap on the theodolite, and thickly covered my own clothes. Here, then, was a combination of snow in the air, and of soft fresh snow on the ground, such as Derham could hardly have enjoyed; still through such an atmosphere I was able to make my instructions audible quite across the glacier, the distance being half a mile, while the experiment was rendered reciprocal by one of my assistants making his voice audible to me.

Passage of Sound through Textile Fabrics, and through Artificial Showers

The flakes here were so thick that it was only at intervals that I was able to pick up the retreating forms of the men. Still the air through which the flakes fell was continuous. Did the flakes merely yield passively to the sonorous waves, swinging like the particles of air themselves to and fro as the sound-waves passed them? Or did the waves bend by diffraction round the flakes, and emerge from them without sensible loss? Experiment will aid us here by showing the astonishing facility with which sound makes its way among obstacles, and passes through tissues, so long as the continuity of the air in their interstices is preserved.

A piece of millboard or of glass, a plank of wood, or the hand, placed across the open end t′ of the tunnel a b c d, Fig. 146 (page 334), intercepts the sound of the bell, placed in the padded box P, and stills the sensitive flame k.

An ordinary cambric pocket-handkerchief, on the other hand, placed across the tunnel-end produced hardly an appreciable effect upon the sound. Through two layers of the handkerchief the flame was strongly agitated; through four layers it was still agitated; while through six layers, though nearly stilled, it was not entirely so.

Dipping the same handkerchief into water, and stretching a single wetted layer across the tunnel-end, it stilled the flame as effectually as the millboard or the wood. Hence the conclusion that the sound-waves in the first instance passed through the interstices of the cambric.

Through a single layer of thin silk the sound passed without sensible interruption; through six layers the flame was strongly agitated; while through twelve layers the agitation was quite perceptible.

A single layer of this silk, when wetted, stilled the flame.
