Such experiments yield new conceptions as to the scattering of sound in the atmosphere. No sound here employed is a simple sound; in every case the fundamental note is accompanied by others, and the action of the atmosphere on these different groups of waves has its optical analogue in that scattering of the waves of the luminiferous ether which produces the various shades and colors of the sky.

Concluding Remarks

A few additional remarks and suggestions will fitly wind up this chapter. It has been proved that in some states of the weather the howitzer firing a 3-lb. charge commands a larger range than the whistles, trumpets, or siren. This was the case, for example, on the particular day, October 17th, when the ranges of all the sounds reached their maximum.

On many other days, however, the inferiority of the gun to the siren was demonstrated in the clearest manner. The gun-puffs were seen with the utmost distinctness at the Foreland, but no sound was heard, the note of the siren at the same time reaching us with distinct and considerable power.

The disadvantages of the gun are these:

a. The duration of the sound is so short that, unless the observer is prepared beforehand, the sound, through lack of attention rather than through its own powerlessness, is liable to be unheard.

b. Its liability to be quenched by a local sound is so great that it is sometimes obliterated by a puff of wind taking possession of the ears at the time of its arrival. This point was alluded to by Arago, in his report on the celebrated experiments of 1822. By such a puff a momentary gap is produced in the case of a continuous sound, but not entire extinction.

c. Its liability to be quenched or deflected by an opposing wind, so as to be practically useless at a very short distance to windward, is very remarkable. A case has been cited in which the gun failed to be heard against a violent wind at a distance of 550 yards from the place of firing, the sound of the siren at the same time reaching us with great intensity.

Still, notwithstanding these drawbacks, I think the gun is entitled to rank as a first-class signal. I have had occasion myself to observe its extreme utility at Holyhead and the Kish light-vessel near Kingstown. The commanders of the Holyhead boats, moreover, are unanimous in their commendation of the gun. An important addition in its favor is the fact that in a fog the flash or glare often comes to the aid of the sound. On this point, the evidence is quite conclusive.

There may be cases in which the combination of the gun with one of the other signals may be desirable. Where it is wished to confer an unmistakable individuality on a fog-signal station, such a combination might with advantage be resorted to.

If the gun be retained as one form of fog-signal (and I should be sorry at present to recommend its total abolition), it ought to be of the most suitable description. Our experiments prove the sound of the gun to be dependent on its shape; but we do not know that we have employed the best shape. This suggests the desirability of constructing a gun with special reference to the production of sound.

Footnote: The Elder Brethren have already had plans of a new signal-gun laid before them by the constructors of the War Department.

An absolutely uniform superiority on all days cannot be conceded to any one of the instruments subjected to examination; still, our observations have been so numerous and long-continued as to enable us to come to the sure conclusion, that, on the whole, the steam-siren is the most powerful fog-signal which has hitherto been tried in England. It is specially powerful when local noises, such as those of wind, rigging, breaking waves, shore-surf, and the rattle of pebbles, have to be overcome. Its density, quality, pitch, and penetration, render it dominant over such noises after all other signal-sounds have succumbed.

I have not, therefore, hesitated to recommend the introduction of the siren as a coast-signal.

It will be desirable in each case to confer upon the instrument a power of rotation, so as to enable the person in charge of it to point its trumpet against the wind or in any other required direction. This arrangement was made at the South Foreland, and it presents no mechanical difficulty. It is also desirable to mount the siren, so as to permit of the depression of its trumpet fifteen or twenty degrees below the horizon.

In selecting the position at which a fog-signal is to be mounted, the possible influence of a sound-shadow, and the possible extinction of the sound by the interference of the direct waves with waves reflected from the shore, must form the subject of the gravest consideration. Preliminary trials may, in most cases, be necessary before fixing on the precise point at which the instrument is to be placed.

The siren which has been long known to scientific men is worked with air; and it would be worth while to try how the fog-siren would behave supposing compressed air to be substituted for steam. Compressed air might also be tried with the whistles.

No fog-signal hitherto tried is able to fulfil the condition laid down in a very able letter already referred to, namely, “that all fog-signals should be distinctly audible for at least 4 miles, under every circumstance.” Circumstances may exist to prevent the most powerful sound from being heard at half this distance. What may with certainty be affirmed is, that in almost all cases the siren may certainly be relied on at a distance of 2 miles; in the great majority of cases it may be relied upon at a distance of 3 miles, and in the majority of cases to a distance greater than 3 miles.

Happily the experiments thus far made are perfectly concurrent in indicating that at the particular time when fog-signals are needed, the air holding the fog in suspension is in a highly-homogeneous condition; hence it is in the highest degree probable that in the case of fog we may rely upon the signals being effective at far greater distances than those just mentioned.

I am cautious not to inspire the mariner with a confidence which may prove delusive. When he hears a fog-signal he ought, as a general rule (at all events until extended experience justifies the contrary), to assume the source of sound to be not more than 2 or 3 miles distant, and to heave his lead or to take other necessary precautions. If he errs at all in his estimate of distance, it ought to be on the side of safety.

With the instruments now at our disposal wisely established along our coasts, I venture to think that the saving of property in ten years will be an exceedingly large multiple of the outlay necessary for the establishment of such signals. The saving of life appeals to the higher motives of humanity.

In a report written for the Trinity House on the subject of fog-signals, my excellent predecessor, Prof. Faraday, expresses the opinion that a false promise to the mariner would be worse than no promise at all. Casting our eyes back upon the observations here recorded, we find the sound-range on clear, calm days varying from 2-1/2 miles to 16-1/2 miles. It must be evident that an instruction founded on the latter observation would be fraught with peril in weather corresponding to the former. Not the maximum but the minimum sound-range should be impressed upon the mariner. Want of attention to this point may be followed by disastrous consequences.

This remark is not made without cause. I have before me a “Notice to Mariners” regarding a fog-whistle recently mounted at Cape Race, which is reputed to have a range of 20 miles in calm weather, 30 miles with the wind, and in stormy weather or against the wind 7 to 10 miles. Now, considering the distance reached by sound in our observations, I should be willing to concede the possibility, in a more homogeneous atmosphere than ours, of a sound-range on some calm days of 20 miles, and on some light windy days of 30 miles, to a powerful whistle; but I entertain a strong belief that the stating of these distances, or of the distance 7 to 10 miles against a storm, without any qualification, is calculated to inspire the mariner with false confidence. I would venture to affirm that at Cape Race calm days might be found in which the range of the sound will be less than one-fourth of what this notice states it to be. Such publications ought to be without a trace of exaggeration, and furnish only data on which the mariner may with perfect confidence rely. My object in extending these observations over so long a period was to make evident to all how fallacious it would be, and how mischievous it might be, to draw general conclusions from observations made in weather of great acoustic transparency.

Thus ends, for the present at all events, an inquiry which I trust will prove of some importance, scientific as well as practical. In conducting it I have had to congratulate myself on the unfailing aid and co-operation of the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House. Captain Drew, Captain Close, Captain Were, Captain Atkins, and the Deputy Master, have all from time to time taken part in the inquiry. To the eminent arctic navigator, Admiral Collinson, who showed throughout unflagging and, I would add, philosophic interest in the investigation, I am indebted for most important practical aid. He was almost always at my side, comparing opinions with me, placing the steamer in the required positions, and making with consummate skill and promptness the necessary sextant observations. I am also deeply sensible of the important services rendered by Mr. Douglass, the able and indefatigable engineer, by Mr. Ayres, the assistant engineer, and by Mr. Price Edwards, the private secretary of the Deputy Master of the Trinity House.

The officers and gunners at the South Foreland also merit my best thanks, as also Mr. Holmes and Mr. Laidlaw, who had charge of the trumpets, whistles, and siren.

In the subsequent experimental treatment of the subject I have been most ably aided by my excellent assistant, Mr. John Cottrell.

NOTE In the Appendix will be found a brief paper on “Acoustic Reversibility,” in which I offer a solution of a difficulty encountered by the French philosophers in their experiments on the velocity of sound in 1822. The solution is based on the experiments and observations recorded in the foregoing chapter.—J. T.

NOTE In the Appendix will be found a brief paper on “Acoustic Reversibility,” in which I offer a solution of a difficulty encountered by the French philosophers in their experiments on the velocity of sound in 1822. The solution is based on the experiments and observations recorded in the foregoing chapter.—J. T.

Note

In the Appendix will be found a brief paper on “Acoustic Reversibility,” in which I offer a solution of a difficulty encountered by the French philosophers in their experiments on the velocity of sound in 1822. The solution is based on the experiments and observations recorded in the foregoing chapter.—J. T.

Summary of Chapter VII

The paper of Dr. Derham, published in the “Philosophical Transactions” for 1708, has been hitherto the almost exclusive source of our knowledge of the causes which affect the transmission of sound through the atmosphere.

Derham found that fog obstructed sound, that rain and hail obstructed sound, but that above all things falling snow, or a coating of fresh snow upon the ground, tended to check the propagation of sound through the atmosphere.

With a view to the protection of life and property at sea in the years 1873 and 1874, this subject received an exhaustive examination, observational and experimental. The investigation was conducted at the expense of the Government and under the auspices of the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House.

The most conflicting results were at first obtained. On the 19th of May, 1873, the sound range was 3-1/3 miles; on the 20th it was 5-1/2 miles; on the 2d of June, 6 miles; on the 3d, more than 9 miles; on the 10th, 9 miles; on the 25th, 6 miles; on the 26th, 9-1/4 miles; on the 1st of July, 12-3/4 miles; on the 2d, 4 miles; while on the 3d, with a clear calm atmosphere and smooth sea, it was less than 3 miles.

These discrepancies were proved to be due to a state of the air which bears the same relation to sound that cloudiness does to light. By streams of air differently heated, or saturated in different degrees with aqueous vapors, the atmosphere is rendered flocculent to sound.

Acoustic clouds, in fact, are incessantly floating or flying through the air. They have nothing whatever to do with ordinary clouds, fogs, or haze. The most transparent atmosphere may be filled with them; converting days of extraordinary optical transparency into days of equally extraordinary acoustic opacity.

The connection hitherto supposed to exist between a clear atmosphere and the transmission of sound is therefore dissolved.

The intercepted sound is wasted by repeated reflections in the acoustic cloud, as light is wasted by repeated reflections in an ordinary cloud. And as from the ordinary cloud the light reflected reaches the eye, so from the perfectly invisible acoustic cloud the reflected sound reaches the ear.

Aërial echoes of extraordinary intensity and of long duration are thus produced. They occur, contrary to the opinion hitherto entertained, in the clearest air.

It is to the wafting of such acoustic clouds through the atmosphere that the fluctuations in the sounds of our public clocks and of church-bells are due.

The existence of these aërial echoes has been proved both by observation and experiment. They may arise either from air-currents differently heated, or from air-currents differently saturated with vapor.

Rain has no sensible power to obstruct sound.

Hail has no sensible power to obstruct sound.

Snow has no sensible power to obstruct sound.

Fog has no sensible power to obstruct sound.

The air associated with fog is, as a general rule, highly homogeneous and favorable to the transmission of sound. The notions hitherto entertained regarding the action of fog are untenable.

Experiments on artificial showers of rain, hail, and snow, and on artificial fogs of extraordinary density, confirm the results of observation.

As long as the air forms a continuous medium the amount of sound scattered by small bodies suspended in it is astonishingly small.

This is illustrated by the ease with which sound traverses layers of calico, cambric, silk, flannel, baize, and felt. It freely passes through all these substances in thicknesses sufficient to intercept the light of the sun.

Through six layers of thin silk, for example, it passes with little obstruction; it finds its way through a layer of close felt half an inch thick, and it is not wholly intercepted by 200 layers of cotton-net.

The atmosphere exercises a selective choice upon the waves of sound which varies from day to day, and even from hour to hour. It is sometimes favorable to the transmission of the longer, and at other times favorable to the transmission of the shorter, sonorous waves.

The recognized action of the wind has been confirmed by this investigation.
