Law of Vibratory Motions in Water and Air—Superposition of Vibrations—Interference of Sonorous Waves—Destruction of Sound by Sound—Combined Action of Two Sounds nearly in Unison with each other—Theory of Beats—Optical Illustration of the Principle of Interference—Augmentation of Intensity by Partial Extinction of Vibrations—Resultant Tones—Conditions of their Production—Experimental Illustrations—Difference-Tones and Summation-Tones—Theories of Young and Helmholtz

Interference of Water-Waves

FROM a boat in Cowes Harbor, in moderate weather, I have often watched the masts and ropes of the ships, as mirrored in the water. The images of the ropes revealed the condition of the surface, indicating by long and wide protuberances the passage of the larger rollers, and, by smaller indentations, the ripples which crept like parasites over the sides of the larger waves. The sea was able to accommodate itself to the requirements of all its undulations, great and small. When the surface was touched with an oar, or when drops were permitted to fall from the oar into the water, there was also room for the tiny wavelets thus generated. This carving of the surface by waves and ripples had its limit only in my powers of observation; every wave and every ripple asserted its right of place, and retained its individual existence, amid the crowd of other motions which agitated the water.

The law that rules this chasing of the sea, this crossing and intermingling of innumerable small waves, is that the resultant motion of every particle of water is the sum of the individual motions imparted to it. If a particle be acted on at the same moment by two impulses, both of which tend to raise it, it will be lifted by a force equal to the sum of both. If acted upon by two impulses, one of which tends to raise it, and the other to depress it, it will be acted upon by a force equal to the difference of both. When, therefore, the sum of the motions is spoken of, the algebraic sum is meant—the motions which tend to raise the particle being regarded as positive, and those which tend to depress it as negative.

When two stones are cast into smooth water, 20 or 30 feet apart, round each stone is formed a series of expanding circular waves, every one of which consists of a ridge and a furrow. The waves touch, cross each other, and carve the surface into little eminences and depressions. Where ridge coincides with ridge, we have the water raised to a double height; where furrow coincides with furrow, we have it depressed to a double depth; where ridge coincides with furrow, we have the water reduced to its average level. The resultant motion of the water at every point is, as above stated, the algebraic sum of the motions impressed upon that point. And if, instead of two sources of disturbance, we had ten, or a hundred, or a thousand, the consequence would be the same; the actual result might transcend our powers of observation, but the law above enunciated would still hold good.

Instead of the intersection of waves from two distinct centres of disturbance, we may cause direct and reflected waves, from the same centre, to cross each other. Many of you know the beauty of the effects produced when light is reflected from ripples of water. When mercury is employed the effect is more brilliant still. Here, by a proper mode of agitation, direct and reflected waves may be caused to cross and interlace, and by the most wonderful self-analysis to untie their knotted scrolls. The adjacent figure (Fig. 149), which is copied from the excellent “Wellenlehre” of the brothers Weber, will give some idea of the beauty of these effects. It represents the chasing produced by the intersection of direct and reflected water-waves in a circular vessel, the point of disturbance (marked by the smallest circle in the figure) being midway between the centre and the circumference.

[Figure 149]

This power of water to accept and transmit multitudinous impulses is shared by air, which concedes the right of space and motion to any number of sonorous waves. The same air is competent to accept and transmit the vibrations of a thousand instruments at the same time. When we try to visualize the motion of that air—to present to the eye of the mind the battling of the pulses direct and reverberated—the imagination retires baffled from the attempt. Still, amid all the complexity, the law above enunciated holds good, every particle of air being animated by a resultant motion, which is the algebraic sum of all the individual motions imparted to it. And the most wonderful thing of all is, that the human ear, though acted on only by a cylinder of that air, which does not exceed the thickness of a quill, can detect the components of the motion, and, by an act of attention, can even isolate from the aërial entanglement any particular sound.

Interference of Sound

When two unisonant tuning-forks are sounded together, it is easy to see that the forks may so vibrate that the condensations of the one shall coincide with the condensations of the other, and the rarefactions of the one with the rarefactions of the other. If this be the case, the two forks will assist each other. The condensations will, in fact, become more condensed, the rarefactions more rarefied; and as it is upon the difference of density between the condensations and rarefactions that loudness depends, the two vibrating forks, thus supporting each other, will produce a sound of greater intensity than that of either of them vibrating alone.

It is, however, also easy to see that the two forks may be so related to each other that one of them shall require a condensation at the place where the other requires a rarefaction; that the one fork shall urge the air-particles forward, while the other urges them backward. If the opposing forces be equal, particles so solicited will move neither backward nor forward, the aërial rest which corresponds to silence being the result. Thus it is possible, by adding the sound of one fork to that of another, to abolish the sounds of both. We have here a phenomenon which, above all others, characterizes wave-motion. It was this phenomenon, as manifested in optics, that led to the undulatory theory of light, the most cogent proof of that theory being based upon the fact that, by adding light to light, we may produce darkness, just as we can produce silence by adding sound to sound.

[Figure 150]

During the vibration of a tuning-fork the distance between the two prongs is alternately increased and diminished. Let us call the motion which increases the distance the outward swing, and that which diminishes the distance the inward swing of the fork. And let us suppose that our two forks, A and B, Fig. 150, reach the limits of their outward swing and their inward swing at the same moment. In this case the phases of their motion, to use the technical term, are the same. For the sake of simplicity we will confine our attention to the right-hand prongs, A and B, of the two forks, neglecting the other two prongs; and now let us ask what must be the distance between the prongs A and B, when the condensations and rarefactions of both, indicated respectively by the dark and light shading, coincide? A little reflection will make it clear that if the distance from B to A be equal to the length of a whole sonorous wave, coincidence between the two systems of waves must follow. The same would evidently occur were the distance between A and B two wave-lengths, three wave-lengths, four wave-lengths—in short, any number of whole wavelengths. In all such cases we shall have coincidence of the two systems of waves, and consequently a reinforcement of the sound of the one fork by that of the other. Both the condensations and rarefactions between A and C are, in this case, more pronounced than they would be if either of the forks were suppressed.

[Figure 151]

But if the prong B be only half the length of a wave behind A, what must occur? Manifestly the rarefactions of one of the systems of waves will then coincide with the condensations of the other system, the air to the right of A being reduced to quiescence. This is shown in Fig. 151, where the uniformity of shading indicates an absence both of condensations and rarefactions. When B is two half wave-lengths behind A, the waves, as already explained, support each other; when they are three half wave-lengths apart, they destroy each other. Or expressed generally, we have augmentation or destruction according as the distance between the two prongs amounts to an even or an odd number of semi-undulations. Precisely the same is true of the waves of light. If through any cause one system of ethereal waves be any even number of semi-undulations behind another system, the two systems support each other when they coalesce, and we have more light. If the one system be any odd number of semi-undulations behind the other, they oppose each other, and a destruction of light is the result of their coalescence.

The action here referred to, both as regards sound and light is called Interference.

Experimental Illustrations

[Figure 152]

Sir John Herschel was the first to propose to divide a stream of sound into two branches, of different lengths, causing the branches afterward to reunite, and interfere with each other. This idea has been recently followed out with success by M. Quincke; and it has been still further improved upon by M. König. The principle of these experiments will be at once evident from Fig. 152. The tube o f divides into two branches at f, the one branch being carried round n, and the other round m. The two branches are caused to reunite at g, and to end in a common canal, g p. The portion b n of the tube which slides over a b can be drawn out as shown in the figure, and thus the sound-waves can be caused to pass over different distances in the two branches. Placing a vibrating tuning-fork at o, and the ear at p, when the two branches are of the same length, the waves through both reach the ear together, and the sound of the fork is heard. Drawing n b out, a point is at length obtained where the sound of the fork is extinguished. This occurs when the distance a b is one-fourth of a wave-length; or, in other words, when the whole right-hand branch is half a wave-length longer than the left-hand one. Drawing b n still further out, the sound is again heard; and when twice the distance a b amounts to a whole wave-length, it reaches a maximum. Thus, according as the difference of both branches amounts to half a wave-length, or to a whole wave-length, we have reinforcement or destruction of the two series of sonorous waves. In practice, the tube o f ought to be prolonged until the direct sound of the fork is unheard, the attention of the ear being then wholly concentrated on the sounds that reach it through the tube.

It is quite plain that the wave-length of any simple tone may be readily found by this instrument. It is only necessary to ascertain the difference of path which produces complete interference. Twice this difference is the wave-length; and if the rate of vibration be at the same time known, we can immediately calculate the velocity of sound in air.

Each of the two forks now before you executes exactly 256 vibrations in a second. Sounded together, they are in unison. Loading one of them with a bit of wax, it vibrates a little more slowly than its neighbor. The wax, say, reduces the number of vibrations to 255 in a second; how must their waves affect each other? If they start at the same moment, condensation coinciding with condensation, and rarefaction with rarefaction, it is quite manifest that this state of things cannot continue. At the 128th vibration their phases are in complete opposition, one of them having gained half a vibration on the other. Here the one fork generates a condensation where the other generates a rarefaction; and the consequence is, that the two forks, at this particular point, completely neutralize each other. From this point onward, however, the forks support each other more and more, until, at the end of a second, when the one has completed its 255th, and the other its 256th vibration, condensation again coincides with condensation, and rarefaction with rarefaction, the full effect of both sounds being produced upon the ear.

It is quite manifest that under these circumstances we cannot have the continuous flow of perfect unison. We have, on the contrary, alternate reinforcements and diminutions of the sound. We obtain, in fact, the effect known to musicians by the name of beats, which, as here explained, are a result of interference.

I now load this fork still more heavily, by attaching a fourpenny-piece to the wax; the coincidences and interferences follow each other more rapidly than before; we have a quicker succession of beats. In our last experiment, the one fork accomplished one vibration more than the other in a second, and we had a single beat in the same time. In the present case, one fork vibrates 250 times, while the other vibrates 256 times in a second, and the number of beats per second is 6. A little reflection will make it plain that in the interval required by the one fork to execute one vibration more than the other, a beat must occur; and inasmuch as, in the case now before us, there are six such intervals in a second, there must be six beats in the same time. In short, the number of beats per second is always equal to the difference between the two rates of vibration.

Interference of Waves from Organ-pipes

[Figure 153]

Beats may be produced by all sonorous bodies. These two tall organ-pipes, for example, when sounded together, give powerful beats, one of them being slightly longer than the other. Here are two other pipes, which are now in perfect unison, being exactly of the same length. But it is only necessary to bring the finger near the embouchure of one of the pipes, Fig. 153, to lower its rate of vibration, and produce loud and rapid beats. The placing of the hand over the open top of one of the pipes also lowers its rate of vibration, and produces beats, which follow each other with augmented rapidity as the top of the pipe is closed more and more. By a stronger blast the first two harmonics of the pipes are brought out. These higher notes also interfere, and you have these quicker beats.

[Figure 154]

No more beautiful illustration of this phenomenon can be adduced than that furnished by two sounding-flames. Two such flames are now before you, the tube surrounding one of them being provided with a telescopic slider, Fig. 154. There are, at present, no beats, because the tubes are not sufficiently near unison. I gradually lengthen the shorter tube by raising its slider. Rapid beats are now heard; now they are slower; now slower still; and now both flames sing together in perfect unison. Continuing the upward motion of the slider, I make the tube too long; the beats begin again, and quicken, until finally their sequence is so rapid as to appeal only as roughness to the ear. The flames, you observe, dance within their tubes in time to the beats. As already stated, these beats cause a silent flame within a tube to quiver when the voice is thrown to a proper pitch, and when the position of the flame is rightly chosen, the beats set it singing. With the flames of large rose-burners, and with tin tubes from 3 to 9 feet long, we obtain beats of exceeding power.
