We have now to turn from this question of interference to the consideration of a new class of musical sounds, of which the beats were long considered to be the progenitors. The sounds here referred to require for their production the union of two distinct musical tones. Where such union is effected, under the proper conditions, resultant tones are generated, which are quite distinct from the primaries concerned in their production. They were discovered, in 1745, by a German organist named Sorge, but the publication of the fact attracted little attention. They were discovered independently, in 1754, by the celebrated Italian violinist Tartini, and after him have been called Tartini’s tones.

To produce them it is desirable, if not necessary, to have the two primary tones of considerable intensity. Helmholtz prefers the siren to all other means of exciting them, and with this instrument they are very readily obtained. It requires some attention at first, on the part of the listener, to single out the resultant tone from the general mass of sound; but, with a little practice, this is readily accomplished; and though the unpracticed ear may fail, in the first instance, thus to analyze the sound, the clang-tint is influenced in an unmistakable manner by the admixture of resultant tones. I set Dove’s siren in rotation, and open two series of holes at the same time; with the utmost strain of attention, I am as yet unable to hear the least symptom of a resultant tone. Urging the instrument to greater rapidity, a dull, low droning mingles with the two primary sounds. Raising the speed of rotation, the low, resultant tone rises rapidly in pitch, and now, to those who stand close to the instrument, it is very audible. The two series of holes here open number 8 and 12 respectively. The resultant tone is in this case an octave below the deepest of the two primaries. Opening two other series of orifices, numbering 12 and 16 respectively, the resultant tone is quite audible. Its rate of vibration is one-third of the rate of the deepest of the two primaries. In all cases, the resultant tone is that which corresponds to a rate of vibration equal to the difference of the rates of the two primaries.

The resultant tone here spoken of is that actually heard in the experiment. But with finer methods of experiment other resultant tones are proved to exist. Those on which we have now fixed our attention are, however, the most important. They are called difference-tones by Helmholtz, in consequence of the law just mentioned.

To bring these resultant tones audibly forth, the primaries must, as already stated, be forcible. When they are feeble the resultants are unheard. I am acquainted with no method of exciting these tones more simple and effectual than a pair of suitable singing-flames. Two such flames may be caused to emit powerful notes—self-created, self-sustained, and requiring no muscular effort on the part of the observer to keep them going. Here are two of them. The length of the shorter of the two tubes surrounding these flames is 10-3/8 inches, that of the other is 11·4 inches. I hearken to the sound, and in the midst of the shrillness detect a very deep resultant tone. The reason of its depth is manifest: the two tubes being so nearly alike in length, the difference between their vibrations is small, and the note corresponding to this difference, therefore, low in pitch. Lengthening one of the tubes by means of its slider, the resultant tone rises gradually, and now it swells surprisingly. When the tube is shortened the resultant tone falls, and thus, by alternately raising and lowering the slider, the resultant tone is caused to rise and sink in accordance with the law which makes the number of its vibrations the difference between the number of its two primaries.

We can determine, with ease, the actual number of vibrations corresponding to any one of those resultant tones. The sound of the flame is that of the open tube which surrounds it, and we have already learned (Chapter III.) that the length of such a tube is half that of the sonorous wave it produces. The wave-length, therefore, corresponding to our 10-3/8-inch tube is 20-3/4 inches. The velocity of sound in air of the present temperature is 1,120 feet a second. Bringing these feet to inches, and dividing by 20-3/4, we find the number of vibrations corresponding to a length of 10-3/8 inches to be 648 per second.

But it must not be forgotten here that the air in which the vibrations are actually executed is much more elastic than the surrounding air. The flame heats the air of the tube, and the vibrations must, therefore, be executed more rapidly than they would be in an ordinary organ-pipe of the same length. To determine the actual number of vibrations, we must fall back upon our siren; and with this instrument it is found that the air within the 10-3/8 inch tube executes 717 vibrations in a second. The difference of 69 vibrations a second is due to the heating of the aërial column. Carbonic acid and aqueous vapor are, moreover, the product of the flame’s combustion, and their presence must also affect the rapidity of the vibration.

Determining in the same way the rate of vibration of the 11·4-inch tube, we find it to be 667 per second; the difference between this number and 717 is 50, which expresses the rate of vibration corresponding to the first deep resultant tone.

But this number does not mark the limit of audibility. Permitting the 11·4-inch tube to remain as before, and lengthening its neighbor, the resultant tone sinks near the limit of hearing. When the shorter tube measures 11 inches, the deep sound of the resultant tone is still heard. The number of vibrations per second executed in this 11-inch tube is 700. We have already found the number executed in the 11·4-inch tube to be 667; hence 700-667=33, which is the number of vibrations corresponding to the resultant tone now plainly heard when the attention is converged upon it. We here come very near the limit which Helmholtz has fixed as that of musical audibility. Combining the sound of a tube 17-3/8 inches in length with that of a 10-3/8-inch tube, we obtain a resultant tone of higher pitch than any previously heard. Now the actual number of vibrations executed in the longer tube is 459; and we have already found the vibrations of our 10-3/8-inch tube to be 717; hence 717-459=258, which is the number corresponding to the resultant tone now audible. This note is almost exactly that of one of our series of tuning-forks, which vibrates 256 times in a second.

And now we will avail ourselves of a beautiful check which this result suggests to us. The well-known fork which vibrates at the rate just mentioned is here, mounted on its case, and I touch it with the bow so lightly that the sound alone could hardly be heard; but it instantly coalesces with the resultant tone, and the beats produced by their combination are clearly audible. By loading the fork, and thus altering its pitch, or by drawing up the paper slider, and thus altering the pitch of the flame, the rate of these beats can be altered, exactly as when we compare two primary tones together. By slightly varying the size of the flame, the same effect is produced. We cannot fail to observe how beautifully these results harmonize with each other.

Standing midway between the siren and a shrill singing-flame, and gradually raising the pitch of the siren, the resultant tone soon makes itself heard, sometimes swelling out with extraordinary power. When a pitch-pipe is blown near the flame, the resultant tone is also heard, seeming, in this case, to originate in the ear itself, or rather in the brain. By gradually drawing out the stopper of the pipe, the pitch of the resultant tone is caused to vary in accordance with the law already enunciated.

The resultant tones produced by the combination of the ordinary harmonic intervals are given in the following table:

Footnote: A subject to be dealt with in Chapter IX.

    Interval     Ratio of vibrations  Difference  The resultant tone is deeper than the lowest primary tone by
    Octave       2 : 3                1           an octave
    Fourth       3 : 4                1           a twelfth
    Major third  4 : 5                1           two octaves
    Minor third  5 : 6                1           two octaves and a major third
    Major sixth  3 : 5                2           a fifth
    Minor sixth  5 : 8                3           major sixth

The celebrated Thomas Young thought that these resultant tones were due to the coalescence of rapid beats, which linked themselves together like the periodic impulses of an ordinary musical note. This explanation harmonized with the fact that the number of the beats, like that of the vibrations of the resultant tone, is equal to the difference between the two sets of vibrations. This explanation, however, is insufficient. The beats tell more forcibly upon the ear than any continuous sound. They can be plainly heard when each of the two sounds that produce them has ceased to be audible. This depends in part upon the sense of hearing, but it also depends upon the fact that when two notes of the same intensity produce beats, the amplitude of the vibrating air-particles is at times destroyed, and at times doubled. But by doubling the amplitude we quadruple the intensity of the sound. Hence, when two notes of the same intensity produce beats, the sound incessantly varies between silence and a tone of four times the intensity of either of the interfering ones.

If, therefore, the resultant tones were due to the beats of their primaries, they ought to be heard, even when the primaries are feeble. But they are not heard under these circumstances. When several sounds traverse the same air, each particular sound passes through the air as if it alone were present, each particular element of a composite sound asserting its own individuality. Now, this is in strictness true only when the amplitudes of the oscillating particles are infinitely small. Guided by pure reasoning, the mathematician arrives at this result. The law is also practically true when the disturbances are extremely small; but it is not true after they have passed a certain limit. Vibrations which produce a large amount of disturbance give birth to secondary waves, which appeal to the ear as resultant tones. This has been proved by Helmholtz, and, having proved this, he inferred further that there are also resultant tones formed by the sum of the primaries, as well as by their difference. He thus discovered the summation-tones before he had heard them; and bringing his result to the test of experiment, he found that these tones had a real physical existence. They are not at all to be explained by Young’s theory.

Another consequence of this departure from the law of superposition is, that a single sounding body, which disturbs the air beyond the limits of the law of superposition, also produces secondary waves, which correspond to the harmonic tones of the vibrating body. For example, the rate of vibration of the first overtone of a tuning-fork, as stated in the fourth chapter, is 6-1/4 times the rate of the fundamental tone. But Helmholtz shows that a tuning-fork, not excited by a bow, but vigorously struck against a pad, emits the octave of its fundamental note, this octave being due to the secondary waves set up when the limits of the law of superposition have been exceeded.

These considerations make it probably evident to you that a coalescence of musical sounds is a far more complicated dynamical condition than you have hitherto supposed it to be. In the music of an orchestra, not only have we the fundamental tones of every pipe and of every string, but we have the overtones of each, sometimes audible as far as the sixteenth in the series. We have also resultant tones; both difference-tones and summation-tones; all trembling through the same air, all knocking at the self-same tympanic membrane. We have fundamental tone interfering with fundamental tone; overtone with overtone; resultant tone with resultant tone. And, besides this, we have the members of each class interfering with the members of every other class. The imagination retires baffled from any attempt to realize the physical condition of the atmosphere through which these sounds are passing. And, as we shall immediately learn, the aim of music, through the centuries during which it has ministered to the pleasure of man, has been to arrange matters empirically, so that the ear shall not suffer from the discordance produced by this multitudinous interference. The musicians engaged in this work knew nothing of the physical facts and principles involved in their efforts; they knew no more about it than the inventors of gunpowder knew about the law of atomic proportions. They tried and tried till they obtained a satisfactory result; and now, when the scientific mind is brought to bear upon the subject, order is seen rising through the confusion, and the results of pure empiricism are found to be in harmony with natural law.

Summary of Chapter VIII

When several systems of waves proceeding from distinct centres of disturbance pass through water or air, the motion of every particle is the algebraic sum of the several motions impressed upon it.

In the case of water, when the crests of one system of waves coincide with the crests of another system, higher waves will be the result of the coalescence of the two systems. But when the crests of one system coincide with the sinuses, or furrows, of the other system, the two systems, in whole or in part, destroy each other.

This coalescence and destruction of two systems of waves is called interference.

Similar remarks apply to sonorous waves. If in two systems of sonorous waves condensation coincides with condensation, and rarefaction with rarefaction, the sound produced by such coincidence is louder than that produced by either system taken singly. But if the condensations of the one system coincide with the rarefactions of the other, a destruction, total or partial, of both systems is the consequence.

Thus, when two organ-pipes of the same pitch are placed near each other on the same wind-chest and thrown into vibration, they so influence each other that as the air enters the embouchure of the one it quits that of the other. At the moment, therefore, the one pipe produces a condensation the other produces a rarefaction. The sounds of two such pipes mutually destroy each other.

When two musical sounds of nearly the same pitch are sounded together the flow of the sound is disturbed by beats.

These beats are due to the alternate coincidence and interference of the two systems of sonorous waves. If the two sounds be of the same intensity, their coincidence produces a sound of four times the intensity of either; while their opposition produces absolute silence.

The effect, then, of two such sounds, in combination, is a series of shocks, which we have called “beats,” separated from each other by a series of “pauses.”

The rate at which the beats succeed each other is equal to the difference between the two rates of vibration.

When a bell or disk sounds, the vibrations on opposite sides of the same nodal line partially neutralize each other; when a tuning-fork sounds, the vibrations of its two prongs in part neutralize each other. By cutting off a portion of the vibrations in these cases the sound may be intensified.

When a luminous beam, reflected on to a screen from two tuning-forks producing beats, is acted upon by the vibrations of both, the intermittence of the sound is announced by the alternate lengthening and shortening of the band of light upon the screen.

The law of the superposition of vibrations above enunciated is strictly true only when the amplitudes are exceedingly small. When the disturbance of the air by a sounding body is so violent that the law no longer holds good, secondary waves are formed, which correspond to the harmonic tones of the sounding body.

When two tones are rendered so intense as to exceed the limits of the law of superposition, their secondary waves combine to produce resultant tones.

Resultant tones are of two kinds; the one class corresponding to rates of vibration equal to the difference of the rates of the two primaries; the other class corresponding to rates of vibration equal to the sum of the two primaries. The former are called difference-tones, the latter summation-tones.
