Graphic Representation of Consonance and Dissonance

Helmholtz has attempted to represent this result graphically, and from his work I copy, with some modification, the next two diagrams. He assumes, as already stated, the maximum dissonance to correspond to 33 beats per second; and he seeks to express different degrees of dissonance by lines of different lengths. The horizontal line c′ c″, Fig. 164, represents a range of the musical scale in which c″ is our middle C, with 528 vibrations, and c′ the lower octave of c″. The distance from any point of this line to the curve above it represents the dissonance corresponding to that point. The pitch here is supposed to ascend continuously, and not by jumps. Supposing, for example, two performers on the violin to start with the same note c′, and that, while one of them continues to sound that note, the other gradually and continuously shortens his string, thus gradually raising its pitch up to the octave c″. The effect upon the ear would be represented by the irregular curved line in Fig. 164. Soon after the unison, which is represented by contact at c′, is departed from, the curve suddenly rises, showing the dissonance here to be the sharpest of all. At c′, the curve approaches the straight line c′ c″, and this point corresponds to the major third. At f′ the approach, is still nearer, and this point corresponds to the fourth. At g′ the curve almost touches the straight line, indicating that at this point, which corresponds to the fifth, the dissonance almost vanishes. At a′ we have the major sixth; while at c″, where the one note is an octave above the other, the dissonance entirely vanishes. The e s′ and the a s′, of this diagram are the German names of a third and a flat sixth.

[Figure 164]

Maintaining the same fundamental note c′, and passing through the octave above c″, the various degrees of consonance and dissonance are those shown in Fig. 165. That is to say, beginning with the octave c′-c″, and gradually elevating the pitch of one of the strings till it reaches c″′, the octave of c″, the curved line represents the effect upon the ear. We see, from both these curves, that dissonance is the general rule, and that only at certain definite points does the dissonance vanish, or become so decidedly enfeebled as not to destroy the harmony. These points correspond to the places where the numbers expressing the ratio of the two rates of vibration are small whole numbers. It must be remembered that these curves are constructed on the supposition that the beats are the cause of the dissonance; and the agreement between calculation and experience sufficiently demonstrates the truth of the assumption.

Footnote: The comparison employed by Mr. Sedley Taylor appeals with graphic truth to a mountaineer. Considering, the above curve to represent a mountain-chain, he calls the discords peaks, and the concords passes.

[Figure 165]

You have thus accompanied me to the verge of the Physical portion of the science of Acoustics, and through the æsthetic portion I have not the knowledge of music necessary to lead you. I will only add that, in comparing three or more sounds together, that is to say, in choosing them for chords, we are guided by the principles just mentioned. We choose sounds which are in harmony with the fundamental sound and with each other. In choosing a series of sounds for combination two by two, the simplicity alone of the ratios would lead us to fix on those expressed by the numbers 1, 5/4, 4/3, 3/2, 5/3, 2; these being the simplest ratios that we can have within an octave. But, when the notes represented by these ratios are sounded in succession, it is found that the intervals between 1 and 5/4, and between 5/3 and 2, are wider than the others, and require the interpolation of a note in each case. The notes chosen are such as form chords, not with the fundamental tone, but with the note 3/2 regarded as a fundamental tone. The ratios of these two notes with the fundamental are 9/8 and 15/8. Interpolating these, we have the eight notes of the natural or diatonic scale, expressed by the following names and ratios:

    Names               C.    D.    E.    F.    G.    A.    B.     C′.
    Intervals           1st.  2d.   3d.   4th.  5th.  6th.  7th.   8th.
    Rates of vibration  1,    9/8,  5/4,  4/3,  3/2,  5/3,  15/8,  2.

Multiplying these ratios by 24, to avoid fractions, we obtain the following series of whole numbers, which express the relative rates of vibration of the notes of the diatonic scale:

24, 27, 30, 32, 36, 40, 45, 48.

The meaning of the terms third, fourth, fifth, etc., which we have so often applied to the musical intervals, is now apparent; the term has reference to the position of the note in the scale.

Composition of Vibrations

In our second lecture I referred to, and in part illustrated, a method devised by M. Lissajous for studying musical vibrations. By means of a beam of light reflected from a mirror attached to a tuning-fork, the fork was made to write the story of its own motion. In our last lecture the same method was employed to illustrate optically the phenomenon of beats. I now propose to apply it to the study of the composition of the vibrations which constitute the principal intervals of the diatonic scale. We must, however, prepare ourselves for the thorough comprehension of this subject by a brief preliminary examination of the vibrations of a common pendulum.

Such a pendulum hangs before you. It consists of a wire carefully fastened to a plate of iron at the roof of the house, and bearing a copper ball weighing 10 lbs. I draw the pendulum aside and let it go; it oscillates to and fro almost in the same plane.

I say “almost,” because it is practically impossible to suspend a pendulum without some little departure from perfect symmetry around its point of attachment. In consequence of this, the weight deviates sooner or later from a straight line, and describes an oval more or less elongated. Some years ago this circumstance presented a serious difficulty to those who wished to repeat M. Foucault’s celebrated experiment, demonstrating the rotation of the earth.

Nevertheless, in the case now before us, the pendulum is so carefully suspended that its deviation from a straight line is not at first perceptible. Let us suppose the amplitude of its oscillation to be represented by the dotted line a b, Fig. 166. The point d, midway between a and b, is the pendulum’s point of rest. When drawn aside from this point to b, and let go, it will return to d, and in virtue of its momentum will pass on to a. There it comes momentarily to rest, and returns through d to b. And thus it will continue to oscillate until its motion is expended.

The pendulum having first reached the limit of its swing at b, let us suppose a push in a direction perpendicular to a b imparted to it; that is to say, in the direction b c. Supposing the time required by the pendulum to swing from b to a to be one second, then the time required to swing from b to d will be half a second.

[Figure 166]

Suppose, further, the force applied at b to be such as would carry the bob, if free to move in that direction alone, to c in half a second, and that the distance b c is equal to b d, the question then occurs, where will the bob really find itself at the end of half a second? It

[Figure 167]

is perfectly manifest that both forces are satisfied by the pendulum reaching the point e, exactly opposite the centre d, in half a second. To reach this point, it can be shown that it must describe the circular arc b e, and it will pursue its way along the continuation of the same arc, to a, and then pass round to b. Thus, by the rectangular impulse the rectilinear oscillation is converted into a rotation, the pendulum describing a circle, as shown in Fig. 167.

Footnote: This supposition is of course made for the sake of simplicity, the real period of oscillation of a pendulum 28 feet long being between two and three seconds.

If the force applied at b be sufficient to urge the weight in half a second through a greater distance than b c, the pendulum will describe an ellipse, with the lines a b for its smaller axis; if, on the contrary, the force applied at b urge the pendulum in half a second through a distance less than b c, the weight will describe an ellipse, with the line a b for its greater axis.

Let us now inquire what occurs when the rectangular impulse is applied at the moment the ball is passing through its position of rest at d.

Supposing the pendulum to be moving from a to b, Fig. 168, and that at d a shock is imparted to it sufficient of itself to carry it in half a second to c; it is here manifest that the resultant motion will be along the straight line d g lying between b d and d c. The pendulum will return along this line to d, and pass on to h. In this case, therefore, the pendulum will describe a straight line, g h, oblique to its original direction of oscillation.

Supposing the direction of motion at the moment the push is applied to be from b to a, instead of from a to b, it is manifest that the resultant here will also be a straight line oblique to the primitive direction of oscillation; but its obliquity will be that shown in Fig. 169.

[Figure 168]

[Figure 169]

When the impulse is imparted to the pendulum neither at the centre nor at the limit of its swing, but at some point between both, we obtain neither a circle nor a straight line, but something between both. We have, in fact, a more or less elongated ellipse with its axis oblique to a b, the original direction of vibration. If, for example, the impulse be imparted at d′, Fig. 170, while the pendulum is moving toward b, the position of the ellipse will be that shown in Fig. 170; but if the push at d′ be given when the motion is toward a, then the position of the ellipse will be that represented in Fig. 171.

[Figure 170]

[Figure 171]

[Figure 172]

By the method of M. Lissajous we can combine the rectangular vibrations of two tuning-forks, a subject which I now wish to illustrate before you. In front of an electric lamp, L, Fig. 172, is placed a large tuning-fork, T′, fixed in a stand horizontally, and provided with a mirror, on which a narrow beam of light, L T′, is permitted to fall. The beam is thrown back, by reflection. In the path of the reflected beam is placed a second upright tuning-fork, T, also furnished with a mirror. By the horizontal fork, when it vibrates, the beam is tilted laterally; by the vertical fork, vertically. At the present moment both forks are motionless, the beam of light being reflected from the mirror of the horizontal to that of the vertical fork, and from the latter to the screen, on which it prints a brilliant disk. I now agitate the upright fork, leaving the other motionless. The disk is drawn out into a fine luminous band, 3 feet long. On sounding the second fork, the straight band is instantly transformed into a white ring o p, Fig. 172, 36 inches in diameter. What have we done here? Exactly what we did in our first experiment with the pendulum. We have caused a beam of light to vibrate simultaneously in two directions, and have accidentally hit upon the phase when one fork has just reached the limit of its swing and come momentarily to rest, while the beam is receiving the maximum impulse from the other fork.

That the circle was obtained is, as stated, a mere accident; but it was a fortunate accident, as it enables us to see the exact similarity between the motion of the beam and that of the pendulum. I stop both forks, and, agitating them afresh, obtain an ellipse with its axis oblique. After a few trials we obtain the straight line, indicating that both the forks then pass simultaneously through their positions of equilibrium. In this way, by combining the vibrations of the two forks, we reproduce all the figures obtained with the pendulum.

When the vibrations of the two forks are, in all respects, absolutely alike, whatever the figure may be which is first traced upon the screen, it remains unchanged in form, diminishing only in size as the motion is expended. But the slightest difference in the rates of vibration destroys this fixity of the image. I endeavored before the lecture to reader the unison between these two forks as perfect as possible, and hence you have observed very little alteration in the shape of the figure. But by moving a small weight along the prong of either fork, or by attaching to either of them a bit of wax, the unison is impaired. The figure then obtained by the combination of both passes slowly from a straight line into an oblique ellipse, thence into a circle; after which it narrows again to an ellipse with an opposed obliquity, it then passes again into a straight line, the direction of which is at right angles to the first direction. Finally, it passes, in the reverse order, through the same series of figures to the straight line with which we began. The interval between two successive identical figures is the time in which one of the forks succeeds in executing one complete vibration more than the other. Loading the fork still more heavily, we have more rapid changes; the straight line, ellipse, and circle being passed through in quick succession. At times the luminous curve exhibits a stereoscopic depth, which renders it difficult to believe that we are not looking at a solid ring of white-hot metal.

[Figure 173]

By causing the mirror of the fork, T, to rotate through a small arc, the steady circle first obtained is drawn out into a luminous scroll stretching right across the screen, Fig. 173. The same experiment made with the changing figure, obtained by throwing the forks out of unison, gives us a scroll of irregular amplitude, Fig. 174.

Footnote: This figure corresponds to the interval 15:16. For it and some other figures, I am indebted to that excellent mechanician, M. König, of Paris.

[Figure 174]

We have next to combine the vibrations of two forks, one of which oscillates with twice the rapidity of the other; in other words, to determine the figure corresponding to the combination of a note and its octave.

[Figure 175]

To prepare ourselves for the mechanics of the problem, we must resort once more to our pendulum; for it also can be caused to oscillate in one direction twice as rapidly as in another. By a complicated mechanical arrangement this might be done in a very perfect manner, but at present simplicity is preferable to completeness. The wire of our pendulum is therefore permitted to descend from its point of suspension, A, Fig. 175, midway between two horizontal glass rods, a b, a′ b′, supported firmly at their ends, and about an inch asunder. The rods cross the wire at a height of 7 feet above the bob of the pendulum. The whole length of the pendulum being 28 feet, the glass rods intercept one-fourth of this length. On drawing the pendulum aside in the direction of the rods, a b, a′ b′, and letting it go, it oscillates freely between them. I bring it to rest and draw it aside in a direction perpendicular to the last; a length of 7 feet only can now oscillate, and by the laws of oscillation a pendulum 7 feet long vibrates with twice the rapidity of a pendulum 28 feet long.
