I wish to show you the figure described by the combination of these two rates of vibration. Attached to the copper ball, p, is a camel’s-hair pencil, intended to rub lightly upon a glass plate placed on black paper and over which is strewed white sand. Allowing the pendulum to oscillate as a whole, the sand is rubbed away along a straight line which represents the amplitude of the vibration. Let a b, Fig. 176, represent this line, which, as before, we will assume to be described in one second. When the pendulum is at the limit, b, of its swing, let a rectangular impulse be imparted to it sufficient to carry it to c in one-fourth of a second. If this were the only impulse acting on the pendulum, the bob would reach c and return to b in half a second. But under the actual circumstances it is also urged toward d, which point, through the vibration of the whole pendulum, it ought also to reach in half a second. Both vibrations, therefore, require that the bob shall reach d at the same moment; and to do this it will have to describe the curve b c′ d. Again, in the time required by the long pendulum to pass from d to a, the short pendulum will pass to and fro over the half of its excursion; both vibrations must therefore reach a at the same moment, and to accomplish this the pendulum describes the lower curve between d and a. It is manifest that these two curves will repeat themselves at the opposite sides of a b, the combination of both vibrations producing finally a figure of 8, which you now see fairly drawn upon the sand before you.

The same figure is obtained if the rectangular impulse be imparted when the pendulum is passing its position of rest, d.

[Figure 176]

[Figure 177]

[Figure 178]

I have here supposed the time occupied by the pendulum in describing the line a b to be one second. Let us suppose three-fourths of the second exhausted, and the pendulum at d′, Fig. 177, in its excursion toward b; let the rectangular impulse then be imparted to it, sufficient to carry it to c in one-fourth of a second. Now the long pendulum requires that it should move from d′ to b in one-fourth of a second; both impulses are therefore satisfied by the pendulum taking up the position c′ at the end of a quarter of a second. To reach this position it must describe the curve d′ c′. It will manifestly return along the same curve, and at the end of another quarter of a second find itself again at d′. From d′ to d the long pendulum requires a quarter of a second. But at the end of this time the short pendulum must be at the lower limit of its swing: both requirements are satisfied by the pendulum being at e. We thus obtain one arm, c′ e, of a curve, which repeats itself to the left of e; so that the entire curve, due to the combination of the two vibrations, is that represented in Fig. 165. This figure is a parabola, whereas the figure of 8 before obtained is a lemniscata.

We have here supposed that, at the moment when the rectangular impulse was applied, the motion of the pendulum was toward b: if it were toward a we should obtain the inverted parabola, as shown in Fig. 178.

Supposing, finally, the impulse to be applied, not when the pendulum is passing through its position of equilibrium, nor when it is passing a point corresponding to three-fourths or one-fourth of the time of its excursion, but at some other point in the line, a b, between its end and centre. Under these circumstances we should have neither the parabola nor the perfectly symmetrical figure of 8, but a distorted 8.

And now we are prepared to witness with profit the combined vibration of our two tuning-forks, one of which sounds the octave of the other. Permitting the vertical fork, T, Fig. 172, to remain undisturbed in front of the lamp, we can oppose to it a horizontal fork, which vibrates with twice the rapidity. The first passage of the bow across the two forks reveals the exact similarity of this combination, and that of our pendulum. A very perfect figure of 8 is described upon the screen. Before the lecture the vibrations of these two forks were fixed as nearly as possible to the ratio of 1:2, and the steadiness of the figure indicates the perfection of the tuning. Stopping both forks, and again agitating them, we have the distorted 8 upon the screen. A few trials enable me to bring out the parabola. In all these cases the figure remains fixed upon the screen. But if a morsel of wax be attached to one of the forks, the figure is steady no longer, but passes from the perfect 8 into the distorted one, thence into the parabola, from which it afterward opens out to an 8 once more. By augmenting the discord, we can render those changes as rapid as we please.

When the 8 is steady on the screen, a rotation of the mirror of the fork, T, produces the scroll shown in Fig. 179.

[Figure 179]

Our next combination will be that of two forks vibrating in the ratio of 2:3. Observe the admirable steadiness of the figure produced by the compounding of these two rates of vibration. On attaching a four-penny-piece with wax to one of the forks the steadiness ceases, and we have an apparent rocking to and fro of the luminous figure. Passing on to intervals of 3:4, 4:5, and 5:6, the figures become more intricate as we proceed. The last combination, 5:6, is so entangled that to see the figure plainly a very narrow band of light must be employed. The distance existing between the forks and the screen also helps us to unravel the complication.

[Figure 180]

And here it is worth noting that, when the figure is fully developed, the loops along the vertical and horizontal edges express the ratio of the combined vibrations. In the octave, for example, we have two loops in one direction, and one in another; in the fifth, two loops in one direction, and three in another. When the combination is as 1:3, the luminous loops are also as 1:3. The changes which some of these figures undergo, when the tuning is not perfect, are extremely remarkable. In the case of 1:3, for example, it is difficult at times not to believe that you are looking at a solid link of white-hot metal. The figure exhibits a depth, apparently incompatible with its being traced upon a plane surface.

[Figure 181]

Fig. 180 (page 445) is a diagram of these beautiful figures, including combinations from 1:1 to 5:6. In each case, the characteristic phases of the vibration are shown; and through all of these each figure passes when the interval between the two forks is not pure. I also add here, Fig. 181, two phases of the combination 8:9.

[Figure 182]

[Figure 183]

To these illustrations of rectangular vibrations I add two others, Figs. 182 and 183, from a very beautiful series obtained by Mr. Herbert Airy with a compound pendulum. The experiments are described in “Nature” for August 17 and September 7, 1871. As their loops indicate, the figures are those of an octave and a twelfth.

[Figure 184]

[Figure 185]

But the most instructive apparatus for the compounding of rectangular vibrations is that of Mr. Tisley. Figs. 184 and 185 are copies of figures obtained by him through the joint action of two distinct pendulums; the rates of vibration corresponding to these particular figures being 2:3 and 3:4 respectively. The pen which traces the figures is moved simultaneously by two rods attached to the pendulums above their places of suspension. These two rods lie in the two planes of vibration, being at right angles to the pendulums, and to each other. At their place of intersection is the pen. By means of a ball and socket, of a special kind, the rods are enabled to move with a minimum of friction in all directions, while the rates of vibration are altered, in a moment, by the shifting of movable weights. The figures are drawn either with ink on paper, or, when projection on a screen is desired, by a sharp point on smoked glass. When the pendulums, having gone through the entire figure, return to their starting-point, they have lost a little in amplitude. The second excursion will, therefore, be smaller than the first, and the third smaller than the second. Hence the series of fine lines, inclosing gradually-diminishing areas, shown in these exquisite figures. Mr. Tisley’s apparatus reflects the highest credit upon its able constructor.

Footnote: For some beautiful figures of this description I am indebted to Prof. Lyman, of Yale College.

[Figure 186]

Sir Charles Wheatstone devised, many years ago, a small and very efficient apparatus for the compounding of rectangular vibrations. A drawing, Fig. 186, and a description of this beautiful little instrument, for both of which I am indebted to its eminent inventor, may find a place here: a is a steel rod polished at its upper end so as to reflect a point of light; this rod moves in a ball-and-socket joint at b, so that it may assume any position. Its lower end is connected with two arms c and d, placed at right angles to each other, the other ends of which are respectively attached to the circumferences of the two circular disks e and f. The axis of the disk e carries at its opposite end another large disk g, which gives motion to the small disk h, placed on the axis which carries the disk f; and, according as this small disk h is placed nearer to or further from the centre of the disk g, it communicates a different relative motion to the disk f. The nut and screw i enable the disk h to be placed in any position between the centre, and circumference of the larger disk g; and by means of the fork j the disk f is caused to revolve, whatever may be the position of the disk h. By this arrangement, while the wheel k is turned regularly, the rod a is moved backward and forward by the disk e in one direction, and by the disk f, with any relative oscillatory motion, in the rectangular direction. The end of the rod is thus made to describe and to exhibit optically all the beautiful acoustical figures produced by the composition of vibrations of different periods in directions rectangular to each other. A lever l, bearing against the nut i, indicates, on a scale m, the numerical ratio of the two vibrations.

Footnote: Mr. Sang, of Edinburgh, was, I believe, the first to treat this subject analytically.

I close these remarks on the combination of rectangular vibrations with a brief reference to an apparatus constructed by Mr. A. E. Donkin, of Exeter College, Oxford, and described in the “Proceedings of the Royal Society,” vol. xxii., p. 196. In its construction great mechanical knowledge is associated with consummate skill. I saw the apparatus as a wooden model, before it quitted the hands of its inventor, and was charmed with its performance. It is now constructed by Messrs. Tisley and Spiller.

Summary of Chapter IX

By the division of a string Pythagoras determined the consonant intervals in music, proving that, the simpler the ratio of the two parts into which the string was divided, the more perfect is the harmony of the sounds emitted by the two parts of the string. Subsequent investigators showed that the strings act thus because of the relation of their lengths to their rates of vibration.

With the double siren this law of consonance is readily illustrated. Here the most perfect harmony is the unison, where the vibrations are in the ratio of 1:1. Next comes the octave, where the vibrations are in the ratio of 1:2. Afterward follow in succession the fifth, with a ratio of 2:3; the fourth, with a ratio of 3:4; the major third, with a ratio of 4:5; and the minor third, with a ratio of 5:6. The interval of a tone, represented by the ratio 8:9, is dissonant, while that of a semitone, with a ratio of 15:16, is a harsh and grating dissonance.

The musical interval is independent of the absolute number of the vibrations of the two notes, depending only on the ratio of the two rates of vibration.

The Pythagoreans referred the pleasing effect of the consonant intervals to number and harmony, and connected them with “the music of the spheres.” Euler explained the consonant intervals by reference to the constitution of the mind, which, he affirmed, took pleasure in simple calculations. The mind was fond of order, but of such order as involved no weariness in its contemplation. This pleasure was afforded by the simpler ratios in the case of music.

The researches of Helmholtz prove the rapid succession of beats to be the real cause of dissonance in music.

By means of two singing-flames, the pitch of one of them being changeable by the telescopic lengthening of its tube, beats of any degree of slowness or rapidity may be produced. Commencing with beats slow enough to be counted, and gradually increasing their rapidity, we reach, without breach of continuity, downright dissonance.

But, to grasp this theory in all its completeness, we must refer to the constitution of the human ear. We have first the tympanic membrane, which is the anterior boundary of the drum of the ear. Across the drum stretches a series of little bones, called respectively the hammer, the anvil, and the stirrup-bone; the latter abutting against a second membrane, which forms part of the posterior boundary of the drum. Beyond this membrane is the labyrinth filled with water, and having its lining membrane covered with the filaments of the auditory nerve.

Every shock received by the tympanic membrane is transmitted through the series of bones to the opposite membrane; thence to the water of the labyrinth, and thence to the auditory nerve.

The transmission is not direct. The vibrations are in the first place taken up by certain bodies, which can swing sympathetically with them. These bodies are of three kinds: the otolites, which are little crystalline particles; the bristles of Max Schultze; and the fibres of Corti’s organ. This latter is to all intents and purposes a stringed instrument, of extraordinary complexity and perfection, placed within the ear.

As regards our present subject, the strings of Corti’s organ probably play an especially important part. That one string should respond, in some measure, to another, it is not necessary that the unison should be perfect; a certain degree of response occurs in the immediate neighborhood of unison.

Hence each of two strings, not far removed from each other in pitch, can cause a third string, of intermediate pitch, to respond sympathetically. And if the two strings be sounded together, the beats which they produce are propagated to the intermediate string.

So, as regards Corti’s organ, when single sounds of various pitches, or rather when vibrations of various rapidities, fall upon its strings, the vibrations are responded to by the particular string whose period coincides with theirs. And when two sounds, close to each other in pitch, produce beats, the intermediate Corti’s fibre is acted on by both, and responds to the beats.

In the middle and upper portions of the musical scale the beats are most grating and harsh when they succeed each other at the rate of 33 per second. When they occur at the rate of 132 per second, they cease to be sensible.

The perfect consonance of certain musical intervals is due to the absence of beats. The imperfect consonance of other intervals is due to their existence. And here the overtones play a part of the utmost importance. For, though the primaries may sound together without any perceptible roughness, the overtones may be so related to each other as to produce harsh and grating beats. A strict analysis of the subject proves that intervals which require large numbers to express them are invariably accompanied by overtones which produce beats; while in intervals expressed by small numbers the beats are practically absent.

The graphic representation of the consonances and dissonances of the musical scale, by Helmholtz, furnishes a striking proof of this explanation.

The optical illustration of the musical intervals has been effected in a very beautiful manner by Lissajous. Corresponding to each interval is a definite figure, produced by the combination of its vibrations.

The compounding of vibrations has, of late years, been beautifully illustrated by apparatus constructed by Sir C. Wheatstone, Mr. Herbert Airy, and Mr. A. E. Donkin; and by the beautiful pendulum apparatus of Mr. Tisley, of the firm of Tisley and Spiller.

The pressure which, on a former occasion, prevented me from adding a “summary” to this chapter, was also the cause of hastiness, and partial inaccuracy, in its sketch of the theory of Helmholtz. That the sketch needed emendation I have long known, but I did not think it worth while to anticipate the correction here made; as the chapter, imperfect as it was, had been published, without comment, in Germany, by Helmholtz himself.
