Chapter 7: The Ends, or Conclusions, of Discourse

Every train of discourse driven by the desire for knowledge comes, at last, to an end — either because you find what you were looking for, or because you give up the search. And wherever the chain of discourse gets interrupted, there is an end of it, at least for that time.

Judgment, or Final Verdict; Doubt

If the discourse is purely mental — the mind talking to itself — it consists of thoughts swinging back and forth: the thing will happen, the thing will not happen; it has been, it has not been. So wherever you break off the chain of a man's thinking, you leave him stranded in a presumption one way or the other: it will be, or it will not be; it has been, or it has not been. All of this is OPINION.

Notice the parallel. The back-and-forth of desires, when we deliberate about good and evil, has its exact counterpart in the back-and-forth of opinions, when we inquire into the truth about past and future. And just as the last desire in deliberation is called the will, so the last opinion in the search for the truth of past and future is called the JUDGMENT — the resolute and final verdict of the person doing the reasoning. And just as the whole chain of alternating desires on the question of good or bad is called deliberation, so the whole chain of alternating opinions on the question of true or false is called DOUBT.

No discourse whatsoever can end in absolute knowledge of fact, whether past or still to come. Knowledge of fact is, at its origin, sense — and ever afterward, memory. And knowledge of consequence, which I said before is called science, is not absolute but conditional. No man can know by discourse that this or that is, has been, or will be — that would be knowing absolutely. He can only know that if this is, then that is; if this has been, then that has been; if this shall be, then that shall be. That is knowing conditionally. And even then, it is not knowledge of the consequence of one thing to another, but of one name of a thing to another name of the same thing.

Science, Opinion, Conscience

So when discourse is put into speech, and begins with the definitions of words, and proceeds by connecting them into general affirmations, and connecting those in turn into syllogisms, the end — the final sum — is called the conclusion. And the thought of the mind it signifies is that conditional knowledge, that knowledge of the consequences of words, which is commonly called science. But if the first ground of such discourse is not definitions, or if the definitions are not rightly joined together into syllogisms, then the end or conclusion is once again opinion — an opinion about the truth of something said, even though it is sometimes said in absurd and senseless words that no one could possibly understand.

When two or more men know one and the same fact, they are said to be CONSCIOUS of it to one another — which is as much as to say they know it together. And because such men make the best witnesses of each other's deeds, or of a third man's, it always has been and always will be considered a very evil act for any man to speak against his conscience, or to corrupt or force another man to do so. That is why the plea of conscience has been listened to so carefully in every age.

Afterward, men took the same word and used it metaphorically, for the knowledge of their own secret deeds and secret thoughts. Hence the rhetorical saying that the conscience is a thousand witnesses.

And last of all, men passionately in love with their own new opinions — however absurd — and stubbornly determined to maintain them, gave those opinions, too, the revered name of conscience. As if to make it seem unlawful ever to change them or to speak against them. And so they pretend to know their opinions are true, when the most they actually know is that they think so.

Belief and Faith

When a man's discourse does not begin at definitions, it begins in one of two other places. Either it begins at some contemplation of his own — and then it is still called opinion. Or it begins at the saying of someone else, whose ability to know the truth, and whose honesty in not deceiving, he does not doubt. In that case the discourse is not so much about the thing as about the person. And the resolution of it is called BELIEF and FAITH: faith in the man; belief both of the man and of the truth of what he says.

So in belief there are two opinions at once: one about the saying, the other about the man's virtue. To have faith in a man, to trust him, to believe him — these all mean the same thing, namely an opinion of the man's truthfulness. But to believe what is said means only an opinion of the truth of the saying itself.

Now here is something worth observing. The phrase "I believe in" — like the Latin credo in, and the Greek pisteuo eis — is never used except in the writings of theologians. In all other writing, men say instead: I believe him; I have faith in him; I rely on him — in Latin, credo illi and fido illi; in Greek, pisteuo auto. And this peculiarity of the ecclesiastical use of the word has stirred up many disputes about the right object of the Christian faith.

But "believing in," as the words are used in the Creed, means not trust in the person, but confession and acknowledgment of the doctrine. For it is not only Christians — men of every kind believe in God in the sense of holding everything they hear him say to be true, whether they understand it or not. And that is all the faith and trust that can possibly be placed in any person whatsoever. But they do not all believe the doctrine of the Creed.

From this we may draw a conclusion. Whenever we believe a saying to be true — any saying at all — on the basis of arguments taken not from the thing itself, nor from the principles of natural reason, but from the authority and good opinion we have of the man who said it, then the speaker is the person we believe in, the person we trust, the person whose word we take. He is the object of our faith, and the honor done in believing is done to him alone.

It follows that when we believe the Scriptures are the word of God, having no immediate revelation from God himself, our belief, faith, and trust is in the Church — whose word we take, and rest content with. And those who believe what a prophet tells them in the name of God are taking the word of the prophet: they do honor to him, and it is him they trust and believe concerning the truth of what he reports — whether he is a true prophet or a false one.

And the same goes for all other history. If I refused to believe everything the historians have written about the glorious deeds of Alexander or Caesar, I don't think the ghost of Alexander or Caesar would have any just cause to be offended — nor would anyone else, except the historian. If Livy says the gods once made a cow speak, and we don't believe it, we are not distrusting God; we are distrusting Livy.

So the matter is plain: whatever we believe on no other grounds than the authority of men and their writings — whether those men were sent from God or not — is faith in men only.
