Chapter 19: The Several Kinds of Commonwealth by Agreement, and the Succession to Sovereign Power


There Are Only Three Forms of Commonwealth

The difference between commonwealths lies in the difference of the sovereign — the person who represents each and every one of the multitude. And since sovereignty rests either in one man or in an assembly of more than one; and since into that assembly either every man has the right to enter, or not every man but only certain men distinguished from the rest; it is clear that there can be only three kinds of commonwealth. For the representative must be either one man or more than one; and if more, then it is an assembly of all, or of only a part.

When the representative is one man, the commonwealth is a MONARCHY. When it is an assembly of all who are willing to come together, it is a DEMOCRACY, or popular commonwealth. When it is an assembly of only a part, it is called an ARISTOCRACY.

There can be no other kind of commonwealth. For either one, or more, or all must hold the sovereign power — which I have shown to be indivisible — entire.


Tyranny and Oligarchy Are Just Other Names for Monarchy and Aristocracy

There are other names for government in the histories and the books of policy — tyranny, for instance, and oligarchy. But these are not the names of other forms of government. They are the names of the same forms, disliked. People who are discontented under a monarchy call it tyranny; people displeased with an aristocracy call it oligarchy; and likewise, people who feel aggrieved under a democracy call it anarchy — which means the absence of government. Yet I do not think anyone believes that the absence of government is some new kind of government. And by the same reasoning, no one should believe that a government is one kind when they like it, and another kind when they dislike it or feel oppressed by the governors.


Subordinate Representatives Are Dangerous

Clearly, men in a state of absolute liberty may, if they please, give authority to one man to represent every one of them, just as readily as they may give such authority to any assembly of men whatsoever. They may therefore subject themselves, if they think it good, to a monarch just as absolutely as to any other representative.

It follows that where a sovereign power has already been set up, there can be no other representative of the same people, except for certain particular purposes, limited by the sovereign. To allow otherwise would be to erect two sovereigns, and to have every man's person represented by two actors who, by opposing each other, must divide the power which — if men want to live in peace — is indivisible. That would reduce the multitude back into the condition of war, contrary to the very purpose for which all sovereignty is instituted.

So just as it would be absurd for a sovereign assembly to invite the people of its dominion to send up deputies with power to make known their advice and desires, and then to treat those deputies, rather than itself, as the absolute representative of the people — so it is equally absurd to think the same thing in a monarchy. And I do not know how so obvious a truth has lately been so little noticed: that in a certain monarchy, a man who held the sovereignty by a descent of six hundred years, who alone was called sovereign, who received the title of Majesty from every one of his subjects, and who was unquestionably taken by them for their king, was nevertheless never considered their representative — while that name passed without contradiction as the title of the men whom the people, at his command, sent up to carry their petitions and give him (if he permitted it) their advice.

Let this serve as a warning to those who are the true and absolute representatives of a people: instruct men in the nature of that office, and be careful how you admit any other general representation on any occasion whatsoever, if you mean to discharge the trust committed to you.


Comparing Monarchy with Sovereign Assemblies

The difference between these three kinds of commonwealth does not lie in a difference of power, but in a difference of convenience — that is, in their aptitude to produce the peace and security of the people, which is the purpose for which they were instituted. Comparing monarchy with the other two, we may observe the following.

First: whoever bears the person of the people, or belongs to the assembly that bears it, also bears his own natural person. And though he may be careful, in his political person, to advance the common interest, he is just as careful — or more so — to advance the private good of himself, his family, his relatives, and his friends. For the most part, if the public interest happens to cross the private, he prefers the private; for the passions of men are commonly more powerful than their reason. From this it follows that wherever the public and private interest are most closely united, there the public interest is most advanced. Now in a monarchy, the private interest is the same as the public. The riches, power, and honor of a monarch arise only from the riches, strength, and reputation of his subjects. For no king can be rich, or glorious, or secure, whose subjects are poor, or contemptible, or too weak — through want or division — to fight a war against their enemies. Whereas in a democracy or an aristocracy, the public prosperity does not add as much to the private fortune of a man who is corrupt or ambitious as a treacherous piece of advice often does, or a betrayal, or a civil war.

Second: a monarch receives counsel from whomever he pleases, whenever and wherever he pleases. He can hear the opinions of men genuinely versed in the matter he is deliberating, of whatever rank or quality, as long before the time of action and with as much secrecy as he wants. But when a sovereign assembly needs counsel, no one is admitted except those who have had a right to be there from the beginning — and these, for the most part, are men more versed in acquiring wealth than in acquiring knowledge. They give their advice in long speeches, which may and commonly do stir men up to action, but do not govern them in it. For the understanding is never enlightened by the flame of the passions — only dazzled. Nor is there any place or time in which an assembly can receive counsel in secrecy, because of its own multitude.

Third: the resolutions of a monarch are subject to no inconstancy except that of human nature. But in assemblies, besides the inconstancy of nature, there arises an inconstancy from the number. The absence of a few who would have kept a resolution firm once it was taken — which may happen through overconfidence, negligence, or private obstacles — or the diligent attendance of a few of the contrary opinion, undoes today everything that was concluded yesterday.

Fourth: a monarch cannot disagree with himself out of envy or self-interest. An assembly can — and to such a height that it may produce a civil war.

Fifth: there is this inconvenience in monarchy, that any subject may be stripped of everything he possesses by the power of one man, for the enriching of a favorite or a flatterer. I confess this is a great and unavoidable inconvenience. But the same thing can just as easily happen where the sovereign power is in an assembly. For their power is the same; they are just as subject to evil counsel, and just as easily seduced by orators, as a monarch is by flatterers; and becoming one another's flatterers, they serve one another's greed and ambition by turns. Moreover, the favorites of an assembly are many, and their relatives far more numerous than any monarch's. Besides, there is no favorite of a monarch who cannot help his friends as well as hurt his enemies. But orators — that is to say, the favorites of sovereign assemblies — though they have great power to hurt, have little power to save. For to accuse requires less eloquence than to excuse (such is man's nature), and condemnation looks more like justice than absolution does.

Sixth: it is an inconvenience in monarchy that the sovereignty may descend upon an infant, or upon someone who cannot tell good from evil. The inconvenience consists in this: that the use of his power must be in the hands of another man, or of some assembly of men, who govern by his right and in his name, as curators and protectors of his person and his authority. But to say there is inconvenience in putting the use of the sovereign power into the hands of a man, or an assembly of men, is to say that all government is more inconvenient than confusion and civil war. So whatever danger can be claimed here must arise from the rivalry of those who may become competitors for an office of such great honor and profit.

To see that this inconvenience does not come from the form of government we call monarchy, consider the possibilities. Either the previous monarch appointed who should have the guardianship of his infant successor — expressly, by testament, or tacitly, by not overriding the accepted custom in that case. Then such inconvenience, if it happens, is to be blamed not on the monarchy but on the ambition and injustice of the subjects — which is the same in every kind of government where the people are not well instructed in their duty and in the rights of sovereignty. Or else the previous monarch made no arrangement at all for such guardianship. In that case the law of nature has provided this sufficient rule: that the guardianship shall be in the man who has, by nature, the most interest in preserving the authority of the infant, and who can gain the least by his death or diminishment. For since every man by nature seeks his own benefit and advancement, to put an infant into the power of those who can advance themselves by destroying or damaging him is not guardianship — it is treachery. So with sufficient provision made against every just quarrel about the government under a child, if any contention arises that disturbs the public peace, it is not to be attributed to the form of monarchy, but to the ambition of subjects and their ignorance of their duty.

On the other side, there is no great commonwealth whose sovereignty rests in a great assembly that is not — when it comes to deliberations of peace and war, and the making of laws — in the very same condition as if the government were in a child. For just as a child lacks the judgment to dissent from the counsel given him, and so is forced to take the advice of those to whom he is entrusted, so an assembly lacks the liberty to dissent from the counsel of the majority, whether that counsel is good or bad. And just as a child needs a tutor or protector to preserve his person and authority, so also, in great commonwealths, the sovereign assembly, in all great dangers and troubles, needs Custodes Libertatis — guardians of liberty — that is, dictators, or protectors of its authority. These are nothing less than temporary monarchs, to whom the assembly may commit the entire exercise of its power for a time — and at the end of that time, assemblies have been stripped of that power by their dictators more often than infant kings have been by their protectors, regents, or any other tutors.

Though the kinds of sovereignty are, as I have now shown, only three — monarchy, where one man has it; democracy, where the general assembly of subjects has it; and aristocracy, where it rests in an assembly of certain persons named or otherwise distinguished from the rest — still, anyone who considers the particular commonwealths that have existed and do exist in the world may not find it easy to reduce them all to three, and may be inclined to think there are other forms, made by mixing these together. For example: elective kingdoms, where kings hold the sovereign power for a time only; or kingdoms in which the king's power is limited — governments which most writers nevertheless call monarchies. Likewise, if a popular or aristocratic commonwealth subdues an enemy country and governs it by a president, procurator, or other magistrate, this may seem at first sight to be a democratic or aristocratic government. But it is not. Elective kings are not sovereigns but ministers of the sovereign; limited kings are not sovereigns but ministers of those who hold the sovereign power; and provinces subject to the democracy or aristocracy of another commonwealth are not governed democratically or aristocratically, but monarchically.

First, consider an elective king, whose power is limited to his lifetime, as it is in many places in Christendom today, or to certain years or months, like the dictator's power among the Romans. If he has the right to appoint his successor, he is no longer elective but hereditary. But if he has no power to elect his successor, then either there is some other known man or assembly that can elect a new one after his death — or else the commonwealth dies and dissolves with him, and returns to the condition of war. If it is known who has the power to confer the sovereignty after his death, then it is also known that the sovereignty was in them all along. For no one has the right to give what he does not have the right to possess and keep for himself, if he thinks fit. But if there is no one who can confer the sovereignty after the death of the man first elected, then he has the power — indeed, he is obliged by the law of nature — to provide for a successor, to keep those who trusted him with the government from relapsing into the miserable condition of civil war. And consequently, he was, when elected, an absolute sovereign.

Second, a king whose power is limited is not superior to the one — man or assembly — that has the power to limit it. And he that is not superior is not supreme; that is to say, not sovereign. The sovereignty, therefore, was always in the assembly that had the right to limit him, and the government was consequently not a monarchy, but either a democracy or an aristocracy. So it was in ancient Sparta, where the kings had the privilege of leading the armies, but the sovereignty was in the Ephori — the board of magistrates who held the real power.

Third, when the Roman people governed the land of Judea, for example, by a president, Judea was not therefore a democracy — for the people of Judea were not governed by any assembly into which any of them had the right to enter. Nor was it an aristocracy — for they were not governed by any assembly into which any man could enter by their election. They were governed by one person. And though that person, with respect to the people of Rome, was an assembly of the people — a democracy — yet with respect to the people of Judea, who had no right whatsoever to participate in the government, it was a monarch. For where people are governed by an assembly chosen by themselves out of their own number, the government is called a democracy or an aristocracy; but when they are governed by an assembly not of their own choosing, it is a monarchy — not of one man over another man, but of one people over another people.


The Right of Succession

In all these forms of government, the material is mortal. Not only monarchs but whole assemblies die. So for the preservation of peace among men, it is necessary that, just as order was taken for an artificial man, order should also be taken for an artificial eternity of life. Without it, men governed by an assembly would return to the condition of war in every generation, and men governed by one man would return to it as soon as their governor died. This artificial eternity is what men call the right of succession.

There is no perfect form of government where the disposing of the succession is not in the hands of the present sovereign. For if it lies in any other particular man or private assembly, it lies in a person who is a subject, and the sovereign may take it back at his pleasure — so the right is really in himself. And if it lies in no particular man, but is left to a fresh choice, then the commonwealth is dissolved when the sovereign dies, and the right belongs to whoever can seize it — contrary to the intention of those who instituted the commonwealth for their perpetual security, not a temporary one.

In a democracy, the whole assembly cannot fail unless the multitude to be governed fails. Questions about the right of succession therefore have no place at all in that form of government.

In an aristocracy, when any member of the assembly dies, the election of another into his place belongs to the assembly, as the sovereign to whom the choosing of all counselors and officers belongs. For whatever the representative does as actor, every one of the subjects does as author. And though the sovereign assembly may give others the power to elect new men to fill its ranks, the election is still made by its authority — and by that same authority it may be recalled whenever the public requires it.


The Present Monarch Has the Right to Dispose of the Succession

The greatest difficulty about the right of succession arises in monarchy. The difficulty comes from this: at first sight it is not obvious who is to appoint the successor, nor, in many cases, whom he has appointed. Both questions require more careful reasoning than most men are accustomed to use.

As to the question of who shall appoint the successor of a monarch who has the sovereign authority — that is, a monarch who owns the sovereign power, not one who merely uses it, as elective kings and princes do — we must consider this: either the man in possession has the right to dispose of the succession, or else that right falls back to the dissolved multitude. For the death of the man who owns the sovereign power leaves the multitude with no sovereign at all — that is, with no representative in whom they are united and through whom they are capable of doing any single action whatsoever. They are therefore incapable of electing any new monarch. Every man would have an equal right to submit himself to whomever he thinks best able to protect him — or, if he can, to protect himself by his own sword. And that is a return to confusion, and to the condition of a war of every man against every man, contrary to the end for which monarchy was first instituted. It is therefore clear that, by the institution of monarchy, the disposing of the successor is always left to the judgment and will of the present possessor.

And as for the question that may sometimes arise — whom the monarch in possession has designated to succeed to and inherit his power — it is settled by his express words and testament, or by other tacit signs sufficient to show his will.


Succession Passes by Express Words

By express words, or testament: when the monarch declares it in his lifetime, viva voce — by spoken word — or in writing, as the first emperors of Rome declared who should be their heirs. For the word "heir" does not by itself mean a man's children or nearest relatives, but whomever a man declares, in any way, that he wants to succeed him in his estate. If, therefore, a monarch declares expressly, by word or writing, that a certain man shall be his heir, then that man is invested with the right of being monarch immediately upon the death of his predecessor.


Or by Letting a Custom Stand

But where testament and express words are lacking, other natural signs of the will are to be followed. One of these is custom. Where the custom is that the next of kin absolutely succeeds, there the next of kin has the right to the succession — for if the will of the man in possession had been otherwise, he could easily have declared it in his lifetime. Likewise, where the custom is that the next of the male line succeeds, there the right of succession is in the next male relative, for the same reason. And the same holds if the custom were to advance the female line. For whatever custom a man could override with a word, and does not, is a natural sign that he wants that custom to stand.


Or by Presumption of Natural Affection

But where neither custom nor testament has gone before, it is to be understood: first, that a monarch's will is for the government to remain monarchical, because he has approved that form of government in his own case. Second, that a child of his own, male or female, is to be preferred before anyone else — because men are presumed to be more inclined by nature to advance their own children than the children of other men; and of their own children, a male rather than a female, because men, in his view, are naturally fitter than women for actions of labor and danger. Third, where his own children fail, a brother rather than a stranger — and so on, always the nearer in blood rather than the more remote, because it is always presumed that the nearer in kin is the nearer in affection; and it is evident that a man always receives, by reflection, the most honor from the greatness of his nearest kindred.


Disposing of the Succession, Even to a King of Another Nation, Is Not Unlawful

But if it is lawful for a monarch to dispose of the succession by words of contract or by testament, someone may object to a great inconvenience: he may sell or give his right of governing to a stranger. And because strangers — that is, men not used to living under the same government, and not speaking the same language — commonly undervalue one another, this may turn to the oppression of his subjects. That is indeed a great inconvenience. But it does not come necessarily from being subject to a stranger's government; it comes from the unskillfulness of governors who are ignorant of the true rules of politics. That is why the Romans, when they had subdued many nations, made their government digestible by removing that grievance as far as they thought necessary: they gave not only the privileges but the very name of Romans, sometimes to whole nations, and sometimes to the leading men of every nation they conquered, and took many of them into the Senate and into offices of responsibility, even in the city of Rome itself.

And this is what our most wise king, King James, aimed at in working for the union of his two realms of England and Scotland. Had he obtained it, it would in all likelihood have prevented the civil wars that now make both those kingdoms miserable. It is therefore no injury to the people for a monarch to dispose of the succession by will — though through the fault of many princes, it has sometimes proved inconvenient. And there is this further argument for its lawfulness: whatever inconvenience can come from giving a kingdom to a stranger can also come from marrying among strangers in such a way that the right of succession may descend upon them — and yet everyone counts that as lawful.
