Chapter 30: The Office of the Sovereign Representative

Securing the Good of the People

The OFFICE of the sovereign — whether a monarch or an assembly — consists in the end for which he was trusted with sovereign power: namely, securing the safety of the people. To this he is obliged by the law of nature, and he must render an account of it to God, the author of that law, and to nobody else. This is the old maxim salus populi — "the safety of the people" is the supreme law. But by safety I do not mean bare survival. I mean also all the other contentments of life that every man, by lawful industry, and without danger or harm to the commonwealth, can acquire for himself.

By Instruction and Laws

And this is meant to be done not by care applied to individuals — beyond protecting them from injuries when they complain — but by a general providence: by public instruction, in both doctrine and example, and by the making and executing of good laws, which individual persons can then apply to their own cases.

A Sovereign Must Not Give Up Any Essential Right of Sovereignty — Nor Leave the People Untaught About the Grounds of Those Rights

Now, if the essential rights of sovereignty (the ones spelled out back in chapter 18) are taken away, the commonwealth is dissolved by it, and every man returns to the condition and calamity of a war with every other man — which is the greatest evil that can happen in this life. So it is the office of the sovereign to keep those rights entire. And consequently it is against his duty, first, to transfer any of them to someone else, or to lay any of them aside. For he that deserts the means deserts the end. And he deserts the means who, being the sovereign, acknowledges himself subject to the civil laws; or renounces the power of supreme judicature; or the power of making war or peace by his own authority; or of judging what the commonwealth needs; or of levying money and soldiers when, and in whatever amounts, his own conscience judges necessary; or of appointing officers and ministers of both war and peace; or of appointing teachers, and examining which doctrines support — and which undermine — the defense, peace, and good of the people.

Secondly, it is against his duty to let the people remain ignorant or misinformed about the grounds and reasons of those essential rights. Because an ignorant people is easily seduced and drawn into resisting him, just when the commonwealth needs those rights used and exercised.

And the grounds of these rights especially need to be diligently and truly taught, because they cannot be maintained by any civil law or by the terror of legal punishment. A civil law forbidding rebellion (and all resistance to the essential rights of sovereignty is rebellion) does not bind as a civil law at all. It binds only by virtue of the law of nature, which forbids breaking faith — and if men do not know that natural obligation, they cannot know the right of any law the sovereign makes. As for the punishment, they take it for nothing more than an act of hostility — and when they think they have strength enough, they will try to avoid it by acts of hostility of their own.

The Objection That There Are No Principles of Reason for Absolute Sovereignty

I have heard some people say that justice is just a word without substance, and that whatever a man can acquire for himself by force or cunning — not only in the condition of war, but inside a commonwealth too — is his own. I have already shown this to be false. In the same spirit, there are also people who maintain that there are no grounds, no principles of reason, to support those essential rights that make sovereignty absolute. If there were, they argue, somebody somewhere would have discovered them by now — whereas, as far as we can see, there has never yet been a commonwealth where those rights were acknowledged or claimed in full.

They argue exactly as badly as if the indigenous peoples of the Americas were to deny that there are any grounds or principles of reason for building a house that lasts as long as its materials — because they had never yet seen one so well built. Time and industry produce new knowledge every day. The art of building well was derived from principles of reason, observed by industrious men who had long studied the nature of materials and the different effects of shape and proportion — and that happened long after mankind had begun (poorly) to build. In the same way, long after men first began to set up commonwealths — imperfect ones, apt to relapse into disorder — principles of reason may be found out, by industrious meditation, to make their constitutions last (except by external violence) forever. And these are the kind of principles I have set down in this discourse.

Whether the men who today have the governing of mankind notice these principles and make use of them, or neglect them, concerns my own personal interest, at this point, very little. But suppose these principles of mine are not principles of reason after all. I am still sure they are principles backed by the authority of Scripture — as I will make clear when I come to speak of the kingdom of God, administered by Moses over the Jews, his peculiar people by covenant.

The Objection That Ordinary People Cannot Understand Them

But then they say: even if the principles are right, common people lack the capacity to be made to understand them. I would be delighted if the rich and powerful subjects of a kingdom, and those accounted the most learned, were no less incapable than the common people are. Everyone knows that the obstructions to this kind of doctrine come not so much from the difficulty of the matter as from the interests of those who are supposed to learn it. Powerful men can hardly digest anything that sets up a power to bridle their passions; and learned men can hardly digest anything that exposes their errors and thereby lessens their authority. Whereas the minds of common people — unless they are tainted by dependence on the powerful, or scribbled over with the opinions of their teachers — are like clean paper, fit to receive whatever public authority chooses to imprint on them.

Shall whole nations be brought to accept the great mysteries of the Christian religion, which are above reason — shall millions of men be made to believe that the same body can be in countless places at one and the same time, which is against reason — and yet men cannot, by teaching and preaching protected by law, get people to receive a doctrine so consonant with reason that any unprejudiced man needs only to hear it to learn it? I conclude, therefore, that in instructing the people in the essential rights of sovereignty (which are the natural and fundamental laws), there is no difficulty — so long as a sovereign keeps his power entire — except what proceeds from his own fault, or the fault of those he trusts with the administration of the commonwealth. And consequently it is his duty to have the people instructed in them. And not only his duty, but his benefit too, and his security against the danger that rebellion poses to his own natural person.

The People Are to Be Taught Not to Crave a Change of Government

To descend to particulars: the people are to be taught, first, that they ought not to fall in love with any form of government they see in neighboring nations more than with their own — and that whatever present prosperity they see in nations governed differently, they should not desire change. For the prosperity of a people ruled by an aristocratic or democratic assembly does not come from the aristocracy or the democracy, but from the obedience and concord of the subjects. Nor do people flourish in a monarchy because one man has the right to rule them, but because they obey him. Take away the obedience (and with it the concord of the people) in any kind of state, and they will not only fail to flourish — in a short time they will be dissolved.

And those who set out, by disobedience, merely to reform the commonwealth will find that they destroy it instead — like the foolish daughters of Peleus in the fable, who, wanting to renew the youth of their decrepit father, took Medea's advice, cut him in pieces, and boiled him with strange herbs, but did not make a new man of him. This desire for change is like a breach of the first of God's commandments. For there God says, Non habebis deos alienos — thou shalt not have the gods of other nations; and in another place, concerning kings, he says that they are gods.

Nor to Attach Themselves to Popular Men Against the Sovereign

Secondly, they are to be taught that they ought not to be so carried away by admiration for the virtue of any fellow subject — however high he stands, however conspicuously he shines in the commonwealth — nor for any assembly (except the sovereign assembly itself), as to give them any obedience or honor that belongs to the sovereign alone, whom such men, in their particular stations, merely represent. Nor should the people receive any influence from such men except what is conveyed through them from the sovereign authority. For a sovereign cannot be imagined to love his people as he ought if he is not jealous of them, but lets them be seduced from their loyalty by the flattery of popular men — as they have often been, not only secretly but openly, with preachers proclaiming the marriage between the demagogue and the people in facie ecclesiae — before the face of the church, in full public view — and publishing it in the open streets. This may fitly be compared to a violation of the second of the Ten Commandments.

Nor to Dispute the Sovereign Power

Thirdly, and as a consequence of this, they ought to be informed how great a fault it is to speak evil of the sovereign representative (whether one man or an assembly of men), or to argue and dispute his power, or in any way to use his name irreverently — by which he may be brought into contempt with his people, and their obedience (on which the safety of the commonwealth rests) loosened. This is the doctrine the third commandment points to, by resemblance.

Set Days Apart for Learning Their Duty

Fourthly: people cannot be taught all this — nor, once taught, remember it — nor, after one generation has passed, even know in whom the sovereign power is placed — unless certain times are set apart from their ordinary labor, in which they can attend to those appointed to instruct them. So it is necessary that such times be fixed, when they can assemble together and (after prayers and praises given to God, the sovereign of sovereigns) hear their duties told to them, and the positive laws that generally concern them all read and explained, and be reminded of the authority that makes those rules laws.

To this end the Jews had a sabbath every seventh day, in which the law was read and expounded — and in the solemnity of which they were reminded that their king was God; that having created the world in six days, he rested the seventh; and that by their resting from labor on that day, they remembered that this God was their king, who redeemed them from their slavish and painful labor in Egypt, and gave them a time, after they had rejoiced in God, to take joy in themselves too, by lawful recreation. So the first table of the commandments is spent entirely in setting down the sum of God's absolute power — not only as God, but as king, by special covenant, of the Jews. And it may therefore give light to those who hold sovereign power by the consent of men, showing them what doctrine they ought to teach their subjects.

And to Honor Their Parents

And because the first instruction of children depends on the care of their parents, it is necessary that children be obedient to them while under their tuition — and not only then, but afterwards too (as gratitude requires), acknowledging the benefit of their education by external signs of honor. To this end they are to be taught that originally the father of every man was also his sovereign lord, with power of life and death over him; and that when the fathers of families instituted a commonwealth and resigned that absolute power, it was never intended that they should lose the honor due to them for their children's upbringing. Giving up that honor was not necessary to the institution of sovereign power — and besides, there would be no reason for any man to want children, or to take the trouble to feed and instruct them, if he were afterwards to get no more benefit from them than from strangers. And this accords with the fifth commandment.

And to Avoid Doing Injury

Again, every sovereign ought to cause justice to be taught — and since justice consists in taking from no man what is his, that amounts to teaching men not to deprive their neighbors, by violence or fraud, of anything that the sovereign authority has made theirs. Of the things a man holds as his own, the dearest are his own life and limbs; next in degree (for most men) come those that concern married affection; and after them, riches and the means of living. So the people are to be taught to abstain from violence against one another's persons through private revenge; from violation of marital honor; and from forcible robbery and sneaking theft of one another's goods. For the same purpose, it is necessary to show them the evil consequences of false judgment through the corruption of judges or witnesses — for that erases the distinction between mine and thine, and justice becomes of no effect. All of this is intimated in the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth commandments.

And to Do All This Sincerely, From the Heart

Lastly, they are to be taught that not only the unjust deeds, but the designs and intentions to do them — even when something happens to prevent them — are injustice; for injustice consists in the depravity of the will as well as in the irregularity of the act. This is the intention of the tenth commandment, and the sum of the second table — which all reduces to this one commandment of mutual charity: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself"; just as the sum of the first table reduces to the love of God, whom the Jews had then newly received as their king.

The Use of the Universities

As for the means and channels by which the people can receive this instruction, we should ask: by what means did opinions so contrary to the peace of mankind, resting on weak and false principles, nevertheless become so deeply rooted in them? I mean the opinions I specified in the previous chapter: that men should judge what is lawful and unlawful not by the law itself but by their own private judgment; that subjects sin in obeying the commands of the commonwealth unless they themselves have first judged those commands lawful; that their property in their riches excludes the dominion the commonwealth has over the same; that it is lawful for subjects to kill those they call tyrants; that the sovereign power may be divided; and the like.

These opinions get instilled into the people in the following way. Those whom necessity or greed keeps attentive to their trades and labor, and those, on the other side, whom abundance or laziness carries after their sensual pleasures — and these two sorts of men make up the greatest part of mankind — are diverted from the deep meditation that learning the truth requires, not only in matters of natural justice but in every other science. So they receive their notions of duty chiefly from divines in the pulpit, and partly from those neighbors and familiar acquaintances who, having a knack for ready and plausible talk, seem wiser and better learned in cases of law and conscience than they are themselves. And the divines, and the others who make a show of learning, derive their knowledge from the universities and the schools of law, or from books published by men eminent in those schools and universities. It is therefore obvious that the instruction of the people depends wholly on the right teaching of youth in the universities.

But (some may say) are not the universities of England learned enough already to do that? Or is it you who would undertake to teach the universities? Hard questions. To the first, I do not hesitate to answer: until toward the latter end of Henry the Eighth, the power of the Pope was always upheld against the power of the commonwealth principally by the universities; and the fact that the doctrines maintained against the sovereign power of the king by so many preachers, and by so many lawyers and others who had their education there, is argument enough that even if the universities were not the authors of those false doctrines, they did not know how to plant the true ones. In such a contradiction of opinions, it is quite certain that they have not been sufficiently instructed; and it is no wonder if they still retain a relish of that subtle liquor against the civil authority with which they were first seasoned. But to the second question, it is neither fitting nor needful for me to say yes or no — for anyone who sees what I am doing can easily perceive what I think.

The safety of the people further requires, from him or them that hold the sovereign power, that justice be equally administered to all degrees of people: that the rich and mighty, as well as poor and obscure persons, may be righted of the injuries done to them — so that the great have no greater hope of impunity when they do violence, dishonor, or any injury to those of meaner sort, than when one of the meaner sort does the like to one of them. For in this consists equity, and to equity, as a precept of the law of nature, a sovereign is as much subject as the lowest of his people. All breaches of the law are offenses against the commonwealth; but some are also offenses against private persons. Those that concern the commonwealth only may be pardoned without any breach of equity — for every man may pardon what is done against himself, at his own discretion. But an offense against a private man cannot, in equity, be pardoned without the consent of the injured party, or reasonable satisfaction.

The inequality of subjects proceeds from the acts of sovereign power, and therefore has no more place in the presence of the sovereign — that is, in a court of justice — than the inequality between kings and their subjects has in the presence of the King of kings. The honor of great persons is to be valued for their beneficence and for the aid they give to men of lower rank — or not at all. And the violence, oppression, and injuries they commit are not extenuated but aggravated by the greatness of their persons, because they have the least need to commit them. The consequences of partiality toward the great unfold like this: impunity makes insolence; insolence, hatred; and hatred, an endeavor to pull down all oppressing and insulting greatness — even at the cost of ruining the commonwealth.

Equal Taxes

To equal justice belongs also the equal imposition of taxes. And this equality depends not on the equality of riches, but on the equality of the debt that every man owes to the commonwealth for his defense. It is not enough for a man to labor for the maintenance of his life; he must also fight, if need be, to secure his labor. Men must either do as the Jews did after their return from captivity, when they rebuilt the Temple — build with one hand and hold the sword in the other — or else they must hire others to fight for them. For the taxes laid on the people by the sovereign power are nothing else but the wages due to those who hold the public sword, to defend private men in the exercise of their various trades and callings.

Now, since the benefit everyone receives from this is the enjoyment of life — which is equally dear to poor and rich — the debt a poor man owes to those who defend his life is the same a rich man owes for the defense of his. The only difference is that the rich, who have the service of the poor, may be debtors not only for their own persons but for many more. All things considered, then, the equality of taxation consists in the equality of what is consumed, rather than in the riches of the persons who consume it. For what reason is there that a man who labors much and, saving the fruits of his labor, consumes little, should be more heavily charged than one who lives idly, earns little, and spends everything he gets — when the one receives no more protection from the commonwealth than the other? But when taxes are laid on the things men consume, every man pays equally for what he uses, and the commonwealth is not defrauded by the luxurious waste of private men.

Public Charity

And whereas many men become unable to maintain themselves by their labor through unavoidable accident, they ought not to be left to the charity of private persons, but to be provided for — as far as the necessities of nature require — by the laws of the commonwealth. For just as it is uncharitable in any man to neglect those who cannot help themselves, so it is uncharitable in the sovereign of a commonwealth to expose them to the hazard of such uncertain charity.

Preventing Idleness

But for those who have strong bodies, the case is different. They are to be made to work; and to remove the excuse of not finding employment, there ought to be laws that encourage every kind of industry — navigation, agriculture, fishing, and all kinds of manufacture that require labor. And if the multitude of poor but able-bodied people keeps increasing, they are to be transplanted into countries not sufficiently inhabited — where, nevertheless, they are not to exterminate the people they find there, but to oblige them to live closer together: not ranging over a great deal of ground to snatch what they find, but courting each little plot with skill and labor, to draw their sustenance from it in due season. And when the whole world is overcharged with inhabitants, then the last remedy of all is war — which provides for every man, by victory or by death.

What Makes a Good Law

To the care of the sovereign belongs the making of good laws. But what is a good law? By a good law I do not mean a just law — for no law can be unjust. The law is made by the sovereign power, and everything done by that power is warranted and owned by every one of the people; and what every man wills in this way, no man can call unjust. It is with the laws of a commonwealth as with the rules of a game: whatever the players all agree on is injustice to none of them. A good law is one that is needful for the good of the people, and at the same time clear.

Laws That Are Necessary

For the use of laws (which are only rules backed by authority) is not to bind the people from all voluntary actions, but to direct them and keep them in such motion that they do not hurt themselves through their own impetuous desires, rashness, or indiscretion — just as hedges are set, not to stop travelers, but to keep them on the road. So a law that is not needful lacks the true end of a law, and is not good. A law might be thought good when it benefits the sovereign even though it is not necessary for the people — but it is not so. For the good of the sovereign and of the people cannot be separated. It is a weak sovereign that has weak subjects; and it is a weak people whose sovereign lacks the power to rule them at his will. Unnecessary laws are not good laws, but traps for money — which, where the right of sovereign power is acknowledged, are superfluous; and where it is not acknowledged, insufficient to defend the people.

Laws That Are Clear

The clarity of a law consists not so much in the words of the law itself as in a declaration of the causes and motives for which it was made. That is what shows us the meaning of the legislator; and once the meaning of the legislator is known, the law is more easily understood in few words than in many. For all words are subject to ambiguity, and so multiplying words in the body of the law is multiplying ambiguity. Besides, excessive wordiness seems to imply that whoever can dodge the words is outside the reach of the law. And this is the cause of many unnecessary lawsuits. When I consider how short the laws of ancient times were, and how by degrees they grew ever longer, I seem to see a contest between the drafters of the law and the pleaders of the law — the former seeking to hem in the latter, and the latter seeking to slip out of their fences — and the pleaders have won. It therefore belongs to the office of a legislator (which in all commonwealths is the supreme representative, whether one man or an assembly) to make the reason clear for which the law was made, and to keep the body of the law itself as short as possible, in the most proper and significant terms that can be found.

Punishments

It also belongs to the office of the sovereign to make a right application of punishments and rewards. And since the end of punishing is not revenge or the venting of anger, but correction — of the offender, or of others through his example — the severest punishments should be inflicted for those crimes that are most dangerous to the public: those that proceed from malice against the established government; those that spring from contempt of justice; those that provoke indignation in the multitude; and those which, left unpunished, seem authorized — as when they are committed by the sons, servants, or favorites of men in authority. For indignation carries men not only against the actors and authors of injustice, but against every power that looks likely to protect them — as in the case of Tarquin, who, for the insolent act of one of his sons, was driven out of Rome, and the monarchy itself dissolved with him.

But crimes of weakness — those that proceed from great provocation, from great fear, great need, or from ignorance of whether the act is a great crime or not — often leave room for lenity without prejudice to the commonwealth; and lenity, when there is room for it, is required by the law of nature. It is the punishment of the leaders and teachers of an uprising — not of the poor, seduced people — that profits the commonwealth by example. To be severe with the common people is to punish an ignorance that may in great part be laid at the sovereign's own door, since it was his fault that they were no better instructed.

Rewards

In the same way, it belongs to the office and duty of the sovereign always to apply his rewards so that benefit to the commonwealth arises from them — for that is their use and end. And this is done when those who have served the commonwealth well are recompensed — with as little expense of the common treasury as possible — well enough that others are encouraged both to serve it as faithfully as they can and to study the arts that will enable them to serve it better.

But to buy off a popular, ambitious subject with money or promotion, so that he will be quiet and stop making bad impressions on the minds of the people — that has nothing of the nature of reward in it (for reward is ordained for past service, not for disservice), nor is it a sign of gratitude, but of fear; and it tends not to the benefit but to the damage of the public. It is a contest with ambition like that of Hercules with the monster Hydra: the beast had many heads, and for every one cut off, three grew up in its place. In just the same way, when the stubbornness of one popular man is overcome with reward, many more arise — following the example — to do the same mischief in hope of the same payoff. And like every kind of manufacture, malice multiplies by being marketable. A civil war may sometimes be deferred by such methods, but the danger keeps growing greater, and the public ruin more assured. It is therefore against the duty of the sovereign, to whom the public safety is committed, to reward those who aspire to greatness by disturbing the peace of their country — rather than opposing the beginnings of such men, at a little danger now, instead of at a much greater danger later.

Counselors

Another business of the sovereign is to choose good counselors — I mean men whose advice he takes in the government of the commonwealth. The word counsel — consilium, corrupted from considium — has a broad meaning, and covers all assemblies of men who sit together, not only to deliberate about what is to be done in the future, but also to judge of facts past and of law for the present. I take it here in the first sense only. And in this sense there is no choosing of counsel in a democracy or an aristocracy, because the persons counseling are members of the person counseled. The choice of counselors, then, belongs properly to monarchy — in which the sovereign who does not try to choose, in every field, the most able men, fails to discharge his office as he ought.

The most able counselors are those who have the least hope of benefit from giving evil counsel, and the most knowledge of what conduces to the peace and defense of the commonwealth. It is a hard matter to know who expects benefit from public troubles; but the signs that justify suspicion include the soothing of the people in their unreasonable or irremediable grievances, by men whose estates are not sufficient to cover their accustomed expenses — something easily observed by anyone whose business it is to know it. But to know who has the most knowledge of public affairs is harder still; and those who do know such men have that much less need of them. For to know who knows the rules of almost any art is itself a great degree of knowledge of that art, since no man can be assured of the truth of another's rules unless he is first taught to understand them. The best signs of knowledge of any art are much practice in it and consistently good effects from it.

Good counsel comes neither by lot nor by inheritance; and therefore there is no more reason to expect good advice from the rich or noble in matters of state than in drawing up the dimensions of a fortress — unless we are to think there is no method needed in the study of politics (as there is in the study of geometry), but only spectating. Which is not so. Politics is the harder study of the two. In these parts of Europe it has been taken as the right of certain persons to have a place in the highest council of state by inheritance. This derives from the conquests of the ancient Germans, in which many absolute lords, joining together to conquer other nations, would not enter the confederacy without privileges that would mark the difference, in time to come, between their posterity and the posterity of their subjects. Those privileges are inconsistent with sovereign power; by the favor of the sovereign, they may seem to keep them; but if they contend for them as their right, they must by degrees let them go, and end with no more honor than naturally adheres to their abilities.

And however able the counselors may be in any affair, the benefit of their counsel is greater when each gives his advice, and the reasons for it, separately, than when they do it in an assembly by way of speeches; and greater when they have prepared in advance than when they speak on the spur of the moment — both because they have more time to survey the consequences of the action, and because they are less liable to be carried into contradiction by envy, rivalry, or the other passions that arise from difference of opinion.

The best counsel, in matters that concern not other nations but only the ease and benefit the subjects may enjoy from laws that look only inward, is to be taken from the general reports and complaints of the people of each province, who know their own wants best — and who therefore, when they demand nothing that derogates from the essential rights of sovereignty, ought to be diligently listened to. For without those essential rights, as I have said often enough, the commonwealth cannot subsist at all.

Commanders

A commander-in-chief of an army, if he is not popular, will be neither loved nor feared by his army as he ought to be, and consequently cannot perform his office with good success. He must therefore be industrious, valiant, affable, generous, and fortunate, so that he gains a reputation both for competence and for loving his soldiers. This is popularity; it breeds in the soldiers both the desire and the courage to recommend themselves to his favor, and it protects the severity of the general when he must punish mutinous or negligent soldiers. But this love of soldiers, if no assurance is given of the commander's fidelity, is a dangerous thing to sovereign power — especially when that power is in the hands of an assembly that is not popular. It therefore belongs to the safety of the people that those to whom the sovereign commits his armies be both good leaders and faithful subjects.

But when the sovereign himself is popular — that is, revered and beloved by his people — there is no danger at all from the popularity of a subject. For soldiers are never so generally unjust as to side with their captain against their sovereign, however much they love him, when they love not only the sovereign's person but also his cause. That is why those who have at any time suppressed the power of their lawful sovereign by violence have always, before they could settle into his place, been put to the trouble of contriving titles for themselves — to save the people from the shame of accepting them. To have a known right to sovereign power is so popular a quality that the man who has it needs nothing more, on his own part, to turn the hearts of his subjects to him, than to be seen able to govern his own household absolutely; and nothing more, on the part of his enemies, than the disbanding of their armies. For the greatest and most active part of mankind has never yet been well contented with the present.

Concerning the offices of one sovereign to another, which are comprehended in the law commonly called the law of nations, I need say nothing here — because the law of nations and the law of nature are the same thing. Every sovereign has the same right, in procuring the safety of his people, that any individual man has in procuring the safety of his own body. And the same law that dictates to men who have no civil government what they ought to do, and what to avoid, with regard to one another, dictates the same to commonwealths — that is, to the consciences of sovereign princes and sovereign assemblies. For there is no court of natural justice except in the conscience alone, where not man but God reigns — whose laws, such of them as oblige all mankind, are natural in respect of God as the author of nature, and are laws in respect of the same God as King of kings. But of the kingdom of God, as King of kings and as king also of a peculiar people, I shall speak in the rest of this discourse.
