Chapter 37: Of Miracles, and Their Use

A Miracle Is a Work That Causes Wonder

By miracles we mean the admirable works of God — which is why they are also called wonders. And because they are usually performed to signal what God commands, in situations where people would otherwise doubt (following their own private natural reasoning) what he has commanded and what he has not, Scripture commonly calls them signs — in the same sense the Latins called them ostenta and portenta, words meaning "showings" and "foreshadowings" of what the Almighty is about to bring to pass.

A Miracle Must Be Rare, with No Known Natural Cause

So to understand what a miracle is, we first have to understand what kinds of works make people wonder and call them admirable. There are only two things that make anyone wonder at an event. The first is that it is strange — that is, nothing like it has ever been produced, or only very rarely. The second is that when it is produced, we cannot imagine it was done by natural means, but only by the immediate hand of God. But the moment we see some possible natural cause for a thing, however rarely the like has been done, we stop wondering. And if the like has been done often, however impossible it is to imagine a natural means for it, we likewise stop wondering, and no longer count it a miracle.

So if a horse or a cow were to speak, that would be a miracle — because the thing is strange, and a natural cause is hard to imagine. The same goes for seeing some strange deviation of nature produce a living creature of an entirely new shape. But when a man, or any other animal, fathers offspring like himself, that is no miracle — even though we understand how it happens no better than the other case — simply because it is usual. In the same way, if a man were transformed into a stone or a pillar, it would be a miracle, because it is strange. But if a piece of wood is changed into stone, that is no miracle, because we see it often. And yet we know no more by what operation of God the one is brought to pass than the other.

The first rainbow ever seen in the world was a miracle, because it was the first — and therefore strange — and it served as a sign from God, placed in heaven to assure his people that the world would never again be universally destroyed by water. But today, because rainbows are frequent, they are not miracles — not to those who know their natural causes, and not to those who don't. Likewise, there are many rare works produced by human skill and craft. But when we know they were made by men — because then we also know the means by which they were made — we do not count them as miracles, since they were not wrought by the immediate hand of God but through the mediation of human industry.

What Seems a Miracle to One Man May Not to Another

Furthermore, since admiration and wonder depend on the knowledge and experience a person happens to have — some more, some less — it follows that the same thing may be a miracle to one man and not to another. That is why ignorant and superstitious people make great wonders out of works that other people don't marvel at in the least, knowing they proceed from nature (which is not the immediate, but the ordinary work of God). Eclipses of the sun and moon have been taken for supernatural works by the common people — even while there were others who, from their natural causes, could predict the very hour they would arrive. Or take the man who, by conspiracy and secret information-gathering, learns the private doings of some ignorant, unwary person, and then tells him what he did in times past. To the victim it seems a miraculous thing. But among wise and wary men, "miracles" like that are not so easily performed.

The Purpose of Miracles

Again, it belongs to the very nature of a miracle that it be wrought to procure credit for God's messengers, ministers, and prophets — so that people may know they are called, sent, and employed by God, and so be more inclined to obey them. That is why the creation of the world, and after it the destruction of every living creature in the universal flood, are not usually called miracles, admirable works though they were: they were not done to procure credit for any prophet or other minister of God. For however admirable a work may be, the wonder does not lie in the fact that it could be done — people naturally believe the Almighty can do all things — but in the fact that he does it at the prayer or word of a man.

The works of God in Egypt, done by the hand of Moses, were properly miracles, because they were done with the intention of making the people of Israel believe that Moses came to them not from any scheme of his own self-interest, but as one sent from God. After God had commanded him to deliver the Israelites from Egyptian bondage, Moses said (Exodus 4:1), "They will not believe me, but will say, the Lord has not appeared to me." So God gave him power to turn the rod in his hand into a serpent and back into a rod again; and by putting his hand into his bosom, to make it leprous, and by pulling it out again, to make it whole — all to make the children of Israel believe (as it says in verse 5) that the God of their fathers had appeared to him. And if that were not enough, God gave him power to turn their waters into blood. And when he had done these miracles before the people, it is said (verse 31) that "they believed him." Nevertheless, out of fear of Pharaoh, they did not yet dare to obey him. So the other works, done to plague Pharaoh and the Egyptians, all tended to make the Israelites believe in Moses — and were properly miracles.

In the same way, if we consider all the miracles done by the hand of Moses and all the rest of the prophets up to the Captivity, and those of our Savior and his apostles afterward, we will find that their purpose was always to create or confirm belief that these men did not come on their own initiative, but were sent by God.

We can observe something further in Scripture: the purpose of miracles was to produce belief not universally, in all men, elect and reprobate alike, but in the elect only — that is, in those whom God had determined should become his subjects. The miraculous plagues of Egypt were not aimed at converting Pharaoh; God had told Moses beforehand that he would harden Pharaoh's heart so that he would not let the people go. And when Pharaoh finally did let them go, it was not the miracles that persuaded him — it was the plagues that forced him. So too with our Savior. It is written (Matthew 13:58) that he did not perform many miracles in his own country because of their unbelief; and in Mark 6:5, instead of "he did not perform many," it reads "he could perform none." This was not because he lacked the power — to say that would be blasphemy against God. Nor was it because the purpose of miracles was something other than converting unbelievers to Christ; the purpose of all the miracles of Moses, the prophets, our Savior, and his apostles was to add men to the Church. It was because the purpose of their miracles was to add to the Church not all men, but those who should be saved — that is, those whom God had elected. Since our Savior was sent from his Father, he could not use his power to convert those whom his Father had rejected. As for the commentators on this passage of St. Mark who say that his phrase "he could not" stands for "he would not" — they do so without a single example in the Greek language (where "would not" is sometimes put for "could not" in inanimate things that have no will, but "could not" for "would not," never). And by doing so they lay a stumbling block before weak Christians, as if Christ could do miracles only among the credulous.

The Definition of a Miracle

From what I have set down here about the nature and use of a miracle, we may define it this way: a MIRACLE is a work of God (apart from his operation by the way of nature, ordained in the creation), done to make manifest to his elect the mission of an extraordinary minister for their salvation.

From this definition we may draw two conclusions. First: in all miracles, the work done is not the effect of any power in the prophet, because it is the effect of the immediate hand of God — that is to say, God has done it without using the prophet as a subordinate cause.

Second: no devil, angel, or other created spirit can do a miracle. For such a being would have to do it either by virtue of some natural science, or by incantation — that is, by the power of words. If enchanters do it by a power of their own, independent of God, then there is some power that does not proceed from God — which all men deny. And if they do it by a power given to them, then the work is not from the immediate hand of God, but natural — and consequently no miracle.

There are some texts of Scripture that seem to attribute the power of working wonders — equal to some of those immediate miracles wrought by God himself — to certain arts of magic and incantation. For example, we read that after the rod of Moses, cast on the ground, became a serpent, "the magicians of Egypt did the like by their enchantments" (Exodus 7:11); and that after Moses had turned the waters of the Egyptian streams, rivers, ponds, and pools into blood, "the magicians of Egypt did so likewise, with their enchantments" (Exodus 7:22); and that after Moses had, by the power of God, brought frogs upon the land, "the magicians also did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt" (Exodus 8:7). Wouldn't a man be apt to attribute miracles to enchantments — that is, to the efficacy of the sound of words — and think it well proved from these and similar passages? And yet there is no passage of Scripture anywhere that tells us what an enchantment actually is. If, therefore, enchantment is not what many take it to be — a working of strange effects by spells and words — but rather imposture and delusion, wrought by ordinary means, and so far from supernatural that the impostors need no study even of natural causes, but only the ordinary ignorance, stupidity, and superstition of mankind to pull it off — then those texts that seem to support the power of magic, witchcraft, and enchantment must have a different sense than the one they seem to carry at first sight.

Men Are Easily Deceived by False Miracles

For it is plain enough that words have no effect except on those who understand them — and then their only effect is to signify the intentions or passions of the speaker, and thereby produce hope, fear, or other passions or ideas in the hearer. So when a rod seems to become a serpent, or water seems to become blood, or any other miracle seems to be done by enchantment — if it is not for the edification of God's people, then it is not the rod, nor the water, nor anything else that has been enchanted. That is to say, the thing worked upon by the words is not the object. It is the spectator. The whole "miracle" consists in this: the enchanter has deceived a man. And that is no miracle at all. It is a very easy thing to do.

For such is the ignorance and proneness to error of all men generally — and especially of those who know little about natural causes, or about the nature and interests of other men — that they can be taken in by countless easy tricks. Before it was known that there is a science of the course of the stars, imagine what reputation for miraculous power a man might have gained by telling people, "At this hour, on this day, the sun will go dark." A juggler, by his handling of cups and other trinkets, would be thought to do his wonders by the power of the devil at the very least, if his act were not common practice today. A man who has trained himself to speak by drawing in his breath (the kind of men the ancients called ventriloqui — "belly-speakers"), making the weakness of his voice seem to come not from the weak push of his speech organs but from far away, can make a great many people believe it is a voice from heaven, saying whatever he pleases to tell them. And for a crafty man who has dug into the secrets and private confessions that one person ordinarily makes to another about his past actions and adventures, it is no hard matter to repeat them back — and yet there are many who, by exactly such means, gain the reputation of being conjurers.

It would take too long to catalogue all the kinds of men the Greeks called thaumaturgi — workers of wonders — and yet everything they do, they do by their own simple dexterity. And if we look at the impostures wrought by confederacy — by accomplices working together — there is nothing, however impossible to do, that is impossible to be believed. Two men conspiring, one to seem lame and the other to cure him with a charm, will deceive many. But many men conspiring — one to seem lame, another to "cure" him, and all the rest to bear witness — will deceive many more.

Precautions Against the Imposture of Miracles

Given this readiness of mankind to give over-hasty belief to pretended miracles, there can be no better caution — and I think no other — than the one God has prescribed: first through Moses, as I said in the previous chapter, at the beginning of Deuteronomy 13 and the end of Deuteronomy 18. We are to take no one for a prophet who teaches any other religion than the one established by God's lieutenant (which at that time was Moses); nor anyone — even if he teaches the same religion — whose prediction we do not see come to pass. So Moses in his time, and Aaron and his successors in theirs, and the sovereign governor of God's people, next under God himself — that is, the head of the Church in every age — are to be consulted about what doctrine has been established, before we give credit to a pretended miracle or prophet.

And once that is done, when men claim something is a miracle, we must both see it done and use every possible means to consider whether it was really done — and not only that, but whether it is the kind of thing no man could do by his natural power, so that it requires the immediate hand of God. And in this too we must have recourse to God's lieutenant, to whom we have submitted our private judgments in all doubtful cases. For example: suppose a man claims that after certain words are spoken over a piece of bread, God has instantly made it not bread, but a god, or a man, or both — and yet it still looks exactly as much like bread as it ever did. There is no reason for anyone to think this has really been done, nor consequently to fear the man who claims it, until he inquires of God, through his vicar or lieutenant, whether it has been done or not. If the lieutenant says no, then what Moses said follows (Deuteronomy 18:22): "he has spoken it presumptuously; you shall not fear him." If the lieutenant says it is done, then the man is not to contradict it.

Likewise, if we do not see a miracle but only hear tell of one, we are to consult the lawful Church — that is, its lawful head — about how far to credit those who report it. And this is chiefly the situation of people who, in these days, live under Christian sovereigns. For miracles have now ceased: in these times I do not know of one man who ever saw any wondrous work, done by the charm or word or prayer of a man, that anyone with even a moderate share of reason would think supernatural. The question now is no longer whether what we see done is a miracle, or whether the miracle we hear or read of was a real work and not merely the act of a tongue or pen — but, in plain terms, whether the report is true or a lie.

In that question, we are not to make our own private reason or conscience the judge, but the public reason — that is, the reason of God's supreme lieutenant. And in fact we have made him judge already, if we have given him sovereign power to do everything necessary for our peace and defense. A private man always has the liberty — because thought is free — to believe or not believe in his heart those acts that have been put forward as miracles. He may weigh what benefit would flow, from people's belief in them, to those who claim or promote them, and from that conjecture whether they are miracles or lies. But in forming that judgment, we are not to renounce our senses and experience, nor our natural reason — that undoubted word of God. When it comes to public confession of the faith, however, private reason must submit to the public reason — that is, to God's lieutenant. But who this lieutenant of God and head of the Church is, we shall consider in its proper place hereafter.
