Chapter 42: Of Ecclesiastical Power
(Part 3 of 5)

Which Offices in the Church Are Magisterial

Bishop is a word formed in our language out of the Greek episcopus, which means an overseer or superintendent of any business — and in particular a pastor, or shepherd. From there it was taken up by metaphor, not only among the Jews (who were originally shepherds), but among the pagans too, to mean the office of a king or any other ruler or guide of a people, whether he ruled by laws or by doctrine. In this sense the apostles were the first Christian bishops, instituted by Christ himself — which is why the apostleship of Judas is called his bishopric (Acts 1:20). Later, when elders were appointed in the Christian churches with the charge of guiding Christ's flock by their doctrine and advice, these elders were also called bishops. Timothy was an elder (and in the New Testament, "elder" is the name of an office, not just of an age), yet he was also a bishop. And bishops in those days were content with the title of elder. Even St. John himself, the apostle our Lord loved, begins his second epistle with the words "The Elder to the Elect Lady."

From all this it is plain that bishop, pastor, elder, and doctor — that is, teacher — were just so many different names for the same office in the time of the apostles. For there was then no government by coercion, but only by doctrine and persuasion. The kingdom of God was still to come, in a new world; so there could be no authority to compel in any church until the commonwealth had embraced the Christian faith. And that means there could be no diversity of authority, though there was diversity of employments.

Besides these magisterial employments in the church — namely apostles, bishops, elders, pastors, and doctors, whose calling was to proclaim Christ to the Jews and the unbelievers, and to direct and teach those who believed — we read of no others in the New Testament. The names evangelist and prophet signify no office at all, but particular gifts by which particular men were useful to the church. Evangelists were useful by writing the life and acts of our Savior — such as the apostles St. Matthew and St. John, and the disciples St. Mark and St. Luke, and whoever else wrote on that subject (as St. Thomas and St. Barnabas are said to have done, though the Church has not received the books that have gone under their names). Prophets were useful by the gift of interpreting the Old Testament, and sometimes by declaring their special revelations to the church. But neither these gifts, nor the gift of languages, nor the gift of casting out devils or curing diseases, nor anything else made a man an officer in the church. Only one thing did that: the due calling and election to the charge of teaching.

The Ordination of Teachers

The apostles Matthias, Paul, and Barnabas were not made apostles by our Savior himself. They were elected by the Church — that is, by the assembly of Christians: Matthias by the church of Jerusalem, and Paul and Barnabas by the church of Antioch. In the same way, the presbyters and pastors in other cities were elected by the churches of those cities.

For proof, consider first how St. Paul proceeded in the ordination of presbyters in the cities where he had converted men to the Christian faith, immediately after he and Barnabas had received their apostleship. We read (Acts 14:23) that "they ordained elders in every church" — which at first glance might be taken as an argument that the apostles themselves chose the elders and gave them their authority. But if we look at the original text, it becomes clear that the elders were authorized and chosen by the assembly of the Christians of each city. The Greek words there are cheirotonesantes autois presbuterous kat ekklesian — that is, "when they had ordained them elders by the holding up of hands in every congregation." Now it is well known that in all those cities, the way of choosing magistrates and officers was by majority vote; and because the ordinary way of telling the yes votes from the no votes was by the holding up of hands, to "ordain" an officer in any of those cities was nothing more than to bring the people together and elect him by majority — whether by a majority of raised hands, or of voices, or of balls, or beans, or small stones, each man casting one into a vessel marked for yes or for no. Different cities had different customs on that point.

So it was the assembly that elected its own elders. The apostles were only presidents of the assembly: they called it together for the election, pronounced the winners elected, and gave them the blessing that is now called consecration. That is why those who presided over the assemblies — as the elders did in the absence of the apostles — were called proestotes, and in Latin antistites: words that mean the principal person of the assembly, whose office was to count the votes, declare who was chosen, and, when the votes were tied, decide the question by adding his own. That is simply the office of a president in a council.

And because all the churches had their presbyters ordained in this same way, wherever the word is "constitute" — as in Titus 1:5, ina katasteses kata polin presbuterous, "For this cause I left you in Crete, that you should constitute elders in every city" — we are to understand the same thing: that Titus should call the faithful together and ordain them presbyters by majority vote. It would have been a strange thing if, in a town where men had perhaps never seen a magistrate chosen any other way than by an assembly, the townspeople, on becoming Christians, had so much as thought of any other way of electing their teachers and guides — that is, their presbyters, otherwise called bishops — than this election by majority vote, which is exactly what St. Paul's word cheirotonesantes implies (Acts 14:23). Nor was there ever any choosing of bishops, before the emperors found it necessary to regulate them in order to keep the peace among them, except by the assemblies of the Christians in every separate town.

The same point is confirmed by the continual practice, even to this day, in the election of the bishops of Rome. For if the bishop of any place had the right to choose another man to succeed to the pastoral office in any city when he left it to plant the faith somewhere else, then surely he would have had all the more right to appoint his successor in the place where he last lived and died. And yet we never find that any bishop of Rome appointed his own successor. For a long time they were chosen by the people — as we can see from the riot raised over the election between Damasus and Ursinus, which Ammianus Marcellinus says was so violent that Juventius the prefect, unable to keep the peace between the factions, was forced to leave the city, and more than a hundred men were found dead on that occasion in the church itself. And though afterward the popes were chosen first by the whole clergy of Rome, and later by the cardinals, no pope was ever appointed to the succession by his predecessor. If, then, the popes never claimed the right to appoint their own successors, I think I may reasonably conclude they had no right to appoint themselves any new power — a power that no one could take from the Church and bestow on them except someone with lawful authority not only to teach the Church but to command it. And no one could do that but the civil sovereign.

What the Ministers of the Church Are

The word minister, in the original diakonos, means someone who voluntarily does another man's business. A minister differs from a servant only in this: servants are obliged by their condition to do whatever they are commanded, while ministers are obliged only by what they have undertaken — and so are bound to no more than they have undertaken. By this measure, both those who teach the Word of God and those who manage the secular affairs of the Church are ministers; but they are ministers of different persons. The pastors of the Church, called "the ministers of the Word" (Acts 6:4), are ministers of Christ, whose Word it is. But the ministry of a deacon — called "serving of tables" in verse 2 of the same chapter — is a service done to the church, that is, to the congregation. So neither any one man nor the whole church could ever say of their pastor that he was their minister. But of a deacon — whether his charge was to serve tables, or to distribute support to the Christians when they lived in each city on a common stock or on collections (as they did in the earliest times), or to take care of the house of prayer, or of the revenue, or of any other worldly business of the church — the whole congregation could properly call him their minister.

Their employment as deacons was to serve the congregation; though when the occasion arose they did not fail to preach the Gospel and uphold the doctrine of Christ, each according to his gifts — as St. Stephen did — and even to preach and baptize, as Philip did. For the Philip who preached the Gospel at Samaria (Acts 8:5) and baptized the eunuch (verse 38) was Philip the deacon, not Philip the apostle. This is clear from verse 1: when Philip preached in Samaria, the apostles were at Jerusalem; and (verse 14) "when they heard that Samaria had received the Word of God, they sent Peter and John to them." It was by the laying on of Peter and John's hands that those who had been baptized received the Holy Spirit (verse 15) — which by Philip's baptism alone they had not received. For the conferring of the Holy Spirit, their baptism had to be administered or confirmed by a minister of the Word, not by a minister of the church. And so, to confirm the baptism of those Philip the deacon had baptized, the apostles sent two from their own number, Peter and John, from Jerusalem to Samaria; and they conferred on those who until then were merely baptized the graces that were the signs of the Holy Spirit, which at that time accompanied all true believers.

What those signs were, we can learn from what St. Mark says (Mark 16:17): "These signs shall follow them that believe in my name: they shall cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." This was what Philip could not give but the apostles could — and, as this passage shows, actually did give to every man who truly believed and was baptized by a minister of Christ himself. From which it follows that either Christ's ministers in our own age cannot confer this power, or else there are very few true believers — or Christ has very few ministers.

And How They Were Chosen

That the first deacons were chosen not by the apostles but by a congregation of the disciples — that is, by Christian men of every sort — is clear from Acts 6. There we read that the Twelve, after the number of disciples had multiplied, called them together; and having told them it was not fitting that the apostles should leave the Word of God to serve tables, said to them (verse 3), "Brethren, look out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business." It is plain here that though the apostles declared them elected, the congregation chose them — which verse 5 says even more expressly: "the saying pleased the multitude, and they chose seven," and so on.

Church Revenue Under the Law of Moses

Under the Old Testament, only the tribe of Levi was eligible for the priesthood and the other lesser offices of the Church. The land was divided among the other tribes (Levi excepted), which — by the subdivision of the tribe of Joseph into Ephraim and Manasseh — still numbered twelve. The tribe of Levi was assigned certain cities to live in, with the surrounding land for their cattle; but for their portion, they were to have a tenth of the fruits of the land of their brethren. The priests, in turn, had for their maintenance a tenth of that tenth, together with part of the offerings and sacrifices. For God had said to Aaron (Numbers 18:20), "You shall have no inheritance in their land, neither shall you have any part among them: I am your part and your inheritance among the children of Israel."

God was then king; and having appointed the tribe of Levi to be his public ministers, he allowed them for their maintenance the public revenue — that is, the part God had reserved to himself, which was the tithes and offerings. That is what is meant where God says, "I am your inheritance." And for this reason the Levites might fittingly be given the name of clergy, from kleros, which means "lot" or "inheritance" — not because they were heirs of the kingdom of God any more than other men, but because God's inheritance was their maintenance. Now, seeing that in this period God himself was their king, and Moses, Aaron, and the succeeding high priests were his lieutenants, it is plain that the right of tithes and offerings was established by the civil power.

After the Jews rejected God by demanding a king, the Levites still enjoyed the same revenue; but their right to it now rested on the fact that the kings never took it from them. For the public revenue was at the disposal of whoever was the public person — and until the Captivity, that was the king. And again, after the return from the Captivity, the people paid their tithes to the priest as before. Up to this point, then, church livings were determined by the civil sovereign.

In Our Savior's Time, and After

Of the maintenance of our Savior and his apostles, we read only that they had a purse (carried by Judas Iscariot); that those apostles who were fishermen sometimes worked at their trade; and that when our Savior sent the twelve apostles out to preach, he forbade them "to carry gold, and silver, and brass in their purses, for the workman is worthy of his hire" (Matthew 10:9-10). From this it is likely that their ordinary maintenance was not out of keeping with their employment — for their employment was "freely to give, because they had freely received" (verse 8), and their maintenance was the free gift of those who believed the good news they carried about the coming of the Messiah, their Savior. To this we may add what was contributed out of gratitude by those our Savior had healed of diseases — among whom are mentioned (Luke 8:2-3) "certain women which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils; and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward; and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance."

After our Savior's ascension, the Christians of every city lived in common (Acts 4:34), on the money raised from the sale of their lands and possessions and laid down at the apostles' feet — out of good will, not duty. For as St. Peter said to Ananias (Acts 5:4), "While the land remained, was it not yours? And after it was sold, was it not in your power?" — which shows that Ananias had no need to save his land or his money by lying, since he was not bound to contribute anything at all unless he pleased. And as in the time of the apostles, so all the way down until after Constantine the Great, we find that the maintenance of the bishops and pastors of the Christian Church was nothing but the voluntary contribution of those who had embraced their doctrine. There was still no mention of tithes. But by the time of Constantine and his sons, such was the affection of Christians toward their pastors that — as Ammianus Marcellinus says, describing the riot between Damasus and Ursinus over the bishopric — the office was worth fighting over: the bishops of those times, thanks to the generosity of their flocks, and especially of wealthy matrons, lived splendidly, were carried about in coaches, and were lavish in their food and dress.

The Ministers of the Gospel Lived on the Generosity of Their Flocks

Here someone may ask whether the pastor in those days was bound to live on voluntary contribution, as on alms. "For who," says St. Paul (1 Corinthians 9:7), "goes to war at his own expense? Or who feeds a flock and does not eat of the milk of the flock?" And again (1 Corinthians 9:13), "Do you not know that they which minister about holy things live of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the altar partake with the altar?" — that is to say, have part of what is offered at the altar for their maintenance. And then he concludes, "Even so has the Lord appointed, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel."

From this passage we may indeed infer that the pastors of the Church ought to be maintained by their flocks — but not that the pastors were to determine the amount or the kind of their own allowance, and carve out their own portions, so to speak. Their allowance, then, had to be determined either by the gratitude and generosity of each individual member of the flock, or by the whole congregation. It could not be by the whole congregation, because in those days the congregation's acts were not laws. Therefore the maintenance of pastors, before emperors and civil sovereigns had made laws to settle it, was nothing but benevolence. Those who served at the altar lived on what was offered. In what court could they have sued for more, when they had no tribunals? Or if they had arbitrators among themselves, who would have executed their judgments, when they had no power to arm their officers? It remains, therefore, that no fixed maintenance could be assigned to any pastors of the Church except by the whole congregation — and then only when its decrees came to have the force not merely of canons but of laws; and such laws could be made by no one but emperors, kings, or other civil sovereigns. Nor could the right of tithes in Moses' law be applied to the ministers of the Gospel of that age — because Moses and the high priests were the civil sovereigns of the people under God, whose kingdom among the Jews was then present, whereas the kingdom of God by Christ is yet to come.

So far, then, we have shown what the pastors of the Church are; what the points of their commission are (to preach, to teach, to baptize, to preside in their several congregations); what ecclesiastical censure — excommunication — is (namely: where Christianity was forbidden by the civil laws, the Christians removing themselves from the company of the excommunicated person, and where Christianity was commanded by the civil law, the excommunicated person being put out of the congregations of Christians); who elected the pastors and ministers of the Church (the congregation); who consecrated and blessed them (the pastor); and what their due revenue was (none but their own possessions, their own labor, and the voluntary contributions of devout and grateful Christians). We are now to consider what office belongs to those persons who, being civil sovereigns, have also embraced the Christian faith.

A Christian Civil Sovereign Has the Right to Appoint Pastors

First, we must remember that the right of judging which doctrines are fit for peace and fit to be taught to the subjects is, in all commonwealths, inseparably attached to the sovereign civil power, whether that power lies in one man or in one assembly of men — as has already been proved in chapter 18. For it is obvious to the meanest understanding that men's actions flow from the opinions they hold about the good or evil those actions will bring upon themselves. Consequently, once men are possessed of the opinion that obeying the sovereign power will hurt them more than disobeying it, they will disobey the laws — and thereby overthrow the commonwealth and bring in confusion and civil war, the very things all civil government was ordained to avoid. That is why, in all the commonwealths of the pagans, the sovereigns bore the name of pastors of the people: because no subject could lawfully teach the people except by their permission and authority.

This right of the pagan kings cannot be thought to have been taken from them by their conversion to the faith of Christ — who never ordained that kings, for believing in him, should be deposed (that is, subjected to anyone but himself), or, which comes to the same thing, be stripped of the power necessary for preserving peace among their subjects and defending them against foreign enemies. Therefore Christian kings are still the supreme pastors of their people, and have the power to ordain whatever pastors they please to teach the Church — that is, to teach the people committed to their charge.

Again, suppose the right of choosing pastors remains (as it was before the conversion of kings) in the Church — for so it was in the time of the apostles themselves, as has already been shown in this chapter. Even so, the right will still belong to the Christian civil sovereign. For insofar as he is a Christian, he allows the teaching; and insofar as he is the sovereign — which is as much as to say, the Church by representation — the teachers he elects are elected by the Church. And when an assembly of Christians chooses its pastor in a Christian commonwealth, it is the sovereign who elects him, because it is done by his authority — just as when a town chooses its mayor, it is the act of the one who holds the sovereign power. For every act done is the act of him without whose consent it would be invalid. And therefore, whatever examples may be drawn out of history of pastors being elected by the people or by the clergy, they are no argument against the right of any civil sovereign, because those who elected them did it by his authority.

Since, then, in every Christian commonwealth the civil sovereign is the supreme pastor, to whose charge the whole flock of his subjects is committed, and since it is consequently by his authority that all other pastors are made and have power to teach and to perform all other pastoral offices, it follows that it is from the civil sovereign that all other pastors derive their right of teaching, preaching, and every other function belonging to that office — and that they are nothing but his ministers. They are his ministers in the same way that town magistrates, judges in courts of justice, and commanders of armies are all ministers of him who is the magistrate of the whole commonwealth, the judge of all causes, and the commander of the whole militia — which is always the civil sovereign. And the reason for this is not that the teachers are his subjects, but that the learners are.

For suppose a Christian king were to hand over the authority of ordaining pastors in his dominions to another king — as various Christian kings allow that power to the Pope. He does not thereby set up a pastor over himself, nor a sovereign pastor over his people. To do that would be to strip himself of the civil power itself — which, since it depends on the opinion men have of their duty to him and the fear they have of punishment in another world, would then depend also on the skill and loyalty of teachers of religion, who are no less subject to ambition, and to ignorance, than any other sort of men. So wherever a foreigner has authority to appoint teachers, that authority is given to him by the sovereign in whose dominions he teaches. Christian doctors are our schoolmasters in Christianity; but kings are the fathers of families, and they may receive schoolmasters for their subjects on the recommendation of a foreigner, but not on his command — especially when teaching the subjects badly would work to the great and obvious profit of the one recommending them. Nor can kings be obliged to keep such teachers any longer than it serves the public good — the care of which remains in their charge for as long as they retain any other essential right of the sovereignty.

Only the Sovereign's Pastoral Authority Is Jure Divino; All Other Pastors Hold Theirs Jure Civili

If a man should ask a pastor, in the execution of his office, the question the chief priests and elders of the people asked our Savior (Matthew 21:23) — "By what authority do you do these things, and who gave you this authority?" — he can give no other honest answer than that he does it by the authority of the commonwealth, given him by the king or the assembly that represents it. All pastors, except the supreme one, execute their charges in the right — that is, by the authority — of the civil sovereign: that is, jure civili, by civil right. But the king, and every other sovereign, executes his office of supreme pastor by immediate authority from God — that is to say, in God's right, or jure divino, by divine right. And that is why none but kings may put into their titles the mark of their submission to God alone: Dei Gratia Rex — "King by the grace of God," and so forth. Bishops ought to say at the beginning of their official documents, "By the favor of the King's Majesty, Bishop of such-and-such a diocese," or, as civil ministers, "In his Majesty's name." For when they write Divina Providentia — "by Divine Providence," which is just Dei Gratia in disguise — they deny that they received their authority from the civil state, and slyly slip the collar of their civil subjection off their necks, contrary to the unity and defense of the commonwealth.

Christian Kings Have the Power to Perform Every Pastoral Function

But if every Christian sovereign is the supreme pastor of his own subjects, it would seem he also has the authority not only to preach (which perhaps no one will deny), but also to baptize, to administer the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and to consecrate both temples and pastors to God's service. Most men deny this — partly because sovereigns do not customarily do these things, and partly because the administration of sacraments and the consecration of persons and places to holy uses is thought to require the laying on of hands by men who, through a chain of such impositions reaching back to the apostles, have themselves been ordained to that ministry. So to prove that Christian kings have the power to baptize and to consecrate, I must explain two things: why they do not customarily do it, and how, without the ordinary ceremony of laying on of hands, they are nevertheless qualified to do it whenever they please.

There is no doubt that any king, if he happened to be skilled in the sciences, could by the very right of his office deliver lectures in them himself — the same right by which he authorizes others to deliver them in the universities. Nevertheless, because the care of the whole business of the commonwealth takes up his entire time, it would not be practical for him to apply himself in person to that particular task. A king may also, if he pleases, sit in judgment and hear and decide all manner of cases, just as well as give others the authority to do it in his name; but the burden of command and government that lies on him forces him to stay continually at the helm and commit the ministerial offices to others under him. In just the same way our Savior — who surely had the power to baptize — baptized no one himself, but sent his apostles and disciples to baptize (John 4:2). So also St. Paul, pressed by the necessity of preaching in many far-distant places, baptized few: among all the Corinthians he baptized only Crispus, Gaius, and Stephanas (1 Corinthians 1:14, 16), and the reason was that his principal charge was to preach (1 Corinthians 1:17). From this it is clear that the greater charge — such as the government of the Church — is a dispensation from the lesser. The reason Christian kings do not customarily baptize is therefore obvious, and it is the same reason why, to this day, few people are baptized by bishops — and by the Pope, fewer still.

As for the laying on of hands — whether it is needed to authorize a king to baptize and consecrate — we may consider the matter as follows.

The laying on of hands was a very ancient public ceremony among the Jews, by which the person or thing intended in a man's prayer, blessing, sacrifice, consecration, condemnation, or other speech was designated and made certain. So Jacob, in blessing the children of Joseph (Genesis 48:14), "laid his right hand on Ephraim the younger, and his left hand on Manasseh the firstborn" — and he did this deliberately (though the boys were presented to him by Joseph in the opposite order, so that he had to stretch his arms crosswise to do it) in order to mark which one he intended the greater blessing for. So also in the sacrificing of the burnt offering, Aaron is commanded (Exodus 29:10) "to lay his hands on the head of the bullock," and (verse 15) "to lay his hand on the head of the ram." The same is said again in Leviticus 1:4 and 8:14. Likewise, when Moses ordained Joshua to be captain of the Israelites — that is, consecrated him to God's service — he "laid his hands upon him and gave him his charge" (Numbers 27:23), designating and making certain who it was they were to obey in war. And in the consecration of the Levites (Numbers 8:10), God commanded that "the children of Israel should put their hands upon the Levites." And in the condemnation of the man who had blasphemed the Lord (Leviticus 24:14), God commanded that "all that heard him should lay their hands on his head, and that all the congregation should stone him." Why should only those who heard him lay their hands on him, rather than a priest, a Levite, or some other minister of justice? Because no one else was able to designate and demonstrate to the eyes of the congregation who it was that had blasphemed and deserved to die. To point a man out — or anything else — by the hand to the eye is less subject to mistake than to do it by a name to the ear.

So carefully was this ceremony observed that even in blessing the whole congregation at once — which cannot be done by laying on of hands — "Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people when he blessed them" (Leviticus 9:22). And we read of a similar ceremony in the consecration of temples among the pagans: the priest laid his hands on some post of the temple the whole time he was speaking the words of consecration. So natural is it, in matters of God's public service, to designate any individual thing by the hand, to assure the eyes, rather than by words, to inform the ear.

This ceremony, then, was nothing new in our Savior's time. Jairus, whose daughter was sick (Mark 5:23), begged our Savior — not simply to heal her, but — "to lay his hands upon her, that she might be healed." And (Matthew 19:13) "they brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on them and pray."

Following this ancient rite, the apostles, the presbyters, and the presbytery itself laid hands on those they ordained as pastors, praying at the same time that they might receive the Holy Spirit — and not only once, but sometimes more than once, whenever a new occasion arose. But the purpose was always the same: a precise and religious designation of the person, ordained either to the pastoral charge in general or to a particular mission. So "the apostles prayed and laid their hands" on the seven deacons (Acts 6:6) — which was done not to give them the Holy Spirit (for they were full of the Holy Spirit before they were chosen, as appears just before, in verse 3), but to designate them to that office. And after Philip the deacon had converted certain persons in Samaria, Peter and John went down "and laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit" (Acts 8:17). Nor was this power confined to apostles: a presbyter had it too. For St. Paul advises Timothy (1 Timothy 5:22), "Lay hands suddenly on no man" — that is, designate no man rashly to the office of a pastor. The whole presbytery laid their hands on Timothy, as we read in 1 Timothy 4:14; but this is to be understood as meaning that some did it by the appointment of the presbytery — most likely their proestos, or presiding officer, who may well have been St. Paul himself. For in his second epistle to Timothy (verse 6) he says to him, "Stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the laying on of my hands." Note in passing that by "the Holy Spirit" here is meant not the third Person of the Trinity, but the gifts necessary for the pastoral office. We read also that St. Paul himself received the laying on of hands twice: once from Ananias at Damascus (Acts 9:17-18), at the time of his baptism, and again at Antioch (Acts 13:3), when he was first sent out to preach.

The use of this ceremony in the ordination of pastors, then, was to designate the person to whom the power was being given. But suppose there had been, in those days, a Christian who already possessed the power of teaching before his baptism. Baptizing him — that is, making him a Christian — would have given him no new power; it would only have directed him to preach true doctrine, that is, to use the power he already had rightly. So the laying on of hands would have been unnecessary; baptism itself would have been sufficient. Now, every sovereign, before Christianity existed, had the power of teaching and of ordaining teachers. Christianity therefore gave sovereigns no new right; it only directed them in the way of teaching truth. And consequently they needed no laying on of hands — beyond the one performed in baptism — to authorize them to exercise any part of the pastoral function, such as baptizing and consecrating. And in the Old Testament, though only the priest had the right to consecrate during the time when the sovereignty was in the high priest, it was not so when the sovereignty was in the king. For we read (1 Kings 8) that Solomon blessed the people, consecrated the Temple, and pronounced the public prayer that is the pattern to this day for the consecration of all Christian churches and chapels. From this it appears that he possessed not only the right of ecclesiastical government, but also the right of exercising ecclesiastical functions.
