Chapter 45: Demonology and Other Relics of Pagan Religion
(Part 2 of 2)

But Scripture stretches the name of idol even further. It covers the sun, or a star, or any other creature, visible or invisible, whenever that creature is worshipped as a god.


What Idolatry Is

Having shown what worship is, and what an image is, I will now put the two together and examine what that IDOLATRY is which the Second Commandment, and other places of Scripture, forbid.

To worship an image is voluntarily to perform those external acts which are signs of honoring one of three things: the material of the image — the wood, stone, or metal, or some other visible creature; or the phantasm in the brain that the material was shaped and figured to resemble; or both together, as one living body composed of the matter and the phantasm, the way a man is composed of body and soul.

Now compare that with civil honor. To remove your hat before a man of power and authority, or before the throne of a prince, or in whatever other places he appoints for that purpose in his absence, is to worship that man or prince with civil worship. It is a sign of honoring not the chair, and not the place, but the person — and that is not idolatry. But if the man who does it supposed the soul of the prince to be in the chair, or presented a petition to the chair, that would be divine worship, and idolatry.

To pray to a king for things he is actually able to do for us — even if we prostrate ourselves before him — is only civil worship, because we acknowledge no power in him beyond the human. But voluntarily to pray to him for fair weather, or for anything only God can do, is divine worship, and idolatry.

On the other side, if a king compels a man to such worship by the terror of death or other severe bodily punishment, it is not idolatry. The worship that a sovereign commands to be paid to himself through the terror of his laws is not a sign that the man obeying inwardly honors him as a god. It is a sign that the man wants to save himself from death, or from a miserable life. And what is no sign of internal honor is no worship — and therefore no idolatry. Nor can it be said that such a man scandalizes his brother, or lays a stumbling block in his path. However wise or learned the man worshipping in that manner may be, no one else can conclude from his behavior that he approves of it — only that he does it out of fear, and that it is not his act, but the act of the sovereign.

To worship God in some particular place, or turning your face toward an image or a fixed spot, is not to worship or honor the place or the image. It is to acknowledge it as holy — that is, to acknowledge that the image or place has been set apart from common use. That is all the word holy means here. It implies no new quality in the place or image, only a new relation: appropriation to God. And therefore it is not idolatry — no more than it was idolatry to worship God before the bronze serpent; or for the Jews, when they were out of their own country, to turn their faces toward the Temple of Jerusalem when they prayed; or for Moses to take off his shoes before the burning bush on the ground belonging to Mount Sinai. That place was the one God had chosen to appear in and to give his laws to the people of Israel, and so it was holy ground — not by any inherent sanctity, but by being set apart to God's use. Just so, it is no idolatry for Christians to worship in churches once solemnly dedicated to God for that purpose by the authority of the king, or whoever else truly represents the Church.

But to worship God as animating or inhabiting such an image or place — that is, to worship an infinite substance in a finite place — is idolatry. Such finite gods are mere idols of the brain, nothing real, and Scripture commonly calls them by their right names: vanity, and lies, and nothing. It is also idolatry to worship God — not as present in the place or image, but simply to be reminded of him or of some of his works — in a place or before an image dedicated or set up by private authority, without the authority of those who are our sovereign pastors. For the Commandment is: "You shall not make to yourself any graven image." God commanded Moses to set up the bronze serpent; Moses did not make it to himself; so it was not against the Commandment. But the making of the golden calf by Aaron and the people, being done without any authority from God, was idolatry — not only because they held it for God, but also because they made it for a religious use without warrant either from God their sovereign, or from Moses, who was his lieutenant.

The pagans of the past worshipped as gods Jupiter and the rest — who in life were perhaps men who had done great and glorious deeds. And they worshipped as children of God various men and women, supposing them to have been begotten between an immortal deity and a mortal human. This was idolatry, because they made these gods for themselves, with no authority from God — neither in his eternal law of reason, nor in his positive and revealed will. But though our Savior was a man, whom we also believe to be God immortal and the Son of God, this is no idolatry; because we build that belief not on our own fancy or judgment, but on the Word of God revealed in the Scriptures.

As for the adoration of the Eucharist: if the words of Christ, "This is my body," really mean that he himself, and the seeming bread in his hand — and not only that, but every seeming morsel of bread that has ever since been or shall ever hereafter be consecrated by priests — are so many bodies of Christ, and yet all of them only one body, then that is no idolatry, because our Savior authorized it. But if the text does not mean that — and no other text can be brought forward for it — then, because it is a worship of human institution, it is idolatry. It is not enough to say that God can transubstantiate the bread into Christ's body. The pagans also held God to be omnipotent, and on that ground they could just as easily have excused their idolatry by claiming the transubstantiation of their wood and stone into God Almighty.

There are also those who claim divine inspiration is a supernatural entering of the Holy Spirit into a man, rather than an acquisition of God's grace through doctrine and study. I think those people are caught in a very dangerous dilemma. If they do not worship the men they believe to be so inspired, they fall into impiety — failing to adore God's supernatural presence. But if they do worship them, they commit idolatry — for the Apostles would never permit themselves to be worshipped like that. The safest course, therefore, is to believe that the descending of the dove upon the Apostles, and Christ's breathing on them when he gave them the Holy Spirit, and the giving of it by laying on of hands, were the signs God was pleased to use, or ordain to be used, of his promise to assist those men in their study to preach his kingdom, and in their conduct of life — so that it might not be scandalous, but edifying to others.


Scandalous Worship of Images

Besides the idolatrous worship of images, there is also a scandalous worship of them — which is also a sin, but not idolatry. Idolatry is worship by signs of an internal and real honor. Scandalous worship is only seeming worship. It may sometimes go along with an inward, hearty detestation both of the image and of the imaginary demon or idol it is dedicated to, and proceed only from the fear of death or other grievous punishment. Even so, it is a sin in those who worship this way, if they are men whose actions others look to as guiding lights. For those who follow their example cannot help but stumble and fall in the way of religion. Whereas the example of people we pay no attention to does not work on us at all; it leaves us to our own diligence and caution, and so is no cause of our falling.

If, therefore, a pastor lawfully called to teach and direct others — or anyone else whose knowledge is held in high regard — pays external honor to an idol out of fear, then unless he makes his fear and his unwillingness as evident as the worship itself, he scandalizes his brother by seeming to approve idolatry. His brother, reasoning from the action of his teacher, or of a man whose knowledge he respects, concludes that the thing is lawful in itself. That scandal is sin, and a scandal given.

But if someone who is no pastor, and has no eminent reputation for knowledge of Christian doctrine, does the same thing, and another follows him — that is no scandal given, for the follower had no reason to follow such an example. It is only a pretense of scandal, which he takes up himself as an excuse before men. For an unlearned man in the power of an idolatrous king or state, commanded on pain of death to worship before an idol: if he detests the idol in his heart, he does well — though if he had the fortitude to suffer death rather than worship it, he would do better. But if a pastor — who, as Christ's messenger, has undertaken to teach Christ's doctrine to all nations — should do the same, it would be not only a sinful scandal with respect to other Christians' consciences, but a treacherous desertion of his post.

Here, then, is the sum of everything I have said so far about the worship of images. Whoever worships, in an image or in any creature, either the matter of it, or some fancy of his own which he thinks dwells in it, or both together — or believes that such things hear his prayers or see his devotions, without ears or eyes — commits idolatry. Whoever counterfeits such worship out of fear of punishment, if he is a man whose example carries weight among his brethren, commits a sin. But whoever worships the Creator of the world before such an image, or in such a place, as he has not made or chosen for himself, but has taken from the commandment of God's Word — as the Jews did in worshipping God before the cherubim, and before the bronze serpent for a time, and in or toward the Temple of Jerusalem, which was also only for a time — commits no idolatry.

Now, as for the worship of saints, and images, and relics, and the other things practiced today in the Church of Rome, I say this: they are not allowed by the Word of God, and they were not brought into the Church of Rome by the doctrine taught there. They were partly left in it at the first conversion of the pagans — and afterwards countenanced, confirmed, and enlarged by the Bishops of Rome.


The Argument from the Cherubim and the Bronze Serpent, Answered

As for the proofs alleged out of Scripture — those examples of images that God himself appointed to be set up — they were not set up for the people, or for anyone, to worship. They were set up so that the people should worship God himself before them: before the cherubim over the Ark, and before the bronze serpent. We never read that the priest, or anyone else, worshipped the cherubim. On the contrary, we read (2 Kings 18:4) that Hezekiah broke the bronze serpent that Moses had set up into pieces — because the people were burning incense to it.

Besides, those examples were not given for our imitation, as if we too should set up images under the pretense of worshipping God before them. The words of the second Commandment — "You shall not make to yourself any graven image" — draw a line between the images God commanded to be set up and those we set up for ourselves. And therefore the argument from the cherubim or the bronze serpent to images of man's devising — from the worship commanded by God to the will-worship of men — is no good argument at all.

Consider this too: just as Hezekiah broke the bronze serpent in pieces because the Jews worshipped it, so that they would do so no more, so also Christian sovereigns ought to break down the images their subjects have grown accustomed to worshipping, so there is no further occasion for such idolatry. For at this day, where images are worshipped, the ignorant people really do believe there is a divine power in the images. Their pastors tell them that some of these images have spoken, and have bled, and that miracles have been done by them — which the people understand as done by the saint, who they think either is the image itself or is inside it. The Israelites, when they worshipped the calf, thought they were worshipping the God who brought them out of Egypt; and yet it was idolatry, because they thought the calf either was that God or had him in its belly.

Some may think it impossible for people to be so stupid as to take the image for God, or for a saint, or to worship it under that notion. But Scripture plainly says otherwise. When the golden calf was made, the people said (Exodus 32:2), "These are your gods, O Israel." And the images of Laban (Genesis 31:30) are called his gods. And we see by daily experience, in all sorts of people, that men who study nothing but their food and their ease are content to believe any absurdity rather than trouble themselves to examine it. They hold their faith the way a family holds an entailed estate — unalienable, except by an express and new law.


Painting What You Imagine Is Not Idolatry — Worshipping It Is

But they infer from certain other passages that it is lawful to paint angels, and even God himself: from God's walking in the garden, from Jacob's seeing God at the top of the ladder, and from other visions and dreams. But visions and dreams, whether natural or supernatural, are only phantasms. The man who paints an image of any of them is making an image not of God, but of his own phantasm — which is the making of an idol. I do not say that drawing a picture from your imagination is a sin. But once it is drawn, to hold it up as a representation of God is against the second Commandment, and can serve no purpose but worship.

The same goes for images of angels, and of the dead — unless they stand as monuments of friends, or of men worth remembering. That use of an image is not worship of the image, but a civil honoring of the person — not the person who is, but the person who was. But when it is done to the image we make of a saint, for no other reason than that we think he hears our prayers and is pleased with the honor we pay him — when he is dead and without sense — then we attribute to him more than human power, and that is idolatry.

So then: there is no authority, in the Law of Moses or in the Gospel, for the religious worship of images or other representations of God which men set up for themselves, nor for the worship of the image of any creature in heaven, or earth, or under the earth. And Christian kings — who are God's living representatives — are not to be worshipped by their subjects with any act signifying a greater esteem of their power than mortal human nature can carry. Given all that, it cannot be imagined that the religious worship now in use was brought into the Church through a misunderstanding of Scripture. The only remaining explanation is that it was left in the Church — because, when the pagans who worshipped the images were converted, the images themselves were never destroyed.


How Idolatry Was Left in the Church

And here is how that happened. The images were held in immoderate esteem and carried high prices as works of craftsmanship. So their owners — though converted from worshipping them religiously, as they once had, for demons — kept them in their houses anyway, on the pretense of doing it in honor of Christ, of the Virgin Mary, of the Apostles, and of the other pastors of the primitive Church. It was easy: just give them new names. What had perhaps been called the image of Venus and Cupid became an image of the Virgin Mary and her Son our Savior. A Jupiter became a Barnabas; a Mercury, a Paul; and so on. And as worldly ambition crept by degrees into the pastors, it drew them to try to please these newly made Christians — and also to develop a liking for this kind of honor themselves, which they could hope to receive after their own deaths, just like those who had already gained it. So the worshipping of the images of Christ and his Apostles grew more and more idolatrous. True, somewhat after the time of Constantine, various emperors and bishops and general councils noticed the unlawfulness of it, and opposed it — but too late, or too weakly.


The Canonization of Saints

The canonizing of saints is another relic of pagan religion. It is neither a misunderstanding of Scripture nor a new invention of the Roman Church, but a custom as ancient as the commonwealth of Rome itself. The first man ever canonized at Rome was Romulus — and that on the story of Julius Proculus, who swore before the Senate that he had spoken with Romulus after his death, and had it from his own mouth that he dwelt in heaven, was called there Quirinius, and would look kindly on the fortunes of their new city. On the strength of that, the Senate gave public testimony of his sanctity. Julius Caesar, and other emperors after him, received the same testimony — that is, they were canonized as saints. For that is what canonization, now properly defined, amounts to: it is the same thing as the apotheosis — the god-making — of the heathen.


The Name Pontifex

It is also from the Roman heathen that the Popes have received the name and power of PONTIFEX MAXIMUS. This was the title of the man who, in the ancient commonwealth of Rome, held the supreme authority — under the Senate and people — for regulating all ceremonies and doctrines concerning their religion. And when Augustus Caesar turned the state into a monarchy, he took to himself no more than this office and that of tribune of the people — which is to say, the supreme power in both state and religion. The succeeding emperors enjoyed the same.

But in the days of the Emperor Constantine — the first emperor to profess and authorize the Christian religion — it suited his profession to have religion regulated, under his authority, by the Bishop of Rome. Not that the bishops appear to have taken the name of Pontifex that early; rather, the later bishops assumed it on their own, to dress up the power they were exercising over the bishops of the Roman provinces. For it was never any privilege of St. Peter that gave them such authority over other bishops. It was the privilege of the city of Rome, which the emperors were always willing to uphold. That is plain from this: the Bishop of Constantinople, when the emperor made that city the seat of the empire, claimed to be equal to the Bishop of Rome. In the end — not without a fight — the Pope carried the point and became the Pontifex Maximus. But he held it only by right of the emperor; and not beyond the bounds of the empire; and nowhere at all after the emperor had lost his power in Rome — even though it was the Pope himself who took that power from him. From this we may observe, in passing, that there is no ground for the Pope's superiority over other bishops, except in territories where he is himself the civil sovereign, or where an emperor holding sovereign civil power has expressly chosen the Pope as chief pastor under himself over his Christian subjects.


Processions of Images

The carrying of images about in procession is another relic of the religion of the Greeks and Romans. They too carried their idols from place to place in a kind of chariot specially dedicated to that use, which the Latins called the thensa, the vehiculum deorum — the carriage of the gods. The image rode in a frame or shrine called the ferculum. And what they called the pompa is exactly what is now called a procession. Accordingly, among the divine honors the Senate granted to Julius Caesar was this: that in the pompa — the procession — at the Circaean games, he should have a thensa and ferculum, a sacred chariot and a shrine; which was as much as to be carried up and down as a god. Just as the Popes, at this day, are carried about by their Swiss Guards under a canopy.


Wax Candles and Lighted Torches

Part of those processions, too, was the bearing of burning torches and candles before the images of the gods, among both the Greeks and the Romans. Later, the emperors of Rome received the same honor. We read of Caligula that at his reception to the empire he was carried from Misenum to Rome through a throng of people, the roads lined with altars, beasts for sacrifice, and burning torches. And of Caracalla, that he was received into Alexandria with incense, with the scattering of flowers, and with dadouchiai — that is, with torches; for the dadouchoi were the men who, among the Greeks, carried lighted torches in the processions of their gods. In the course of time, the devout but ignorant people began honoring their bishops with the same pomp of wax candles, and paying it constantly to the images of our Savior and the saints in the church itself. And that is how wax candles came into use — a use afterwards established by some of the ancient councils.

The heathens also had their aqua lustralis — that is to say, holy water. The Church of Rome imitates them in its holy days as well. They had their Bacchanalia, and we have our wakes, which answer to them. They had their Saturnalia, and we our carnivals and the Shrove Tuesday liberty of servants. They had their procession of Priapus; we our fetching in, setting up, and dancing around maypoles — and dancing is one kind of worship. They had their procession called the Ambarvalia; and we our procession around the fields in Rogation Week.

Nor do I think these are all the ceremonies left in the Church from the first conversion of the pagans. They are only all that I can presently call to mind. If a man were to look carefully at what the histories tell us about the religious rites of the Greeks and Romans, I have no doubt he would find many more of these old empty bottles of paganism — bottles which the doctors of the Roman Church, whether by negligence or by ambition, have filled up again with the new wine of Christianity, which will not fail, in time, to break them.
