Chapter 46: Darkness from Vain Philosophy and Fabulous Traditions
(Part 2 of 2)

Again: motion is change of place, and incorporeal substances are not capable of occupying any place. So the Scholastics are hard pressed to make it seem possible how a soul can leave here and go — without its body — to Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory; and how the ghosts of men (and, I may add, the ghosts of the clothes they appear in) can walk by night in churches, churchyards, and other burial places. I do not know what they can answer to this, unless they want to say that ghosts walk "definitively, not circumscriptively," or "spiritually, not temporally." Such magnificent distinctions are equally applicable to any difficulty whatsoever — which is exactly what is wrong with them.


The Nunc-Stans

Then there is the meaning of eternity. They refuse to let eternity be an endless succession of time, because then they could not explain how God's will and his preordaining of things to come would not have to exist before his foreknowledge of those same things — the way an efficient cause comes before its effect, or an agent before its action — nor could they defend many of their other bold opinions about the incomprehensible nature of God. So instead, they teach us that eternity is the standing still of the present time, a nunc-stans — "a standing now," as the Schools call it. Neither they nor anyone else understands this, any more than anyone would understand a hic-stans — "a standing here" — for an infinite greatness of place.


One Body in Many Places, and Many Bodies in One Place at Once

When we divide a body in our thoughts, we do it by counting its parts; and in counting the parts, we also count the parts of the place that body filled. We cannot make many parts without making just as many places for those parts. No mind on earth can conceive of more parts, or fewer parts, than there are places for them. Yet they would have us believe that, by the almighty power of God, one body can be in many places at one and the same time, and many bodies in one place at one and the same time — as if it were a tribute to divine power to say that what is, is not; or that what has been, has not been.

And these are only a small sample of the absurdities they are forced into by insisting on disputing philosophically about God, instead of admiring and adoring his divine and incomprehensible nature — whose attributes cannot tell us what he is, but ought to express our desire to honor him with the best names we can think of. Those who venture to reason about God's nature from these attributes of honor lose their understanding at the very first step, and then tumble from one blunder into another, without end and without number. They are like a man ignorant of the ceremonies of court who comes into the presence of someone far greater than he is used to addressing: he stumbles at the entrance; to keep from falling, he lets slip his cloak; to recover his cloak, he drops his hat; and with one disorder after another, he reveals his bewilderment and his bad breeding.


Absurdities in Natural Philosophy, Such as Gravity as the Cause of Heaviness

Then there is their physics — the knowledge of the subordinate, secondary causes of natural events. Here they offer no causes at all, only empty words.

If you want to know why some kinds of bodies sink naturally down toward the earth while others naturally rise away from it, the Schools will tell you, out of Aristotle, that the bodies that sink downward are heavy, and that this heaviness is what causes them to descend. But if you ask what they mean by heaviness, they will define it as an endeavor to go to the center of the earth. So the cause of things sinking downward is — an endeavor to be below. Which is as much as to say that bodies descend, or ascend, because they do.

Or they will tell you that the center of the earth is the place of rest and preservation for heavy things, and that is why heavy things endeavor to be there. As if stones and metals had desires; or could discern the place they want to be in, the way a man does; or loved rest, which man does not; or as if a pane of glass were less safe sitting in the window than falling into the street.


Quantity Poured into a Body Already Made

If we want to know why the same body seems greater at one time than another, without anything being added to it, they say: when it seems less, it is condensed; when greater, rarefied. And what are "condensed" and "rarefied"? Condensed is when there is less quantity in the very same matter than before; rarefied, when there is more. As if there could be matter without some determinate quantity — when quantity is nothing but the determination of matter, that is, of body: the measure by which we say one body is greater or less than another, by this much or that much. As if a body could be made without any quantity at all, and then more or less quantity poured into it afterward, depending on how dense the body is intended to be.


The Pouring In of Souls

For the cause of the soul of man, they say: Creatur infundendo, and Creando infunditur — that is, "It is created by being poured in," and "poured in by being created." That is the entire explanation.


The Ubiquity of Apparitions

For the cause of sense, they offer a ubiquity of "species" — that is, of the shows or apparitions of objects: which, when they are apparitions to the eye, is sight; when to the ear, hearing; to the palate, taste; to the nostril, smelling; and to the rest of the body, feeling.


The Will as the Cause of Willing

For the cause of the will to do any particular action — which is called volitio — they assign the faculty, that is, the general capacity that men have to will sometimes one thing and sometimes another, which is called voluntas. In other words, they make the power the cause of the act. That is like naming, as the cause of men's good or evil deeds, their ability to do them.


Ignorance Dressed Up as an Occult Cause

And on many occasions they put forward, as the cause of natural events, their own ignorance — disguised in other words. As when they say that fortune is the cause of contingent things; that is, of things whose cause they do not know. Or when they attribute many effects to "occult qualities" — that is, qualities unknown to them, and therefore (so they think) unknown to everyone else too. Or to "sympathy," "antipathy," "antiperistasis," "specifical qualities," and other such terms — which signify neither the agent that produces the effect, nor the operation by which it is produced.

If metaphysics and physics like this are not vain philosophy, then there never was any, and St. Paul need not have warned us to avoid it.


One Maker for the Things, Another for Their Incongruity

As for their moral and civil philosophy, it has the same absurdities, or greater. If a man commits an act of injustice — that is, an action contrary to the law — they say God is the prime cause of the law, and also the prime cause of that action and all other actions, but no cause at all of the injustice, which is the failure of the action to conform to the law. This is vain philosophy. One might as well say that one man makes both a straight line and a crooked one, and a different man makes their failure to match. Such is the philosophy of all men who settle on their conclusions before they know their premises; who pretend to comprehend what is incomprehensible; and who turn attributes of honor into attributes of nature — as this particular distinction was invented to prop up the doctrine of free will, that is, of a human will not subject to the will of God.


Private Appetite as the Measure of Public Good

Aristotle and other heathen philosophers define good and evil by human appetite — and fairly enough, so long as we consider each man governed by no law but his own. In the condition of men who have no law but their own appetites, there can be no general rule of good and evil actions. But in a commonwealth this measure is false. It is not the appetite of private men, but the law — which is the will and appetite of the state — that is the measure.

And yet this doctrine is still practiced. Men judge the goodness or wickedness of their own actions, and of other men's actions, and of the actions of the commonwealth itself, by their own passions; and no man calls anything good or evil except what is so in his own eyes, without any regard at all to the public laws — except only monks and friars, who are bound by vow to that simple obedience to their superior which every subject ought to consider himself bound to render to the civil sovereign by the law of nature. This private measure of good is a doctrine that is not merely vain, but pernicious to the public state.


And That Lawful Marriage Is Unchastity

It is also vain and false philosophy to say that the work of marriage is repugnant to chastity or continence, and so to make them moral vices — as they do who plead chastity and continence as the ground for denying marriage to the clergy. For they admit it is nothing more than a regulation of the Church, requiring that those in holy orders who continually attend the altar and administer the Eucharist practice continual abstinence from women, under the name of continual chastity, continence, and purity. By this they call the lawful use of wives a lack of chastity and continence, and so make marriage a sin — or at least a thing so impure and unclean that it renders a man unfit for the altar. But follow the logic. If the law was made because the use of wives is incontinence and contrary to chastity, then all marriage is vice. If it was made because marriage is too impure and unclean for a man consecrated to God, then other natural, necessary, daily functions that all men perform should disqualify men from the priesthood far more, since they are more unclean.

But the secret foundation of this prohibition of priests' marriage was probably not laid so carelessly as on such errors in moral philosophy. Nor was it laid on the preference of the single life over the married state — a preference that came from the wisdom of St. Paul, who saw how inconvenient it was for the preachers of the Gospel in those times of persecution, forced to flee from one country to another, to be weighed down with the care of a wife and children. No: it was laid on the design of the popes and priests of later times to make themselves "the clergy" — that is, the sole heirs of the kingdom of God in this world. And for that purpose it was necessary to take the use of marriage away from them; because our Savior says that at the coming of his kingdom the children of God shall "neither marry, nor be given in marriage, but shall be as the angels in heaven" — that is to say, spiritual. Having taken on themselves the name of spiritual men, to have allowed themselves wives (when there was no need) would have been an incongruity.


And That All Government Except Popular Government Is Tyranny

From Aristotle's civil philosophy they have learned to call every kind of commonwealth except the popular kind (which was the state of Athens in his day) by the name of tyranny. All kings they called tyrants; and the aristocracy of the Thirty Governors, set up in Athens by the Spartans who had conquered them, they called the Thirty Tyrants. Likewise they learned to call the condition of the people under a democracy liberty.

Now, a tyrant originally meant nothing more than a monarch, plain and simple. But after that kind of government was abolished in most parts of Greece, the name came to signify not only what it had meant before, but along with it the hatred the popular states bore toward monarchy — just as the name of king became odious in Rome after the kings were deposed. It is natural to all men to assume that some great fault is signified by any label that is hurled in spite at a great enemy. And when these same men become displeased with those who administer a democracy or an aristocracy, they do not have to hunt for disgraceful names to vent their anger: they readily call the one anarchy and the other oligarchy, the tyranny of a few.

And what is it that actually offends the people? Nothing but this: that they are governed not as each one of them would govern himself, but as the public representative — whether one man or an assembly of men — thinks fit. That is, by an arbitrary government. For this they give evil names to their superiors, never knowing (until perhaps a little while after a civil war) that without such arbitrary government, war must be perpetual; and that it is men and arms, not words and promises, that make the force and power of the laws.


That Not Men, but Law Governs

And therefore this is another error of Aristotle's politics: that in a well-ordered commonwealth, not men but the laws should govern. What man with his natural senses intact — even if he can neither read nor write — does not find himself governed by those he fears, those he believes can kill or hurt him if he disobeys? Who believes that the law itself can hurt him — that is, words and paper, without the hands and swords of men? This error belongs on the list of pernicious ones, for it leads men, whenever they dislike their governors, to attach themselves to those who call the governors tyrants, and to think it lawful to raise war against them. And yet this doctrine is many times nurtured from the pulpit, by the clergy.


Laws Over the Conscience

There is another error in their civil philosophy, and this one they never learned from Aristotle, nor Cicero, nor any other of the heathens: to extend the power of the law — which is the rule of actions only — to the very thoughts and consciences of men, by examination and inquisition into what they hold in their hearts, even when their speech and actions conform. By this practice, men are either punished for answering with the truth of their thoughts, or forced to answer with a lie for fear of punishment.

It is true that a civil magistrate, intending to employ a minister as a teacher, may ask him whether he is willing to preach such and such doctrines, and may deny him the job if he refuses. But to force a man to accuse himself of opinions, when his actions are not forbidden by law, is against the law of nature. And it is especially monstrous in those who teach that a man will be damned to eternal and extreme torments if he dies holding a false opinion about an article of the Christian faith. For who is there who, knowing there is such great danger in an error, and whom the natural care of himself compels, would not rather hazard his soul on his own judgment than on the judgment of some other man who has no stake whatsoever in his damnation?


Private Interpretation of Law

For a private man, without the authority of the commonwealth — that is, without permission from its representative — to interpret the law by his own spirit, is another error in politics; but this one is not drawn from Aristotle, nor from any other heathen philosopher. None of them denied that the power of making laws includes the power of explaining them when there is need. And are not the Scriptures, in every place where they are law, made law by the authority of the commonwealth — and consequently a part of the civil law?

It is an error of the same kind when anyone but the sovereign restrains in any man a power that the commonwealth has not restrained — as they do who claim the preaching of the Gospel as the exclusive property of one particular order of men, in places where the laws have left it free. If the state gives me leave to preach or teach — that is, if it does not forbid me — then no man can forbid me. Suppose I find myself among the idolaters of America. Shall I, a Christian, though not ordained, think it a sin to preach Jesus Christ until I have received orders from Rome? And once I have preached, shall I not answer their doubts, and expound the Scriptures to them — that is, shall I not teach? Some may say that in such a case, as also for administering the sacraments to them, the necessity is to be counted a sufficient commission — which is true. But this is also true: wherever a dispensation would be due because of necessity, no dispensation is needed at all when there is no law that forbids the thing. Therefore to deny these functions to those whom the civil sovereign has not denied them is to take away a lawful liberty — which is contrary to the doctrine of civil government.


The Language of the School-Divines

More examples of vain philosophy brought into religion by the doctors of School-divinity could be produced, but other men may observe them for themselves if they please. I shall only add this: the writings of the School-divines are, for the most part, nothing but meaningless trains of strange and barbarous words — or words used otherwise than in the ordinary use of the Latin tongue — such as would stump Cicero, and Varro, and all the grammarians of ancient Rome. If anyone wants this proved, let him (as I have said once before) try whether he can translate any School-divine into any of the modern tongues — French, English, or any other language rich in words. For whatever cannot be made intelligible in most of these languages is not intelligible in the Latin either. This meaninglessness of language I cannot quite mark down as false philosophy; but it has a quality of its own: it not only hides the truth, but makes men think they already have it — and so they stop searching.


Errors from Tradition

Lastly, consider the errors brought in from false or uncertain history. What is the whole legend of fictitious miracles in the lives of the saints; and all the histories of apparitions and ghosts alleged by the doctors of the Roman Church to shore up their doctrines of hell and purgatory, the power of exorcism, and other doctrines that have no warrant in either reason or Scripture; and all those traditions they call the unwritten word of God — what is all this, but old wives' fables?

It is true that scraps of such things can be found scattered in the writings of the ancient Fathers. But those Fathers were men, and men who might too easily believe false reports. Producing their opinions as testimony to the truth of what they believed carries no force with anyone who — following the counsel of St. John (1 John 4:1) — examines the spirits. On the contrary: in everything that concerns the power of the Roman Church (whose abuse they either did not suspect, or profited by), their testimony is discredited by their too-hasty belief in reports. The most sincere men, when they lack great knowledge of natural causes (as the Fathers did), are usually the most prone to such credulity; for it is natural that the best men are the least suspicious of fraudulent purposes. Pope Gregory and St. Bernard have something about apparitions of ghosts who said they were in purgatory; and so does our own Bede. But nowhere, I believe, except by report from others. And if they, or anyone else, should relate such stories as matters of their own firsthand knowledge, they would not thereby make such vain reports any more credible; they would only expose their own weakness, or their own fraud.


The Suppression of Reason

To the introduction of false philosophy we may add the suppression of true philosophy — by men who, having neither lawful authority nor sufficient study, are not competent judges of the truth. Our own voyages of navigation make it plain, and all men learned in the human sciences now acknowledge, that there are antipodes — people standing on the opposite side of the globe. And every day it appears more and more clearly that the years and the days are determined by the motions of the earth. Nevertheless, men who have done no more in their writings than suppose such doctrine, as an occasion to lay out the reasons for and against it, have been punished for it by ecclesiastical authority.

And what reason is there for that? Is it because such opinions are contrary to true religion? That cannot be, if they are true. Let the truth first be examined by competent judges, or refuted by those who claim to know the contrary. Is it because they are contrary to the established religion? Then let them be silenced by the laws of those to whom their teachers are subject — that is, by the civil laws; for disobedience may lawfully be punished even in those who teach true philosophy against the law. Is it because they tend toward disorder in government, by encouraging rebellion or sedition? Then let them be silenced, and their teachers punished, by the power of the one to whom the care of the public peace is committed — which is the civil authority. For whatever power churchmen take upon themselves in their own right, in any place where they are subject to the state — though they call it God's right — is nothing but usurpation.
