At last, having had divers letters from his masters, requiring him to
change[419] the monies in question and remit them to them, he
determined to depart, lest, an he did it not, his default should be
discovered there, and accordingly, going aboard a little ship, he
betook himself, not to Pisa, as he should have done, but to Naples.
There at that time was our gossip Pietro dello Canigiano, treasurer to
the Empress of Constantinople, a man of great understanding and subtle
wit and a fast friend of Salabaetto and his family; and to him, as to
a very discreet man, the disconsolate Florentine recounted that which
he had done and the mischance that had befallen him, requiring him of
aid and counsel, so he might contrive to gain his living there, and
avouching his intention nevermore to return to Florence. Canigiano was
concerned for this and said, 'Ill hast thou done and ill hast thou
carried thyself; thou hast disobeyed thy masters and hast, at one
cast, spent a great sum of money in wantonness; but, since it is done,
we must look for otherwhat.'[420] Accordingly, like a shrewd man as he
was, he speedily bethought himself what was to be done and told it to
Salabaetto, who was pleased with the device and set about putting it
in execution. He had some money and Canigiano having lent him other
some, he made up a number of bales well packed and corded; then,
buying a score of oil-casks and filling them, he embarked the whole
and returned to Palermo, where, having given the customhouse officers
the bill of lading and the value of the casks and let enter everything
to his account, he laid the whole up in the magazines, saying that he
meant not to touch them till such time as certain other merchandise
which he expected should be come.

[Footnote 419: _i.e._ procure bills of exchange for.]

[Footnote 420: _i.e._ we must see what is to be done.]

Biancofiore, getting wind of this and hearing that the merchandise he
had presently brought with him was worth good two thousand florins,
without reckoning what he looked for, which was valued at more than
three thousand, bethought herself that she had flown at too small game
and determined to restore him the five hundred florins, so she might
avail to have the greater part of the five thousand. Accordingly, she
sent for him and Salabaetto, grown cunning, went to her; whereupon,
making believe to know nothing of that which he had brought with him,
she received him with a great show of fondness and said to him,
'Harkye, if thou wast vexed with me, for that I repaid thee not thy
monies on the very day....' Salabaetto fell a-laughing and answered;
'In truth, madam, it did somewhat displease me, seeing I would have
torn out my very heart to give it you, an I thought to pleasure you
withal; but I will have you hear how I am vexed with you. Such and so
great is the love I bear you, that I have sold the most part of my
possessions and have presently brought hither merchandise to the value
of more than two thousand florins and expect from the westward as much
more as will be worth over three thousand, with which I mean to stock
me a warehouse in this city and take up my sojourn here, so I may
still be near you, meseeming I fare better of your love than ever
lover of his lady.'

'Look you, Salabaetto,' answered the lady, 'every commodity of thine
is mighty pleasing to me, as that of him whom I love more than my
life, and it pleaseth me amain that thou art returned hither with
intent to sojourn here, for that I hope yet to have good time galore
with thee; but I would fain excuse myself somedele to thee for that,
whenas thou wast about to depart, thou wouldst bytimes have come
hither and couldst not, and whiles thou camest and wast not so gladly
seen as thou wast used to be, more by token that I returned thee not
thy monies at the time promised. Thou must know that I was then in
very great concern and sore affliction, and whoso is in such case, how
much soever he may love another, cannot always show him so cheerful a
countenance or pay him such attention as he might wish. Moreover, thou
must know that it is mighty uneasy for a woman to avail to find a
thousand gold florins; all day long we are put off with lies and that
which is promised us is not performed unto us; wherefore needs must we
in our turn lie unto others. Hence cometh it, and not of my default,
that I gave thee not back thy monies. However, I had them a little
after thy departure, and had I known whither to send them, thou mayst
be assured that I would have remitted them to thee; but, not knowing
this, I kept them for thee.' Then, letting fetch a purse wherein were
the very monies he had brought her, she put it into his hand, saying,
'Count them if there be five hundred.' Never was Salabaetto so glad;
he counted them and finding them five hundred, put them up and said,
'Madam, I am assured that you say sooth; but you have done enough [to
convince me of your love for me,] and I tell you that, for this and
for the love I bear you, you could never require me, for any your
occasion, of whatsoever sum I might command, but I would oblige you
therewith; and whenas I am established here, you may put this to the
proof.'

Having again on this wise renewed his loves with her in words, he fell
again to using amically with her, whilst she made much of him and
showed him the greatest goodwill and honour in the world, feigning the
utmost love for him. But he, having a mind to return her cheat for
cheat, being one day sent for by her to sup and sleep with her, went
thither so chapfallen and so woebegone that it seemed as he would die.
Biancofiore, embracing him and kissing him, began to question him of
what ailed him to be thus melancholy, and he, after letting himself be
importuned a good while, answered, 'I am a ruined man, for that the
ship, wherein is the merchandise I expected, hath been taken by the
corsairs of Monaco and held to ransom in ten thousand gold florins,
whereof it falleth to me to pay a thousand, and I have not a farthing,
for that the five hundred pieces thou returnedst to me I sent
incontinent to Naples to lay out in cloths to be brought hither; and
should I go about at this present to sell the merchandise I have here,
I should scarce get a penny for two pennyworth, for that it is no time
for selling. Nor am I yet so well known that I could find any here to
help me to this, wherefore I know not what to do or to say; for, if I
send not the monies speedily, the merchandise will be carried off to
Monaco and I shall never again have aught thereof.'

The lady was mightily concerned at this, fearing to lose him
altogether, and considering how she should do, so he might not go to
Monaco, said, 'God knoweth I am sore concerned for the love of thee;
but what availeth it to afflict oneself thus? If I had the monies, God
knoweth I would lend them to thee incontinent; but I have them not.
True, there is a certain person here who obliged me the other day
with the five hundred florins that I lacked; but he will have heavy
usance for his monies; nay, he requireth no less than thirty in the
hundred, and if thou wilt borrow of him, needs must he be made secure
with a good pledge. For my part, I am ready to engage for thee all
these my goods and my person, to boot, for as much as he will lend
thereon; but how wilt thou assure him of the rest?' Salabaetto readily
apprehended the reason that moved her to do him this service and
divined that it was she herself who was to lend him the money;
wherewith he was well pleased and thanking her, answered that he would
not be put off for exorbitant usance, need constraining him. Moreover,
he said that he would give assurance of the merchandise he had in the
customhouse, letting inscribe it to him who should lend him the money;
but that needs must be kept the key of the magazines, as well that he
might be able to show his wares, an it were required of him, as that
nothing might be touched or changed or tampered withal.

The lady answered that it was well said and that this was good enough
assurance; wherefore, as soon as the day was come, she sent for a
broker, in whom she trusted greatly, and taking order with him of the
matter, gave him a thousand gold florins, which he lent to Salabaetto,
letting inscribe in his own name at the customhouse that which the
latter had there; then, having made their writings and counter-writings
together and being come to an accord,[421] they occupied themselves
with their other affairs. Salabaetto, as soonest he might, embarked,
with the fifteen hundred gold florins, on board a little ship and
returned to Pietro dello Canigiano at Naples, whence he remitted to
his masters, who had despatched him with the stuffs, a good and entire
account thereof. Then, having repaid Pietro and every other to whom he
owed aught, he made merry several days with Canigiano over the cheat
he had put upon the Sicilian trickstress; after which, resolved to be
no more a merchant, he betook himself to Ferrara.

[Footnote 421: _i.e._ having executed and exchanged the necessary
legal documents for the proper carrying out of the transaction and
completed the matter to their mutual satisfaction.]

Meanwhile, Biancofiore, finding that Salabaetto had left Palermo,
began to marvel and wax misdoubtful and after having awaited him good
two months, seeing that he came not, she caused the broker force open
the magazines. Trying first the casks, which she believed to be filled
with oil, she found them full of seawater, save that there was in each
maybe a runlet of oil at the top near the bunghole. Then, undoing the
bales, she found them all full of tow, with the exception of two,
which were stuffs; and in brief, with all that was there, there was
not more than two hundred florins' worth. Wherefore Biancofiore,
confessing herself outwitted, long lamented the five hundred florins
repaid and yet more the thousand lent, saying often, 'Who with a
Tuscan hath to do, Must nor be blind nor see askew.' On this wise,
having gotten nothing for her pains but loss and scorn, she found, to
her cost, that some folk know as much as others."

       *       *       *       *       *

No sooner had Dioneo made an end of his story than Lauretta, knowing
the term to be come beyond which she was not to reign and having
commended Canigiano's counsel (which was approved good by its effect)
and Salabaetto's shrewdness (which was no less commendable) in
carrying it into execution, lifted the laurel from her own head and
set it on that of Emilia, saying, with womanly grace, "Madam, I know
not how pleasant a queen we shall have of you; but, at the least, we
shall have a fair one. Look, then, that your actions be conformable to
your beauties." So saying, she returned to her seat, whilst Emilia, a
thought abashed, not so much at being made queen as to see herself
publicly commended of that which women use most to covet, waxed such
in face as are the new-blown roses in the dawning. However, after she
had kept her eyes awhile lowered, till the redness had given place,
she took order with the seneschal of that which concerned the general
entertainment and presently said, "Delightsome ladies, it is common,
after oxen have toiled some part of the day, confined under the yoke,
to see them loosed and eased thereof and freely suffered to go
a-pasturing, where most it liketh them, about the woods; and it is
manifest also that leafy gardens, embowered with various plants, are
not less, but much more fair than groves wherein one seeth only oaks.
Wherefore, seeing how many days we have discoursed, under the
restraint of a fixed law, I opine that, as well unto us as to those
whom need constraineth to labour for their daily bread, it is not only
useful, but necessary, to play the truant awhile and wandering thus
afield, to regain strength to enter anew under the yoke. Wherefore,
for that which is to be related to-morrow, ensuing your delectable
usance of discourse, I purpose not to restrict you to any special
subject, but will have each discourse according as it pleaseth him,
holding it for certain that the variety of the things which will be
said will afford us no less entertainment than to have discoursed of
one alone; and having done thus, whoso shall come after me in the
sovranty may, as stronger than I, avail with greater assurance to
restrict us within the limits of the wonted laws." So saying, she set
every one at liberty till supper-time.

All commended the queen of that which she had said, holding it sagely
spoken, and rising to their feet, addressed themselves, this to one
kind of diversion and that to another, the ladies to weaving garlands
and to gambolling and the young men to gaming and singing. On this
wise they passed the time until the supper-hour, which being come,
they supped with mirth and good cheer about the fair fountain and
after diverted themselves with singing and dancing according to the
wonted usance. At last, the queen, to ensue the fashion of her
predecessors, commanded Pamfilo to sing a song, notwithstanding those
which sundry of the company had already sung of their freewill; and he
readily began thus:

         Such is thy pleasure, Love
     And such the allegresse I feel thereby
     That happy, burning in thy fire, am I.

     The abounding gladness in my heart that glows,
       For the high joy and dear
         Whereto thou hast me led,
     Unable to contain there, overflows
       And in my face's cheer
         Displays my happihead;
         For being enamouréd
     In such a worship-worthy place and high
     Makes eath to me the burning I aby.

     I cannot with my finger what I feel
       Limn, Love, nor do I know
         My bliss in song to vent;
     Nay, though I knew it, needs must I conceal,
       For, once divulged, I trow
         'Twould turn to dreariment.
         Yet am I so content,
     All speech were halt and feeble, did I try
     The least thereof with words to signify.

     Who might conceive it that these arms of mine
       Should anywise attain
         Whereas I've held them aye,
     Or that my face should reach so fair a shrine
       As that, of favour fain
         And grace, I've won to? Nay,
         Such fortune ne'er a day
     Believed me were; whence all afire am I,
     Hiding the source of my liesse thereby.

This was the end of Pamfilo's song, whereto albeit it had been
completely responded of all, there was none but noted the words
thereof with more attent solicitude than pertained unto him, studying
to divine that which, as he sang, it behoved him to keep hidden from
them; and although sundry went imagining various things, nevertheless
none happened upon the truth of the case.[422] But the queen, seeing
that the song was ended and that both young ladies and men would
gladly rest themselves, commanded that all should betake themselves to
bed.

[Footnote 422: The song sung by Pamfilo (under which name, as I have
before pointed out, the author appears to represent himself)
apparently alludes to Boccaccio's amours with the Princess Maria of
Naples (Fiammetta), by whom his passion was returned in kind.]


HERE ENDETH THE EIGHTH DAY
OF THE DECAMERON




