The Torres Strait

During the night of December 27th to 28th, the Nautilus left the waters of Vanikoro behind at a headlong speed. Her course was southwest, and in three days she covered the seven hundred and fifty leagues that separate the La Pérouse group from the southeastern point of Papua.

Early on the morning of January 1, 1863, Conseil joined me on the platform.

"Master," said the good fellow, "will Master permit me to wish him a happy New Year?"

"Of course, Conseil — exactly as if I were back in Paris, in my study at the Botanical Gardens. I accept your good wishes and I thank you for them. Only, I'd like to ask what you mean by 'a happy New Year,' given the circumstances we find ourselves in. Do you mean the year that will bring an end to our imprisonment, or the year that will see this strange voyage go on?"

"Well now," Conseil answered, "I hardly know what to tell Master. It's certain we're seeing curious things, and that for two months now we haven't had a moment to be bored. The latest wonder is always the most astonishing, and if this keeps up, I honestly don't know how it will all end. It's my opinion we'll never come across an opportunity like this again."

"Never, Conseil."

"Besides, Captain Nemo, who certainly lives up to his Latin name, is no more of a bother than if he didn't exist at all."

"Just as you say, Conseil."

"So I think, if Master doesn't mind my saying so, that a happy year would be one that let us see everything —"

"See everything, Conseil? That might take a while. But what does Ned Land think?"

"Ned Land thinks exactly the opposite of me," Conseil replied. "He's a practical mind and a demanding stomach. Watching fish, and forever eating them, isn't enough for him. The lack of wine, of bread, of meat hardly suits a worthy Saxon who's used to his beefsteaks, and whom a bit of brandy or gin, taken in moderation, doesn't frighten in the least!"

"For my part, Conseil, that isn't what troubles me, and I get along very well on the ship's fare."

"So do I," Conseil answered. "Which is why I think as much about staying as Master Land does about running off. So if the year that's beginning isn't a good one for me, it will be for him, and the other way around. That way there'll always be somebody satisfied. And so, to conclude, I wish Master whatever will please Master."

"Thank you, Conseil. Only I'll ask you to put off the question of New Year's gifts to a later date, and for now to accept a good firm handshake in their place. It's all I have on me."

"Master has never been so generous," Conseil replied.

And with that the good fellow went off.

By January 2 we had logged eleven thousand three hundred and forty miles — that is, five thousand two hundred and fifty leagues — since our starting point in the seas of Japan. Ahead of the Nautilus's ram stretched the dangerous waters of the Coral Sea, off the northeastern coast of Australia. Our boat ran along, a few miles off, that formidable barrier on which Cook's ships nearly came to grief on June 10, 1770. The vessel Cook was aboard struck a rock, and if she didn't sink it was thanks to this piece of luck: the chunk of coral, torn loose by the impact, stayed lodged in the gaping hull.

I would dearly have loved to visit that reef, three hundred and sixty leagues long, against which the always-heavy sea broke with a stupendous violence, like rolling thunder. But just then the Nautilus's diving planes were carrying us down to a great depth, and I could see nothing of those high coral walls. I had to content myself with the various specimens of fish our nets brought up. Among others I noticed albacore, a kind of mackerel as big as tuna, with bluish flanks striped by transverse bands that vanish when the animal dies. These fish traveled with us in shoals and furnished our table with extremely delicate flesh. We also caught a great number of green sea breams, half a decimeter long, tasting like gilthead, and flying pyrapedes, true submarine swallows that on dark nights streak the air and the water by turns with their phosphorescent gleams. Among the mollusks and zoophytes, I found in the meshes of the trawl various kinds of alcyonarians, sea urchins, hammer shells, spur shells, sundial shells, cerith shells, and sea butterflies. The flora was represented by beautiful floating seaweeds, tangleweed and giant kelp, steeped in the mucilage that oozed through their pores, and among them I gathered a magnificent Nemastoma Geliniaroide, which was filed away among the natural curiosities of the ship's museum.

Two days after crossing the Coral Sea, on January 4, we sighted the coast of Papua. On this occasion Captain Nemo informed me that he intended to reach the Indian Ocean by way of the Torres Strait. That was all he said. Ned was glad to see that this route brought him closer to European seas.

The Torres Strait is reckoned no less dangerous for the reefs that bristle across it than for the savage inhabitants who frequent its shores. It separates the great island of Papua — also called New Guinea — from New Holland.

Papua is four hundred leagues long by a hundred and thirty leagues wide, with an area of forty thousand geographical leagues. It lies in latitude between 0°19′ and 10°2′ south, and in longitude between 128°23′ and 146°15′. At noon, while the first officer was taking the sun's altitude, I caught sight of the summits of the Arfak Mountains, rising in terraces and crowned with sharp peaks.

This land, discovered in 1511 by the Portuguese Francisco Serrano, was visited in turn by Don José de Menesès in 1526, by Grijalva in 1527, by the Spanish general Alvar de Saavedra in 1528, by Juigo Ortez in 1545, by the Dutchman Shouten in 1616, by Nicolas Sruick in 1753, by Tasman, Dampier, Fumel, Carteret, Edwards, Bougainville, Cook, Forrest, and Mac Cluer, by d'Entrecasteaux in 1792, by Duperrey in 1823, and by Dumont d'Urville in 1827. "It is the heartland of the black peoples who occupy all of Malaysia," Monsieur de Rienzi has said — and I little suspected that the hazards of this passage were about to bring me face to face with the formidable Andamenese.

So the Nautilus presented herself at the mouth of the most dangerous strait on the globe — the one the boldest navigators scarcely dare to run — the strait that Luis Vaez de Torres braved coming back from the southern seas into Melanesia, and in which, in 1840, the stranded corvettes of Dumont d'Urville came within a hair of being lost with all hands. The Nautilus herself, superior to every peril of the sea, was nonetheless about to make the acquaintance of its coral reefs.

The Torres Strait is about thirty-four leagues wide, but it is choked with a countless swarm of islands, islets, breakers, and rocks that make navigating it all but impossible. Accordingly, Captain Nemo took every precaution the crossing required. The Nautilus, floating just at the surface, advanced at a moderate pace. Her propeller, like the tail of some great sea creature, beat the waves slowly.

Taking advantage of this, my two companions and I settled ourselves on the platform, which was as deserted as ever. In front of us rose the pilothouse, and unless I was much mistaken, Captain Nemo himself must be in there, steering his own Nautilus.

Before me I had the excellent charts of the Torres Strait, surveyed and drawn up by the hydrographic engineer Vincendon Dumoulin and the ensign Coupvent-Desbois — now an admiral — who were both on Dumont d'Urville's staff during his last voyage of circumnavigation. These, along with Captain King's, are the best charts for untangling the snarl of this narrow passage, and I studied them with the most scrupulous attention.

All around the Nautilus the sea boiled furiously. The current, running from southeast to northwest at a speed of two and a half miles an hour, broke over the coral heads that jutted up here and there.

"That's an ugly sea!" Ned Land said to me.

"Detestable, indeed," I answered, "and not at all the thing for a vessel like the Nautilus."

"That damned captain," the Canadian went on, "had better be very sure of his course, because I can see clumps of coral out there that would smash his hull into a thousand pieces if it so much as grazed them!"

The situation was perilous, no question — yet the Nautilus seemed to glide as if by magic through those raging reefs. She didn't follow exactly the track of the Astrolabe and the Zélée that had proved fatal to Dumont d'Urville. She bore farther north, skirted Murray Island, and came back to the southwest, toward the Cumberland passage. I thought she was going to head straight into it when, standing off again to the northwest, she made her way through a great many little-known islands and islets, toward Tound Island and the Bad Channel.

I was already wondering whether Captain Nemo, reckless to the point of madness, meant to drive his ship into that passage where Dumont d'Urville's two corvettes had run aground — when, altering course a second time and cutting straight west, he steered for Gueboroar Island.

It was then three in the afternoon. The swell broke high, the tide being nearly full. The Nautilus drew near this island, which I can still picture with its remarkable fringe of pandanus. We ranged along it at less than two miles.

Suddenly a shock threw me off my feet. The Nautilus had just struck a reef, and she lay motionless, listing slightly to port.

When I got up, I saw Captain Nemo and his first officer on the platform. They were examining the ship's position, exchanging a few words in their incomprehensible tongue.

Here is how things stood. Two miles off to starboard lay Gueboroar Island, its coastline curving from north to west like an enormous arm. To the south and east a few coral heads were already showing, laid bare by the ebb. We had run hard aground at full tide, and in one of those seas where the tides are feeble — an awkward circumstance for refloating the Nautilus. Still, the ship had suffered no damage at all, so solidly was her hull put together. But though she could neither sink nor split open, she ran a very real risk of being pinned forever on those reefs — and if so, that would be the end of Captain Nemo's underwater vessel.

I was turning all this over in my mind when the captain, cool and calm, master of himself as always, showing neither agitation nor annoyance, came up to me.

"An accident?" I asked.

"No — an incident," he answered.

"An incident," I shot back, "that may well force you to become once more a dweller on the very lands you flee!"

Captain Nemo looked at me strangely and made a negative gesture. It told me clearly enough that nothing would ever compel him to set foot on a continent again. Then he said:

"Besides, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus is not lost. She will carry you yet through the wonders of the ocean. Our voyage is only just beginning, and I have no wish to deprive myself so soon of the honor of your company."

"All the same, Captain Nemo," I resumed, letting the ironic turn of the phrase pass, "the Nautilus has run aground at high water. Now, the tides aren't strong in the Pacific, and if you can't lighten the Nautilus — which strikes me as impossible — I don't see how she can be refloated."

"The tides aren't strong in the Pacific — you're right there, Professor," Captain Nemo replied. "But in the Torres Strait you still get a difference of a meter and a half between high and low water. Today is January 4, and in five days the moon will be full. Now, I'll be very much surprised if that obliging satellite doesn't raise these masses of water high enough, and do me a service I care to owe to no one but it alone."

With that, Captain Nemo, followed by his first officer, went back down inside the Nautilus. As for the ship, she no longer stirred, lying as motionless as if the coral polyps had already walled her in with their indestructible cement.

"Well, Professor?" said Ned Land, coming over to me after the captain had gone.

"Well, friend Ned, we'll wait quietly for the tide of the 9th, since it seems the moon will be kind enough to set us afloat again."

"Just like that?"

"Just like that."

"And this captain isn't going to drop anchors off the shoals, put the engine on the chains, and do everything he can to haul her off?"

"Since the tide will be enough!" Conseil put in simply.

The Canadian looked at Conseil, then shrugged his shoulders. It was the sailor in him talking.

"Professor," he said, "you can take my word for it when I tell you this hunk of iron will never sail again, on or under the sea. It's fit for nothing but selling by the pound. So I think the time has come to give Captain Nemo the slip."

"Friend Ned," I answered, "I don't despair of this gallant Nautilus the way you do, and in four days we'll know just where we stand on the Pacific tides. Besides, the advice to make a run for it might be timely if we were within sight of the coasts of England or Provence — but off Papua it's another matter, and there'll always be time enough to come to that extremity if the Nautilus fails to right herself, which I would regard as a grave turn of events."

"But couldn't we at least get a taste of that ground over there?" Ned Land went on. "There's an island. On the island, there are trees. Under the trees, land animals — the kind that carry cutlets and roast beef around on them, and that I'd gladly sink a few teeth into."

"Here friend Ned is right," said Conseil, "and I side with him. Couldn't Master persuade his friend Captain Nemo to set us ashore, if only so that we don't lose the habit of treading the solid parts of our planet underfoot?"

"I can ask him," I answered, "but he'll refuse."

"Let Master take the chance," said Conseil, "and we'll find out just how obliging the captain is."

To my great surprise, Captain Nemo granted the permission I asked of him, and he did it very graciously and readily, without even requiring me to promise to come back aboard. But a flight across the wilds of New Guinea would have been extremely dangerous, and I would not have advised Ned Land to attempt it. Better to be a prisoner aboard the Nautilus than to fall into the hands of the natives of Papua.

The dinghy was placed at our disposal for the next morning. I didn't try to find out whether Captain Nemo would come with us. I even supposed that no member of the crew would be assigned to us, and that Ned Land alone would be charged with handling the boat. In any case, the shore was two miles off at most, and it was mere child's play for the Canadian to steer that light craft between the lines of reefs so fatal to great ships.

The next day, January 5, the dinghy was lifted out of its housing, its decking removed, and launched into the sea from the top of the platform. Two men were enough for the operation. The oars were already in the boat, and we had only to take our places.

At eight o'clock, armed with rifles and axes, we pushed off from the Nautilus. The sea was fairly calm. A light breeze blew off the land. Conseil and I took the oars and pulled vigorously, while Ned steered through the narrow gaps the breakers left between them. The boat handled well and skimmed along swiftly.

Ned Land couldn't contain his joy. He was a prisoner escaped from his prison, and he gave hardly a thought to the fact that he would have to go back into it.

"Meat!" he kept saying. "So we're going to eat meat — and what meat! Real game! No bread, though, more's the pity! I'm not saying fish isn't a fine thing, but you mustn't overdo it, and a chunk of fresh venison, grilled over glowing coals, will be a pleasant change from our usual fare."

"Glutton!" Conseil retorted. "He's making my mouth water."

"It remains to be seen," I said, "whether these forests are full of game, and whether the game isn't of such a size that it might hunt the hunter instead."

"Fine, Professor Aronnax!" answered the Canadian, whose teeth seemed as sharp as the edge of an axe. "But I'll eat tiger — sirloin of tiger — if there's no other four-footed animal on this island."

"Friend Ned is a worry," said Conseil.

"Whatever it is," Ned Land went on, "any animal on four legs without feathers, or on two legs with them, will get a salute from my first shot."

"Good!" I said. "There go Master Land's rash ways, starting up again!"

"Don't be afraid, Professor Aronnax," the Canadian replied, "and pull hard! I don't ask twenty-five minutes to serve you up a dish of my own making."

At half past eight, the Nautilus's dinghy ran gently aground on a beach of sand, having safely cleared the coral ring that encircled the island of Gueboroar.
