Front Matter

Introduction

Two things are expected of anyone who undertakes a course of Christmas lectures at the Royal Institution. First, the talks must be illustrated with experiments, to the greatest extent possible. Second, however simple the language in which the science is described, every talk must strike at least some note of modernity — must catch some wave of recent progress.

So in taking on a course of lectures in optics, I ventured to work along certain lines that may seem strange to the sober student whose knowledge of optics has been built on the narrower foundation of the standard textbook. The ideas developed in the first lecture grew out of a conviction of mine: that the time-honoured way of teaching geometrical optics — a method in which the wave-nature of light is steadily ignored — is fundamentally wrong. For the sake of students and teachers of optics I have added an appendix to Lecture One, in which the newer ideas are worked out further. Other appendices have been added to the later lectures, with the aim of filling in some of the gaps left by the way the subjects had to be treated in the lecture theatre.

Now that the electromagnetic nature of all light-waves has been fully demonstrated, no apology is needed for bringing into the fifth lecture a few of the experimental points on which that demonstration rests. That these fundamental points can be given without any great complication of thought or of language is itself the strongest argument for making that demonstration an essential feature at an early stage in the teaching of the science.

Many of the ideas that have to be grasped — the polarisation of light, for example — are popularly supposed to be extremely difficult. But the difficulty lies not so much in the ideas themselves as in the language in which they are usually set out. In an experience stretching over a good many years, I have found that the main points of polarisation are quite easily grasped by people of ordinary intelligence — even by children — provided they are presented in a modern way, free of pedantic terms, and illustrated with the right models. A similar remark would apply just as well to other parts of optics, such as interference and diffraction, which are barely touched on in these lectures.

Many branches are necessarily left out altogether from so brief a course: among them the whole subject of spectrum analysis, the construction and theory of optical instruments, and the greater part of the subject of colour vision. No attempt was made to include these topics, and no apology is needed for leaving them out. Whatever value these talks may have must depend on the things they include, not on the things they do not.

London, January 1897.
