Lecture One: Lights and Shadows

(Part 2 of 5)

[Figure 4: How to find where a wave-front will be a moment later. From points a, b, c, d on the front FF, arcs of equal radius are struck with a pair of compasses; where all the little arcs overlap, their envelope GG is the new wave-front.]

Perhaps you will say that if this is true, then when light-waves meet an obstacle some light ought to spread round into the shadow at the edges. And so it does, as I have already said. But because the light-waves are so exceedingly small compared with the size of ordinary objects, the spreading is so slight that it goes unnoticed. In fact, except when we are dealing with the shadows of very thin objects such as hairs and pins, or with mere edges, light behaves as though it simply travelled in straight lines.

Footnote: This is all that is meant by the old statement that light travels in "rays." There really are no rays. The harder one tries to isolate a "ray" by itself — by letting light pass first through a narrow slit or pinhole, and then through a second slit or pinhole — the more impossible one finds it, for then the tendency to spread shows itself more than ever. If the word "ray" is to be kept at all in the science of optics, it must be understood to mean nothing more than the geometrical line along which a piece of the wave-front marches.

Our next business is to show how ripples can be made to diverge and converge. If we take a point as our source of ripples, they will of themselves spread — diverge — from that point in all directions in circles, each portion of each wave-front bulging outwards. If we take a flat surface as the source, so as to get plane waves, they march forward as plane waves without either diverging or converging. If, however, we can somehow arrange our experiment so as to get ripples with a hollow front instead of a bulging one, then the ripples will converge as they march. This is shown in Fig. 5. Suppose FF is a hollow wave-front marching forward towards the right. Think of the bit of wave-front at a. After a short interval of time it would spread (were it alone) to a'. Likewise b would spread to b', and so on, so that when all these separate wavelets overlap, the effect is the same as though the wave-front FF had marched to GG, closing in as it goes. After another equally short interval it will have closed in to HH. It is clear that, on the principle that waves always march at right angles to their own front, they must all march inwards and meet at a new centre somewhere near Q. Suppose you ranged a row of soldiers along a curve like FF and told each of them to march straight forward between his comrades. If each marched at right angles to the curved line, they would all be marching towards a common centre, and would close in against one another!

[Figure 5: A hollow wave-front FF marching to the right. Each little arc struck from a point on the front closes the curve in tighter — GG, then HH — until all the wave-fronts are converging on the focus at Q.]

Now it is obviously easy to make waves of light diverge: they do it of themselves if the source of light is a point. We shall see later on how to make them converge. Meanwhile we will use what we know about divergence to help us measure the relative brightness of two lights.

Here is a little electric glow-lamp. The shopkeeper who sold it to me says that when it is supplied with electric current at the proper pressure, it will give as much light as sixteen candles. I switch on the current and it shines. I light a standard candle, so that you can compare the brightness for yourselves. Do you think the glow-lamp really is sixteen times as bright as the candle? Your eye is a very unreliable judge of relative brightness. We must therefore find some way of balancing the brighter and the less bright light against one another. The instrument for doing this is called a photometer. But before we can understand the photometer we must first think about the degree of illumination a light produces when it falls on a white surface. Here I have a piece of white cardboard one inch square. If I hold it close to my candle it catches a great deal of the light and is brightly lit. If I hold it farther away it is less brightly lit. We can therefore alter the illumination of a surface by altering its distance. But we cannot use this for calculations about brightness until we know the rule connecting the distance with the degree of illumination — and that rule depends on the way light spreads when it starts from a point.

Footnote: Electric pressure, or "voltage," is measured in terms of the unit of electric pressure called the volt. The usual electric pressure in the conductors that branch from the supply mains into a house is 100 volts.

Footnote: The standard candle prescribed by the regulations of the Board of Trade as the legal standard of light in Great Britain is a sperm candle burning 120 grains of spermaceti per hour.

Footnote: This unreliability of the eye in forming a numerically correct judgment depends partly on the physiological fact that the sensation is never numerically proportional to the stimulus. Though the stimulus be 16 times as great, the sensation perceived by the brain is not 16 times as great. The rule (Fechner's law) is that the sensation is proportional to the natural logarithm of the stimulus. The natural logarithm of 16 is 2.77; that is to say, a light that is 16 times as bright as 1 candle only produces a sensation 2.77 times as great. A single light of 100 candle brilliancy only produces a sensation 4.6 times as great as that of 1 candle. Besides this, the iris of the eye automatically reduces the size of the pupil when a brighter light shines in, making the eye less sensitive.

[Figure 6: Why light falls off as the square of the distance. The cone of light that just covers one square inch at one distance covers four square inches at twice that distance, and nine at three times — so each square inch gets a quarter, then a ninth, as much light.]

Suppose we think about the whole quantity of light spreading in all directions from a point. Of all that light, what fraction will be caught by this square inch of cardboard when I hold it a foot away? Not very much. But now follow that same quantity of light as it goes on spreading. Fig. 6 shows you that by the time the light has travelled out to twice the distance from the centre, it will have spread — by the law of straight-line travel just discussed — so that the diverging beam is now twice as broad each way. It will now cover a cardboard square 2 inches each way, which has 4 square inches of surface. So if the same amount of light that used to fall on 1 square inch is now spread over 4 square inches, it follows that each of those 4 square inches is only lit a quarter as brightly as before. If you had a lump of butter to spread on a piece of bread, and were then told you must spread that same lump over a piece of bread with four times the surface, you know the layer of butter would be only a quarter as thick! And again, if I let the light spread still farther, by the time it has gone three times as far it will have spread over nine times the surface, and the degree of illumination on any one square inch at that treble distance will be only one-ninth as great as at first. This is the so-called law of inverse squares, and it is simply the geometrical consequence of the light spreading from a point.

Now we are ready to deal with the balancing of two lights. By letting two lights shine on a piece of cardboard — or rather on two neighbouring pieces — and then altering the distance of one of them until both pieces are equally lit, we can get a balance of effects, and then calculate from the squares of the distances how bright the lights were. The eye, which is a very bad judge of unequal brightnesses, is a really quite fair judge of the equality of illumination of two neighbouring patches, and with practice can be trained to be an accurate one. But we must arrange things so that only one light shines on each patch. One simple way is to let each light cast the shadow of a stick on a white surface, so that each light shines into the shadow cast by the other. If you alter the distances until the shadows are equally dark, then you know the illumination of each is equal. A better way still is to arrange matters so that the two lit patches are actually superposed on one another. Here is a very simple and effective way of doing it. Two pieces of white cardboard, A and B (Fig. 7), forming a V-shape, are set on a stand between the two lights to be compared. One light shines on the face of A, the other on the face of B. A number of slots or holes are cut in A, so that the lit surface of B is seen through the slots. If A is less brightly lit than B, the slots will look dark between the brighter bars of the front card; if A is more brightly lit than B, the slots will look bright between dull bars. By moving one of the lights nearer or farther away, the two illuminations can be altered until balance is reached, and then the relative values are worked out from the squares of the distances. With this photometer let us now test our electric lamp and see whether it really is worth sixteen candles. I put it on the photometer bench and move it backward and forward till the lights balance. You see it balances when it is rather less than four times as far away as the standard candle. It is therefore not quite sixteen candle-power.

[Figure 7: The slotted-card photometer. Two white cards A and B stand in a V between the two lights being compared; the slots cut in A let the reader see B's surface through A's, and the bars vanish when the two illuminations balance.]

Footnote: The fact that a candle flame is not a mere point introduces a measurable error into photometry. It cannot be too clearly understood that the law of inverse squares is never strictly applicable except to effects spreading from points. The same criticism applies to the use — or misuse — of the law of inverse squares in magnetism and electricity.

Another very simple and accurate photometer is made by taking two small slabs of paraffin wax, of the kind candles are made from, and putting them back to back with a sheet of tin-foil or black paper between them. They are then placed, as in Fig. 8, on a graduated bench between the lights whose brightness is to be compared, and set so that one light shines on one slab and the other light on the other, as in Fig. 9. If the illuminations on the two sides balance, the edges of the slabs will look equally bright. But if one face is more strongly lit than the other, then the slab that is more brightly lit will look brighter at its edge. This is because of the translucent, or semi-opaque, property of paraffin wax, which spreads the light sideways through it. With this photometer it is very easy to balance the brightness of two lights, even when their tint is not quite the same.

In Germany they use as their standard, instead of a sperm candle, the little Hefner lamp filled with a chemical liquid called amyl acetate. But it has — as you can see — the serious disadvantage of giving a light of a redder tint than most of our other lights. To be quite suitable, the lamp we choose as our standard of light ought to be not only one that gives out a fixed quantity of light, but one that is beyond reproach in the quality of its whiteness: it should be a standard of white light. Perhaps now that acetylene gas is so easily made, it may serve as a standard; for so far, none of the proposed electric standards seems quite satisfactory.

[Figure 9: The paraffin-slab photometer in use, one light falling on each wax slab. When the two slabs are equally lit, the bright line where their edges meet disappears.]

Footnote: This form of photometer is a modification, by Mr. A. P. Trotter, M.A., of Cape Town, of the relief photometer invented in 1883 by the author and Mr. C. C. Starling. To prevent error from internal reflection, the back of card A should be blackened. By setting the support at a fixed distance from the standard light on the left, and altering the distance of the light whose brightness is to be measured until balance is reached, the instrument can be made direct-reading: the scale to the right of the support is then graduated to read not the actual distances but their squares. For instance, if the distance of the middle slot from the standard light is 1 metre, then on the other side the graduation must read 1 at 1 metre, 4 at 2 metres, 9 at 3 metres, and so on. Accuracy of reading is helped by the fact that when balance has been found for the middle slot of A, the slots to the left of the middle look darker and those to the right brighter than the central one.

Footnote: This paraffin-slab photometer is the invention of Dr. Joly, F.R.S., of Dublin. It is an exceedingly satisfactory instrument.

[Figure 11: The prism combination of the precision photometer seen alone — the light from one mirror passing straight through the cemented centre of the join, the light from the other turned into the eye by total internal reflection at the uncemented parts.]

[Figure 10: The Brodhun and Lummer precision photometer. The two lights fall on opposite faces of the small white screen W; mirrors M1 and M2 carry the two views into a pair of cemented glass prisms A and B, which deliver them to the eye as one patch inside another.]

Footnote: Either of these two forms of instrument is preferable to the old-fashioned "grease-spot" photometer of Bunsen. But both are surpassed in accuracy by the precision photometer of Brodhun and Lummer, which can, however, only be described here very briefly. It gives determinations that can be relied on to within one-half of one per cent. The two lights to be compared are made to shine on the two opposite faces of a small opaque white screen, W (Fig. 10). The eye views these two faces, reflected in two small mirrors M1 and M2, through a special prism combination consisting, as shown, of two right-angled glass prisms A and B, cemented together with balsam over only a small part of their sloping faces. The light from M1 can pass straight through this central portion to the eye, while the uncemented portions of B's sloping face work by total internal reflection and bring the light from M2 to the eye. The eye therefore effectively sees a patch of one surface of W surrounded by a patch of the other surface of W, and so can judge very accurately whether the two are equally lit or not.

Let us pass on now to the reflection of light by mirrors. A piece of polished metal such as
