Lecture One: Lights and Shadows

(Part 3 of 5)

silver, or silvered glass, will reflect the waves of light — and so, to a lesser degree, will any other material, provided only that its surface is smooth enough. By "smooth enough" I mean that the ridges or scratches or roughnesses of its surface are decidedly smaller than the wave-length of the light. If the scratches or ridges on a surface are less than a quarter of a wave-length across — in the case of light, therefore, less than about 1/200000 inch — they do not break up the waves at all, and such surfaces are, for optical purposes, quite "smooth." Indeed, that is the usual way of polishing things. You scratch them all over with some sort of very fine powder that makes scratches finer than 1/200000 of an inch.

Now the rebound of waves when they beat against a polished surface — whether that surface is flat or curved — can be studied by applying the same principles of wave-motion we have already learned. In Fig. 11 we have light starting from a point at P and spreading out. If a smooth obstacle SS is placed in the path of these waves they will meet it, but some parts of the wave-front will meet it before other parts do. Think of the bit of the wave-front that meets the mirror at a. If it had not been stopped, after a brief moment it would have got as far as a'. But having bounded back from the surface it sets up a wavelet that spreads backwards at the same rate. So take your compasses and draw the wavelet a", using the length a a' as your radius. The next bit of the wave-front, b, reaches the surface of the mirror a little later, so the distance from there to b' is a little shorter than a a'. Take that shorter length as radius and strike the wavelet b". Complete the set of wavelets in the same way and you get the final curve of the reflected wave, which, you see, now marches backwards as though it had come from a point Q on the other side of the mirror. In fact, if the mirror is flat, Q will be exactly as far behind the surface as P is in front of it. We call the point Q the image of the point P. This reflection of ripples as though they had come from a point behind the mirror I can show you in my ripple-tank. I put in a flat strip of lead to serve as a reflector — see how the waves, as they come up to it, march off with their curvature reversed, as though they had started from some point behind the reflecting surface.

Again, I can show you the same thing with a candle and a looking-glass. You know that we can test the direction light is coming from by looking at the direction in which it casts a shadow. If I set up this little dagger on a whitened board (Fig. 12), I can see which way its shadow falls. If I now put a candle beside it on the board at P, the dagger casts a shadow on the side away from P. Next, set up a piece of silvered mirror glass a little farther along the board. We now have two shadows. One is the direct shadow cast before; the other is the shadow cast by the waves reflected in the mirror, and you can see from the direction this second shadow falls that it falls exactly as if the light had come from a second candle placed at Q, just as far behind the mirror as P is in front. Let us put an actual second candle at Q, and then take the mirror away — and you see the second shadow in the same place and of the same shape as before. So we have proved by direct experiment that our reasoning about the waves was right. Indeed, you have only to look into a flat mirror and examine the images of things in it to satisfy yourselves about the rule. The images of objects are always exactly opposite the objects, and each is as far behind the mirror as the object is in front. Probably you have all heard of the prince captured by sailors who, when he was taken aboard ship and shown a mirror hanging on a wall, wanted to run round behind it to see the other prince he saw on the far side!

[Figure 12: Proving the image is really behind the glass. The candle at P casts one shadow of the little dagger directly; the mirror casts a second, falling exactly as though a second candle stood at Q, as far behind the glass as P is in front.]

If instead of flat mirrors we use curved ones, we find different rules apply. That is because curved surfaces imprint new curvatures on the wave-fronts and so alter their line of march. There are, as you know, two sorts of curvature. The surface may bulge outwards, in which case we call it convex; or it may be hollowed, in which case we call it concave.

In my ripple-tank I now place a curved piece of metal with its bulging side towards the place where I make the ripples. Suppose I send a train of plane ripples to beat against this surface. The part of the wave-front that strikes the bulging curve first is the earliest to be reflected back. The other parts strike the surface later and, when they are reflected back, have fallen behind — so that the ripples come back curved. The curved mirror has, in fact, imprinted on the ripples a curvature twice as great as its own. This can be seen from Fig. 13, where we watch straight ripples marching to meet the bulging reflector. The middle point M of the bulging surface meets the advancing wave first and turns that bit back. If there had been no obstacle the wave would, after a short interval, have got as far as A. But where does it actually go? The bit that strikes M goes back as far as B; the bit marked a goes on a little farther, and is then reflected back. Take your compasses again, measure the distance it still has to go to reach a, then turn the compasses round and strike that arc. Do the same for the bits marked b and c, and you will find the overlapping wavelets give you the new outline of the reflected wave, which marches backwards as though it had started from the point marked F. This point F is halfway between M and the centre of curvature of the surface, marked C in the drawing.

So too, if I use a hollow or concave surface as my reflector, it will imprint a concave form on the waves, the imprinted curvature again being twice as great as the curvature of the reflecting surface. But now we come to a new effect. See in my ripple-tank how, when the straight ripples beat against the concave surface so that the middle of the wave-front is the last to rebound, all the other parts have already rebounded and are marching back, so that the returning ripples are curved inwards. Being now curved ripples with hollow wave-fronts, they converge on one another and march back towards the point F. A bit of the wave-front at P marches straight on until it strikes the mirror at R; then, instead of going on to Q, it is reflected inwards and travels to F, towards which point other parts of the wave also travel. Here, then, we have found a real focus — a genuine meeting point of the waves — and not, as in the earlier cases, a virtual focus from which the waves merely seemed to come. So we have learned that, for ripples at least, a concave mirror can produce a real convergence to a point.

[Figure 14: The concave mirror at work. Straight ripples striking the hollow surface come back curved inwards, and the wave-front closes in on the real focus at F.]

Let us show at once that the same thing can be done with light-waves, by using a concave silvered mirror.

From my optical lantern, with its electric lamp inside, my assistant sends out a broad beam of light. The air is dusty, and each little particle of dust catches a portion of the beam and helps you to see which way it is going. Into this beam I hold a concave silvered mirror. At once you see how, by imprinting a curvature on the waves, it forces the beam to converge (Fig. 15) on a point here in mid-air. That point is the focus. You will further notice that by turning the mirror about I can shift the focus and concentrate the waves wherever I like.

[Figure 15: A concave silvered mirror held in the lantern beam. The dusty air makes the converging cone visible, running to a bright point of focus in mid-air.]

If I replace the concave mirror with a convex one, I shall make the waves diverge instead. There is now no real focus at all; the waves march away as if they had come from a virtual focus behind the mirror at F (Fig. 16), exactly as we saw with the ripples in the tank.

We have now got as far as making real images, by so changing the shapes of the wave-fronts, and with them the lines along which the waves march, that they converge to focal points. Let us try a few more experiments on how images are formed. Take all the lenses out of the optical lantern and leave only the electric lamp inside. You know that in this lamp there are two carbon pencils whose tips do not quite touch, and which are made white-hot by the electric current flowing between them. I cover the opening at the front of the lantern with a piece of tin-foil, and in this I now stab a small round hole with a pointed stiletto. At once you see an image thrown on the screen (Fig. 17) of the two white-hot carbon tips. The positive carbon has a flat end; the negative tip is pointed. That image is, as it happens, upside down, and its formation on the screen is a simple consequence of light travelling in straight lines. If I stab another hole we get another image. This time I have pierced a square hole, but the second image is just like the first: it does not depend on the shape of the hole. I pierce a three-cornered hole — still another image. If I pierce a whole crowd of holes I get just as many images, arranged in a pattern that corresponds exactly to the pattern of holes I have made in the tin-foil.

[Figure 17: The pinhole image of the arc lamp thrown on the screen — the flat-ended positive carbon above, the pointed negative tip below, the whole picture upside down.]

[Figure 16: A convex mirror in the beam. There is no real focus now; the reflected waves spread as though they had started from the virtual focus F behind the glass.]

Now if I wanted to produce one single bright image instead of a scatter of little ones, I must somehow turn all these separate beams so that they converge on the same region of the screen. In other words, bright images can be formed by using some device that imprints a convergence on the waves. You know that a concave mirror will do this. Very well — let me use one. See how, when we pick one of the right curvature to converge the light onto the screen, it blends all the images together and gives us one bright image. We may take the tin-foil cap off altogether, so as to work with the whole beam, and we get a still more brilliant image of the carbon points.

Substituting a group of little coloured electric glow-lamps for the arc lamp, I have my concave mirror reflect their beams out into the room; and here, by feeling for it with a hand-screen of thin translucent paper, you see how I can find the real image of the group of lamps. This image is upside down; and because it is formed at a greater distance from the mirror than the object is, it is magnified. If the object is moved farther away, the image comes in closer, and is then smaller, though still upside down.

So far we have been dealing with the regular reflection that takes place at properly polished surfaces. But if a surface is not properly polished — that is, if its ridges or scratches or roughnesses are not appreciably smaller than the waves — then, though it may still reflect, the reflection is irregular. White paper reflects in this diffuse way. You get no definite image, because the slight roughness of the texture breaks up the wave-fronts and scatters them in all directions. That is why a sheet of white paper looks white from whatever direction you view it. If the material is one which, like silk, has a definite fibre or grain that reflects a little better in one direction than another, then the amount of light reflected will depend partly on which way the grain catches the light and partly on the angle at which the light falls. This is easily shown by looking at a piece of metal electrotyped in exact facsimile of a piece of silk fabric. Here is such a piece. It was deposited in a gutta-percha mould cast from a piece of figured silk brocade, and it reproduces the exact shimmer of silk, because it reproduces the grain of the silk in the way it partially reflects. If silk is woven with a warp of one colour and a weft of another, the different colours are reflected better at different angles — hence the effect of "shot" silk.

To illustrate diffuse reflection, let me show you two simple experiments. Here is a piece of mirror. On it I paint the word LIGHT in Chinese white. The letters look white against a dark background. But if I use the mirror to throw a patch of light from the electric lamp onto the wall, the letters come out black. The light falling on those parts was scattered in all directions — so those parts looked white to you, but they have diffused the waves instead of directing them straight to the wall as the smooth parts of the surface do.

Let me prove to you how much light really is reflected from a piece of paper. I have only to shine my lamp on this piece of white paper and hold it near the cheek of this white marble bust, for you to see for yourselves what a quantity of light it throws onto the object. Now exchange the white paper for a piece of red paper — that is, paper that reflects red waves better than waves of any other colour — and you see how the red light is thrown back onto the bust and brings an artificial blush to its cheek.

Footnote: Made at the Technical College, Finsbury, by Mr. E. Rousseau, instructor in electro-deposition. His process of casting the matrices in a molten gutta-percha compound, which are afterwards metallised to receive the deposit in the electrotype bath, is distinctly superior to the commercial process of taking moulds in a hydraulic press. On one occasion he made me a mould of a Rowland's diffraction grating with 14,400 parallel lines to the inch. Like the original, it showed the most gorgeous diffraction colours.

If light is reflected from one mirror to another standing at an angle to it, two or more images may be formed, depending on how the mirrors are placed. Here (Fig. 18) are two flat mirrors hinged together like the leaves of a book. If I open them to an angle equal to one-third of a circle — 120° — and then place a candle between them, each mirror will make an image, so that when you peep in between them there seem to be three candles. If I fold the mirrors a little closer, so that they enclose a quadrant of a circle
