Appendix to Lecture Two: Anomalous Refraction and Dispersion

On p. 78 attention is drawn to the fact that the spectrum produced by a prism is irrational — that is to say, that the dispersion is such that the different waves are not spaced out in proportion to their wave-length, the red and orange waves being relatively crowded together at one end of the spectrum while the violet and blue waves are unduly spread out. But the dispersion differs from substance to substance. In fact no two substances disperse light in exactly the same way, though in general the order of the colours is the same, and the general tendency of the irrationality is to compress the red end.

There are, however, a few known substances in which this irrationality becomes excessive, and develops into an entirely abnormal dispersion in which the violet waves are refracted less than the red! This phenomenon of anomalous dispersion was first noticed in 1840 by Fox Talbot, in some crystals of the double oxalate of chromium and potassium. The spectra of some of these crystals were so anomalous that he could only explain them "by the supposition that the spectrum, after proceeding for a certain distance, stopped short and returned upon itself." In 1861 Le Roux found that the vapour of iodine, which transmits only red and blue, actually retards the red more than the blue, and gives an inverted spectrum. Christiansen in 1870 noticed that an alcoholic solution of magenta (rosaniline) refracts ordinarily for the waves from red to yellow — the yellow being refracted more than the orange, and the orange more than the red — but that it absorbs green powerfully, and that all the rest of the colours, commonly called more refrangible, are in this substance refracted less than the red! In this case the spectrum literally turns back on itself. Other observations have been added by Kundt and others. In particular, Kundt discovered that some of the metals, when made up into exceedingly thin prisms, possess an anomalous dispersion.

Footnote: See Tait's Light, p. 156.

The first point to notice in discussing this phenomenon of anomalous dispersion is that it occurs only in strongly coloured substances. It is closely bound up with the fact that in these substances there is, by reason of their molecular constitution, a strong absorption for waves of some particular wave-length. Thus in rosaniline, which has a strong absorption band in the green, the fact that green light is absorbed appears to exert a disturbing influence on the waves of the shorter kinds, causing them to be refracted less instead of more. These remarkable phenomena clearly have something to do with the way the molecules of ponderable matter are connected with the ether. None of the dispersion formulae of Cauchy, Ketteler or others gave a satisfactory account of them.

In 1872 Lord Rayleigh considered the problem of the refraction of light by opaque bodies, and in the Philosophical Magazine (vol. xliii, p. 322) offered the following exceedingly suggestive comment: "On either side of an absorption-band there is an abnormal change in the refrangibility (as determined by prismatic deviation) of such a kind that the refraction is increased below (that is on the red side of) the band, and diminished above it. An analogy may be traced here with the repulsion between two periods which frequently occurs in vibrating systems. The effect of a pendulum, suspended from a body subject to horizontal vibration, is to increase or diminish the virtual inertia of the mass according as the natural period of the pendulum is shorter or longer than that of its point of suspension. This may be expressed by saying that if the point of support tends to vibrate more rapidly than the pendulum it is made to go faster still, and vice versa. Below the absorption-band the material vibration is naturally the higher, and hence the effect of the associated matter is to increase (abnormally) the virtual inertia of the ether and therefore the refrangibility. On the other side the effect is the reverse."

In 1893 von Helmholtz published a remarkable study based on Maxwell's electromagnetic theory of light. The essence of the theory is as follows. The electromagnetic waves passing through the ether travel at a rate that is slowed by the presence of material molecules, the ether being, as it were, loaded by them. These heavy particles cannot be set vibrating without taking up energy from the advancing wave; and so long as there is no absorption, they give this kinetic energy back to the wave as it passes on. In this way the speed at which the train of waves travels is slightly less than the speed of the individual wave, the front wave of the train continually dying away as it gives up its energy to the material particles in the medium. In such a medium there will of course be ordinary refraction; and since the speed of the wave train depends on the frequency — that is, on the wave-length — of the oscillations, waves of higher frequency, and so of shorter wave-length, generally being retarded more, there will be a dispersion of the ordinary kind.

All this applies to waves whose wave-length is large compared with the size of the molecules. But if there were smaller waves whose frequency coincided very nearly with the natural oscillation period of the molecules or atoms, such waves would set up a violent sympathetic vibration of these material particles and would be strongly absorbed. Suppose now there are waves smaller still and of higher frequency yet. Their oscillations are too rapid to affect the atoms; they pass freely between the gaps in matter and are not retarded, and therefore not refracted or dispersed — or only very slightly. The medium would behave as though it were almost perfectly transparent to such waves, and their refraction might be either slightly negative or slightly positive; while for the very minutest waves of all the refraction would be simply zero.

The formula which von Helmholtz deduced is, in its simplest form, the following:

    μ² = (α² − n²) / (β² − n²)

where μ is the refractive index of the medium (supposed quite transparent), n the frequency, and α and β constants depending on the material. To interpret the formula, consider what it reduces to in the following cases: (1) n much smaller than α or β; (2) n = β; (3) n = α; and (4) n much greater than α or β.

In the first case, n being small, we are dealing with long, slow-period waves such as Hertzian waves, or waves of infra-red size. Neglecting n² compared with α² or β², the formula reduces to μ = α/β, independent of wave-length. In the second case, if the frequency is such that n = β, the medium cannot possibly be transparent, as there would be violent absorption. What this really means is that as n increases from case (1) towards the value n = β, the refractive index increases, and would become indefinitely great were it not for the absorption that sets in. In the state of things between cases (2) and (3), where n is larger than β but smaller than α, the values of μ calculated by the formula are imaginary; but owing to the absorption they would in reality fall to near zero — that is to say, the refraction in these conditions becomes negative. This corresponds to what Kundt observed with his refracting prisms of iron, nickel and platinum, which refract the light towards the refracting edge instead of away from it. As n increases past case (3), where it equals α, the zero value of μ gradually changes, and when n becomes very great compared with α and β it approaches unity, so that for exceedingly short waves there is no refraction at all.

Footnote: See Wiedemann's Annalen, xlviii, p. 389. The fullest account of this that has appeared in English is in The Electrician, xxxvii, p. 404, and there is an abstract by Professor Oliver Lodge, ib. p. 371 (July 1896).

Consider the particular value of n for which μ becomes a maximum. This is the case in which the excessive absorption makes the medium practically opaque. For values of n a little less than this there will be practically complete transparency, with ordinary refraction and dispersion; for values of n a little greater there will again be practical transparency, but the refraction will be in the wrong direction (μ being less than unity), and the dispersion will be anomalous. Fig. 63 illustrates this dependence of μ on n.

[Figure 63: How the refractive index depends on the frequency. The curve climbs steeply towards the region of great absorption, breaks off there, and comes back on the far side below the line of zero refraction — the anomalous dispersion, drawn as a graph.]

In the case of rosaniline, the frequency at which the absorption becomes excessive is about 578 billions per second, corresponding to a wave-length of 21 millionths of an inch in air. E. F. Nichols has found that quartz shows a similar change of properties for infra-red waves of a frequency between 36 and 45.4 billions per second. For almost all ordinary transparent substances the absorption band lies a long way down in the ultra-violet; in some it may possibly lie in the infra-red. It may be possible, for example, for flint glass — whose refractive index for ordinary light is between 1.5 and 1.7 — to have a refractive index as high as 2.6 for disturbances of very low frequency such as Hertzian waves: that being the theoretical value for long waves required by Maxwell's theory to correspond to the square root of the observed dielectric constant. Probably many substances have more than one absorption band, which complicates the anomalous dispersion still further.
