Lecture Three: The Polarisation of Light

(Part 1 of 4)

The meaning of polarisation — How to polarise waves of light — Illustrative models — Polarisers made of glass, of calc-spar, and of slices of tourmaline — How any polariser will cut off polarised light — Properties of crystals — Using polarised light to detect false gems — Rubies, sapphires and amethysts — Polarisation by double refraction — The curious coloured effects produced in polarised light by colourless slices of thin crystals placed between polariser and analyser — A further study of complementary and supplementary tints — Slides shown by polarised light — The effects produced on glass by compression and by heating

Scientific men often fall into the habit of using long and difficult words to express very simple and easy ideas. The natural consequence is that people are often led to think there is something difficult about a really easy subject, whereas the main difficulty is understanding the meaning of the words chosen to describe it.

The word "polarisation," as used in optics, is one of these terms. It sounds very learned and difficult, but the idea it is meant to express is really very simple. Let me try to give you the idea before we try to fit any name to it.

In my first lecture I tried to give you some simple notions about waves and the way they travel. I asked you particularly to distinguish between the oscillating motions of the particles and the forward travelling of the waves themselves. Let us go back to the motions of the particles. Suppose any particle, or group of particles, is set moving with a rapid to-and-fro motion — in other words, suppose it vibrates. Then if it is surrounded by a suitable medium, and its vibrations happen with a great enough frequency, it will set up waves in the surrounding medium which will start off from it and travel away at a definite speed, depending on the rigidity and density of the medium.

In the case of a compressible surrounding medium such as air, a vibrating body — if it vibrates within the range of frequency appropriate to sound, that is, between about 30 per second and 38,000 per second — will compress the air in front of it as it moves forward, and rarefy the air behind it as it moves back, so that it sends off waves of condensation and rarefaction. Picture the oscillating body as a sphere moving rapidly up and down along a short path AB. It will alternately condense and rarefy the air above and below it, and these compressions and rarefactions will travel off upwards and downwards, spreading a little as they go. But hardly any waves of compression and rarefaction will travel off sideways from the oscillating sphere, because in moving up and down it neither condenses nor rarefies the air at its sides. A wave of this kind would be described as a longitudinal wave, meaning one that is propagated along the same line as the motion that produces it — in this case, vertically. If you want to know more about how sound-waves travel, you should read Professor Tyndall's delightful book On Sound; or, if you are a deep student, study Lord Rayleigh's two mathematical volumes on the Theory of Sound.

But now suppose you have to deal not with a compressible medium like air, but with an incompressible one like jelly, whose density is small compared with the resistance it puts up against any rapid shear. If in this case you set up an oscillation of high enough frequency, waves will be set up that travel off at a high rate — but not along the line of the motion. On the contrary, they will travel off sideways in all directions as ripples. Picture instead a sphere embedded in the middle of a great block of jelly, made to oscillate up and down as before, but very rapidly. It cannot move up without tending to tear or shear the jelly all round its girth, nor move down without tending to shear the jelly downwards; and these shearing stresses travel outwards in all directions, so that a particle at a will, as these ripples in the solid jelly reach it, also tend to move up and down. In any medium, jelly or not, if the particles are so related to one another that the movement of any of them tends to set up a shearing stress, then that medium will, like the jelly, carry the disturbance sideways. Waves of this kind are described as transverse waves — meaning waves propagated in directions at right angles to the direction in which the to-and-fro displacements happen.

Now, the waves of light are of the transverse kind; and though they can pass through air, they are not waves of the air as sound-waves are. Waves of light can cross the most perfect vacuum; they travel thousands of millions of miles through the empty space between the stars. They are waves of another medium which, so far as we know, exists throughout all space, and which we call — using Sir Isaac Newton's term — the ether. If you ask me what the ether is made of, let me say frankly that I do not know. But if light consists of waves, and if those waves can travel across the millions of miles separating the stars from the earth, then they must clearly be waves of something. They are not air-waves nor water-waves, because interstellar space has neither air nor water in it. They are waves of a medium which, though millions of times less dense than water or air, nevertheless has a property that resists being torn or sheared apart — exceeding even the resistance to shear of hard-tempered steel. Though it is not a jelly, since things can move through it far more freely than you or I can move through air, it resembles jelly in this resistance to shear, and carries vibrations across the direction of their displacements. Though we know neither the density of the ether (which must be very small) nor its rigidity against shear (which must be very great), we do know something that depends on the ratio of these two properties: the speed at which those ether-waves we call "light" travel (see the Appendix, p. 156).

Now, having got this notion of transverse waves, let us go back to the wave-motion model we used in the first lecture. It has, as you will remember (Fig. 2, p. 8), a row of little white particles along which the wave is carried from left to right, though each particle moves only up and down. It is therefore a model of a transverse wave: the direction the wave travels is at right angles to the direction of the displacements.

But if a wave is to travel along a line of march from A to B, we can satisfy the condition of transverse vibration in other ways as well. The small to-and-fro motions must be made across the line of march; but they may be across it without being vertical — they may be horizontal, or oblique. If I turn my wave-motion model on its side, the little white particles now move horizontally, towards you and away from you, but the wave still travels from left to right.

If I stretch a long indiarubber cord across the room, holding one end in my hand, I can throw it into transverse vibrations. If I move my hand rapidly up and down, I produce up-and-down vibrations. If I move my hand right and left, I get right-and-left vibrations. If I move my hand to and fro obliquely, I produce oblique vibrations; and the cord carries them all.

Now, all the word polarisation means is that the motions are being made in one particular transverse direction. If the vibrations are polarised vertically, that means the waves travelling along are up-and-down waves. If I say the light is polarised horizontally, all I mean is that the motions are made right and left across the line of march. Can anything be simpler?

[Figure 66: The block of jelly with two silver-headed pins stuck into it. Set one quivering and the other takes up the same quiver — up and down, side to side, or round and round, according to how the first was struck.]

Here is a lump of jelly. It will do excellently to show how a polarised vibration is carried along. I stick two pins with silvered heads into it horizontally, one at each side. If I give one pin a sudden push it quivers, and the jelly carries the motion across to the other. And notice: if I strike one so as to make it quiver up and down, the other quivers up and down — here we have a vibration polarised vertically. If I make one quiver right and left, the other quivers right and left — here we have a vibration polarised horizontally. If I make one quiver round and round in a circle, the other quivers round and round too, illustrating a circularly polarised vibration.

[Figure 67: The wave-motion model turned on its side, so that the little white balls swing towards the audience and away from it while the wave still runs along the row from left to right.]

Now let us turn to the waves of light themselves. If you look at a beam of white light, you cannot tell by eye whether it is polarised to move up and down or right and left. In fact you cannot tell whether it is polarised at all. Naturally, if the waves are so exceedingly small, and vibrate so many millions of millions of times a second, your eye cannot catch their motions.

Footnote: Not as thrown on the screen. But the eye can be trained to detect the plane of polarisation — of light from the blue sky, for example, which is naturally polarised in directions at right angles to the position of the sun. The training consists in learning to recognise certain appearances called "Haidinger's brushes," which result from the feeble polarising properties of the refracting structures of the eye.

The fact is that light of any natural kind — from the sun, an electric lamp, a flame, or any other source — is unpolarised; that is to say, it consists of vibrations that are not specially directed either up and down, or right and left, or in any other single direction. Natural light, given out by hot bodies, is thoroughly miscellaneous. Not only does it consist, as we saw in the last lecture, of many different colours — that is, of different wave-lengths mixed together — but the directions of its transverse vibrations are all jumbled up as well. At one instant they may be up and down; then they change to right and left, or oblique, or circular, or elliptical, or possibly to something more complex still.

Just think how the light starts from the white-hot tip of the carbon pencil in my electric lamp. The particles of white-hot carbon are in fierce vibration, jostling one another, and in jostling they impart vibrations to the ether, setting up ether-waves. When any one particle gets a sudden jolt it quivers and gives out a vibration, which we may represent by the curve in Fig. 68 — a run of little wavelets each like its fellow, perhaps several thousand of them before they die away. Each such vibration would die away like the note of a piano string struck and left to itself. But perhaps, before the motion has died away, another jolt sets it vibrating in a new direction, again to die away. Now suppose millions of these little particles, all jostling and vibrating and sending out trains of wavelets. Clearly one should expect the utmost mixture of wave-sizes and directions of vibration in the resulting light.

[Figure 68: The train of waves given out by a single jolted particle — a long run of little wavelets, each like the last, dying gradually away.]

Footnote: According to the researches of Fizeau, at least 50,000 on average in ordinary light. Professor Michelson's more recent experiments, in which he obtained interference between two waves whose paths differed by more than 20 cm, or 1,000,000 wave-lengths, prove that the average number of wavelets in each train must be reckoned in millions.

You understand, then, that as natural light is not polarised in any particular direction, if we want polarised light we must do something to it to polarise it. But how?

Table III — Polarisers

    How it works                    Apparatus
    ---------------------------------------------------------
    By reflection                   Black glass at about 57°
                                    Delezenne's polariser
    By refraction                   Glass sheet at about 57°
                                    Bundle of thin glass sheets
                                      set obliquely
    By double refraction            Rhomb of Iceland spar (p. 120)
                                    Double-image prism (p. 125)
    By double refraction,           Slice of tourmaline
      with absorption
    By double refraction, with      Nicol's prism and its modern
      internal reflection             varieties

In Table III I have set down some eight different ways of polarising light, which we shall presently consider in order. But before we deal with any of them, let us go back to the vibrations of cords and see how they can be polarised.

Here (Fig. 69) is an indiarubber cord passing through a wooden box with vertical partitions. These partitions limit the movement and let only vertical vibrations through. If I vibrate the cord in any way at all, only the vertical component of the vibration succeeds in getting past. The waves, after passing through the box, come out polarised in a vertical plane. If I turn the box on its side (Fig. 70) it will now transmit only the horizontal component of the vibration.

What will happen, then, if I pass the cord through a second box, as in Fig. 70? That depends on how the boxes are set. If the first, P, has its partitions vertical, it will polarise the waves vertically, and as these waves travel on they come to the second box, marked A.

[Figure 70: The cord passing through two boxes in succession. The first, P, polarises the waves; the second, A, either passes them or stops them according to the way its partitions run.]

[Figure 69: A single box with vertical partitions on the indiarubber cord. Shake the cord any way you like and only the up-and-down part of the motion gets through.]

If A also has its partitions vertical, the vertical waves get through it too. If both boxes are turned on their sides, the first polarises the waves horizontally and the horizontally polarised waves pass through both. But if I set the first box P vertically and the second box A horizontally (Fig. 71), then P polarises the vibrations in such a way that they cannot get through A at all: they are cut off. However P is placed, it will polarise the waves; and if A is turned so as to lie across them, they are cut off.

[Figure 71: The two boxes crossed — P vertical, A horizontal. Nothing gets through: what P lets past is exactly what A stops.]

On the lecture table is another model that illustrates the same set of facts more fully. If you understand it, you will have no difficulty in understanding the optical apparatus we are going to use. In this apparatus the vibrations of a thin silk cord — best seen by those in front of the table — are produced by attaching one end to the prong of a tuning fork, whose vibrations are kept going by an electromagnetic attachment. To the far end of the cord a small weight is attached, adjusted so that the cord is thrown into stationary waves. In short, the vibrations of the cord are tuned to those of the fork. To polarise the vibrations, the motion of the cord is confined by a pair of glass plates mounted in wooden cylinders (Figs. 72, 73). At the first nodal point of the cord, the first pair of glass plates acts as a polariser, P, the cord beyond that point vibrating in the plane thus forced on it. A pointer fixed to the wooden cylinder shows the direction of the plane of polarisation. The second pair of glass plates is set at the second nodal point, to act as an analyser, A.

The vibrations of the cord are made vertical by the polariser P, and when the plane of the analyser A is vertical too (as in Fig. 72), the vibrations that pass through the polariser pass through the analyser as well. But if — as in the earlier experiment with the boxes — the analyser is turned a quarter round, so that the slit between its glass plates lies across the vibrations (as in Fig. 73), the vibrations are no longer transmitted. To sum up: the vibrations are transmitted when polariser and analyser are parallel to one another, and are cut off and extinguished when polariser and analyser are crossed. So by turning the analyser round until it cuts off the vibrations, we can find out accurately which way the vibrations coming from the polariser run.

[Figure 72: The silk cord driven by a tuning fork, with polariser P and analyser A both set vertically. The stationary waves pass through both.]

Footnote: On the term "plane of polarisation," see the remarks in the Appendix to this lecture, p. 158.

But why linger over mere models when we can work with light-waves themselves? My assistant throws a beam of white light from the electric lamp inside the optical lantern onto the screen. He now places a large polariser, P, in the path of the beam (Fig. 74). What this polariser is, I shall explain presently. He sets it so that it polarises the light, letting only those waves whose vibrations are made in a vertical plane fall on the screen. The white disk of light on the screen consists, in fact, of up-and-down light only. Your eye would not tell you whether the light was vibrating up and down, or even that it was polarised at all. To establish that the waves really are polarised, we must turn to an analyser.

This analyser, A, is itself simply a smaller polariser. So that you can see it better, it is hung by thin strings on a ring support (see Fig. 75), whose shadow you can see on the screen. If it too is set in the right position to transmit up-and-down vibrations, the polarised light comes through it, both polariser and analyser being as clear as glass. If the analyser A is now turned a quarter round, it will — though still clear as glass — cut off the up-and-down vibrations entirely, with the result (Fig. 76) that no light gets through at all. This cutting off of the light by turning the analyser a quarter round proves that the light was polarised. When the planes of polariser and analyser are parallel — both vertical or both horizontal — we have the "bright field" of transmitted light. When the planes are crossed — one vertical, the other horizontal — the light is cut off and we have the "dark field."
