Appendix to Lecture Three: The Elastic-Solid Theory of Light

On p. 34 it is remarked that light-waves travel more slowly in denser media, and on p. 129 it is explained how, in a double-refracting crystal, the waves are split into two sets that travel at different speeds. It is worth going further into the question of the speed at which light-waves travel.

If we take it as a fundamental point that the speed at which a wave travels is equal to the square root of the elasticity of the medium divided by its density — or, in symbols, v = √(E/D), which is Newton's law — then the only way to account for two different speeds existing side by side is to suppose that displacements in different directions either call up a different elasticity or bring a different density into play. But since the medium whose waves make up light is the ether, we have to deal, in the case of light passing through crystals, with the ether as it exists inside the crystal. If we assume that the ether behaves as an incompressible, homogeneous elastic solid, then the ordinary theory of elasticity is enough to serve as a theory of the ether. For a long time this "elastic-solid theory" of the ether has held sway, and it has received elaborate mathematical treatment at the hands of Green, Fresnel, MacCullagh, Neumann, Cauchy and others. On this view the ether particles inside crystals are arranged differently in different directions, symmetrically about three axes at right angles, and so the properties of the ether as a medium for carrying waves are modified by the presence of the crystalline matter.

But here a difference of view may arise. It may be held, with Fresnel, that the presence of the crystalline matter alters the density of the ether without altering its elasticity; or it may be supposed, with MacCullagh and Neumann, that the crystalline matter alters the elasticity in different directions without affecting the density. Either assumption leads to equations that fit the fundamental facts of double refraction and polarisation. But there is this difference: Fresnel's theory supposes the displacements to happen at right angles to the so-called "plane of polarisation," while MacCullagh's treats them as happening in that plane.

As to the actual direction in which the displacements are made, the properties of tourmaline are enough — quite apart from other proofs — to settle the fact that in the extraordinary wave, the one that gets through, the displacements are made parallel to the principal axis of the crystal, while in the ordinary wave, the one that is absorbed, they are at right angles to that axis. The simple proof (see the Philosophical Magazine, August 1881) is that tourmaline is opaque, at least in thick slices, to all light travelling along the principal axis of crystallisation; so it absorbs those vibrations that lie across that axis. (Compare p. 119 above.)

But the elastic-solid theory is not the only possible theory of light. Instead of supposing that the ether is itself modified in arrangement or in properties by the presence of crystalline matter, we might suppose it to be isotropic — having the same elasticity and density in every direction — but that as it moves it gives up some of its energy to the particles of matter the wave is travelling through. If the particles of gross matter load the ether in this way, their vibration will, during the passage of the wave, take up some of the energy and slow down the rate at which the group of waves can travel. We should then have a difference between the speed at which the individual waves travel and the speed at which the group travels; and in that case the speed of the group — the apparent speed of light — would be slower than the speed of the waves themselves, and would differ for waves of different frequency. That is in fact the phenomenon of dispersion.

In crystalline media the retardation and the dispersion would differ in different directions, and would depend on the direction of the displacements relative to the axes of the crystal. But as to the connection between the molecules of matter and the ethereal medium that such theories involve, very little is known, and there is room for many different hypotheses about the nature of that connection. Helmholtz, Kelvin, Lommel, Sellmeier and others have made various suggestions, of which an admirable account is to be found in Glazebrook's "Report on Optical Theories," British Association Report, 1885.

The electromagnetic theory of light, which Maxwell founded on Faraday's experimental work, has now definitely superseded all the purely mechanical theories. Some account of it is given in the Appendix to Lecture Five, p. 230.

The only other point that need claim attention here is the use of the term "plane of polarisation." This term, defined variously by different writers, is used to denote a plane with reference to which the polar properties of the wave can be described. It must necessarily contain the line along which the wave is being propagated (that is, the "ray" lies in this plane); but so far as the orientation of that plane around the ray is concerned, its definition with respect to the polar properties is purely a matter of convention.

The following is Herschel's definition (Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, article "Light," p. 506): "The plane of polarisation of a polarised ray is the plane in which it must have undergone reflexion, to have acquired its character of polarisation; or that plane passing through the course of the ray perpendicular to which it cannot be reflected at the polarising angle from a transparent medium; or, again, that plane in which, if the axis of a tourmaline plate exposed perpendicularly to the ray be situated, no portion of the ray will be transmitted."

If we look back at the Nicol prism (Fig. 84, p. 123) we shall see that, by the convention thus laid down, the plane of polarisation of the light that emerges is parallel to the longer diagonal of the end face, and the vibrations are made at right angles to it. To avoid circumlocution in these lectures, I speak of the plane in which the vibrations are made as the plane in which the wave is polarised (see the descriptions of Figs. 69-73, pp. 113-117).
