Lecture Four: The Invisible Spectrum — the Ultra-Violet Part

(Part 1 of 3)

The spectrum stretches invisibly in both directions beyond the visible part — Below the red end are the invisible longer waves that warm bodies instead of lighting them — These are called the calorific, or infra-red, waves — Beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum are the invisible shorter waves that produce chemical effects — These are called actinic, or ultra-violet, waves — How to sift the invisible ultra-violet light out of the visible light — How to make the invisible ultra-violet light visible — The use of fluorescent screens — Reflection, refraction and polarisation of the invisible ultra-violet light — Luminescence: the temporary kind called fluorescence, and the lasting kind called phosphorescence — How to make "luminous paint" — Experiments with phosphorescent bodies — Other properties of invisible ultra-violet light — Its power to discharge electrified bodies — The photographic action of visible and of invisible light — The photography of colours — Lippmann's discovery of true colour photography — The reproduction of the colours of natural objects by three-colour photography — Ives's photochromoscope

All the kinds of light in the visible spectrum lie between the extreme red at one end and the extreme violet at the other. Their wave-lengths vary between about 32 millionths of an inch, for extreme red, and 15 millionths of an inch, for extreme violet. But besides the waves of the various colours lying between those limits, which are visible, there are other waves that bring no sensation to our eyes at all — waves that are invisible, and yet are light-waves. In short, the spectrum stretches on invisibly in both directions, both below the extreme red and beyond the extreme violet.

Perhaps you object that if such waves are invisible, they cannot be waves of light. Well, if you choose to lay down as a definition beforehand that the term "light" must be applied only to the waves that the human eye can see, there is nothing more to be said. But what if there are other eyes, or other processes, that will let these waves be observed? Further, if these invisible waves are found to agree with the visible ones in other important respects — if, in fact, they can be reflected, refracted, polarised and diffracted — then we are bound to regard them as light. They may have wave-lengths longer than that of red waves, or shorter than that of violet waves, and so our eyes, with their limited range, may fail to be sensitive to them. Nevertheless, if in their physical properties they agree with the visible kinds, then the fact that we cannot see them simply shows the imperfection of our eyes. Had we lived all our lives behind screens of red glass, we should never have known anything of green or blue waves; we should have been blind to waves of those particular kinds. But though we should never have seen them, that would not prove they were not waves of light.

Now, the part of the invisible spectrum that consists of waves too large — of too great a wave-length — to affect our eyes has another property: that of warming the things it falls on. Some of the visible waves, particularly those towards the red end of the spectrum, share this property, but to a lesser extent. These longer invisible waves are called the calorific, or infra-red, waves. We shall deal with them in the next lecture.

At the other end of the spectrum, beyond the violet, we have again waves that are invisible, this time because they are too small to affect our sight; and these have several remarkable properties. They are active in producing certain chemical effects, notably those known as photochemical or photographic. They also produce certain physiological effects on animal and vegetable tissues. They vigorously provoke in certain bodies the property of shining in the dark — phosphorescence. And lastly, they have certain electrical properties. These short waves go by the various names of actinic, photographic, or ultra-violet waves. The last of these terms is much to be preferred.

Some of these chemical effects are also produced by visible light, especially by the blue and violet waves. Fig. 100 is a diagram giving a general idea of how these effects are distributed among waves of different lengths. The greatest brightness to the eye belongs to waves with a wave-length of about 22 millionths of an inch, or 0.00055 of a millimetre. The greatest heating effect occurs with waves of about 40 millionths of an inch, or 0.001 of a millimetre. The greatest chemical effect occurs with waves of about 16½ millionths of an inch, or about 0.00041 of a millimetre.

[Figure 100: The three effects plotted against wave-length. The curve of brightness to the eye peaks near 22 millionths of an inch, the heating effect far down among the longer waves, and the chemical effect up beyond the violet.]

Footnote: A table of wave-lengths and frequencies of every kind of light, from the lowest infra-red to the highest ultra-violet, has been added as an appendix to this lecture.

Footnote: This assumes that the effect is measured by one particular chemical reaction, namely the darkening of chloride of silver. If a different reaction were taken as the basis of measurement — say the darkening of ferroprussiate salts, as in blue-prints — the maximum effect would be found at some other point in the spectrum.

Now, for experimental purposes it is desirable to separate the waves that produce one of these effects from those that produce another. If we want to sift the ultra-violet waves out from all the other kinds, several courses are open to us. First, we may use prisms to disperse the waves and sort them into a spectrum according to their size. Second, we may do the same thing with a diffraction grating. Or third, we may sift them with sheets of different substances that have the power of absorbing waves of one sort while letting others through.

This last method we found excellent for visible light, since by using a red glass we could cut off all the other colours and leave only the red. Unfortunately no perfect filter exists that will cut off all the visible light and still let the ultra-violet waves through. Glass tinted a deep violet with manganese, or with manganese and cobalt, may serve to cut off most of the visible light while transmitting a fair proportion of ultra-violet mixed with some violet light. For many purposes this is good enough. But unfortunately every kind of glass cuts off the far end of the ultra-violet. Even the lightest crown glass, though moderately transparent to waves from 15 millionths down to 11 millionths of an inch long, is totally opaque to everything shorter than 11 millionths; while dense flint glass, containing lead, is opaque to everything beyond a wave-length of 13.3 millionths of an inch. So for experiments on ultra-violet light it is best not to use glass lenses or prisms, if a more transparent material can be found. Happily both quartz and fluor-spar are far more transparent to ultra-violet waves than glass is. Quartz transmits them down to about 8.1 millionths of an inch, and fluor-spar down to 8 millionths. My lantern is on this occasion fitted with condensing lenses of quartz, and when we want a spectrum we shall use a quartz prism and a focusing lens cut from quartz crystal as well.

Let me now demonstrate some of the photographic properties of light-waves. Here is a piece of ordinary "printing-out" paper — paper covered with a sensitive film impregnated with chloride or bromide of silver, which turns nearly black when exposed to light for long enough. Over this sheet of sensitised paper I lay some stencil plates cut out of sheet zinc, and then expose it to the white light of the electric arc-lamp on the table. In half a minute the paper will have darkened enough for you to see that wherever the light-waves have fallen on the exposed parts they have produced the chemical action and printed the pattern of the stencils.

In this experiment all kinds of waves — calorific, visible and actinic — have been allowed to fall on the paper. But which of them did the work? That is easily tested. We turn on the light in the optical lantern, using the quartz lenses and prism to make a spectrum for us. Then along the whole length of the visible spectrum, and some distance into the invisible spectrum at both ends, we lay out a long strip of sensitised photographic paper. It must be left there for several minutes, during which we can look into another point.

Here is another sheet of sensitised paper. Over it I lay a sheet of opaque tin-foil with a number of holes cut in it. Over these holes are laid thin slices of various materials: (1) window glass; (2) flint glass; (3) red glass; (4) green glass; (5) blue glass; (6) quartz; (7) fluor-spar; (8) rock salt; (9) ebonite. I now slide the whole arrangement under the beams of the arc-lamp, which is set to throw its light straight down. If any of these materials cuts off the active waves we shall find out at once, for the paper will darken only under those substances that are transparent to the photographic waves.

Two minutes' exposure is enough for our simple test. On bringing out the sheet, you will notice that the ebonite, which is black, and the red glass have both stopped the whole of the photographic waves. Green glass has stopped the greater part of them, and the flint glass has evidently not let them all through. But under the blue glass, the quartz, the rock salt, the fluor-spar and the window glass, the paper seems to have darkened about equally. With a more refined test we should find differences between these too. One fact we have proved that is of practical importance: red light does not affect a photographic film, though it affects our eyes. Every photographer knows this, and takes advantage of it in using ruby glass or red-coloured tissue to cover the windows of his darkroom, or to screen the lamp he works by while preparing and developing his plates.

Meanwhile our long strip of sensitised paper has been exposed to the spectrum; and now, examining it, we see that it has darkened noticeably at the violet end, and beyond the end of the visible violet for some distance into the region where our eyes see nothing. In short, the photographic spectrum lies mostly beyond the violet, the most active waves being shorter than any that are visible. But we must not forget that with other chemical preparations the range of sensitiveness can be changed. To Captain Abney science owes the introduction of emulsions of bromide of silver in films of gelatine, prepared so as to be sensitive not only to violet and ultra-violet light, but to green, to yellow, and even to red waves.

Another chemical effect that light-waves can produce is to make mixed hydrogen and chlorine gases combine. These gases, prepared by the electrolysis of hydrochloric acid, can be kept mixed but not chemically combined in glass bulbs for any length of time, provided they are kept in the dark. Exposed to the diffused light of a room, they slowly combine. But exposed to direct sunlight, or to the light of the arc-lamp, they combine with extraordinary violence and blow the bulb to pieces. Again the question arises: which part of the light produces the effect? Certainly not the red waves, for these bulbs of mixed gas may be freely exposed if protected by red glass and will not explode. The active waves here too are the ultra-violet.

A thin glass bulb containing the mixed gases is now taken by my assistant out of a tin box where it has been kept in the dark. To prevent accidents he puts it inside an empty lantern (Fig. 101), into whose nozzle we shall direct the beams of an electric arc-lamp from outside. To cut off the bulk of the ordinary light I first put in a sheet of violet glass, which lets only violet and ultra-violet through. Then, putting in a quartz lens, I concentrate the beam on the bulb, when — bang —

[Figure 101: The bulb of mixed hydrogen and chlorine standing inside an empty lantern for safety, with the arc-lamp beam directed into the nozzle through violet glass and a quartz lens.]

it explodes, demonstrating how active waves of this sort are.

Perhaps it has struck some of you that if waves invisible to our eyes have such photographic power, it ought to be possible to photograph things that are invisible. And so it is. It is now some twenty years since a lecture was given in this theatre on the photography of the invisible by the veteran chemist Dr. J. Hall Gladstone, who succeeded in photographing images of things quite invisible to the eye.

Behind me, against the wall, stands a drawing board covered with a white sheet of cartridge paper. The light of the arc-lamp shines on it. You see merely a white surface. The photographer, Mr. Norris, has brought his camera and will now take a photograph of it. When he develops it, you will find the photograph reveals that an inscription has been written on the sheet — one which, though invisible to you, the camera can photograph.

Footnote: The inscription was written on the sheet with colourless sulphate of quinine dissolved in a solution of citric acid. This substance fluoresces, and in the act of fluorescing it destroys the ultra-violet light that would otherwise be reflected from the parts of the paper so treated. The parts where the sulphate of quinine has been applied therefore come out darker in the photograph than the untouched surface of the paper.

Since photographic action serves to detect these ultra-violet waves even when no visible light is present at all, it can be used to explore their properties further. We might use photographic plates to prove that these waves can be reflected and refracted, and that they can interfere and be polarised. There is, however, another and readier method of investigation, which we shall now turn to.
