Lecture Four: The Invisible Spectrum — the Ultra-Violet Part

(Part 3 of 3)

of my hand shows as a black silhouette. In this case the luminescence is at first a fine blue. In a few minutes, as it fades, it turns whiter; but it will go on giving out a faint light all night, and even then will not have given up its whole store of luminous energy. Even after six weeks in darkness, a sheet of luminous paint will still give out waves that will fog a photographic plate.

If you take a sheet of luminous paint that has been exposed to light and whose phosphorescence has already died away, you find that merely warming it makes it shine more brightly, though afterwards it is darker than before. Here is such a sheet. I lay my hand against the back, and you can see that where my hand has warmed it it shines more brightly. If you do the opposite experiment and chill a sheet of luminous paint while it is phosphorescing, you find its light dimmed — but it brightens again as it is warmed.

Professor Dewar has made the curious discovery that when cooled to about 200° below zero in liquid air, many substances become phosphorescent that are not so at ordinary temperatures. He has shown in this theatre how such things as feathers, ivory and paper become highly phosphorescent when cooled to these low temperatures and then lit. Chilled, they seem to acquire the power of absorbing luminous energy and storing it, to be given out later when they are warmed. The analogies between this and the behaviour of luminous paint are most suggestive. A sheet of luminous paint that has been exposed and then cooled becomes a veritable lamp of Aladdin: you have only to warm it with your hand and it shines.

Here we come to the third sort of luminescence in our list (p. 175): thermo-luminescence. The term is applied to the property, possessed by various minerals and particularly by the green kinds of fluor-spar, of shining in the dark when heated. Over a large gas burner a square of sheet iron has been heated almost to redness. Onto this hot surface, invisible in the darkness, I scatter from a pepper-pot some fine fragments of crushed fluor-spar. As they heat up they shine like little glow-worms. They shine brightly for a few minutes, then fade, but would go on giving out a faint glow for several hours. Once they have been heated in this way they seem to have used up their store of luminous energy, for on a second heating they do not luminesce again.

Footnote: Many other minerals have similar powers. In some cases the power of thermo-luminescing can be revived by fresh exposure to light, or by stimulation with an electric spark or with cathode rays. Wiedemann has found artificial substances that are thermo-luminescent, in particular a preparation of sulphate of calcium with a small percentage of sulphate of manganese mixed into it as a "solid solution."

The term tribo-luminescence, next on the list, refers to luminescence produced by friction. There is a very simple experiment you can try at home without any apparatus at all. Crush a lump of sugar in a completely dark room. As it is crushed it gives out a pale glow. So do crystals of uranium nitrate if shaken up in a bottle or ground in a mortar. Let me show it to you on a larger scale.

Here is a large specimen of quartz crystal weighing nearly a hundred pounds. One of its faces is almost flat. Taking a smaller quartz crystal in my hand, I rub it to and fro on the larger one. You can all see the brilliant flashes it gives out.

Reserving for my final lecture the use of electric discharges to produce luminescence, we will return to the properties of ultra-violet light. One effect it has above all other kinds of light is that of discharging electrified bodies, a phenomenon discovered by the late Professor Hertz. But there is this peculiar limitation. If the electrified surface is a metal surrounded by air, then when ultra-violet light falls on it, it will discharge the surface if the electrification is negative, but not if it is positive.

Footnote: I have, however, found that a surface of peroxide of lead surrounded by an atmosphere of hydrogen is discharged if the electrification is positive.

The fundamental point is easily shown. Here is an electroscope with two leaves of aluminium hung either side of a central aluminium blade, enclosed (Fig. 104) in a thin glass jar. To the top of the stem is fixed a disk of sheet zinc, freshly cleaned with a little sodium amalgam. It is tilted back at 45°, the angle at which the results are best. I hold a rubbed glass rod near the zinc disk and touch the disk while it is under the influence of the glass's positive charge. The electroscope thus takes on a negative electrification by influence, and the aluminium leaves stand out at a sharp angle. Now, throwing a beam of ultra-violet light onto the disk, the leaves are seen to collapse rapidly. If the electroscope is electrified positively, the leaves do not fall when the beam of ultra-violet light is directed at the disk. Even the longer waves of visible light are active on a clean surface of sodium or potassium. Different kinds of light-wave have different photo-electric powers, just as they have different photochemical ones.

[Figure 104: The aluminium-leaf electroscope with a tilted zinc disk on top. Charged negatively, its leaves stand apart; throw ultra-violet light on the disk and they fall together again.]

At the beginning of this lecture I dwelt on the photographic action of light-waves, and I return to it now to speak of the problem that has lately roused such keen interest among scientific photographers: the photography of colours. There have been many attempts to produce true photographs of things in their natural colours. All hope of this was vain so long as photographers worked with chemically prepared plates more sensitive to invisible light than to the visible kinds. Moreover, in the old collodion processes, the greater sensitiveness of the chemicals to blue and violet waves, and their relative insensitiveness to orange and red, made every photograph misrepresent the relative brightness of coloured objects. It was an old complaint that blues photographed like white and reds came out like black.

The first steps towards a remedy came with the discoveries of Vogel and of Abney: that by staining the film, or by giving it a fine granulation when preparing it as an emulsion, its sensitiveness to the longer visible waves could be increased. So were introduced the orthochromatic plates, which give photographs that represent the relative brightness of objects in black and white far more accurately — the ideal orthochromatic plate being one whose relative sensitiveness to the light of each part of the visible spectrum is the same as our eyes'.

Even before these discoveries, the theory of the three-colour method of reproducing colour by photography had been set out by Clerk Maxwell. In the theory of colour vision originated by Thomas Young, all colour sensations are referred to three simple or primary colour sensations, and it can be shown that no more than three are needed to account for the various phenomena of colour vision. These three primary sensations are the sensation of red, the sensation of green (a full green inclining to yellowish green), and the sensation of blue-violet (a violet inclining towards blue). A red light stimulates only one of these sensations in the nerves of the eye. A yellow light stimulates two, red and green, and is therefore not itself a primary sensation. Now, if we could take three photographs of an object, each corresponding to the light of one primary only, and could then light each photograph with its own kind of light and lay them one on another, we ought to get a reproduction of the object's natural colours. That, in brief, is the three-colour method.

Footnote: Discourse at the Royal Institution, 17th May 1861.

Footnote: The reader should consult Captain Abney's treatise on Colour Vision.

The true photography of colours was only discovered a year or two ago, by Professor Lippmann, whose exceedingly precious and beautiful results are individual pictures, incapable of being multiplied or reproduced. By placing a mirror of mercury behind the transparent sensitive film, each train of waves is reflected back during the exposure; and where the reflected waves meet the advancing waves of the train, they set up stationary nodes spaced through the thickness of the film at distances corresponding to the exact wave-lengths of the various lights. At these nodes the chemical action takes place, producing a permanent picture which, viewed by reflected light, shows all the natural colours of the object photographed. Through the kindness of my colleague Professor Meldola, I am able to show here, and to project on the screen, a Lippmann photograph of the spectrum in which all the colours appear in their natural tints. More recently Professor Lippmann has shown in this theatre the remarkable colour pictures he has produced of landscapes, still-life subjects, and even of the human figure.

Footnote: Since these lectures were delivered, two new processes of colour photography have been announced. In one, by M. Chassagnes, certain chemicals are said to be used to treat the photographic films, by virtue of which they become able to absorb pigments at those parts of the picture impressed by light of the corresponding tint. Another process, by Mr. Benetto, produces coloured transparencies by direct photography.

Returning to the three-colour method of recording and reproducing the natural colours of objects by photography, I am happy to be able, in conclusion, through the kindness of Mr. Ives, to show you the remarkable results he has obtained with his photochromoscope. Starting from Young's theory of the three primary sensations, Mr. Ives set out to build colour filters that would transmit, for each of the three primaries, all those waves of the spectrum that excite that sensation, and in proportion to their power of exciting it. So the filter for red should transmit not simply red light, but all those waves, of whatever colour, that are able to excite the red sensation — and transmit them only in proportion as they are able to excite it. Choosing the right tints for such filters takes no small skill and experience.

Through three such screens — one for red, one for green, one for blue-violet — three photographs, three negatives, are taken simultaneously side by side on a single orthochromatic plate. From these three negatives, which are of course colourless themselves, three positives are printed. These too are colourless, but they differ according to the colours of the different parts of the object photographed. Fig. 105 is a triple chromogram of a butterfly whose wings, besides having definite patches of red and white on a black ground, carry all over them a beautiful sheen of brilliant blue. The uppermost of the three images is the one to be lit by blue-violet light. The second is for the green light, and the lowest for the red. Those parts that are to come out white when combined are white in all three images. Each image is itself, like the printed cut, colourless — a mere black-and-white transcript on glass.

[Figure 105: The triple chromogram of the butterfly. Uppermost, the picture to be lit by blue-violet light; in the middle, the one for green light; at the bottom, the one for red. All three are plain black and white.]

Now let these three colourless pictures be placed in an instrument so arranged that blue-violet light falls through the first, green through the second, and red through the third; and let them then be recombined by suitable mirrors so that the eye sees them all at once. The primary colours will recombine and give the object in all the glory of its natural tints.

[Figure 106: The photochromoscope in section. The three pictures stand at A, B and C behind red, blue-violet and green glasses; the oblique transparent sheets D and E fold their three beams into one, and the lens F delivers the combined image to the eye.]

The instrument Mr. Ives has designed for recombining these triple photographs — the photochromoscope, or kromskop — stands on the table. Fig. 106 gives a diagram of how it is built. Mr. Ives has also brought a lantern photochromoscope, with which he will now project a few of these beautiful photographs onto the screen. The lantern itself has three nozzles, through which the red, the green and the blue-violet pictures are projected separately onto the screen, giving the colour combinations where they overlap.

Footnote: A, B and C are red, blue-violet and green glasses, against which the three corresponding transparent photograms are placed. Two of the pictures, at A and B, are lit directly by light from above; the third, C, is lit by an oblique reflector. The red picture is viewed by light reflected at the front surface of D, an oblique transparent glass sheet. The blue-violet picture at B sends its light down onto another oblique transparent sheet at E, which reflects it through sheet D to the eye. The green picture at C is viewed through both transparent reflectors D and E. The lens F gathers the light for the eye, which thus sees the three pictures as though they were superposed and equally far away. The instrument is made binocular, so that the eyes see what is in effect a single image in its natural colours and in solid relief.

He first shows us separately the three coloured disks of light, red, green and blue-violet. Then he moves the nozzles so that the three disks partly overlap, as in Fig. 107. Where red and green mix they give us yellow; where green and blue-violet overlap they give a peacock blue; where blue-violet and red overlap they give purple; and where all three overlap at the centre they give white. Notice how the tint produced by the overlap of two is always the complementary of the third. The yellow is complementary to the blue-violet; the peacock is complementary to the red; and the purple is a tint complementary to the green.

[Figure 107: The three coloured disks of light thrown so as to overlap. Red and green make yellow, green and blue-violet make peacock, blue-violet and red make purple, and where all three cross at the centre the result is white.]

Those three photographs of the butterfly are now put into the chromoscope lantern and brought into exact register. The blue shimmer on the insect's wings is reproduced with marvellous fidelity. No painter could hope to produce so natural a picture with pigments. Here is a photograph of a basket of fruit. Note the yellow lemon: on examining the separate colour pictures, one sees that this yellow is made up of the red and green lights mixed. Here is a gorgeous bouquet of flowers, the colours superb. Here is a cigar box showing the natural brown of the wood; and beside it a piece of cloisonné enamel, with all the delicate shades of its dull tints in their proper relation. And lastly, here is a box of sweets, photographed so naturally that one feels they must really be edible. After that we need no further proof that, by the proper choice of primary tints, the dream has at last been realised of recording and reproducing by photography the colours of natural objects.
