Lecture Five: The Invisible Spectrum — the Infra-Red Part

(Part 1 of 3)

How to sift the invisible infra-red light out of the visible light — Experiments on the absorption and transmission of invisible infra-red light — It is cut off by transparent glass but let through by opaque ebonite — The use of the radiometer — The use of the thermopile and the bolometer — "Heat-indicating" paint — Experiments on the reflection, refraction and polarisation of invisible infra-red light — Hertz's discovery that electric waves travel — Hertzian waves are really gigantic waves of invisible light — Experiments on the properties of Hertzian waves: their reflection, refraction and polarisation — The conclusion that all light-waves, visible and invisible, are really electric waves of different sizes

Today we deal with those waves of invisible light that lie beyond the red end of the spectrum. They are invisible to us because their wave-lengths are longer than any the nerve structures of our eyes are sensitive to — or, to put it the other way round, because their vibrations have a lower frequency than anything within our optical range.

Just as the ultra-violet waves have a shorter wave-length and a higher frequency than the visible waves, and have to be detected by their chemical, luminescent and discharging effects, so the infra-red waves, with their longer wave-length and lower frequency, have to be detected and investigated by physical effects other than sight. The chief physical effect these long infra-red waves produce is that of warming the things they fall on. For this reason they are sometimes called the calorific waves, and invisible light of this kind is sometimes called "radiant heat."

Footnote: Another term used by some writers is "the radiation." This use of the word is to be deprecated, for "radiation" ought not to be used in two senses. If it is rightly used to mean the act of radiating, then some other word ought to be used for the thing radiated — namely, the waves.

But if, as I shall show you, this so-called radiant heat has, except for being invisible, all the physical properties of light — if we can reflect it, refract it, disperse it, diffract it and polarise it — then we are logically bound to admit that it really is a kind of light.

In short, the spectrum stretches beyond the visible part both ways: beyond the violet are the chemical waves, and below the red are the heat waves.

If you find, as everyone does, that light from the sun or from a flame warms the things it shines on, it is natural to ask which of all the waves mixed together in the beam give the warmth. To answer that, let us turn to a carefully considered experiment. First let us spread the light out into a spectrum, and then explore which part has the greatest warming effect.

The first explorations of the spectrum were made by putting a thermometer, with a blackened bulb, into the different parts of the spectrum. This showed that the heating effect lies mainly at, and beyond, the red end.

The spectrum now thrown on the screen once more is produced, as on previous occasions, by using an electric arc-lamp in the lantern, with a slit in front of it, a lens to focus an image of the slit, and a prism to spread the mixed waves out into their proper places according to wave-length.

Our spectrum today is neither as brilliant nor as long as you have seen it on other occasions. The reason — as you will shortly appreciate — is that we are obliged to give up glass lenses and glass prisms and use lens and prism of rock salt instead. Rock salt refracts less and disperses less, hence the narrowness of our rainbow-coloured band.

And now we have to make good by experiment the proposition I have put forward: that the heating effect is due to the longest waves, those at the red end and beyond it.

An ordinary thermometer would not be convenient, so I use another method — a sort of electric thermometer, the thermopile. If you want to know all about this instrument you must look it up in treatises on electricity. All I need say now is that it is an apparatus (Fig. 109) exceedingly sensitive to heat, which generates an electric current when its face is warmed. The current is led into a galvanometer, which throws a spot of light onto the scale against the wall. You may take it, then, that the position of that spot of light will tell us whether the face of the thermopile is warmer or colder than the air of the room. If it is warmer the spot will move to the right; if colder, to the left.

[Figure 109: The thermopile — an electric thermometer. Warm its face and it generates a current, which the galvanometer turns into a spot of light travelling along a scale on the wall.]

[Figure 110: Crookes's radiometer. Four light vanes, blackened on one face, are poised on a needle inside an exhausted glass bulb; let light fall on them and the mill spins.]

[Figure 111: The differential thermometer. Two air bulbs are joined by a bent tube holding a thread of coloured liquid; one bulb is blackened, the other gilded, so any difference in the warming of the two shows at once in the tube.]

[Figure 112: The Bunsen burner in front of the thermopile's cone, with the shutter drawn back. Stop the air-holes at the foot with a finger and the flame goes bright and sooty — and the spot of light runs off the end of the scale.]

The spectrum now falls on a small brass screen with a slit in it, behind which stands the thermopile; and at present the part of the spectrum coming through the slit onto the face of the pile is the ultra-violet part. The spot of light is still at zero, showing that ultra-violet light does not appreciably warm the face of the pile. I now explore the spectrum by pushing the thermopile gently along. The slit now lies in the violet — yet there is no heating effect. The blue, the peacock, the green and the yellow are explored in turn — yet the spot of light stays at zero. These waves produce no appreciable heating.

Another move forward and the orange waves come through the slit onto the face of the pile: the spot begins to move. The orange waves warm it slightly. I push on into the red, and the spot moves gently across about a quarter of the scale. Red waves heat more than orange ones. Pushing on beyond the end of the visible red, out into the dark, the effect increases. At a point about as far beyond the end of the red as the red is beyond the green, the heating effect is much greater — the spot flies right across the scale. Clearly the waves with the greatest heating power are those a little way into the invisible infra-red region; in other words, the waves that heat most have a wave-length somewhat greater than the largest waves of the visible spectrum. Taking the size of the extreme red waves as 32 millionths of an inch, we may put these more powerful invisible waves at about 40 to 45 millionths of an inch in length.

The invisible infra-red spectrum has often been explored, and by many explorers. Langley, using a different electric instrument of his own invention called a bolometer, has succeeded in observing waves 592 millionths of an inch long — twenty times the wave-length of red light. Professor Rubens has independently measured infra-red waves as long as 0.002400 centimetre, or about 944 millionths of an inch. So, set out on a scale of wave-lengths, the infra-red spectrum stretches to about fifty times the extent of the visible one. In the language used for musical intervals: while the range of visible light is about one octave — the extreme violet having about twice the frequency of the extreme red — the infra-red waves are known to reach more than five octaves below it, and the ultra-violet waves about two octaves above (see the table on pp. 190, 191).

Our thermopile has been set at that part of the spectrum, a little beyond the end of the visible red, where we found the greatest heating effect. To increase the effect a little I shall open the slit slightly, letting more of these longer waves fall on the face of the instrument. Having adjusted things so as to be sensitive to the heat waves, we will try an experiment or two to find whether these longer waves can penetrate the various materials we tried with ordinary light.

First take a piece of window glass and see whether the heat waves will pass through it. Putting it in front of the slit we notice, from what the galvanometer and thermopile tell us, that though it cuts off much of the heat it does not cut it off entirely. Substituting a piece of red glass, we find that it too cuts off some of the effect, but blue glass cuts off much more. Now I take a piece of flint glass, which contains lead: you see that it cuts off far more of the waves. Here is a slice of quartz crystal; it does not cut off as much as the glass did. Here again is a slice of calc-spar of the same thickness: it cuts off the heat waves more completely than any material I have tried so far. And lastly here is a slice, also of the same thickness, of rock salt — a slice of a big crystal of common salt, sawn off and polished. The rock salt hardly cuts off the heat waves at all.

Here, then, are four substances — glass, quartz, calc-spar and rock salt — all equally transparent to ordinary light. Quartz, as we saw in the last lecture, is exceedingly transparent to the ultra-violet kind of invisible light, that is to the shortest waves. But today we prove that rock salt is the most transparent to the infra-red kind. Naturally, since this was discovered half a century ago, we now apply the discovery in building our apparatus. The lenses and the prism I am using today are made neither of glass nor of quartz, but of rock salt. And since rock salt has very poor dispersive power for the visible waves, it produces, as you have seen, a poor spectrum of colours compared with what a prism of glass or quartz of the same size would give.

Instead of the thermopile we might have used another instrument as our explorer: the radiometer (Fig. 110). A little over twenty years ago the celebrated chemist Crookes discovered that when light falls on movable things — such as the vanes of a lightly poised mill inside a glass bulb from which most of the air has been pumped out, leaving a fairly good vacuum — the vanes of the mill are driven round. Apparently the blackened vane tends to retreat from the light. Why, we must consider presently. My point now is that this apparent repulsion can be used to measure the intensity of the radiation falling on the instrument. Put the radiometer in one part of the spectrum and it turns slowly. Move it into the red end and it spins faster. But the effect turns out to depend not only on the kind of waves, but to some extent on the nature of the vanes' surfaces and on the degree of vacuum in the bulb. Some radiometers spin fastest in the bright part of the spectrum our eyes are sensitive to.

Whether we explore the spectrum with a thermometer, as Sir William Herschel did, or with a thermopile, or a bolometer, or a radiometer, we find that it consists of waves spread out in different directions, and that the different waves have different heating powers. And yet all these different waves, with their different powers, are given off at one and the same time from the same source. If a thing that is heated is not heated enough it will not shine — we all know that. But even if it is not hot enough to shine visibly, it will still give out some invisible waves. When you begin to warm a substance, at first it gives out only a few waves of very long wave-length. Heat it more and it gives out more of these heat waves, and along with them some visible waves of shorter wave-length. Heat it hotter still, so that it is white-hot, and it gives out not only heat waves of all sorts but visible waves from red to violet, and ultra-violet waves too, all mixed together.

In the next experiment we shall use a dark source of waves. We shall test the waves given off by a vessel of hot water. Here is a beaker glass, which I fill with boiling water from the kettle. You would not see that in the dark, would you? In a perfectly dark room it would give out none of the waves your eyes are sensitive to. But if you held your hand a few inches from it you would feel a gentle warmth radiating from it. You can feel with the nerves of your hand what the nerves of your eyes cannot perceive: the long waves, the calorific radiation.

These long waves warm everything they fall on — but they do not warm everything equally. This can be established in many ways. Black and dark substances absorb the waves that fall on them; bright and shiny bodies reflect most of them. What becomes of the waves that fall on black and dark bodies? Their energy is not lost; it is transmuted into sensible heat. Instead of wave-motions in free space, we have molecular vibrations in the substance. A bright surface such as polished metal is not warmed by the waves falling on it, because as they meet the surface they are not broken up, but simply start off again in a new direction. Whenever waves break on a surface and are destroyed, or absorbed in the act of breaking, the result is heat. The so-called heat waves, or infra-red waves, are not themselves hot. They do not heat the medium they travel through as waves. But they are readily absorbed by the things they fall on, and being absorbed, they warm what they fall on. A black surface is one that absorbs both the invisible and the visible waves. It heats more readily than a white or a bright surface.

Now here is a peculiar thermometer (Fig. 111) with two bulbs full of air, joined by a bent tube containing a little coloured liquid to serve as an index; it stands at the height marked a. If I put my hand on either bulb and so warm the air inside it, the expansion of the air will push the liquid down in the tube below the warmed bulb. If both were warmed equally the liquid would not move at all. So this apparatus indicates a difference of temperature, and is therefore called a differential thermometer. Notice next that one bulb, B, has been painted dull black, while the other, G, has been gilded with gold leaf. I am going to put the beaker of hot water exactly midway between the two bulbs, where it can radiate equally to both. The gilded bulb, having a bright surface, reflects the waves and is scarcely warmed by them at all. But the black bulb, whose surface absorbs more, will be warmed more than the bright gilded one — and you will see the indicating liquid fall in the tube below B and rise in the tube below G. Had we used a beaker half blackened and half gilded, we could easily have demonstrated another point: that a hot black surface radiates heat waves more readily than a hot bright one.

Now let us pass on to another experiment, again using the thermopile. Here is a thermopile connected by wires to the galvanometer, with its reflected spot of light on the wall. It is arranged so that if the face of the pile is warmed the spot moves to the right and tells you so. In front of the conical mouthpiece of the thermopile stands an ordinary Bunsen burner, which, as you know, is a gas jet with openings at the foot to let atmospheric air mix with the gas. It gives a smokeless blue flame very different from an ordinary bright gas flame. Though very hot, this flame gives out very little light — nor, as a matter of fact, does it radiate much heat. True, a column of hot air rises straight up from it. But that is not what I am thinking of. The question is: is it sending out heat sideways?

Well, we can try. Opening the metal shutter that closes the thermopile's mouthpiece, I let the light and heat, such as they are, radiate from the flame onto the face of the pile. At once the spot of light on the wall moves off to the right, showing that there are at any rate some waves present that can heat the pile. If I put a sheet of glass between the burner and the thermopile for a moment, the spot comes back almost to zero, showing that glass screens off nearly all the waves. I take the screen away and the spot goes back to the right, showing that the heating has begun again.

Now comes the particular point of the experiment. If I stop up the holes at the foot of the burner where the air has been getting in, the flame will at once burn brightly, like an ordinary gas flame. The combustion will in fact be less perfect, for the flame will be sooty, and the total amount of heat produced in a given time will be less because the burning is imperfect. But because the burning is imperfect, innumerable solid particles are formed in the flame, which get brilliantly heated and give out light. They are better radiators of waves than the gaseous particles of the pale blue flame, and they radiate long waves better. To make the flame shine like this I have only to stop the air-holes with finger and thumb — and instantly the spot of light on the wall rushes to the right, even past the end of the scale, proving that the bright flame radiates more heat waves to the pile. I take my fingers away, air gets in again, the flame drops back to its former pale state, and the spot of light settles back where it was. Every time I let the flame burn brightly it radiates more waves sideways.

You may use a radiometer instead of a thermopile to demonstrate the same facts. The vanes of the mill turn fast when the flame is bright, and more slowly when, by letting air into the flame, you improve the burning.
