Appendix to Lecture Five: The Electromagnetic Theory of Light

During the first quarter of the present century the wave theory of light successfully displaced the older corpuscular theory. Young, Fresnel, Arago, Biot and Airy established the laws of physical optics on an impregnable foundation of undulatory theory, leaving Brewster the sole surviving exponent of the material nature of light. But none of those who thus helped to establish the wave theory could do much to explain the nature of the wave-motion itself. If light consists of waves, they must be waves in or of something — that something being provisionally called the ether. But as to the nature of the ether itself, or the particular motions of it that travel as waves, scarcely anything could be learned, beyond the fact that the ether behaves rather like an incompressible liquid or solid of extreme thinness but great rigidity, and that the waves are of the kind classed as transverse (see p. 108).

In 1845 Faraday discovered the singular fact that a magnet exerts a peculiar action on light: the plane of polarisation of a polarised beam is rotated when the beam passes along a magnetic field.

The existence of a relation between light and magnetism being thus established, Faraday went on to look for others, including the action of electrostatic strain on polarised light, and the effect of reflecting polarised light at the polished pole of a magnet — neither of which, however, he managed to observe.

In 1846 he sent to the Philosophical Magazine some "Thoughts on Ray Vibrations," in which he suggested that radiation of all kinds, including light, was a high species of vibration in the lines of force. "Suppose," he says, "two bodies A B, distant from each other and under mutual action, and therefore connected by lines of force, and let us fix our attention upon one resultant of force having an invariable direction as regards space; if one of the bodies move in the least degree right or left, or if its power be shifted for a moment within the mass (neither of these cases being difficult to realise if A and B be either electric or magnetic bodies), then an effect equivalent to a lateral disturbance will take place in the resultant upon which we are fixing our attention; for either it will increase in force whilst the neighbouring resultants are diminishing, or it will fall in force as they are increasing. . . . The propagation of light, and therefore probably of all radiant action, occupies time; and, that a vibration of the line of force should account for the phenomena of radiation, it is necessary that such vibration should occupy time also. . . . As to that condition of the lines of force which represents the assumed high elasticity of the aether, it cannot in this respect be deficient: the question here seems rather to be, whether the lines are sluggish enough in their action to render them equivalent to the aether in respect of the time known experimentally to be occupied in the transmission of radiant force."

In 1864 Clerk Maxwell, in a paper in the Philosophical Transactions on "A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field," wrote: "The conception of the propagation of transverse magnetic disturbances to the exclusion of normal ones is distinctly set forth by Professor Faraday in his 'Thoughts on Ray Vibrations.' The electromagnetic theory of light, as proposed by him, is the same in substance as that which I have begun to develop in this paper, except that in 1846 there were no data to calculate the velocity of propagation."

Maxwell then sets out new equations expressing the relations between the electric and magnetic displacements in the medium and the forces they give rise to. He not only accepts Faraday's idea that a moving electric charge — on a charged body in motion — acts magnetically as an electric current, a proposition then unsupported by any experimental demonstration, but goes further and maintains that there is also a magnetic action produced while an electric displacement is being made or released in a dielectric medium. In fact, displacement-currents in non-conductors produce, while they last, exactly the same magnetic action as the equivalent conduction current would.

He finds that if magnetic methods of measurement are used, the unit of electricity arrived at has a certain value, while if purely electrical methods are used the unit has a different one. The relation between these two units was found to depend on the "electric elasticity" of the medium, and to be a velocity — namely, the velocity at which an electromagnetic disturbance travels through space. This velocity had already been determined as a ratio of units by Weber and Kohlrausch, who found it to be 3.19 × 10¹⁰ centimetres per second. The apparent speed at which an electric disturbance travels along a wire had earlier been roughly determined by Wheatstone, at a somewhat higher figure.

Commenting on Weber's result, Maxwell goes on: "This velocity is so nearly that of light, that it seems we have strong reason to conclude that light itself (including radiant heat, and other radiations, if any) is an electromagnetic disturbance in the form of waves propagated through the electromagnetic field according to electromagnetic laws. If so, the agreement between the elasticity of the medium as calculated from the rapid alternations of luminous vibrations, and as found by the slow processes of electrical experiments, shows how perfect and regular the elastic properties of the medium must be when not encumbered with any matter denser than air. If the same character of the elasticity is retained in dense transparent bodies, it appears that the square of the index of refraction is equal to the product of the specific dielectric capacity and the specific magnetic capacity. Conducting media are shown to absorb such radiations rapidly, and therefore to be generally opaque."

These two conclusions Maxwell tried to verify himself, and he pointed out an apparent exception in the case of electrolytes, which conduct and yet are transparent. In Maxwell's theory every electromagnetic wave must consist of two kinds of displacement, both across the direction of travel and at right angles to one another: one an electrostatic displacement, the other a magnetic one. In this feature Maxwell's theory reconciles the conflicting views of Fresnel and MacCullagh about how the displacements relate to the "plane of polarisation." It is now known that the electric displacements are at right angles to that plane, agreeing with Fresnel's vibrations, while the magnetic displacements lie in the plane of polarisation, as MacCullagh's theory requires.

When Maxwell published his Treatise on Magnetism and Electricity in 1874, he had already attempted a further verification of the theory by a new determination of the ratio of the units. During the next ten years British physicists were busy working out the applications of the theory and testing its truth in particular cases. Lord Rayleigh showed that it led far more readily than the old elastic-solid theory of light to the equations for double refraction, and to the explanation of the scattering of light — as in the blue of the sky — by small particles. FitzGerald applied it to the problems of the reflection and refraction of light. J. J. Thomson undertook a new determination of the ratio of the units. Ayrton and Perry pursued a similar investigation by a new method; the same two also verified the relation between optical and dielectric properties in gases that the theory requires, and examined the anomalies presented by ice and ebonite. Poynting and Heaviside independently deduced from Maxwell's theory the proposition that the energy of an electric current travels by the medium and not by the wire. Hopkinson investigated the relation between the refractive index of a number of substances and their dielectric inductivity, and found some notable departures from the values the theory required. Lodge added a number of important considerations and built mechanical models to illustrate Maxwell's ideas. I myself investigated the opacity of tourmaline in relation to its conductivity, and found also, in accordance with Maxwell's views, that the conductivity of the double iodide of mercury and copper increases when it is raised to the temperature at which its opacity to light suddenly increases.

Even more important, because independent of Maxwell's theory, Dr. Kerr in 1876 and 1877 discovered by direct experiment new relations between light and magnetism, and between light and electrostatic strain — the very effects Faraday had suspected but sought in vain. And lastly, FitzGerald in 1879 and 1883 suggested ways of starting electromagnetic waves in the ether.

By 1884 all British physicists had accepted Maxwell's theory, except perhaps Lord Kelvin, who had just then been working out an independent spring-shell theory of the ether as an improvement on the elastic-solid theory. Three years later Lord Kelvin gave it his support too. On the Continent, however, it was barely recognised. In France it was quite ignored until Mascart and Joubert gave some account of it in their treatise on electricity. In Germany it was not quite so entirely neglected. Von Helmholtz appears to have been drawn to study it early, and himself evolved a new theory of dielectric action along similar lines. Later, in 1893, he applied the electromagnetic theory to explain anomalous refraction and dispersion (see the Appendix to Lecture Three, p. 100, above). It was von Helmholtz who first drew Hertz's attention to the possibility of establishing a relation between electromagnetic forces and dielectric polarisation. Boltzmann had also tried to verify Maxwell's theory in respect of the relation between the optical and dielectric properties of transparent substances.

For the rest, though, Maxwell's theory was practically ignored. Boltzmann himself wrote in 1891: "The theory of Maxwell is so diametrically opposed to the ideas which have become customary to us that we must first cast behind us all our previous views of the nature and operation of electric forces before we can enter into its portals." Wiedemann appears to have thought the discrepancies observed by Hopkinson and Boltzmann enough to call the validity of the theory into question, and little notice is taken of it in the volumes of the 1885 edition of Die Lehre von der Elektricität. (Fleming has shown, in 1897, that these discrepancies disappear when the substances are cooled in liquid oxygen to about −180° C.)

In 1886 Lodge, investigating the theory of lightning conductors, carried out a long series of experiments on the discharge of small condensers, which led him to observe electric oscillations and the travelling of electric waves guided by wires. Hertz, taking up the problem von Helmholtz had set him, threw himself into investigating the influence of non-conducting media on the propagation of electric sparks. By March 1888 he had succeeded not only in producing electric oscillations and electric waves with the apparatus described above (Fig. 114, p. 215), but in demonstrating that these waves could be reflected and refracted like ordinary light.

The result of publishing Hertz's work was immediate and widespread. To those continental physicists who had until then ignored Maxwell's theory, or who did not know of the proofs accumulated by British physicists, Hertz's work was nothing short of a revelation. Scientific Europe threw itself into the production of electric oscillations as if eager to make up lost ground. The revelation was the more significant because, for those who had not accepted the ideas of Faraday and Maxwell about action in the medium, it meant abandoning every other electrical theory then current, all of which rested on the now untenable principle of action at a distance. It was welcomed no less heartily in England by those who were already Maxwell's disciples. They saw in it the crowning proof of a theory they had accepted as true on other grounds. To adopt Oliver Lodge's words: by the end of 1888 the science of electricity had definitely annexed the domain of optics, and had become an imperial science.

Since 1888 much has been done to complete the experimental verification of the full analogy between electric waves and waves of light. The more important results are briefly noticed on pp. 221-229 above. Suffice it to say here that there is no known physical property of ordinary light-waves that has not been found to be a property of the longer invisible waves produced by purely electric means as well. Because of their greater wave-length they will pass through many substances opaque to ordinary light, such as stone and brick walls, and through fog and mist.

A Hertz-Wave Model

After these lectures were delivered, and while this volume was being prepared for the press, I devised a wave-motion model to illustrate mechanically how a wave travels from a Hertz oscillator to a Hertz resonator. This apparatus, shown in Fig. 129, should be compared with Fig. 114, p. 215. In this model the "oscillator" is a heavy mass of brass hung by cords, with a definite time of swing. The "resonator" is a brass circle hung at the other end of the apparatus by three threads. The two are adjusted, by lengthening or shortening their cords, to have identical periods of oscillation. Between them, to represent the intervening medium and carry the energy along in waves, is a row of interconnected pendulums — on a plan somewhat similar to one suggested in 1877 by Osborne Reynolds — each consisting of a lead bullet hung by a V-shaped thread, the separate Vs overlapping one another so that no bullet can swing without passing some of its motion to its neighbour. Draw the oscillator aside and let it go, and it sets up a transverse wave which travels along the row of balls in a way the eye can easily follow, and which, on reaching the resonator at the far end, sets it vibrating.

[Figure 129: The Hertz-wave model. A heavy brass mass hangs at one end as the oscillator and a brass ring at the other as the resonator, with a long row of lead bullets on overlapping V threads between them to carry the wave across.]
