Lecture Six: Röntgen Light

(Part 3 of 4)

The last tube of this set illustrating Crookes's researches has as its cathode a large hollow cup of aluminium at the bottom (Fig. 137). This concave cathode focuses the cathode rays, bringing them together at a point in space a little above the centre of the tube. Crookes found that if the cathode rays were focused in this way on anything, they produced great heat. Glass was melted, diamonds charred, platinum foil heated red-hot and even fused by the impact of the concentrated cathode stream. In the focusing tube before you — an old one, made more than ten years ago — a piece of thin platinum foil hangs in the tube to be heated by the rays. But it has shifted and no longer hangs at the focus. Yet by holding a small horseshoe magnet outside the tube to deflect the rays a little, I can move the focus until it falls on the surface of the platinum foil — which you now see raised to a bright red heat.

[Figure 137: The focusing tube. Its cathode is a large hollow cup of aluminium at the bottom, which gathers the cathode rays to a point a little above the centre of the tube, hot enough to fuse platinum.]

Since the day, now nearly twenty years ago, when these most beautiful and astonishing observations were made by Crookes, there has been much speculation about the nature of these cathode rays inside the tube. Their properties were so extraordinarily unlike anything in ordinary light that even the name "ray," as applied to them, seemed out of place. Crookes's own term, "radiant matter," was objected to as necessarily implying that they were material; and yet no explanation seemed more reasonable than Crookes's own suggestion that they consisted of flights of electrified particles. It was supposed that they could only exist inside a vacuum tube at an exceedingly high degree of exhaustion.

However, in 1894 Dr. Philipp Lenard, acting on a hint given by an observation of Professor Hertz's,

Footnote: Hertz noticed that when a very thin metal film was put inside the Crookes tube, the glass still fluoresced under the cathode discharge. He found the same to be true when the film was replaced by a piece of thin aluminium foil, quite opaque to light.

[Figure 138: Lenard's tube. The cathode disk sits on a central wire inside a protecting glass sleeve, with the anode as a metal cylinder around it, and at the far end a brass cap pierced with a small window of aluminium foil.]

succeeded in bringing the cathode rays out into the air at ordinary pressure. For this he fitted up a tube with a small window of thin aluminium foil opposite the cathode, as shown in Fig. 138. The general form of the tube was the same as Hertz's: cylindrical, with a small cathode disk on the end of a central wire, protected by an inner glass tube, and the anode a cylindrical metal tube surrounding the cathode. On the far end of the tube was cemented a brass cap with a small hole in the middle covered by aluminium foil 1/10000 inch thick.

Through this "window," when the tube was highly exhausted, there came out into the open air rays which, if not the actual continuation of the cathode rays, are closely identified with them. They can be deflected by a magnet, though in varying degrees depending on the vacuum inside. They can excite luminescence. Lenard explored them with a small luminescent screen of paper covered with a chemical called pentadecylparatolylketone. He found they could affect a photographic dry plate, and studied their power of penetrating materials both by the screen and by the plate. He found that air at ordinary pressure is not very transparent to them, acting as a cloudy medium. He found them able to pass through thin sheets of aluminium and even of copper. He also made them affect a photographic plate completely shut up in an aluminium case, and discharge an electroscope shut up in a metal box. All this work was done in 1894 and 1895, and duly published. Though it attracted no public notice, physicists regarded it as of very great importance.

As you were told at the outset in Röntgen's own account, his research began with the deliberate aim of re-investigating the emission of cathode rays from the vacuum tube as studied by Hertz and Lenard. So, as Lenard had done, he used a luminescent screen to explore the rays, and a Crookes tube (Fig. 139) closely resembling Lenard's — indeed identical with the one Hertz had used before. The end opposite the cathode was simply of glass, with no brass cap and no aluminium window. So prepared, he found what I have already described: those mysterious rays which, with characteristic modesty, he called "X-rays," but which will always be best known as Röntgen's rays.

They are not cathode rays, though caused by them. Cathode rays will not pass through glass and are deflected by a magnet; Röntgen rays will pass through glass and are not deflected by a magnet. They seem in fact to be formed by the destruction of the cathode rays, taking their origin at the spot where the cathode rays strike a solid object — best of all a heavy metal such as platinum or uranium. Nor are they ordinary light of either the infra-red or the ultra-violet kind, though they resemble the latter in their chemical activity and in exciting luminescence so freely. But ultra-violet light can, as we have seen in earlier lectures, be reflected, refracted and polarised, while Röntgen light cannot. Nor are Röntgen's rays the same as Lenard's; for Lenard's are deflectible by the magnet in various degrees, and air is relatively far more opaque to them than to Röntgen's.

Röntgen seems to have been fortunate in having the means of producing the most perfect exhaustion with his vacuum pump; for on the perfection of the vacuum, more than on any other detail, the successful production of Röntgen rays depends. A vacuum abundantly good enough to call out luminescence, or to show the shadow of the cross, or to produce heating at the focus, or to drive the "molecule mill," is not good enough to generate Röntgen rays. For that the exhaustion must be carried to a higher point — so high, indeed, that the tube is on the verge of ceasing to conduct at all.

[Figure 139: Röntgen's tube — the same cylindrical form as Lenard's, but with the end opposite the cathode left as plain glass, with no brass cap and no aluminium window.]

Footnote: There is reflection, but not of a regular kind; the supposed cases of true reflection announced by Lord Blythswood and others belong to the category of myths. There is diffuse reflection of Röntgen rays from polished metals, particularly zinc, just as there is diffuse reflection of ordinary light from white paper. As to refraction, Perrin in Paris and Winkelmann in Jena have independently found what they take for evidence of feeble refraction through aluminium prisms; but the deviation, which is towards the refracting edge, is so exceedingly small as to be scarcely distinguishable from instrumental error. Polarisation has been looked for by many skilled observers, using many materials, tourmaline among them. Only one success has been claimed, by MM. Galitzine and Karnojitzky with tourmaline; but their result has not been confirmed and is probably mistaken. Nor has interference of Röntgen light yet been shown to be possible. Several observers have claimed to obtain diffraction fringes from which the wave-length of the Röntgen rays could be measured. But some of these measurements give a wave-length greater than that of red light and others less than that of ordinary ultra-violet: they are probably all due to some unnoticed source of error. None can be accepted without confirmation by other experimenters, and that is not yet forthcoming.

Here let me say a word about the man himself and his surroundings. Still in the prime of life, at fifty-one, Professor Wilhelm Konrad Röntgen had already made a name among physicists by his work in optics and electricity before the brilliant discovery that gave him wider fame. He holds the chair of Physics in the University of Würzburg in Bavaria, and lives and works in the physical laboratory of the University. The little town of Würzburg, with 61,000 inhabitants, boasts a university attended by 1,490 students and supported with an income of £41,000 a year, more than half of it contributed by the State. There are 53 professors and 40 assistants. Its buildings comprise a group of laboratories and institutes devoted to chemistry, physiology, pathology, mineralogy and the like. Its physical laboratory, a neat detached block in which the professor also has his residence, is of modern design. Its equipment for research is infinitely better than that of the University of London; and it is expected of the professor that he shall contribute to the advancement of science by original investigation.

Footnote: From a Report recently presented to the Convocation of the University of London, it appears that the physical and chemical laboratories of the University are practically non-existent. "There are three rooms at Burlington House which are occasionally used as laboratories during examinations, and for examinational purposes only. The largest of these is a large hall lit from the top. When used as a chemical laboratory, it is fitted up with working benches down the middle and along the two sides, the benches being divided into separate stalls to isolate candidates in their work. It was stated that the middle stalls and benches are taken down when the hall is used for written examinations, and are re-erected when a chemical examination is to be held. In a second hall, also lighted from above, where frequent written examinations are held, temporary arrangements are made whenever an examination in practical physics is to be held. A curtain of black cloth slung across one end of the room gave partial obscurity over the tables where photometric and spectroscopic apparatus was placed. The third room, sometimes called the galvanometer room, is a smaller room in the basement, artificially lighted, and used chiefly for printing, except at the times of examinations in practical physics." Such is the melancholy state of things in a University where everything is sacrificed on the altar of competitive examinations.

[Figure 140: Professor W. K. Röntgen.]

With such material and intellectual encouragement to research as surrounds the university professor in even the smallest of German universities, what wonder that science advances there? Would that a like stimulus existed in England. The Professor of Physics in the University of London has made no discovery like Professor Röntgen's, for the very good reason that the University of London has neither appointed any Professor of Physics nor built any physical laboratory in which he might work. Neither the State nor the municipality has provided it with the necessary funds.

Footnote: Bavaria has a population of 6,000,000. It supports the three universities of Munich, Erlangen and Würzburg, with a total of over 6,000 students, at a cost of £150,000 a year, of which £93,000 is provided by the State. London, with a population of 5,000,000, has the University of London, a mere Examining Board, to which about 2,000 students come up yearly for intermediate and degree examinations, a large proportion of them from the provinces. It has no professors. Its laboratories are in the deplorable state described above. So far from being endowed by the State, it pays the State about £16,500 a year and nominally receives back about £16,280 as a parliamentary grant. It receives no subvention from the municipality. Its library is closed for a large part of the year, the room being used for examination purposes almost every day.

Its charter precludes it from doing anything for science except hold examinations! Perhaps some day London may have a university worthy of being mentioned beside that of Würzburg — which is only eleventh in size among the universities of Germany.

Röntgen had explored the properties of the new rays so thoroughly by the time his discovery was announced that little remained for others to do beyond elaborating his work. One point deserves notice: the improvement of the tubes. Röntgen held that his rays originated at the fluorescent spot where the cathode rays struck the glass. This led some people to the idea that fluorescence was an advantage. Several workers, however, discovered at about the same time that if the cathode rays were focused on a piece of metal, the emission of Röntgen light became more copious. Studying the conditions under which the rays are produced early last year, I found that the best radiators are substances that do not fluoresce at all — namely, metals. I found zinc, magnesium, aluminium, copper and iron to answer; but platinum was better than any of these, and uranium best of all.

Directing the cathode discharge against a target, or "anti-cathode," of platinum fixed in the middle of the tube, I watched carefully, with the help of a luminescent screen, how the surface behaved during the process of exhaustion. After the stage is reached at which Crookes's shadows appear, one must go on exhausting further before any trace of Röntgen rays shows itself. The first luminosity seems to come, as in Fig. 141, from the front and the back of the target at once — an oblique line, corresponding to the plane of the metal target, being seen on the screen between two partly luminescent regions. As the exhaustion continues, the light behind dies away while that in front increases, as in Fig. 142, the rays being given off copiously right up to the plane of the anti-cathode. This sideways emission is quite unlike anything in the emission or reflection of ordinary light, and any theory of the Röntgen rays has to account for it.

I have myself observed that inside the tube some other rays are given off in the same way along with the Röntgen rays, but that these are not Röntgen rays, for they can be deflected by a magnet and more nearly resemble the cathode rays. It is these that produce on the glass wall of the tube a well-marked fluorescence, bounded, as in Fig. 142, by an oblique plane corresponding to the boundary of the Röntgen rays seen on the fluorescent screen.

The tube I used at the beginning of this lecture, and which we shall use again at the close to show you your own bones, is of the focus type (Fig. 143). It is the pattern devised by Mr. Herbert Jackson of King's College. Concentrating the cathode rays on the little platinum target, which often becomes red-hot, has the advantage not only of allowing a more copious emission of Röntgen rays than would be possible if the anti-cathode surface were the glass wall, but also of making the Röntgen rays come from a small and definite source, so that the shadows objects cast are more sharply defined.

Here are two more recent tubes still (Figs. 144, 145), built for me by Mr. Böhm, in which the focus principle is kept but with the improvement that the anti-cathode T is not also used as the anode. It is an insulated target of platinum, while the anodes are aluminium rings through which the cone of cathode rays passes. These tubes are not liable to blacken, as tubes are in which the anti-cathode serves as anode too. The tube in Fig. 145 has two concave electrodes, either or both of which may be used as cathode; it is a convenient form where an alternating current is used.
