Lecture Six: Röntgen Light

(Part 4 of 4)

[Figure 141-142: Left, Fig. 141 — the first appearance of the rays, coming from the front and the back of the platinum target at once, with the oblique line of the target's plane between two glowing regions. Right, Fig. 142 — further exhaustion: the light behind has died away and the rays stream out in front, right up to the plane of the anti-cathode.]

Footnote: See the Electrician.

[Figure 143: Mr. Herbert Jackson's focus tube. The concave cathode gathers the rays onto a small platinum target set at an angle in the middle of the bulb, so that the Röntgen rays come from a small, sharply defined source.]

[Figure 144: One of Mr. Böhm's tubes, in which the platinum target T is insulated and serves only as anti-cathode, while the anodes are aluminium rings that the cone of cathode rays passes through.]

[Figure 145: A second Böhm tube with two concave electrodes, either or both of which may serve as cathode — a convenient form where an alternating current is used.]

In another direction, many efforts have been made to improve the luminescent screen. At first good barium platinocyanide was not to be had, and hydrated potassium platinocyanide was found far superior. But the good barium salt now obtainable is quite as luminescent and less troublesome to manage. One result of the ignorance that at first prevailed about the real origin of Röntgen's discovery was that various experimenters up and down the world supposed themselves to have invented something when they took to using fluorescent screens. One man puts a fluorescent screen at the bottom of a pasteboard tube with a peep-hole lens at the top, and calls it a "cryptoscope." Another, on the far side of the globe, puts a fluorescent screen at the bottom of a neat cardboard box fitted with a handle and a flexible opening to fit the eyes, and styles it a "fluoroscope." Both are useful; but the only invention in the whole business is Röntgen's.

Within a few days of the publication of Röntgen's discovery, however, another effect that had escaped his scrutiny was noticed by several independent observers. It had been known for several years that when ultra-violet light falls on an electrically charged surface it discharges it — but only if the surface is negatively charged. Ultra-violet light will not discharge a positive charge. But Röntgen rays are found to discharge a metal surface in air whether the charge is positive or negative.

Footnote: Ultra-violet light will not discharge a metal surface in air unless the surface is negatively charged. I have observed one case, however, in which a positively electrified body was discharged by ultra-violet light — but it was not a metal surface, nor in air.

Here is a convenient arrangement for showing the experiment. An electroscope made on Exner's plan with three leaves — the central one a stiff plate of metal — is charged and then exposed to Röntgen light. The three leaves are of aluminium, aluminium foil being better than gold leaf for electroscopes. They are supported inside a thin flask of Bohemian glass entirely enclosed, except at the top, in a mantle of transparent metal gauze. After the leaves have been charged — either positively with a rod of rubbed glass or negatively with a rod of rubbed celluloid — a metal cap is put over the top (Fig. 146).

[Figure 146: The Exner electroscope with its three aluminium leaves inside a thin glass flask, wrapped in a mantle of transparent metal gauze and capped with metal, so that nothing but the Röntgen rays can reach the charge.]

[Figure 147: The hand of the thirteen-year-old patient, under-exposed — so little of the light has got through that the bones hardly show through the flesh at all.]

[Figure 148: The same hand over-exposed. Now the rays have gone through the flesh so completely that nothing survives on the plate but the bones.]

The leaves, thus completely surrounded by metal, are effectually screened from all outside electrical influence. My electroscope is now charged. So that you can see the effect better, a beam of light is directed on it, throwing a magnified shadow of the leaves onto the white screen. Then, exposing the electroscope to Röntgen light from a focus tube some 18 inches away, you see the leaves at once fall together, proving the discharge. It works whether the charge is positive or negative.

It only remains for me to show you the photographs taken at the beginning of this lecture, and a number of others prepared as lantern slides. In Figs. 147 and 148 we have the hand of a poor child of thirteen, a patient at St. Bartholomew's Hospital. She was brought to my laboratory so that the deformities of her hands might be examined. The first of the two plates was under-exposed, with the result that the bones scarcely show through the flesh at all. The second was over-exposed, and the rays have penetrated the flesh so thoroughly that only the bones appear.

[Figure 149: The hand of a child of eleven. The bones are not yet fully formed, their ends still gelatinous and transparent, so that gaps seem to open between them. Photographed by Mr. J. W. Gifford.]

Fig. 149 is the hand of a child of eleven. In a child's hand the bones are not yet fully ossified, their ends being still gelatinous and transparent, so that there seem to be gaps between them. Compare it with the hand of a full-grown man and you will see how age changes the look of the bones.

Fig. 150 is the hand of a full-grown woman. Notice that in the lady's rings the diamonds are transparent, while the metal casts a shadow even through the bones. These two photographs were taken by Mr. J. W. Gifford of Chard, an early and most successful worker with Röntgen rays.

Fig. 151 is the hand of Lord Kelvin, and shows traces of age and of a tendency to rheumatic deposits.

Fig. 152 is the hand of Mr. Crookes; a knottier hand, but it shows some points of resemblance to Lord Kelvin's.

Fig. 153 is the hand of Sir Richard Webster. The shadow is interesting as showing not only an athletic development but, embedded in the flesh between thumb and first finger, two small shot — the result of a gunshot wound received many years ago. This photograph and the two before it are from the series taken by Mr. Campbell-Swinton, who was the first in England to put this newest of the black arts into practice.

By Mr. Campbell-Swinton's courtesy I am also able to show you a number of other slides: the hand of Lord Rayleigh; the hand of a lady with a needle embedded in the palm; a hand terribly swollen with gout; a foot showing the heel bone and the smaller bones down to the toes, as well as the bones of the ankle; a view through the left shoulder of a young lady, showing her ribs, shoulder blade and collar bone; the torso of a young man, showing his ribs and, dimly, his heart, like a central dark shadow with a triangular apex pointing down towards the right — that is, to his left side; and lastly, the shadow of a living head, showing all the vertebrae of the neck.

[Figure 154: A pair of spectacles photographed lying inside their case. The glass lenses come out plainly, and so does every marking of the shagreen — shark's skin — that the case is covered with.]

Here, again, is the shadow of a newly born child, taken by Mr. Sydney Rowland. Note the imperfect state of the bones in the hands.

Passing from human subjects, we shall look at the shadows of a few animals: a chameleon, giving a clear view not only of its skeleton but of its internal organs; a mouse; a frog; and some fishes. The next slide was taken from an Egyptian mummy in its wrappings. Before this photograph was made there was some dispute as to whether it was the mummy of a cat or of a girl. The photograph settles the question entirely.

Earlier in my lecture I mentioned that glass is fairly opaque to these rays. You have the proof in the next photograph (Fig. 154), which shows a pair of spectacles photographed lying in their case, the shagreen covering of which shows all the markings peculiar to the shark's skin it was made from. The next photograph, by Mr. Campbell-Swinton, lets you read the contents of a sealed letter he received. His too is the next picture (Fig. 155), the photographed shadow of an aluminium cigar case with two cigars inside it. And lastly I show you a photograph of two ruby rings. By gaslight the gems of one cannot be told from those of the other, and in broad daylight it would take an expert to pronounce between them. But viewed or photographed by Röntgen light there is no doubt whatever. The rubies of one ring are true Burmese rubies, and they come out transparent. The others are imitations made of ruby-coloured glass, and come out quite opaque.

[Figure 155: The shadow of an aluminium cigar case with two cigars inside it — the metal barely troubling the rays, the cigars showing plainly through it.]

You will have noticed that I have spoken of these rays as "Röntgen light." But are we really justified in calling it light? It is invisible to our eyes — but then so is ordinary ultra-violet light, and so is infra-red light, and Hertzian light. And there are other kinds of light besides, among them one discovered during the past year by M. Becquerel and myself, which are invisible too. But if the Röntgen light can be neither reflected nor refracted, neither diffracted nor polarised, what reason have we for calling it light at all? Direct proof that it consists of transverse waves is, in fact, lacking.

Footnote: M. Henri Becquerel (see Comptes Rendus, cxxii, pp. 559, 790, etc.) and I myself (see the Philosophical Magazine, July 1896, p. 103) quite independently discovered some invisible radiations given out by uranium salts and by the metal uranium, which can affect photographic plates and will pass through a sheet of aluminium or of cardboard. But they are not the same as Röntgen rays, since, as M. Becquerel has shown, they can be reflected, refracted and polarised. They also discharge electrified bodies.

Many conjectures have been formed about the nature of these rays. Röntgen himself suggested that they might consist of longitudinal vibrations. Others have suggested ether streams, ether vortices, or even streams of minute corpuscles. At one time the notion that they might simply be an extreme kind of ultra-violet light of exceedingly minute wave-length found favour with physicists, who were inclined to explain the absence of refraction and the high penetrating power of the rays by von Helmholtz's theory of anomalous dispersion, according to which the ultra-violet spectrum at its far end ought to double back on itself.

The most probable suggestion yet made, and the only one that seems to account for the strange sideways emission of the rays right up to the plane of the anti-cathode (see Fig. 142, p. 265), is Sir George Stokes's. Stokes's view is that while all ordinary light consists of trains of waves (Fig. 68, p. 112), in which each ripple is one of a series that gradually dies away, the Röntgen light consists of solitary ripples, each of not more than one or

Footnote: There can be no question that these rays, which are due to a sort of invisible phosphorescence, consist of transverse vibrations of a very high frequency: that is, they are ultra-violet light of a very high order.

Footnote: It has long been known, from Fizeau's experiments, that in ordinary light each train consists on average of at least 50,000 successive vibrations; for it is possible to produce interference between two parts of a beam whose paths differ by more than 50,000 wave-lengths. Michelson has gone far beyond that number. See the footnote on p. 112.

one and a half waves. According to Stokes, the Röntgen light is generated at the anti-cathode by the impact of the flying negatively electrified molecules, or atoms, that make up the cathode stream. At the moment each of these flying molecules strikes the target and rebounds, there will be a quiver of its electric charge — in other words, the charge on the molecule will make an oscillation. Now that oscillation will run across the molecule in a direction generally at right angles to the plane of the target, and will give rise to an electromagnetic disturbance which travels off as a wave in all directions, except where the metal of the target stops it. And this oscillation, being of exceedingly short period and dying out after about one or two complete periods (Fig. 157), will generate a wave which, though of a frequency as high as, or higher than, that of ordinary ultra-violet light, and therefore capable of producing kindred effects, will not be able to interfere, nor to undergo regular refraction or reflection, because it does not consist of a complete train of waves.

Here is a model roughly illustrating the theory. An iron hoop (Fig. 158), which can be thrown or swung against the wall, represents the flying molecule. The electric charge it carries is represented by a lump of lead free to slide along a transverse wire, held centrally by a pair of spiral springs. When this model molecule is made to strike the wall and rebound, the leaden mass is disturbed and oscillates to and fro along the wire. The oscillation dies out after about 1½ periods. Now suppose this oscillation to set up a transverse wave in the surrounding space. Though it consists of only 1½ ripples, they would travel outwards just as trains of waves do. And if there were millions of such flying molecules at work, these solitary ripples might come in millions one after another — but not regularly spaced behind one another like the trains of waves that make up ordinary light. This is only a crude and rough illustration of Stokes's thesis, but it must serve for the present.

[Figure 158: The model of Stokes's theory. An iron hoop stands for the flying molecule, and the lump of lead sliding on a wire between two spiral springs stands for its electric charge; swing the hoop against the wall and the lead quivers to and fro for about a period and a half.]

But I cannot close this course of lectures without a word about the possibilities this amazing discovery of the Röntgen light has opened up to science. It is clear that there are more things in heaven and earth than are sometimes admitted to exist. There are sounds our ears have never heard; there is light our eyes will never see. And yet, of these inaudible, invisible things, discoveries are made from time to time by the patient labour of the pioneers of science.

You have seen how no scientific discovery ever stands alone: it is built on those that went before. Behind Röntgen stands Lenard; behind Lenard, Crookes; behind Crookes, the line of explorers from Boyle and Hauksbee and Otto von Guericke downwards. We have had Crookes's tubes in use since 1878, so for nearly twenty years Röntgen's rays have been in existence — though nobody, until Röntgen observed them on 8 November 1895, even suspected their presence or guessed at their qualities. And just as these rays lay undiscovered for twenty years, so even now there exist beyond doubt, in the universe, other rays, other vibrations, of which we as yet know nothing.

Yet as year after year rolls by, one discovery leads to another. The seemingly useless or trivial observation made by one worker leads on to a useful observation by another; and so science advances, "creeping on from point to point." And so, steadily, year by year, the sum of our knowledge grows, and our ignorance is rolled a little further and further back; and where now there is darkness, there will be light.

Footnote: It is only fair to Professor Eilhard Wiedemann to mention that in August 1895 he described some "discharge rays" (Entladungsstrahlen) inside a vacuum tube which, though photographically active, refused to pass through fluor-spar and could not be deflected by a magnet. But their properties differ from Röntgen rays in some other respects.
