Appendix to Lecture Six: Other Kinds of Invisible Light

On Röntgen's discovery of the rays that bear his name, it was natural to ask whether there are any other rays with penetrating properties at all like them. Lenard's rays, discovered in 1894 and referred to on p. 258 above, have the power of penetrating thin sheets of metal, of producing photographic action, and of discharging electrified bodies. But they differ from Röntgen's rays in their penetrating power, for air is relatively opaque to them; and they are deflected in varying degrees by a magnet. Wiedemann's "discharge rays," briefly mentioned above, are described further on p. 281.

No source for Röntgen's rays has yet been discovered other than the highly exhausted vacuum tube under electric stimulation. Many people have supposed that Röntgen rays are produced by electric sparks in the open air, simply because such sparks will fog photographic plates and print images of coins and other metal objects lying in contact with them. Those images, however, are due to direct electric action. They are not produced when a sheet of aluminium is placed so as to screen off all direct electrical action.

There do not appear to be any Röntgen rays in sunlight, nor in the light of the electric arc; neither of these sources contains any rays that will affect a photographic plate protected by a sheet of aluminium.

There are, however, some kinds of light that will, like Röntgen's rays, pass through aluminium or through black cardboard and produce photographic effects. These are worth some notice.

Becquerel's Rays

Early in 1896 M. Henri Becquerel, as mentioned on p. 272, and I myself independently, observed that certain invisible radiations are given off by some salts of the metal uranium — the nitrate of uranyl, for example, and the fluoride of uranium and ammonium. These and other uranium salts, whether in the dark or in the light, give off a sort of invisible light which can pass through aluminium and cast, on a photographic plate, shadows of metal objects placed in the way. The effect appears to be due to an invisible phosphorescence of a persistent kind. Just as luminous paint goes on giving out visible light for many hours after it has been shone on, so these substances go on month after month giving out an invisible light. The phenomenon is therefore known as hyper-phosphorescence. It is worth noting that ordinary luminous paint, which stops giving out any visible light after a few days, will go on for as long as six months giving out in the darkness an invisible radiation that will fog a photographic plate.

Some time after the original discovery, Becquerel observed that metallic uranium far surpasses the salts of that metal in its power of hyper-phosphorescence.

The following is a summary of Becquerel's observations. A photographic plate was enclosed in a double layer of black paper, over which was laid a thin crust of the transparent crystals of the double sulphate of uranyl and potassium. After several hours' exposure to the sun the plate was found to have been affected. It was affected too when a sheet of aluminium was interposed, but a coin placed between the crystals and the plate cast a photographic shadow. The experiment also succeeds with a sheet of glass in the way. This double sulphate, when examined in the phosphoroscope, is found to phosphoresce for only 1/100th of a second after exposure to light. Nevertheless it goes on giving out photographically active rays for many hours without being exposed to light at all. The persistence of these non-luminous rays is incomparably greater than that of the visible glow. The invisible rays are weakened by passing through either thin glass or sheet aluminium.

Footnote: See the paper by M. Sagnac in the Journal de Physique, May 1896, p. 193, and sundry papers by M. Becquerel in the Comptes Rendus.

Other substances were tried. M. Charles Henry had found that sulphide of zinc, and M. Niewenglowski that sulphide of calcium, gave out under the stimulus of Röntgen rays some rays that passed through opaque bodies. M. Troost found that hexagonal blende, previously exposed to sunlight, would photograph through cardboard. M. Becquerel found that the particular kind of sulphide of calcium which luminesces blue or green gave at first a strong photographic action through aluminium 2 mm. thick — though later the same substances refused to work. Zinc sulphide, hexagonal blende, failed in the same way. Becquerel could not revive the calcium sulphides, either by warming them, or by cooling them to −20° C and exposing them to magnesium light, or by exposing them to electric sparks. In the case of uranyl salts, neither magnesium light nor the radiation of a Crookes tube — to which they are opaque — increases their emission of the invisible rays. Daylight quickens them a little. But the double sulphate of uranyl and potassium is quickened by exposure to arc light, or to the light of sparks from a Leyden jar. Uranous salts, which are not phosphorescent, work as strongly as uranic ones. Crystals of uranium nitrate melted and recrystallised in the dark, or dissolved, and which are not fluorescent in the ordinary sense, work just as well as crystals that have been exposed to light.

Becquerel's rays possess, like ultra-violet light and like Röntgen's rays — though to a lesser degree, because they are less intense — the power of discharging electrified bodies. Using an electroscope designed by M. Hurmuzescu, enclosed in metal, he placed a plate of the crystalline mass of sulphate of uranyl and potassium against an aluminium window 0.12 mm. thick. The leaves, which started 18° apart, collapsed in 2 hours 55 minutes. They collapsed in about a quarter of that time when the plate was placed inside, under the leaves.

These rays are absorbed by air. Water is transparent to them; so are metallic solutions, wax and paraffin. Uranium glass and red glass 2 mm. thick are fairly opaque. Native sulphur is transparent; calc-spar not very transparent; quartz more opaque than calc-spar. Tin is more opaque than aluminium, and cobalt glass more opaque than either. These rays go through metals relatively more easily than Röntgen's rays do. Copper 0.1 mm. thick is very transparent, platinum nearly as much so. Silver and zinc let them pass, but lead 0.36 mm. thick is opaque. These measurements were made with an electroscope. Quartz 5 mm. thick absorbs Becquerel's rays less than it does Röntgen's. Becquerel's rays will discharge an electroscope through metal screens — platinum or copper 1.4 mm. thick — that would stop Röntgen's rays. Copper and aluminium screens are almost equally transparent to them; platinum absorbs a little more. The absorption of copper and aluminium screens together, or of platinum and aluminium together, is less than the sum of the absorptions of the same screens separately, which proves that the Becquerel rays are not homogeneous.

Becquerel proved reflection by laying on a dry plate a thin sheet of uranium-potassium sulphate, half covered by a polished steel plate laid face downwards. After an exposure of 55 hours the covered part was the more strongly affected. He also demonstrated reflection with a hemispherical tin mirror. Refraction was demonstrated with a thin prism of crown glass, near whose refracting edge was placed a tube 1 mm. across containing crystals of nitrate of uranyl. After three days' exposure he found the light refracted towards the base of the prism. He proved the rays capable of polarisation, since the photographic shadow through two plates of tourmaline was stronger when their axes were crossed than when they were parallel.

Metallic uranium surpasses every other material in the freedom with which it gives off these rays. It goes on emitting them for months in complete darkness — the source of this supply of energy being at present unknown.

I have made some experiments myself to compare the penetrating power of uranium rays with that of Röntgen's rays. Using a layer of uranium nitrate, I found carbon and copal to be as opaque as rock salt, whereas to Röntgen's rays those substances are far more transparent than rock salt.

There appears to be no doubt that the uranium rays are a species of extreme ultra-violet light, with a wave-length certainly less than 10 micro-centimetres and a frequency certainly greater than 3000 billions per second.

Quite recently Dr. W. J. Russell has found a similar action produced by newly cleaned metallic zinc, and by some other materials, including certain kinds of wood and paper.

Phosphorus Light

I have examined the penetrating effect of some other kinds of light. The pale light given out by phosphorus oxidising in moist air is accompanied by some invisible rays that will penetrate black paper or celluloid but will not pass through aluminium. So will some invisible rays given out by the flame of carbon disulphide.

The Light of Glow-worms and Fireflies

Dr. Dawson Turner has found that the light given out by glow-worms contains photographic rays that will pass through aluminium.

In Japan, Dr. Muraoka has examined the rays given out by a firefly, the Johanniskäfer. He found that it emits rays which, after being filtered through card or through copper plates, will still act photographically. These rays can be reflected, and probably refracted and polarised too. He used about 1000 fireflies shut up in a shallow box over the screened photographic plate.

Wiedemann's Rays

Professor E. Wiedemann in 1895 described some rays — named by him discharge rays, or Entladungsstrahlen — produced in vacuum tubes by the influence of a rapidly alternating electric discharge. They have the property of exciting, in certain chemically prepared substances, notably in calcium sulphate containing a small percentage of manganese sulphate, the power of thermo-luminescence. In other words, after exposure to these rays the substance will give out light when it is afterwards warmed.

They are emitted at lower degrees of rarefaction than are needed to produce cathode rays. They come from every part of the path of the spark discharge, but most strongly near the cathode. They travel in straight lines, but no reflection of them by solid bodies has yet been observed. They are readily absorbed by certain gases — oxygen and carbon dioxide — but their production is helped by hydrogen and nitrogen. Those produced in hydrogen are partly transmitted by quartz and fluor-spar. They appear not to be present in the glow discharge. In a vacuum they are produced by every part of the discharge. Under the influence of electric oscillations they are emitted, in some cases even at half an atmosphere of pressure, at the boundary between the rarefied gas and the glass wall, even before any visible light appears. No deflection of them by a magnet has yet been observed. Those produced at relatively high pressures generally penetrate bodies in inverse ratio to their densities.

New Kinds of Cathode Ray

I have recently found two new kinds of cathode ray. One of them, which I call para-cathodic rays, is produced when ordinary cathode rays strike an anti-cathode, as in the "focus" tubes. If the vacuum is low, rays closely resembling ordinary cathode rays are given off from the anti-cathode in nearly equal strength in all directions. They can be deflected both electrostatically and magnetically, and can cast shadows of objects on the glass walls. If the vacuum is high enough to produce Röntgen's rays, some para-cathodic rays are produced at the same time. They make the glass bulb fluoresce over an obliquely bounded region, as in Fig. 142, p. 265.

The other kind, which I call dia-cathodic rays, is produced by directing ordinary cathode rays full on a piece of wire gauze, or a spiral of wire, that is itself negatively electrified. The ordinary cathode rays refuse to pass through the meshes of the gauze; instead a beam of bluish rays passes through, differing from cathode rays in that they are not directly affected by a magnet. These dia-cathodic rays can also make the glass fluoresce where they meet the walls of the tube, and can cast shadows of objects in the way; but the fluorescence is of a different kind, for ordinary soda glass gives a dark orange fluorescence instead of its usual golden green. Examined with the spectroscope, this orange fluorescence shows the D lines characteristic of sodium.

Goldstein's Rays

Herr Goldstein has also described some rays apparently closely akin to those just mentioned. If a perforated disk is used as the cathode, blue rays are produced which stream back behind the cathode opposite the holes.
