Protagoras (Part 2)

Hippias the sage spoke up next. He said: All of you here -- I consider you kinsmen, friends, and fellow citizens, by nature if not by law. Because by nature, like is drawn to like, but law is a tyrant over humanity, and often forces us to do things that go against our nature. So how embarrassing would it be if we -- people who understand how things really work, the wisest people in all of Greece, gathered here in this city that's the capital of wisdom, in the greatest and most impressive house in the city -- if we had nothing to show for all this distinction except squabbling with each other like the lowest sort of people? What I'm urging -- begging, really -- is that you, Protagoras, and you, Socrates, agree to a compromise. Let us be your peacemakers. Socrates, don't insist on that extreme, razor-sharp brevity in your arguments if Protagoras objects. Loosen the reins a bit, let your words flow more freely and grandly. And Protagoras, don't set all your sails and go racing off into an ocean of words until you're completely out of sight of land. Let there be a happy middle ground between you. And here's my advice: choose an umpire or moderator or chairman, someone who'll keep an eye on both of you and make sure your speeches stay a reasonable length.

Everyone approved of this proposal. Callias said he wasn't going to let me leave, and they all urged me to choose an umpire. But I said that choosing a referee for a discussion would be inappropriate. If the person chosen were less capable than us, then having someone inferior presiding over his betters would be wrong. If he were our equal, he'd do exactly what we do, so what's the point of choosing him? And if you say, "Let's find someone better" -- well, I don't think you can find anyone wiser than Protagoras. And if you choose someone who isn't really better but you just say he is, that would be an insult to Protagoras, as if you were putting a supervisor over him like he were some inferior person -- not that something like that would bother me much personally. But here's what I'll do instead, so that the conversation can go on the way you all want it to. If Protagoras doesn't feel like answering, let him ask the questions and I'll answer. And at the same time, I'll try to show him how I think an answerer ought to respond. Once I've answered as many questions as he likes, he can take his turn answering mine. If he doesn't seem to be sticking to the point, all of you can join me in urging him -- just as you urged me -- not to derail the discussion. This way we won't need any special referee. You'll all be referees together.

This was generally approved, and Protagoras, very much against his will, was forced to agree that he'd ask questions first, and then, when he'd asked enough, take his turn answering mine in short replies. He began his questioning like this:

I believe, Socrates, he said, that the most important part of education is being skilled in poetry -- by which I mean the ability to understand which parts of the poets' compositions are correct and which aren't, to tell them apart, and to explain the difference when asked. So I'm going to take the question you and I have been debating and move it into the realm of poetry. We'll still be talking about virtue, but through the lens of a particular poem. Now, Simonides says to Scopas, the son of Creon of Thessaly:

"Hard it is, on the one hand, for a man to become truly good, built foursquare in hands and feet and mind, crafted without a flaw."

Do you know the poem? Or should I recite the whole thing?

No need, I said. I know it perfectly well -- I've studied it carefully.

Very good, he said. And do you think the poem is well composed, and true?

Yes, I said. Both well composed and true.

But if there's a contradiction in it, can it really be good or true?

No, not in that case, I replied.

And isn't there a contradiction? he asked. Think about it.

Well, my friend, I have thought about it.

And doesn't the poet go on to say, "I disagree with the saying of Pittacus, wise man though he was: 'Hard it is to be good'"? You see that this comes from the same poet.

And do you think, he said, that these two statements are consistent?

Yes, I said -- I think so. (Though I have to admit, I couldn't help worrying that he might be onto something.)

And you really think otherwise?

Look, he said, how can he possibly be consistent? First, he states as his own view that "hard it is for a man to become truly good." Then a little later in the poem, apparently forgetting what he said, he criticizes Pittacus and refuses to agree with him when Pittacus says "hard it is to be good" -- which is exactly the same thing. So when he criticizes someone for saying the same thing he said himself, he's criticizing himself. He must be wrong in either his first statement or his second.

A lot of the audience cheered and applauded at this. And I have to say, at first I felt dizzy and faint, like I'd taken a punch from a professional boxer -- between his words and the roar of the crowd. To be honest, I needed time to figure out what the poet really meant. So I turned to Prodicus and called out to him. Prodicus, I said, Simonides is from your part of the world -- you ought to come to his defense. I need to summon your help, the way the river Scamander in Homer, when it's being overwhelmed by Achilles, calls on the Simois for backup:

"Dear brother, let the two of us together hold back this hero's power."

I'm calling on you the same way, because I'm afraid Protagoras is going to demolish Simonides. This is the moment to defend Simonides using that specialty of yours -- your philosophy of synonyms, the one that lets you distinguish between "wanting" and "wishing" and draw all those delightful fine distinctions you were making earlier. Tell me if you agree with my reading. I don't think there's any contradiction in Simonides at all. But first, Prodicus, let me ask you: in your view, is "being" the same thing as "becoming"?

Certainly not, replied Prodicus.

Right. Now, didn't Simonides first state, as his own view, that "hard it is for a man to become truly good"?

Exactly right, said Prodicus.

And then he criticizes Pittacus -- but not, as Protagoras imagines, for repeating what Simonides himself said. The statements are different. Pittacus didn't say, like Simonides, that it's hard for a man to become good. He said it's hard to be good. And as our friend Prodicus here would insist, being is not the same as becoming. So Simonides isn't contradicting himself at all. I'd guess Prodicus and many others would agree with Hesiod, who said:

"Hard it is, on the one hand, for a man to become good, for the gods have placed virtue at the end of a long road of toil. But on the other hand, once you've climbed to the summit, holding onto virtue, however hard it was to win -- that part is easy."

Prodicus heard this and approved. But Protagoras said: Your correction, Socrates, contains a bigger mistake than the one you're trying to fix.

Well, I said, that's terrible news, Protagoras. I'm like a doctor who's making his patient worse.

That's exactly the situation, he said.

How so? I asked.

Because, he replied, the poet could never have made the mistake of saying that virtue -- which everyone agrees is the hardest thing in the world -- can be easily kept.

Ah, I said, and what a stroke of luck that we have Prodicus with us at just the right moment! You know, Protagoras, Prodicus has a kind of wisdom that I suspect is more than human -- it may be as old as Simonides himself, or even older. You're clearly learned in many things, but you don't seem to know about this. I know it because I'm Prodicus's student. And if I'm not mistaken, you're misunderstanding the word "hard" as Simonides used it. Let me set you straight, the way Prodicus always sets me straight when I use the word "terrible" as a compliment. If I say that Protagoras or anyone else is a "terribly" wise man, Prodicus asks me if I'm not ashamed to call something good "terrible." He explains that "terrible" always has a negative connotation -- nobody talks about "terrible" health, "terrible" wealth, or "terrible" peace. They say "terrible" disease, "terrible" war, "terrible" poverty -- because "terrible" means bad. I think Simonides and his fellow Ceans, when they said "hard," meant "bad" -- something that you're missing. Let's ask Prodicus, since he should be the expert on Simonides's dialect. What did Simonides mean by "hard," Prodicus?

Bad, said Prodicus.

So, I said, that's why Prodicus says Simonides criticizes Pittacus for saying "hard is it to be good" -- it's as if Pittacus had said "bad is it to be good."

Exactly, Prodicus said. That was certainly Simonides's meaning. He's mocking Pittacus for not knowing how to use words properly -- which is only natural for a Lesbian, someone raised speaking a rough dialect.

Do you hear that, Protagoras? I asked. Do you have an answer for him?

You're completely wrong, Prodicus, said Protagoras. I know perfectly well that when Simonides used the word "hard," he meant what all of us mean by it -- not "bad," but "not easy," something that takes a great deal of effort. I'm certain of it.

I said: You know, Protagoras, I'm actually inclined to think you're right about what Simonides meant. I suspect our friend Prodicus knew that too, but was having a bit of fun -- testing whether you could defend your position. Because that Simonides couldn't have meant "bad" is obvious from what follows in the poem, where he says that only a god can have this gift. He surely can't mean that being good is bad, and then turn around and say that only a god possesses this quality. If he meant "bad," then Prodicus would be making Simonides out to be reckless -- which is very unlike his fellow Ceans. But let me tell you what I think the real meaning of Simonides's poem is, if you'd like to put my poetic interpretation to the test. Or if you'd rather, I'll listen.

Protagoras replied: Whatever you like. And Hippias, Prodicus, and the others all urged me to go ahead.

Well then, I said, I'll try to explain my reading of this poem. There's a very ancient tradition of philosophy that flourished more in Crete and Sparta than anywhere else in Greece -- and there are more philosophers in those places than anywhere in the world. But here's the thing: it's a secret. The Spartans deny it. They pretend to be ignorant, because they don't want the rest of the world to realize that they rule through wisdom, like the Sophists Protagoras was talking about, rather than through courage and military strength. They figure that if people knew the real reason for their supremacy, everyone would start studying philosophy. And this secret has never been discovered by the fans of Spartan culture in other cities -- you know, the ones who go around with cauliflower ears in imitation of the Spartans, who wrap their fists with boxing straps, who are always in training, who wear those short cloaks. They think those are the practices that make the Spartans dominant. But when the Spartans want to relax and have open conversation with their wise men, when they've had enough of meeting in secret, they drive out all these Spartan-wannabes and any foreigners who happen to be around, and hold philosophical discussions in private, hidden from strangers. They also don't let their young men travel to other cities -- just like the Cretans -- so they won't unlearn what they've been taught. And in Sparta and Crete, it's not only men but women who take pride in their intellectual culture. And here's how you can tell I'm right that the Spartans truly excel at philosophy: if you talk to the most ordinary Spartan, you'll find he's usually nothing special in general conversation. But then, at some random point, he'll fire off a remark as sharp and precise as a spear throw -- terse, packed with meaning, perfectly aimed. And whoever he's talking to suddenly looks like a child in comparison. Many people, in our time and in the past, have recognized that the true Spartan character loves philosophy even more than athletics. They understand that only a perfectly educated person can produce sayings like that. Among them were Thales of Miletus, Pittacus of Mytilene, Bias of Priene, our own Solon, Cleobulus of Lindos, Myson of Chenae, and seventh on the list, Chilon the Spartan. All of these were admirers and students of Spartan culture, and anyone can see that their wisdom was of this kind -- consisting of short, memorable sayings. They met together and dedicated to Apollo at Delphi, as the first fruits of their wisdom, those famous inscriptions that everyone knows: "Know thyself" and "Nothing in excess."

Why am I telling you all this? To explain that this Spartan-style brevity was the hallmark of ancient philosophy. Now, there was a particular saying of Pittacus that circulated privately and was admired by the wise: "Hard it is to be good." Simonides, who was ambitious for a reputation in wisdom, knew that if he could demolish this saying, it would be like defeating a famous champion. He'd win the prize among his contemporaries. And if I'm not mistaken, he composed his entire poem as a deliberate attack on this saying of Pittacus.

Let's examine his words together and see if I'm right. Simonides would have had to be crazy if, right at the start of the poem, wanting simply to say that becoming good is hard, he threw in the word "on the one hand" -- "On the one hand, hard it is for a man to become truly good." There's no reason for that "on the one hand" unless you suppose he's setting up a contrast with Pittacus's words. Pittacus says "Hard it is to be good," and Simonides fires back: the really hard thing, Pittacus, is to become good -- connecting "truly" not with "good" but with "hard." Not that it's hard to be truly good, as if some people are truly good and others are sort of good but not truly (that would be a trivial observation, unworthy of Simonides). No, you have to read "truly" as modifying "hard." He's recasting Pittacus's saying. Imagine the two of them in a debate. "My friends," Pittacus says, "hard it is to be good." And Simonides answers: "Wrong, Pittacus. The hard thing isn't to be good. What's hard -- truly hard -- is to become good: foursquare in hands and feet and mind, crafted without a flaw." This reading explains the "on the one hand," explains why "truly" comes where it does, and everything that follows confirms this interpretation. There's much more that could be said about the fine details of this beautifully crafted poem, but that would get tedious. Let me just lay out the general argument, which is clearly designed throughout as a refutation of Pittacus.

Because what Simonides goes on to argue, a bit further along, is this: although it's difficult to become good, it is possible -- for a time, and only for a time. But having become good, to stay good permanently, as you claim, Pittacus -- that's impossible. That's not something granted to human beings. Only a god has that privilege. "But a person can't help being bad when irresistible circumstances overpower him." Now, who gets overpowered by irresistible circumstances in commanding a ship? Not the ordinary passenger -- he's always helpless anyway. You can't knock down someone who's already lying on the ground; you can only knock down someone who's standing. In the same way, irresistible circumstances can only overpower someone who has ability and resources at some point, not someone who's helpless all the time. A massive storm can overpower a skilled pilot. A brutal season can overpower a good farmer or a skilled doctor. The good person can become bad, as another poet says:

"The good are sometimes good and sometimes bad."

But a bad person doesn't become bad -- he always was bad. So when overwhelming circumstances crush someone with ability, skill, and virtue, then and only then does the person "become bad" helplessly. And you, Pittacus, say "hard it is to be good." But really: becoming good is the hard part, though it's possible. Being good permanently? That's impossible --

"For the one who does well is the good person, and the one who does badly is bad."

But what counts as "doing well" in reading and writing? What kind of doing makes someone good at it? Obviously, knowing how to read and write. And what kind of doing makes someone a good doctor? Obviously, knowledge of the healing arts. "And the one who does badly is bad." So who becomes a bad doctor? Clearly, someone who is first of all a doctor, and secondly a good doctor -- such a person might also become a bad one. But none of us amateurs, no matter how badly we perform, can ever become doctors, let alone bad doctors. We can't become bad carpenters or bad anything else in a field we never entered. In the same way, only the good person can deteriorate -- through time, or hardship, or illness, or some other misfortune (the only real "doing badly" is being robbed of knowledge). The bad person will never become bad, because he's bad already. If he were ever to become bad, he'd have to have been good first. So the whole thrust of the poem is that a person can't stay good continuously, but can become good and can also become bad; and that

"Those are best for the longest time whom the gods love."

All of this is aimed at Pittacus, as the rest of the poem proves further. Because Simonides adds:

"Therefore I won't waste my brief span of life searching in vain for what can't exist -- a completely faultless human being among all those who share the fruit of the broad earth. But if I find one, I'll send you word."

(This is the aggressive way he keeps up his attack on Pittacus throughout the entire poem.)

"But anyone who does no evil -- willingly I praise and love. Not even the gods fight against necessity."

All of this has the same point. Simonides wasn't so foolish as to say he praised those who did no evil willingly, as though some people do evil on purpose. No wise person, I believe, would say that any human being makes mistakes voluntarily or willingly does bad and shameful things. They know perfectly well that everyone who does bad and shameful things does them against their will. And Simonides doesn't say he praises someone who does no evil "willingly" -- that "willingly" applies to himself, to his own act of praising. He believed that a good person might often have to force himself to love and praise another person -- might have to become the friend and supporter of someone he doesn't naturally admire. It's like a kind of involuntary love, the sort you might feel toward a difficult father or mother, or your country, or something like that. When bad people have parents or a country with serious flaws, they look on with almost gleeful spite, pointing out the defects and exposing them to others -- figuring that the rest of the world will be less likely to blame them for their own neglect. They criticize the flaws far more than they deserve, piling on extra hostility. But good people hide their feelings, force themselves to find praise, and if they've been wronged and are angry, they calm themselves down and make peace, compelling themselves to love and honor their own flesh and blood. Simonides, I think, had often found himself in the position of having to praise and glorify some tyrant or similar figure very much against his will. And he also wants Pittacus to understand that he's not criticizing him out of spite.

"I'm satisfied," he says, "when a person is neither bad nor too foolish, and when he knows justice (which is the health of communities) and is of sound mind -- I won't find fault with him. I'm not the fault-finding type, and there's no shortage of fools."

(implying that if he enjoyed fault-finding, he'd have plenty of targets.)

"All things are good from which evil is absent."

In these words, he doesn't mean that all things are good which have no evil in them -- the way you might say "all things are white that have no black in them," which would be absurd. He means he accepts and doesn't criticize the moderate, in-between state.

("I don't hope," he says, "to find a perfectly blameless person among those who share the fruit of the broad earth -- but if I find one, I'll send you word. In this spirit, I praise no one. But whoever is moderately good and does no evil is good enough for me, and I love and approve of everyone")

(and notice here that he uses a Lesbian word, epainemi -- "approve" -- because he's addressing Pittacus,

"who love and approve of everyone willingly, who does no evil")

and the key punctuation break should come after "willingly": "but there are some whom I involuntarily praise and love. You, Pittacus -- I'd never have criticized you if you'd said something moderately good and true. But I do criticize you because, while putting on the appearance of truth, you're speaking falsely about the most important matters." And that, I said, addressing Prodicus and Protagoras, is what I take to be Simonides's meaning in this poem.

Hippias said: I think, Socrates, that's a very good explanation of the poem. But I also have an excellent interpretation of my own, which I'd like to share with you, if you'll let me.

Hold on, Hippias, said Alcibiades. Not now -- some other time. Right now we need to stick to the agreement between Socrates and Protagoras: as long as Protagoras is willing to ask questions, Socrates should answer; or if Protagoras would rather answer, then Socrates should ask.

I said: I'd be happy if Protagoras wants to either ask or answer, as he prefers. But I'd really rather be done with poems and odes, if he doesn't mind, and get back to the question I was raising at the start, Protagoras -- and with your help, see it through to the end. Honestly, all this talk about poets reminds me of the kind of entertainment at a low-rent dinner party where the guests can't actually hold a conversation or amuse each other with their own words over drinks -- because they've got nothing interesting to say -- so they hire flute-girls at inflated prices, paying for someone else's music to fill the silence. But when the guests are genuinely educated, thoughtful people, you won't see any flute-girls or dancing-girls or harp-girls. They don't need that noise. They're perfectly content with their own conversation, speaking in turn, keeping things orderly, even when they're drinking freely. A group like ours, made up of people who claim to be what we claim to be, shouldn't need someone else's voice or the poets' words -- poets you can't even cross-examine about what they meant. When people quote poets in arguments, one person says the poet meant this, another says he meant that, and they're debating a point that can never be settled. Serious thinkers avoid that kind of thing. They prefer to test each other directly, using their own words and ideas. That's the model I'd like us to follow. Let's leave the poets behind and stick to ourselves, putting each other to the proof in honest conversation. If you want to ask questions, I'm ready to answer. Or if you'd rather, you answer and give me the chance to pick up where we left off and finish the argument we started.

I said all of this and more along the same lines. But Protagoras wouldn't clearly say which he'd rather do. So Alcibiades turned to Callias and said: Do you think it's fair, Callias, that Protagoras refuses to say whether he'll answer or not? I certainly don't. He should either continue the argument or say straight out that he won't -- so the rest of us know where we stand. Then Socrates can talk with someone else, and the rest of the company can have their own conversations.

I think Protagoras was genuinely embarrassed by Alcibiades's words. And when Callias and the rest of the group added their appeals, he finally agreed to continue the argument. He said I should ask the questions and he'd answer.

So I said: Don't think, Protagoras, that I have any motive in asking you questions beyond wanting to work through the problems that genuinely puzzle me. I really believe Homer was right when he said:

"When two go together, one sees what the other misses."

Because all of us, when we have a companion, are sharper in action, word, and thought. But when someone

"sees a thing when he is alone,"

he goes looking right away for someone to share his discovery with and confirm it. And I'd rather work through these problems with you than with anyone else, because I think no one has a better grasp of the things a good person should understand, and of virtue in particular. Who else could I turn to? You don't just claim to be a good and honorable person -- plenty of people can claim that without being able to make others good. But you are yourself good and can make others good too. And you have so much confidence in your abilities that while other Sophists try to hide what they do, you've announced to all of Greece that you're a Sophist, a teacher of virtue and education, and you were the first to charge a fee for it. How could I possibly not invite you to examine these questions with me? I have to.

So let me refresh both our memories about where we were. If I'm right, the question was this: are wisdom, self-control, courage, justice, and piety five names for the same thing? Or does each name refer to a distinct underlying reality, each with its own unique nature, no one of them being the same as any other? And you said they're not names for the same thing. Each has its own distinct reality. They're all parts of virtue -- but not the way pieces of gold are parts of a bar of gold, where every piece is like every other piece and like the whole. They're parts the way the features of a face are parts -- where the mouth, nose, eyes, and ears are all different from each other and from the whole face, and each has its own distinct function. I'd like to know if that's still your view. Or if you've changed your mind, just say so. I won't hold you to it. You may have said what you did earlier just to test me.

I stand by what I said, Socrates, he replied. All these qualities are parts of virtue, and four of the five are reasonably similar to each other. But the fifth -- courage -- is very different from the rest. Here's my proof: you can find plenty of people who are thoroughly unjust, impious, undisciplined, and ignorant, but who are nevertheless remarkably brave.

Wait, I said. I'd like to think about that. When you say brave people, do you mean people who are bold and confident? Or some other kind?

Yes, he said -- I mean the reckless ones, the people who charge at things that everyone else is afraid of.

Next point: would you agree that virtue is a good thing -- a thing you teach others?

Yes, he said. I'd call it the best of all things, if I'm in my right mind.

And is it partly good and partly bad, I asked, or entirely good?

Entirely good, and in the highest degree.

Now tell me: who feels confident about diving into a well?

The trained divers, I'd say.

And why? Because they have knowledge?

Yes, that's the reason.

And who feels confident fighting on horseback -- the skilled rider or the unskilled one?

The skilled rider.

And who in fighting with light shields -- the trained soldiers or the untrained?

The trained soldiers. And that's true across the board, he said, if that's where you're heading: people with knowledge are more confident than people without it, and they're more confident after they've learned something than they were before.

But haven't you also seen people who are completely ignorant of these things and yet full of confidence?

Yes, he said. I've seen far too many people like that.

And aren't these confident people also courageous?

In that case, he replied, courage would be something shameful, because the people we're talking about are clearly out of their minds.

Then who are the courageous? Aren't they the confident ones?

Yes, he said. I'll stick with that.

But the people who are confident without knowledge, I said -- we've just agreed they're not really courageous, they're crazy. So the wisest people would also be the most confident, and being the most confident, would also be the bravest. And on that logic, wisdom would be the same as courage.

No, Socrates, he replied. You're misremembering what I said. When you asked me, I did say that the courageous are the confident. But you never asked whether the confident are courageous. If you had, I'd have said, "Not all of them." You haven't shown that my answer was wrong. What you showed was that people with knowledge are more confident than they were before, and more confident than people without knowledge -- and from that, you jumped to the conclusion that courage is the same as wisdom. But by this logic, you could prove that strength is wisdom. You might start by asking me: "Are the strong able?" and I'd say yes. Then: "Are people who know how to wrestle more able than those who don't? And more able after they've learned than before?" I'd agree. And then you'd use my answers to prove that, on my own view, wisdom is strength. But I'd never admitted that the able are the strong -- only that the strong are able. Ability and strength aren't the same thing. Ability can come from knowledge, but also from madness or rage. Strength comes from nature and a healthy body. And it's the same with confidence and courage. They're not identical. The courageous are confident, but not everyone who's confident is courageous. Confidence can come from training, but also from madness and rage. Courage comes from nature and the healthy condition of the soul.

I said: You'd agree, Protagoras, that some people live well and others live badly?

He agreed.

And do you think someone lives well if they spend their life in pain and misery?

No, he said.

But if someone lives pleasantly all the way to the end of their life -- wouldn't you say they've lived well?

Yes.

So living pleasantly is good, and living in pain is bad?

Yes, he said -- if the pleasure comes from what's good and honorable.

Really, Protagoras? I asked. Are you like most people, who call some pleasant things bad and some painful things good? Because my own view is more like this: things are good insofar as they're pleasant -- assuming they don't lead to bad consequences -- and things are bad insofar as they're painful.

I don't know, Socrates, he said, whether I can state it quite that simply -- that the pleasant is the good and the painful is the bad. Considering not just this particular answer but my whole life and reputation, I think I'd be safer saying: there are some pleasant things that aren't good, some painful things that are good, some that are neutral, and some that are neither one thing nor the other.

And by "pleasant," I said, you mean things that involve pleasure or create pleasure?

Certainly, he said.

So what I'm asking is this: insofar as things are pleasant, aren't they good? I'm suggesting that pleasure is itself a good.

Let's do what you always say, Socrates, Protagoras replied. "Let's think about this together." If the investigation supports it, and pleasure and good really turn out to be the same, then we'll agree. If not, then we'll have something to argue about.

Do you want to lead the investigation, I asked, or should I?

You should lead, he said. It's your question.

Fair enough. Let me use an analogy, I said. Suppose someone were examining another person's health or physical condition. He looks at the face and the fingertips and says, "Take off your shirt -- let me see your chest and back so I can examine you properly." That's the kind of thing I want to do here. Having heard your views on pleasure and good, I want to say: Open up your mind to me, Protagoras. Tell me what you think about knowledge. Do you agree with most people, or not? Here's what most people believe: knowledge isn't something powerful, isn't something that leads or commands. They think a person can have knowledge, and yet be overwhelmed by anger, or pleasure, or pain, or passion, or fear -- as if knowledge were a slave that gets dragged around by whatever impulse comes along. Is that your view? Or do you think knowledge is something noble and commanding, something that can't be overpowered -- that if a person truly knows the difference between good and bad, nothing can force them to act against that knowledge, and wisdom is strong enough to keep them on the right path?

I agree with you, Socrates, said Protagoras. And more than that -- it would be especially disgraceful for me, of all people, to deny that wisdom and knowledge are the most powerful forces in human life.

Good, I said. And true. But are you aware that most people disagree? The common belief is that people often know what's best and don't do it, even when they could. And when I've asked people why this happens, they say it's because they're "overcome by pleasure" or pain or one of those other things I mentioned.

Yes, Socrates, he replied. And that's hardly the only thing the majority gets wrong.

Well then, I said, suppose you and I tried to educate them about the true nature of this experience they call "being overcome by pleasure" -- this thing they say prevents them from always doing what's best. If we told them, "Friends, you've got it wrong -- that's not what's really going on," they'd probably say: "Socrates and Protagoras, if it's not 'being overcome by pleasure,' then what is it? What would you call it?"

But why, Socrates, should we bother with the opinion of the masses, who just say whatever pops into their heads?

I think, I said, that examining their views might actually help us figure out how courage relates to the other parts of virtue. If you're willing to stick with the plan and let me lead us toward what I think is the clearest path through this difficulty, then follow along. If not, we can drop it.

No, you're absolutely right, he said. Go on.

All right then, I said. Suppose they ask us again: "What do you say is really happening in what we call 'being overcome by pleasure'?" Here's what I'd answer: Listen, and Protagoras and I will try to explain. When people are overcome by food, drink, and other sensual desires -- things that are pleasant -- and they indulge in them while knowing they're harmful, you'd say they've been overcome by pleasure, right? They'd agree.

Then suppose you and I pressed them: "In what sense do you call these things harmful? Is it that they're pleasant in the moment, that they give you immediate gratification? Or is it because down the road they cause disease, poverty, and other problems? If these pleasures had no bad consequences at all -- if they simply gave you the experience of pleasure and nothing else -- would they still be bad?" I think they'd have to answer: these things aren't bad because of the pleasure they give right now. They're bad because of what comes after -- the diseases, the poverty, and so on.

I believe, said Protagoras, that most people would answer the way you describe.

And when these pleasures cause disease, don't they cause pain? And when they cause poverty, don't they cause pain? They'd agree to that too, wouldn't they?

Protagoras said yes.

Then I'd say to them, speaking for both of us: So you think these things are bad for no other reason than that they end in pain and deprive you of other pleasures? They'd agree, right?

We both thought so.

Now flip it around. "Friends, when you say that painful things are good -- aren't you talking about things like physical training, military service, medical treatments involving cautery, surgery, harsh drugs, and strict diets? These are the things that are painful but good?" They'd agree.

"And you call them good not because they cause terrible suffering in the moment, but because they eventually bring health, physical fitness, the safety of your city, power, and wealth?" They'd agree to that too, wouldn't they?

He said yes.

"And are these things good for any reason other than that they end in pleasure and relieve or prevent pain? Is there any standard you're using besides pleasure and pain when you call them good?" They'd have to say no.

I think so, said Protagoras.

"So you chase after pleasure because it's good, and you avoid pain because it's bad?"

He agreed.

"So pain is what you regard as bad, and pleasure as good. You even call pleasure bad when it costs you more pleasure than it gives, or causes more pain than the pleasure is worth. But if you're calling pleasure bad in relation to some other standard, you'd be able to tell us what that standard is. But you don't have one."

I don't think they do, said Protagoras.

"And isn't it the same with pain? You call pain good when it takes away greater pain or produces greater pleasure than the pain it causes. But if you have some other standard besides pleasure and pain for calling pain 'good,' you could show us what it is. But you can't."

True, said Protagoras.

Now suppose, I said, people ask us: "Why are you going on about this at such length?" Fair question, I'd say. But first: the whole argument hinges on explaining what "being overcome by pleasure" really means. And even now, if you can show us any way that good can be something other than pleasure, or bad something other than pain, you can retract what we've said. Can you? Are you satisfied to say that the good life is a life of pleasure without pain? If you are, and if you can't point to any good or bad that doesn't ultimately come down to pleasure and pain, then listen to what follows.

If all this is true, then the claim that people often knowingly do bad things because they're "overcome by pleasure" becomes absurd. And so does saying that someone knowingly refuses to do what's good because they're "overwhelmed by pleasure in the moment." To see how ridiculous this is, just stop switching between names. There are two things at work here. Let's call them by one pair of names at a time -- first "good" and "bad," then "pleasant" and "painful." Using the first pair: we say a person does what's bad knowing it's bad. Why? "Because he's overcome." Overcome by what? We can't say "by pleasure" anymore, because we've replaced "pleasure" with "good." So our answer is: "He's overcome by... the good." Imagine someone hearing that and laughing: "How absurd! A person does what he knows is bad, when he shouldn't, because he's overcome by the good?" And he'd ask: "Is the good that overcame him worth the trade, or not?" We'd clearly have to say: "No, it wasn't worth it -- because if it had been, the person who was supposedly 'overcome by pleasure' wouldn't have been wrong." "But how," our questioner presses, "can the good not be worth the bad, or the bad not worth the good?" There's only one answer: because they're out of proportion. One is greater, the other smaller. One is more, the other less. "And when you talk about being 'overcome,'" he'd say, "don't you just mean choosing a greater bad in exchange for a lesser good?"

We'd have to admit it.

Now put the words "pleasure" and "pain" back in for "good" and "bad," and say: a person does what's painful knowingly, because he's overcome by pleasure -- by pleasure that isn't worth overcoming the pain. And what determines whether pleasure is worth the pain or not? What measure compares them? Nothing but excess and deficiency -- they become greater and smaller, more and fewer, differ in degree. "But wait," someone says, "immediate pleasure is totally different from future pleasure and pain." And I'd reply: different in what way? Only in how much pleasure and how much pain they involve. There's no other standard.

Think of it like a scale, I'd say. You put pleasures on one side and pains on the other. You factor in how near or far away each one is, and you weigh them. Whichever side is heavier, that's the one you should go with. If you're weighing pleasures against pleasures, obviously take the greater amount. Pains against pains? Take the fewer and the smaller. Pleasures against pains? Choose the path where the painful is outweighed by the pleasant -- whether the distant outweighs the near, or the near outweighs the distant. And avoid the path where the pleasant is outweighed by the painful. Isn't that right, friends? I'm confident they couldn't deny it.

He agreed with me.

Good. Then answer me this, I'd continue: Don't the same objects look larger when they're close and smaller when they're far away? They'd agree. And the same goes for thickness and number. And sounds that are equal in themselves seem louder up close and softer at a distance. They'd agree to that too.

Now, if living well depends on choosing the greater and avoiding the lesser, what would be our salvation? Would it be the skill of measuring, or the power of appearances? Isn't it appearances -- that deceiving force -- that makes us wander back and forth, choosing one thing now and regretting it later, in our actions and our choices of great and small? But the skill of measuring would cut through the illusion of appearances, reveal the truth, and let the soul rest securely in that truth -- and so save our lives. Wouldn't people agree that the skill that accomplishes this is the skill of measuring?

Yes, he said. The skill of measuring.

Or suppose our salvation depended on choosing correctly between odd and even, on knowing when to choose the greater or the lesser, whether in relation to themselves or to each other, whether near or far. What would save us? Knowledge, obviously -- specifically, the knowledge of measuring when it's a matter of more and less, and the knowledge of number when it's a matter of odd and even. People would agree, wouldn't they?

Protagoras himself thought they would.

Well then, friends, I'd say to them: since it turns out that the salvation of human life depends on the right choice of pleasures and pains -- the choice of more and fewer, greater and lesser, nearer and farther -- doesn't that come down to measuring their excess, their deficit, and their equality relative to one another?

That's undeniable.

And whatever involves measuring must surely be a skill and a form of knowledge?

They'd agree, he said.

What exactly this skill or science is -- that's a question for another time. But the mere fact that such a science exists gives us a decisive answer to the question you originally asked me and Protagoras. Remember? We'd agreed that nothing is more powerful than knowledge, that knowledge always has the advantage over pleasure and everything else. But you challenged us: "What about when people are 'overcome by pleasure'? What's going on there? Tell us what you'd call it." If we'd immediately answered "Ignorance," you'd have laughed at us. But now, if you laugh, you're laughing at yourselves. Because you've admitted that people go wrong in choosing pleasures and pains -- that is, in choosing good and bad -- through a lack of knowledge. And not just knowledge in general, but specifically the knowledge we've been calling the skill of measuring. And as you know, every wrong action done without knowledge is done from ignorance. So this is what "being overcome by pleasure" really means: ignorance. The worst kind of ignorance.

And our friends Protagoras, Prodicus, and Hippias here claim to be the doctors who cure this ignorance. But you -- because you're under the delusion that ignorance isn't the real cause, and because you think this skill can't be taught -- you don't go to the Sophists yourselves, and you don't send your children to them. You guard your money and give them none. And the result is that you do worse both in public and in private life.

Let's suppose that's our answer to the general public. And now I want to ask you, Hippias, and you, Prodicus, along with Protagoras -- since this argument belongs to all of us -- do you think what I'm saying is true or not?

They all said they thought every word of it was true.

So you agree, I said, that the pleasant is the good and the painful is the bad. And here I'll ask my friend Prodicus to spare us his fine distinctions about terminology -- whether he wants to call it "pleasurable," "delightful," or "joyful," I don't care. Please just answer in the spirit of what I mean, Prodicus.

Prodicus laughed and agreed, and so did the others.

Then how about this, friends? I continued. Aren't all actions honorable and beneficial whose tendency is to make life free from pain and full of pleasure? Isn't honorable work also useful and good?

This was admitted.

So, I said, if the pleasant is the good, then nobody does something bad when they believe something better is available and within their reach. This kind of inferiority to oneself is simply ignorance, just as superiority over oneself is wisdom.

They all agreed.

And isn't ignorance exactly this: holding false beliefs and being deceived about important matters?

They unanimously agreed.

Then, I said, no one voluntarily pursues what's bad, or what they believe to be bad. It isn't in human nature to prefer what's bad over what's good. And when a person is forced to choose between two evils, no one will choose the greater when they can have the lesser.

Everyone agreed with every word of this.

Good, I said. Now there's a certain thing called fear or dread. And here, Prodicus, I'd particularly like to know: would you agree with me in defining fear or dread as the expectation of something bad?

Protagoras and Hippias agreed. Prodicus said that was fear, but not dread.

Never mind the distinction, Prodicus, I said. Here's my question: if everything we've said is true, would anyone run toward what they fear, when they're not forced to? That would flatly contradict what we've already established -- that people regard whatever they fear as bad, and no one willingly pursues or accepts what they believe to be bad.

This too was universally agreed.

Now then, I said, those are our premises, Hippias and Prodicus. And I'd like Protagoras to explain how he can still be right about what he said earlier. I'm not talking about his very first statement -- that there are five parts of virtue, none of which is like any other, each with its own distinct function. I'm talking about what he said after that: that four of the five virtues are closely related, but the fifth -- courage -- is fundamentally different from the rest. He gave this evidence: "You'll find, Socrates, that some of the most impious, unjust, undisciplined, and ignorant people are among the bravest. That proves courage is very different from the other parts of virtue." I was surprised by this at the time, and I'm even more surprised now that we've worked through all of this. So I asked him: when you say the brave, do you mean the bold and confident? "Yes," he said, "and the reckless -- the ones who charge straight in." (You remember saying that, Protagoras?)

He agreed.

Well then, I said, tell us: what do the courageous charge toward? The same things as cowards?

No, he answered.

Different things, then?

Yes, he said.

Do cowards go where it's safe, and the courageous where there's danger?

That's what people say, Socrates.

True, I said. But what I want to know is: do the courageous go toward things they believe to be dangerous, or toward things they don't believe to be dangerous?

They can't go toward what they believe to be dangerous, he said. We proved that's impossible in our earlier argument.

Exactly right, I replied. And if that proof was sound, then nobody goes to meet what they think is dangerous -- because being overwhelmed by one's impulses when rushing into danger has been shown to be ignorance.

He agreed.

And yet both the courageous and the cowardly go toward what they're confident about. So in that respect, they go toward the same things.

But Socrates, said Protagoras, what the coward goes toward is the exact opposite of what the courageous person goes toward. For instance, the courageous person is ready to go into battle, and the coward isn't.

And is going to battle honorable or disgraceful? I asked.

Honorable, he replied.

And if it's honorable, then we've already agreed it's good -- since we said all honorable actions are good.

That's true, and I'll always stand by that view.

Right, I said. So which group refuses to go to war, which is a good and honorable thing?

The cowards, he replied.

And what's good and honorable, I said, is also pleasant?

That's certainly what we established, he replied.

So the cowards knowingly refuse to go toward what's nobler, pleasanter, and better?

If we admit that, he replied, it would contradict everything we've already agreed to.

And doesn't the courageous person go toward what's better, pleasanter, and nobler?

I have to admit that.

And the courageous person has no shameful fear or shameful confidence?

True, he replied.

And if not shameful, then honorable?

He admitted it.

And if honorable, then good?

Yes.

But the fear and confidence of the coward, or the reckless fool, or the madman -- those are shameful?

He agreed.

And these shameful fears and misplaced confidences -- they come from ignorance and lack of education?

True, he said.

Now, the reason cowards act the way they do -- would you call that cowardice or courage?

Cowardice, he replied.

And haven't we just shown that they're cowards because of their ignorance about what's really dangerous and what isn't?

Absolutely, he said.

And it's because of that ignorance that they're cowards?

He agreed.

And you've admitted that what makes them cowards is cowardice?

He agreed again.

So ignorance of what is and isn't dangerous -- that is cowardice?

He nodded.

But surely courage is the opposite of cowardice?

Yes.

Then wisdom about what is and isn't dangerous is the opposite of ignorance about these things?

He nodded again.

And the ignorance of what is and isn't dangerous is cowardice?

Again he nodded, very reluctantly.

So the knowledge of what is and isn't dangerous -- that is courage, and it's the opposite of that ignorance?

At this point he wouldn't nod or speak. He was silent.

Why won't you agree or disagree, Protagoras? I asked.

Finish the argument yourself, he said.

Just one more question, I said. Do you still believe that there are people who are profoundly ignorant and yet profoundly brave?

You seem determined to make me answer, Socrates. Very well -- I'll give you what you want. Based on our argument, it appears to be impossible.

My only reason for pushing this discussion, I said, was my desire to understand the true nature of virtue and how its parts relate to each other. Because if we could get clear on that, I'm sure the other big debate we've been having -- you arguing that virtue can be taught, and I denying it -- would finally be settled too. And the result of our discussion strikes me as truly remarkable. If the argument had a human voice, it would be laughing at both of us, saying:

"What a strange pair you are, Socrates and Protagoras! There you are, Socrates, who started by claiming that virtue can't be taught -- and now you're contradicting yourself by trying to prove that everything is knowledge: justice, self-control, courage -- all of it knowledge. Which would mean that virtue obviously can be taught. After all, if virtue were something other than knowledge, as Protagoras was trying to show, then clearly it couldn't be taught. But if virtue turns out to be entirely a matter of knowledge, as you're now trying to demonstrate, then of course it can be taught.

"And then there's Protagoras, who started by saying virtue can be taught -- and now he's desperately trying to prove it's anything but knowledge. And if that's true, then it can't be taught at all."

When I see this enormous tangle, I said, all I want is to sort it out. I'd love to keep going until we've figured out what virtue actually is -- whether it can be taught or not -- so that Epimetheus doesn't trip us up and fool us in the argument the way he forgot about the humans in the story. I prefer your Prometheus to your Epimetheus, Protagoras. I'm trying to use Promethean foresight to take care of my own life. And if you're willing, I'd love your help in working through it, just as I said at the start.

Protagoras replied: Socrates, I'm not a petty person, and I'm the last man in the world to be envious. I can only admire your energy and the way you conduct an argument. As I've often said, of all the people I know, I admire you more than anyone -- and far more than anyone your age. I believe you're going to become truly distinguished in philosophy. Let's come back to this another time. For now, I think we should move on to other things.

By all means, I said. That suits me fine. I should have left a long time ago to keep the appointment I mentioned earlier. I only stayed because I couldn't refuse such a gracious host as Callias.

And with that, the conversation ended. And we went on our way.
