Euthydemus (Part 2)

Socrates
And what does the kingly art produce when it holds supreme power? Maybe you're not ready with an answer?

Crito
I'm certainly not, Socrates.

Socrates
Neither were we, Crito. But you do at least know that if this is the art we've been looking for, it ought to be useful.

Crito
Of course.

Socrates
And it surely ought to do us some good?

Crito
Of course, Socrates.

Socrates
And Cleinias and I had agreed that knowledge of some kind is the only good.

Crito
Yes, that's what you were saying.

Socrates
Now, all the other results of politics — and there are many: wealth, freedom, peace and stability — turned out to be neither good nor evil in themselves. The political art, if it's the one that's going to do us good and make us happy, ought to make us wise and give us knowledge.

Crito
Yes, that was the conclusion you'd reached, from what you've told me.

Socrates
So does the kingly art make people wise and good?

Crito
Why not, Socrates?

Socrates
What — all people, and in every respect? Does it teach them all the skills — carpentry, shoemaking, and all the rest?

Crito
I don't think so, Socrates.

Socrates
Then what knowledge does it give? And what are we supposed to do with it? It can't be the source of any products that are neither good nor evil in themselves, and it doesn't give us knowledge of anything specific — just the knowledge of itself. So what is it, and what do we do with it? Shall we say, Crito, that it's the knowledge by which we make other people good?

Crito
By all means.

Socrates
And in what way will they be good, and what will they be useful for? Shall we say they'll make still other people good, who'll then make yet more people good, and so on forever — without our ever being able to say what they're actually good at? Because we've set aside all the specific results of politics. It's the same old tune playing again. And we're exactly where we started — if not further back — from knowing what the art of happiness actually is.

Crito
You really do seem to have gotten yourself into quite a pickle, Socrates.

Socrates
And so, Crito, finding myself on the verge of shipwreck, I cried out and desperately begged the two visitors to save me and the young man from the whirlpool of this argument. They were our Castor and Pollux, I said, and it was time for them to be serious and show us — in good, sober earnest — what that knowledge is which would enable us to spend the rest of our lives in happiness.

Crito
And did Euthydemus show you?

Socrates
Oh yes, indeed. He launched into a speech so lofty it went like this: "Would you rather, Socrates," he said, "that I show you this knowledge you've been struggling with? Or shall I prove that you already have it?"

"What!" I said. "You have the power to do that?"

"I certainly do."

"Then I'd much rather you prove I already have it. At my age, that would be a lot more convenient than having to learn something new."

"All right then," he said. "Tell me — do you know anything?"

"Yes," I said. "Lots of things, but nothing very important."

"That'll do," he said. "Now — would you agree that anything is what it is, and at the same time is not what it is?"

"Absolutely not."

"And didn't you say you know something?"

Yes.

"And if you know, you're a knowing person."

"Sure — with respect to the things I know."

"That makes no difference. If you're knowing, you must know all things."

"Certainly not!" I said. "There are plenty of things I don't know."

"And if you don't know, you're not knowing."

"Not knowing those particular things, sure."

"But you're still not knowing. And you just said you are knowing. So you both are and are not knowing at the same time, about the same things."

"Well, that's a pretty little tangle you've tied, Euthydemus! But explain something to me — how does this give me that knowledge we've been looking for? Are you saying that since the same thing can't both be and not be, and since I know one thing, I must therefore know everything? Because I can't be knowing and not knowing at the same time? And if I know everything, then I must possess the knowledge we were searching for? Is that your brilliant insight?"

"Convicted out of your own mouth, Socrates," he said.

"Well, Euthydemus," I said, "hasn't the same thing happened to you? Because if I'm in the same boat as you and your beloved brother Dionysodorus, I really can't complain. Tell me honestly — you two, do you know some things and not know others?"

"Certainly not, Socrates," said Dionysodorus.

"What do you mean?" I said. "You don't know anything?"

"Oh no," he replied. "We do know something."

"Then," I said, "you know everything — if you know anything?"

"Yes, everything," he said. "And that's as true of you as it is of us."

"Oh my!" I said. "What a wonderful thing! What a magnificent blessing! And does everyone else also know everything — or nothing?"

"Naturally," he said. "They can't know some things and not others, because then they'd be knowing and not knowing at the same time."

"So what's the conclusion?" I said.

"Everyone knows everything," he said, "if they know even one thing."

"Oh heavens, Dionysodorus," I said, "I see now you really are being serious — I could hardly get you to that point! And you truly, genuinely know all things? Including carpentry? And leather-cutting?"

"Absolutely," he said.

"And stitching? Do you know stitching?"

"Yes, by the gods — stitching and cobbling too."

"And things like the number of the stars and the grains of sand?"

"Of course! Did you think we'd say no to that?"

"By Zeus," Ctesippus broke in, "I just wish you'd give me some proof that you're telling the truth."

"What kind of proof do you want?" said Dionysodorus.

"Tell me how many teeth Euthydemus has, and Euthydemus can tell us how many you have."

"Won't you just take our word that we know everything?"

"Certainly not," said Ctesippus. "First tell us this one thing, and then we'll believe the rest. If you tell us the number and we count the teeth and you're right, we'll buy everything else you say."

They thought Ctesippus was making fun of them and refused to answer, though they kept insisting in response to each of his questions that they knew everything.

Because Ctesippus had finally thrown off all restraint. No question was too outrageous for him. He started asking them if they knew the most disgusting things imaginable. And the two of them, like wild boars rushing onto the spear points, fearlessly answered that yes, they knew all of it.

Finally, Crito, even I got swept up in my disbelief and asked Euthydemus: "Does Dionysodorus know how to dance?"

"Certainly," he said.

"And can he do acrobatic sword-leaps and spin on a wheel — at his age? Has he really reached that level of skill?"

"He can do anything," he said.

"And have you always known all this?"

"Always," he said.

"Even as children? At your very birth?"

They both said yes.

This we simply couldn't believe. And Euthydemus said, "You're skeptical, Socrates."

"Yes," I said, "and I'd have good reason to be — if I didn't know that you two are wise men."

"But if you'll answer my questions," he said, "I'll get you to confess to equally amazing things."

"Well," I said, "there's nothing I'd like better than to be proven wrong about myself. If I'm actually a wise man and have been all along without knowing it — and you can prove it — there'd be no greater prize in life."

"Then answer," he said.

"Ask," I said. "I'm ready."

"Do you know something, Socrates, or nothing?"

"Something," I said.

"And do you know with what you know, or with something else?"

"With what I know — and I assume you mean with my soul?"

"Aren't you ashamed, Socrates, to ask a question when you're the one being questioned?"

"All right," I said. "But what am I supposed to do? I'll do whatever you say. But when I don't understand what you're asking, you tell me to answer anyway and not to ask for clarification."

"You surely have some notion of what I mean," he said.

"Yes," I said.

"Then answer according to your notion."

"Yes," I said, "but if you mean one thing by your question and I understand it differently and answer based on my interpretation, will you be satisfied with that — even if my answer is off the mark?"

"I'll be very satisfied — but I suspect you won't be."

"Then I definitely won't answer," I said, "unless I understand you."

"You refuse to answer based on your own understanding," he said, "because you'd rather keep yammering on. You're an old fossil."

Now I could see he was getting annoyed with me for making distinctions when he wanted to trap me in his nets of words. And I remembered that Connus always got annoyed with me when I pushed back against him — and then he'd give up on me, figuring I was hopeless. Since I was planning to study under Euthydemus, I figured I'd better let him have his way, or he'd think I was a dunce and refuse to teach me.

So I said, "You're a far better dialectician than I am, Euthydemus — I've never claimed to be a professional. So have it your way. Ask me again, and I'll answer."

"Answer again, then," he said. "Do you know what you know with something, or with nothing?"

"Yes," I said. "With my soul."

"There you go again — answering more than was asked!" he said. "I didn't ask you what you know with. I asked whether you know with something."

"You're right — I said too much. Forgive me, it was just ignorance. I'll answer simply: yes, I always know what I know with something."

"And is that something always the same," he said, "or sometimes one thing and sometimes another?"

"Always the same," I said. "Whenever I know, I know with this."

"Would you stop tacking on extra words?"

"I'm worried the word 'always' is going to get us in trouble."

"It might get you in trouble, but certainly not us. Now answer: do you always know with this?"

"Always — since you won't let me say 'when I know.'"

"And always knowing, do you know some things with this and other things with something else? Or do you know all things with this?"

"All that I know," I said, "I know with this."

"There it is again, Socrates!" he said. "The extra words."

"Fine," I said. "I'll drop 'that I know.'"

"No no — don't drop anything. I'm not asking for favors. Just answer this: would you be able to know all things if you didn't already know all things?"

"That's completely impossible."

"Then add on whatever you like," he said, "because you've just admitted that you know all things."

"I suppose that's true," I said, "since my little qualifier 'that I know' isn't allowed to stand. So yes — I know all things."

"And you've admitted that you always know all things with that by which you know — whether we add the phrase 'when you know them' or not. Because you've agreed that you've always known all things at once — that is, even when you were a child, and at your birth, and while you were growing up, and before you were born, and before heaven and earth existed — you knew all things, since you always know them. And I swear you will continue to always know all things, if I have any say in the matter."

"I certainly hope you'll have that say, reverend Euthydemus," I said, "if you're really telling the truth. But I have a slight doubt about your ability to deliver on this — unless your brother Dionysodorus backs you up. Then maybe you can do it. Tell me, both of you — because in the main, I suppose I can't doubt that I really do know all things, since two prodigiously wise men tell me so — but how can I claim to know things like this, Euthydemus: that the good are unjust? Come on — do I know that or not?"

"You certainly know it."

"Know what?"

"That the good are not unjust."

"Right, yes — I've always known that," I said. "But that's not what I'm asking. What I want to know is: where did I learn that the good are unjust?"

"Nowhere," said Dionysodorus.

"Then I don't know it," I said.

"You're ruining the argument!" Euthydemus said to Dionysodorus. "He'll turn out not to know something, and then he'll be knowing and not knowing at the same time."

Dionysodorus blushed.

I turned to Euthydemus and said, "What do you think, Euthydemus? Doesn't your all-knowing brother seem to have made a little mistake?"

"What?" said Dionysodorus, snapping back instantly. "Am I the brother of Euthydemus?"

"Let that go," I said. "Please don't interrupt, my friend — just let Euthydemus get back to proving that I know the good to be unjust. At least let me learn that much."

"You're running away, Socrates," said Dionysodorus. "Refusing to answer."

"No wonder," I said. "I'm no match for even one of you, let alone both. Of course I'm going to run away from two. I'm no Heracles. And even Heracles couldn't fight the Hydra — a she-Sophist who had the wit to sprout several new heads every time one was cut off. Especially once he saw a second monster — a giant sea-crab, another Sophist, who appeared to have just arrived from a sea voyage — bearing down on him from the left, snapping its jaws. When it got too troublesome, he called in his nephew Iolaus for backup, and Iolaus came through beautifully. But if my Iolaus — my brother Patrocles the sculptor — were to come help, he'd only make things worse."

"All right," said Dionysodorus, "now that you've finished that little performance — tell me, was Iolaus the nephew of Heracles any more than he's yours?"

"I suppose I'd better answer you, Dionysodorus," I said, "because you'll keep pressing — that much I know — out of sheer determination to prevent me from learning anything from Euthydemus."

"Then answer," he said.

"Fine," I said. "Iolaus was not my nephew. He was Heracles' nephew. His father wasn't my brother Patrocles but Iphicles, whose name sounds a bit like Patrocles — Iphicles was Heracles' brother."

"And is Patrocles your brother?" he said.

"Yes," I said. "My half-brother — same mother, different father."

"Then he both is and is not your brother."

"Not by the same father, my friend," I said. "His father was Chaeredemus, and mine was Sophroniscus."

"And Sophroniscus was a father, and Chaeredemus was also a father?"

"Yes," I said. "Sophroniscus was my father, and Chaeredemus was his."

"Then Chaeredemus is different from a father?"

"He's not my father," I said.

"But can a father be anything other than a father? Or are you the same as a stone?"

"I'm definitely not a stone," I said, "though I'm worried you might prove I am one."

"Aren't you different from a stone?"

Yes.

"And being different from a stone, you're not a stone? And being different from gold, you're not gold?"

Right.

"So Chaeredemus," he said, "being different from a father, is not a father?"

"I suppose he's not a father," I said.

"Because if Chaeredemus is a father," said Euthydemus, jumping in, "then Sophroniscus, being different from a father, is not a father. And you, Socrates, have no father at all."

Ctesippus jumped in: "And isn't your father in the same situation? He's different from my father, isn't he?"

"Not at all," said Euthydemus.

"Then he's the same?"

"He's the same."

"I can't say I love the connection," said Ctesippus. "But is he only my father, Euthydemus, or is he everyone's father?"

"Everyone's father," he said. "Do you think the same person can be a father and not a father?"

"That's exactly what I thought," said Ctesippus.

"And do you think gold can be not gold? Or a man can be not a man?"

"Hold on, Euthydemus," said Ctesippus. "You're comparing apples and oranges, as they say. It's absurd to claim your father is the father of all."

"But he is," Euthydemus replied.

"Of men only?" said Ctesippus. "Or of horses and every other animal too?"

"Of all of them," he said.

"And your mother is the mother of all too?"

"Our mother too."

"So your mother has given birth to sea urchins?"

"And so has yours," he said.

"And baby fish and puppies and piglets are your brothers?"

"And yours too."

"And your papa is a dog?"

"And so is yours," he said.

"Let me have a turn," said Dionysodorus. "If you'll answer my questions, Ctesippus, I'll get the same admissions from you in no time. You have a dog, you said?"

"Yes — a real rascal," said Ctesippus.

"And he has puppies?"

"Yes, and they look just like him."

"And the dog is the father of the puppies?"

"I personally witnessed him with the mother," said Ctesippus.

"And isn't the dog yours?"

"He sure is."

"Then he's a father, and he's yours. Therefore: he's your father, and the puppies are your brothers."

"And let me slip in one more quick question," said Dionysodorus, jumping ahead before Ctesippus could respond, "just a small one: do you beat this dog?"

Ctesippus laughed and said, "I certainly do — since I can't beat you instead."

"Then you beat your father," said Dionysodorus.

"You'd have a much better reason to beat yours," said Ctesippus. "What was he thinking when he produced such brilliant sons? Your father — and his fellow puppies — must have gotten an enormous amount of good out of this wisdom of yours."

"Neither he nor you, Ctesippus, have any need of much good," said Euthydemus.

"Including yourself, Euthydemus?" said Ctesippus.

"Including me and every other person. Tell me, Ctesippus — do you think it's good or bad for a sick person to take medicine when he needs it? Or to go to war armed rather than unarmed?"

"I'd say it's good. Though I know I'm about to walk into one of your delightful traps."

"You'll find out soon enough," he said. "Since you admit that taking medicine is a good thing when someone needs it, then surely the more medicine the better? When he takes his dose, a whole cartload of hellebore shouldn't be too much for him."

"Absolutely, Euthydemus," said Ctesippus, "provided the patient is as big as the statue at Delphi."

"And since having weapons in wartime is a good thing, a person ought to have as many shields and spears as possible?"

"Oh, absolutely," said Ctesippus. "And you think one shield and one spear is enough?"

"For someone like you, sure. But would you equip Geryon or Briareus that way? I'd have thought you and your brother, being experts in armored combat, would know better..."

Here Euthydemus fell silent. But Dionysodorus returned to a previous answer of Ctesippus's.

"Don't you think owning gold is a good thing?"

"Yes," said Ctesippus. "The more the better."

"And to have money everywhere and always is a good thing?"

"Absolutely. A tremendous good."

"And you agree gold is a good?"

"I've already said so."

"Then shouldn't a person have gold everywhere and always, and as much as possible stuffed inside himself? Wouldn't the happiest man alive be the one with three talents of gold in his belly, a talent of gold in his skull, and a gold coin stuck in each eye?"

"Well, Euthydemus," said Ctesippus, "the Scythians do consider the people with gold in their skulls to be the happiest and bravest — which is just another version of your 'dog-father' routine. And what's even more extraordinary, the Scythians drink from their own gilded skulls, and look inside their own heads, and hold their own brains in their hands."

"Now tell me," said Euthydemus, "do the Scythians and everyone else see things that have the quality of sight, or things that don't?"

"Things that have the quality of sight, obviously."

"And you see things that have the quality of sight too?"

Yes.

"Then do you see our clothes?"

Yes.

"Then our clothes have the quality of sight."

"They can see brilliantly," said Ctesippus with a grin.

"What can they see?"

"Nothing! But you, my sweet friend, seem to have fallen asleep with your eyes open. And if it's possible to speak and say nothing — that's what you're doing right now."

"Can there not be a silence of the speaker?" said Dionysodorus.

"Impossible," said Ctesippus.

"Or a speaking of the silent?"

"Even more impossible."

"But when you mention stones, wood, and iron bars — aren't you speaking of silent things?"

"Not when I walk past a blacksmith's forge! In there, the iron bars make a terrific racket when you touch them. So your wisdom has slipped up on that one. But please, do tell me how you can be silent while speaking."

(I thought Ctesippus was showing off a bit because Cleinias was watching.)

"When you're silent," said Euthydemus, "isn't there a silence of all things?"

"Yes," he said.

"But if speaking things are included in 'all things,' then the speaking things are silent too."

"Wait," said Ctesippus. "Are all things not silent?"

"Certainly not," said Euthydemus.

"Then, my friend — do all things speak?"

"The ones that speak do."

"That's not what I'm asking," said Ctesippus. "I'm asking whether all things are silent or all things speak."

"Neither and both!" said Dionysodorus, jumping in. "I'm sure you'll be 'nonplussed' by that answer."

At this, Ctesippus — as was his way — exploded into a roar of laughter. "Your brother, Euthydemus, has gotten himself into a real jam! The game is up!" This delighted Cleinias, whose laughter made Ctesippus ten times louder. But I can't help thinking the rascal must have picked up that move from them, because nobody in our time has come close to their level of cleverness.

"Why are you laughing, Cleinias," I said, "at such solemn and beautiful ideas?"

"Well, Socrates," said Dionysodorus, "have you ever seen a beautiful thing?"

"Yes, Dionysodorus," I said. "I've seen many."

"Were they different from the beautiful itself, or the same as the beautiful?"

I was in quite a bind. I felt like I deserved it for opening my big mouth. But I said, "They're not the same as absolute beauty, but each of them has beauty present in it."

"And if an ox is present with you, are you an ox? And if Dionysodorus is present with you, are you Dionysodorus?"

"God forbid!" I said.

"But then how, just because one thing is present with another, will one thing be another?"

"Is that what's stumping you?" I said — because I was starting to try to imitate their technique, which I'd really set my heart on.

"Of course it is," he said. "I and the whole world are puzzled by the nonexistent."

"What do you mean, Dionysodorus?" I said. "Isn't the honorable honorable, and the base base?"

"That's as I please," he said.

"And does it please you?"

"Yes," he said.

"And you'd agree that the same is the same, and the different is different? Surely even a child wouldn't deny that the different is different. But I think, Dionysodorus, that you deliberately fumbled that last question. Because in general, you and your brother seem like excellent craftsmen who do the dialectician's business extremely well."

"And what," he said, "is the business of a good craftsman? Tell me — first of all, whose business is hammering?"

"The blacksmith's."

"And whose is making pots?"

"The potter's."

"And who does the killing, skinning, chopping, boiling, and roasting?"

"The cook," I said.

"And if someone does his proper business, he does right?"

Yes.

"And the cook's proper business, as you agreed, is the chopping and skinning?"

"Yes, I admitted that — but don't be too hard on me."

"So if someone were to kill, chop, boil, and roast the cook, he'd be doing the cook's business. And if someone were to hammer the blacksmith and throw the potter on a wheel, he'd be doing their business."

"Poseidon!" I said. "This is the crowning achievement of wisdom! Can I ever hope to possess such wisdom myself?"

"Would you even recognize it, Socrates, if it became yours?"

"Certainly," I said, "if you'll let me."

"What — do you think you know what's yours?" he said.

"I do — unless you say otherwise. Because you're the foundation and Euthydemus is the capstone of all my wisdom."

"Isn't 'yours' something you have in your power — something you can use however you want? For example, an ox or a sheep — if you could sell it, give it away, or sacrifice it to any god you chose — you'd call it yours. And anything you couldn't sell, give away, or sacrifice, you'd say wasn't really in your power. Right?"

"Right," I said — certain that something spectacular was about to emerge from these questions, and impatient to hear it. "Yes, things like that and only things like that are mine."

"And by animals, you mean living beings?"

"Yes," I said.

"So you agree that only those animals are yours over which you have the power to do all these things I just described?"

Yes.

Then, after a pause during which he seemed lost in contemplation of something enormous, he said: "Tell me, Socrates — do you have an ancestral Zeus?"

At this point, sensing the final move coming like a man caught in a net who makes one desperate twist to escape, I said: "No, Dionysodorus. I don't."

"What a pitiful man you must be!" he said. "You're not even a real Athenian if you have no ancestral gods, no temples, no mark of respectable citizenship."

"Now now, Dionysodorus," I said. "Don't be harsh. When it comes to religion, I've got altars and temples, both household and ancestral — everything any other Athenian has."

"And don't other Athenians have an ancestral Zeus?" he said.

"That title," I said, "isn't found among the Ionians, whether colonists or citizens of Athens. We have an ancestral Apollo, who's the father of Ion. And we have a Zeus of the Family and a Zeus of the Phratry, and an Athena of the Phratry. But 'Ancestral Zeus' — that's not one of our titles."

"No matter," said Dionysodorus. "You admit that you have Apollo, Zeus, and Athena."

"I certainly do."

"And they're your gods?"

"Yes," I said. "My lords and ancestors."

"At any rate, they're yours," he said. "Didn't you just admit that?"

"I did," I said. "What's coming?"

"And aren't these gods living beings? You already agreed that everything with life is an animal. And the gods have life, don't they?"

"They have life," I said.

"Then aren't they animals?"

"They're animals," I said.

"And you admitted that of your animals, the ones that are truly yours are the ones you can give away, sell, or sacrifice to any god you choose?"

"I did admit that, Euthydemus — and I have no way out."

"Well then," he said, "since you admit that Zeus and the other gods are yours — can you sell them, give them away, or do whatever you please with them, just as you would with any other animal?"

At this, Crito, I was completely flattened. Struck dumb. Laid out flat. Ctesippus rushed to my rescue.

"Bravo, Heracles!" he shouted. "What a brilliant argument!"

"Is it Bravo Heracles — or Heracles Bravo?" said Dionysodorus.

"Poseidon!" said Ctesippus. "What horrible word games. I give up — the pair of you are unbeatable."

And then, my dear Crito, the applause became universal. Everyone in the place — the speakers' admirers and the whole audience — was cheering, laughing, clapping, absolutely beside themselves with joy. Until this point, only the Sophists' own fan club had cheered after each successful hit. But now the entire crowd roared with delight, so loudly that the columns of the Lyceum seemed to echo back their joy.

As for me — I was so carried away that I made a speech declaring I'd never seen anything like their wisdom in all my life. I proclaimed myself their devoted servant and piled on the praise and admiration. "What marvelous dexterity!" I said. "How did you acquire such perfection in so short a time? There's so much to admire in what you say, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, but what I admire most of all is your magnificent indifference to the opinions of others — whether the common crowd or distinguished intellectuals. You care only for people like yourselves. And I truly believe very few people are like you or would approve of arguments like these. Most people are so ignorant of their value that they'd be more embarrassed to use these arguments on others than to have them used on themselves.

"I must also express my admiration for your generous, public-spirited denial of all distinctions — whether between good and evil, white and black, or anything else. The beautiful result is that, as you say, everyone's mouth is sewn shut — including your own, which graciously follows the same rule. This removes all possible grounds for offense.

"But what impresses me most of all is this: your art is so brilliantly designed that anyone can learn it in almost no time. I noticed that Ctesippus was already copying your moves after just a few minutes. Now, this quick learnability is excellent in its way — but at the same time, let me offer a bit of advice: don't hold too many public performances. There's a risk that people will stop valuing an art they can pick up so easily. These sessions would work best if limited to just the two of you. But if you must have an audience, only admit people willing to pay a generous fee — and make sure of that. And if you're really wise, you'll also tell your students to practice only with you and each other. Because only what is rare is valuable. As Pindar says, 'Water is the best of all things' — but it's also the cheapest.

"Anyway — all I ask is that you accept Cleinias and me as your students."

That was the discussion, Crito. We exchanged a few more words and then went our separate ways. I hope you'll come along with me to their next session, since they claim they can teach anyone who'll pay them — no age limit and no aptitude requirements. And I should mention one thing they said specifically for your benefit: learning their art doesn't interfere at all with making money.

Crito
I'm certainly curious, Socrates, and eager to learn. But I'm afraid I'm not cut from the same cloth as Euthydemus. I'm more like the people you described — the ones who'd rather be demolished by these arguments than use them to demolish others. And though it may seem silly for me to advise you, I think you should hear what someone said to me. He's a man of considerable standing — a professor of legal rhetoric — and he came up to me after your session as I was walking around. "Crito," he said, "aren't you paying attention to these wise men?" "No," I said. "I couldn't get close enough to hear — there was too big a crowd." "Well, you missed something worth hearing." "What was that?" I asked. "You would have heard the greatest masters of rhetorical art performing." "And what did you think of them?" I asked. "What did I think?" he said. "The same thing anyone would think after hearing men play the fool and make a big deal out of nothing." That was his exact phrase. "Surely," I said, "philosophy is a wonderful pursuit." "Wonderful?" he said. "What naivety! Philosophy is worthless. And if you'd been there, I think you'd have been embarrassed for your friend Socrates — putting himself at the mercy of men who don't care what they say and pounce on every word. And these men, as I was telling you, are supposedly the leading thinkers of our time. But the truth is, Crito, that the whole enterprise — and the men themselves — are utterly trivial and ridiculous." Now, this criticism of philosophy, Socrates — whether from this man or from anyone — seems wrong to me. But the point about the awkwardness of debating in public with men like that — there I admit he may have had a point.

Socrates
Ah, Crito — these are marvelous men. But what was I about to say? First, tell me — who was this person who came up and criticized philosophy? Was he a lawyer who argues cases in court himself, or one of those people who trains the lawyers — who writes the speeches they use in battle?

Crito
Definitely not a courtroom lawyer. I doubt he's ever even been in court. But they say he knows the business well — he's clever and composes remarkable speeches.

Socrates
Now I understand, Crito. He's one of those amphibious creatures I was about to mention — the kind Prodicus describes as straddling the border between philosophy and politics. They think they're the wisest of all people, and that they're generally considered the wisest too. The only thing standing between them and universal recognition is the rivalry of the philosophers. They figure that if they can just prove philosophy is worthless, nobody will challenge their claim to the crown of wisdom. And they really are clever — in their own estimation. They have a little bit of philosophy and a little bit of political savvy, which gives them some basis for their confidence. They figure they've got just enough of both to stay out of danger while collecting the rewards.

Crito
What do you make of them, Socrates? There's something appealing in that attitude.

Socrates
More appealing than true, Crito. These people don't understand the nature of what's in between. Here's the thing: whenever something is a blend of two things, and one of those things is good and the other is evil, the blend is better than the evil part but worse than the good. If it's a blend of two good things that aim at different ends, it falls short of both in achieving either purpose. And only if both ingredients are bad does the mixture come out better than either one.

Now, if philosophy and politics are both good but aim at different goals, and these people are a blend of both — then they're actually worse than either a true philosopher or a true statesman. Or if one is good and the other bad, they're better than one but worse than the other. The only way their claim would hold up is if both philosophy and politics were bad — and I don't think even they'd say that.

The truth is that these philosopher-politicians who try to be both end up falling short of both. They're really in third place, though they'd love to be first. But we shouldn't be too hard on them. Every person should be respected who sincerely pursues and works at anything that even resembles wisdom. We just need to see them for what they really are.

Crito
I've told you many times, Socrates — I'm in a constant struggle over what to do about my sons. What should I do with them? There's no rush with the younger one — he's still a child. But Critobulus is getting older and needs someone to guide him. And whenever I hear you talk, I can't help thinking there's a kind of madness in the way we obsess about our children — making sure to marry a wife from a good family, piling up money for them — but then not bothering about their education. But then again, when I look at the people who claim to be educators, I'm appalled. If I'm being honest, they all strike me as dreadful. So I don't know how to advise a young man to study philosophy.

Socrates
My dear Crito, don't you realize that in every field, the incompetent practitioners are the vast majority while the truly good ones are rare and beyond price? Take gymnastics, rhetoric, business, or generalship — aren't these all worthwhile pursuits?

Crito
Absolutely, in my view.

Socrates
And in each of them, don't you see that most practitioners are laughable?

Crito
Yes — that's very true.

Socrates
But would you, on that account, avoid all these pursuits yourself and keep your son from them?

Crito
That wouldn't be reasonable, Socrates.

Socrates
Then be reasonable, Crito. Don't worry about whether the teachers of philosophy are good or bad. Think about philosophy herself. Examine her carefully and honestly. If she turns out to be worthless, then steer everyone away from her — not just your sons. But if she is what I believe she is, then follow her and serve her, you and your whole household, and be of good cheer.
