The pilgrim having thus made an end of his discourse, the lady, who
had hearkened thereto with the utmost attention, for that his
arguments appeared to her most true and that, hearing him say, she
accounted herself of a certainty afflicted for the sin of which he
spoke, said, 'Friend of God, I know full well that the things you
allege are true, and in great part by your showing do I perceive what
manner of folk are these friars, whom till now I have held all saints.
Moreover, I acknowledge my default without doubt to have been great in
that which I wrought against Tedaldo; and an I might, I would gladly
amend it on such wise as you have said; but how may this be done?
Tedaldo can never more return hither; he is dead; wherefore I know not
why it should behove me promise that which may not be performed.'
'Madam,' replied the pilgrim, 'according to that which God hath
revealed unto me, Tedaldo is nowise dead, but alive and well and in
good case, so but he had your favour.' Quoth the lady, 'Look what you
say; I saw him dead before my door of several knife-thrusts and had
him in these arms and bathed his dead face with many tears, the which
it may be gave occasion for that which hath been spoken thereof
unseemly.' 'Madam,' replied the pilgrim, 'whatever you may say, I
certify you that Tedaldo is alive, and if you will e'en promise me
that [which I ask,] with intent to fulfil your promise, I hope you
shall soon see him.' Quoth she, 'That do I promise and will gladly
perform; nor could aught betide that would afford me such content as
to see my husband free and unharmed and Tedaldo alive.'

Thereupon it seemed to Tedaldo time to discover himself and to comfort
the lady with more certain hope of her husband, and accordingly he
said, 'Madam, in order that I may comfort you for your husband, it
behoveth me reveal to you a secret, which look you discover not unto
any, as you value your life.' Now they were in a very retired place
and alone, the lady having conceived the utmost confidence of the
sanctity which herseemed was in the pilgrim; wherefore Tedaldo,
pulling out a ring, which she had given him the last night he had been
with her and which he had kept with the utmost diligence, and showing
it to her, said, 'Madam, know you this?' As soon as she saw it, she
recognized it and answered, 'Ay, sir; I gave it to Tedaldo aforetime.'
Whereupon the pilgrim, rising to his feet, hastily cast off his
palmer's gown and hat and speaking Florence-fashion, said, 'And know
you me?'

When the lady saw this, she knew him to be Tedaldo and was all aghast,
fearing him as one feareth the dead, an they be seen after death to go
as if alive; wherefore she made not towards him to welcome him as
Tedaldo returned from Cyprus, but would have fled from him in
affright, as he were Tedaldo come back from the tomb. Whereupon,
'Madam,' quoth he, 'fear not; I am your Tedaldo, alive and well, and
have never died nor been slain, whatsoever you and my brothers may
believe.' The lady, somewhat reassured and knowing his voice,
considered him awhile longer and avouched in herself that he was
certainly Tedaldo; wherefore she threw herself, weeping, on his neck
and kissed him, saying, 'Welcome back, sweet my Tedaldo.'

Tedaldo, having kissed and embraced her, said, 'Madam, it is no time
now for closer greetings; I must e'en go take order that Aldobrandino
may be restored to you safe and sound; whereof I hope that, ere
to-morrow come eventide, you shall hear news that will please you;
nay, if, as I expect, I have good news of his safety, I trust this
night to be able to come to you and report them to you at more leisure
than I can at this present.' Then, donning his gown and hat again, he
kissed the lady once more and bidding her be of good hope, took leave
of her and repaired whereas Aldobrandino lay in prison, occupied more
with fear of imminent death than with hopes of deliverance to come.
Tedaldo, with the gaoler's consent, went in to him, in the guise of a
ghostly comforter, and seating himself by his side, said to him,
'Aldobrandino, I am a friend of thine, sent thee for thy deliverance
by God, who hath taken pity on thee because of thine innocence;
wherefore, if, in reverence to Him, thou wilt grant me a little boon
that I shall ask of thee, thou shalt without fail, ere to-morrow be
night, whereas thou lookest for sentence of death, hear that of thine
acquittance.'

'Honest man,' replied the prisoner, 'since thou art solicitous of my
deliverance, albeit I know thee not nor mind me ever to have seen
thee, needs must thou be a friend, as thou sayst. In truth, the sin,
for which they say I am to be doomed to death, I never committed;
though others enough have I committed aforetime, which, it may be,
have brought me to this pass. But this I say to thee, of reverence to
God; an He presently have compassion on me, I will not only promise,
but gladly do any thing, however great, to say nothing of a little
one; wherefore ask that which pleaseth thee, for without fail, if it
come to pass that I escape with life, I will punctually perform it.'
Then said the pilgrim, 'What I would have of thee is that thou pardon
Tedaldo's four brothers the having brought thee to this pass,
believing thee guilty of their brother's death, and have them again
for brethren and for friends, whenas they crave thee pardon thereof.'
Whereto quoth Aldobrandino, 'None knoweth but he who hath suffered the
affront how sweet a thing is vengeance and with what ardour it is
desired; nevertheless, so God may apply Himself to my deliverance, I
will freely pardon them; nay, I pardon them now, and if I come off
hence alive and escape, I will in this hold such course as shall be
to thy liking.'

This pleased the pilgrim and without concerning himself to say more to
him, he exhorted him to be of good heart, for that, ere the ensuing
day came to an end, he should without fail hear very certain news of
his safety. Then, taking leave of him, he repaired to the Seignory and
said privily to a gentleman who was in session there, 'My lord, every
one should gladly labour to bring to light the truth of things, and
especially those who hold such a room as this of yours, to the end
that those may not suffer the penalty who have not committed the crime
and that the guilty may be punished; that which may be brought about,
to your honour and the bane of those who have merited it, I am come
hither to you. As you know, you have rigorously proceeded against
Aldobrandino Palermini and thinking you have found for truth that it
was he who slew Tedaldo Elisei, are minded to condemn him; but this is
most certainly false, as I doubt not to show you, ere midnight betide,
by giving into your hands the murderers of the young man in question.'

The worthy gentleman, who was in concern for Aldobrandino, willingly
gave ear to the pilgrim's words and having conferred at large with him
upon the matter, on his information, took the two innkeeper brothers
and their servant, without resistance, in their first sleep. He would
have put them to the question, to discover how the case stood; but
they brooked it not and each first for himself, and after all
together, openly confessed that it was they who had slain Tedaldo
Elisei, knowing him not. Being questioned of the case, they said [that
it was] for that he had given the wife of one of them sore annoy, what
while they were abroad, and would fain have enforced her to do his
will.

The pilgrim, having heard this, with the magistrate's consent took his
leave and repairing privily to the house of Madam Ermellina, found her
alone and awaiting him, (all else in the house being gone to sleep,)
alike desirous of having good news of her husband and of fully
reconciling herself with her Tedaldo. He accosted her with a joyful
countenance and said, 'Dearest lady mine, be of good cheer, for
to-morrow thou shalt certainly have thine Aldobrandino here again safe
and sound'; and to give her more entire assurance thereof, he fully
recounted to her that which he had done. Whereupon she, glad as ever
woman was of two so sudden and so happy chances, to wit, the having
her lover alive again, whom she verily believed to have bewept dead,
and the seeing Aldobrandino free from peril, whose death she looked
ere many days to have to mourn, affectionately embraced and kissed
Tedaldo; then, getting them to bed together, with one accord they made
a glad and gracious peace, taking delight and joyance one of the
other. Whenas the day drew near, Tedaldo arose, after showing the lady
that which he purposed to do and praying her anew to keep it a close
secret, and went forth, even in his pilgrim's habit, to attend, whenas
it should be time, to Aldobrandino's affairs. The day come, it
appearing to the Seignory that they had full information of the
matter, they straightway discharged Aldobrandino and a few days after
let strike off the murderers' heads whereas they had committed the
crime.

Aldobrandino being now, to the great joy of himself and his wife and
of all his friends and kinsfolk, free and manifestly acknowledging
that he owed his deliverance to the good offices of the pilgrim,
carried the latter to his house for such time as it pleased him to
sojourn in the city; and there they could not sate themselves of doing
him honour and worship, especially the lady, who knew with whom she
had to do. After awhile, deeming it time to bring his brothers to an
accord with Aldobrandino and knowing that they were not only put to
shame by the latter's acquittance, but went armed for fear [of his
resentment,] he demanded of his host the fulfilment of his promise.
Aldobrandino freely answered that he was ready, whereupon the pilgrim
caused him prepare against the morrow a goodly banquet, whereat he
told him he would have him and his kinsmen and kinswomen entertain the
four brothers and their ladies, adding that he himself would go
incontinent and bid the latter on his part to peace and his banquet.
Aldobrandino consenting to all that liked the pilgrim, the latter
forthright betook himself to the four brothers and plying them with
store of such words as behoved unto the matter, in fine, with
irrepugnable arguments, brought them easily enough to consent to
regain Aldobrandino's friendship by asking pardon; which done, he
invited them and their ladies to dinner with Aldobrandino next
morning, and they, being certified of his good faith, frankly accepted
the invitation.

Accordingly, on the morrow, towards dinner-time, Tedaldo's four
brothers, clad all in black as they were, came, with sundry of their
friends, to the house of Aldobrandino, who stayed for them, and there,
in the presence of all who had been bidden of him to bear them
company, cast down their arms and committed themselves to his mercy,
craving forgiveness of that which they had wrought against him.
Aldobrandino, weeping, received them affectionately, and kissing them
all on the mouth, despatched the matter in a few words, remitting unto
them every injury received. After them came their wives and sisters,
clad all in sad-coloured raiment, and were graciously received by
Madam Ermellina and the other ladies. Then were all, ladies and men
alike, magnificently entertained at the banquet, nor was there aught
in the entertainment other than commendable, except it were the
taciturnity occasioned by the yet fresh sorrow expressed in the sombre
raiment of Tedaldo's kinsfolk. Now on this account the pilgrim's
device of the banquet had been blamed of some and he had observed it;
wherefore, the time being come to do away with the constraint
aforesaid, he rose to his feet, according as he had foreordained in
himself, what while the rest still ate of the fruits, and said,
'Nothing hath lacked to this entertainment that should make it joyful,
save only Tedaldo himself; whom (since having had him continually with
you, you have not known him) I will e'en discover to you.'

So saying, he cast off his palmer's gown and all other his pilgrim's
weeds and abiding in a jerkin of green sendal, was with no little
amazement, long eyed and considered of all, ere any would venture to
believe it was indeed he. Tedaldo, seeing this, recounted many
particulars of the relations and things betided between them, as well
as of his own adventures; whereupon his brethren and the other
gentlemen present ran all to embrace him, with eyes full of joyful
tears, as after did the ladies on like wise, as well strangers as
kinswomen, except only Madam Ermellina. Which Aldobrandino seeing,
'What is this, Ermellina?' quoth he. 'Why dost thou not welcome
Tedaldo, as do the other ladies?' Whereto she answered, in the hearing
of all, 'There is none who had more gladly welcomed and would yet
welcome him than myself, who am more beholden to him than any other
woman, seeing that by his means I have gotten thee again; but the
unseemly words spoken in the days when we mourned him whom we deemed
Tedaldo made me refrain therefrom.' Quoth her husband, 'Go to;
thinkest thou I believe in the howlers?[188] He hath right well shown
their prate to be false by procuring my deliverance; more by token
that I never believed it. Quick, rise and go and embrace him.'

[Footnote 188: Lit. barkers (_abbajatori_), _i.e._ slanderers.]

The lady, who desired nothing better, was not slow to obey her husband
in this and accordingly, arising, embraced Tedaldo, as the other
ladies had done, and gave him joyous welcome. This liberality of
Aldobrandino was mighty pleasing to Tedaldo's brothers and to every
man and woman there, and thereby all suspect[189] that had been
aroused in the minds of some by the words aforesaid was done away.
Then, every one having given Tedaldo joy, he with his own hands rent
the black clothes on his brothers' backs and the sad-coloured on those
of his sisters and kinswomen and would have them send after other
apparel, which whenas they had donned, they gave themselves to singing
and dancing and other diversions galore; wherefore the banquet, which
had had a silent beginning had a loud-resounding ending. Thereafter,
with the utmost mirth, they one and all repaired, even as they were,
to Tedaldo's house, where they supped that night, and on this wise
they continued to feast several days longer.

[Footnote 189: Lit. despite, rancour (_rugginuzza_), but the phrase
appears to refer to the suspicions excited by the whispers that had
been current, as above mentioned, of the connection between Ermellina
and Tedaldo.]

The Florentines awhile regarded Tedaldo with amazement, as a man risen
from the dead; nay, in many an one's mind, and even in that of his
brethren, there abode a certain faint doubt an he were indeed himself
and they did not yet thoroughly believe it, nor belike had they
believed it for a long time to come but for a chance which made them
clear who the murdered man was which was on this wise. There passed
one day before their house certain footmen[190] of Lunigiana, who,
seeing Tedaldo, made towards him and said, 'Give you good day,
Faziuolo.' Whereto Tedaldo in his brothers' presence answered, 'You
mistake me.' The others, hearing him speak, were abashed and cried him
pardon, saying, 'Forsooth you resemble, more than ever we saw one man
favour another, a comrade of ours called Faziuolo of Pontremoli, who
came hither some fortnight or more agone, nor could we ever since
learn what is come of him. Indeed, we marvelled at the dress, for that
he was a soldier, even as we are.' Tedaldo's elder brother, hearing
this, came forward and enquired how this Faziuolo had been clad. They
told him and it was found to have been punctually as they said;
wherefore, what with these and what with other tokens, it was known
for certain that he who had been slain was Faziuolo and not Tedaldo,
and all doubt of the latter[191] accordingly departed [the minds of]
his brothers and of every other. Tedaldo, then, being returned very
rich, persevered in his love and the lady falling out with him no
more, they long, discreetly dealing, had enjoyment of their love. God
grant us to enjoy ours!"

[Footnote 190: _i.e._ foot-soldiers.]

[Footnote 191: _i.e._ of his identity.]




