Chapter I: How Plants Grow, and What Their Parts or Organs Are

[Figure ab]

Section I. — The Parts of a Plant

1. Plants are chiefly made up of three parts, namely, of *Root*, *Stem*, and *Leaves.* These are called the plant's *Organs*, that is, its instruments. And as these parts are all that any plant needs for its growth, or vegetation, they are called the Organs of Vegetation.

2. Plants also produce *Flowers*, from which comes the *Fruit*, and from this, the *Seed.* These take no part in nourishing the plant. Their use is to enable it to give rise to new individuals, which increase the numbers of that kind of plant, to take the place of the parent in due time, and keep up the stock; that is, to reproduce and perpetuate the species. So the Flower with its parts, the Fruit, and the Seed, are called the plant's Organs of Reproduction.

3. The different sorts of Lilies represented on the first page, and the common Morning-Glory on this page, show all the parts.

4. The Root (Fig. 4, *r*) is the part which grows downwards into the ground, and takes in nourishment for the plant from the soil. It commonly branches again and again as it grows: its smaller branches or fibres are named *Rootlets.* Real roots never bear leaves, nor anything besides root-branches or rootlets.

5. The Stem (Fig. 4, *s*) is the part which grows upwards, and bears the leaves and blossoms. At certain fixed places the stem bears a leaf or a pair of leaves.

6. Leaves (Fig. 4, *l*, *l*) are generally flat and thin, green bodies, turning one face upwards to the sky, and the other downwards towards the ground. They make the *Foliage.*

7. The Plant in Vegetation. We see that a plant has a body or trunk (in scientific language, an *axis*), consisting of two parts, — an upper and a lower. The lower is the Root: this fixes the plant to the soil. The upper is the Stem: this rises out of the ground, and bears leaves, which are hung out on the stem in the light and air. The root takes in a part of the plant's food from the soil: this the stem carries to the leaves. The leaves take in another part of the plant's food from the air. And in them what the roots absorb from the ground, and what they themselves absorb from the air, are exposed to the sunshine and *digested*; that is, changed into something proper to nourish the plant. For there is no nourishment in earth, air, and water as they are; but vegetables have the power of making these into nourishment. And out of this nourishment it prepares, the plant makes more growth. That is, it extends the roots farther into the soil, and sends out more branches from them, increasing its foothold and its surface for absorbing; while, above, it lengthens the stem and adds leaf after leaf, or shoots forth branches on which still more leaves are spread out in the light and air.

8. So the whole herb, or shrub, or tree, is built up. A tiny herb just sprouted from the seed and the largest tree of the forest alike consist of root, stem, and leaves, and nothing else. Only the tree has larger and more branching stems and roots, and leaves by thousands.

9. The Plant in Reproduction. After having attended in this way to its nourishment and growth for a certain time, the plant sets about reproducing itself by seed. And for this purpose it *blossoms.* Many plants begin to blossom within a few weeks after springing from the seed. All our *annuals*, of which the Garden Morning-Glory (Fig. 4) is one, blossom in the course of the summer. *Biennials*, such as the Carrot, Parsnip, Mullein, and the common Thistle, do not flower before the second summer; and shrubs and trees, and some herbs, do not begin until they are several years old.

10. The object of the Flower is to form the Fruit. The essential part of the fruit is the Seed. And the essential part of a seed is the *Germ* or *Embryo* it contains. The Germ or Embryo is a little plantlet in the seed, ready to grow into a new plant when the seed is sown. Let us notice these organs one after the other, beginning with

11. The Flower. Flowers are most interesting to the botanist; who not only admires them for their beauty, the exquisite arrangement and forms of their parts, and the wonderful variety they exhibit, but also sees in the blossoms much of the nature or character of each plant, and finds in them the best marks for distinguishing the sorts of plants and the family they belong to. So let the student learn at once

12. What the Parts of a Flower are. A flower, with all the parts present, consists of *Calyx*, *Corolla*, *Stamens*, and *Pistils.* One from the Morning-Glory (Fig. 4, *f*) will serve for an example. Here is one taken off, and shown of about the natural size, the corolla, Fig. 5, separated from the calyx, Fig. 6. The calyx and the corolla are the *Floral Envelopes*, or the leaves of the flower. They cover in the bud, and protect the stamens and pistils, which are the *Essential Organs* of the flower, because both of these are necessary to forming the seed.

13. The Calyx — a Latin name for "flower-cup" — is the cup or outer covering of the blossom (Fig. 6). It is apt to be green and leaf-like.

[Figure ac]

[Figure ad]

14. The Corolla is the inner cup, or inner set of leaves, of the flower. It is very seldom green, as the calyx commonly is, but is "colored," i. e. of some other color than green, and of a delicate texture. So it is the most showy part of the blossom. Fig. 5 shows the corolla of the Morning-Glory whole. Fig. 7 is the same, split down and spread open to show

15. The Stamens. These in this flower grow fast to the bottom of the corolla. There are five stamens in the Morning-Glory. Each stamen consists of two parts, namely, a *Filament* and an *Anther.* The *Filament* is the stalk; the *Anther* is a little case, or hollow body, borne on the top of the filament. It is filled with a powdery matter, called *Pollen.* Fig. 9 shows a separate stamen on a larger scale: *f*, the filament; *a*, the anther, out of which pollen is falling from a slit or long opening down each side.

[Figure ae]

16. The Pistils are the bodies in which the seeds are formed. They belong in the centre of the flower. The Morning-Glory has only one pistil: this is shown, enlarged, in Fig. 8. The Rose and the Buttercup have a great many. A pistil has three parts. At the bottom is the *Ovary*, which becomes the seed-vessel. This is prolonged upwards into a slender body, called the *Style.* And this bears a moist, generally somewhat enlarged portion, with a naked roughish surface (not having any skin, like the rest), called the *Stigma.* Upon this stigma some of the pollen, or powder from the anthers, falls and sticks fast. And this somehow enables the pistils to ripen seeds that will grow.

[Figure af]

17. Let us now look at a stamen and a pistil from one of the flowers of a Lily (like those shown on a reduced scale in Figures 1 and 2, on the first page), where all the parts are on a larger scale. Here is a *Stamen* (Fig. 9), with its stalk or *Filament*, *f*, and its *Anther*, *a*, discharging its yellow dust or *Pollen.* And by its side is the *Pistil* (Fig. 10), with its *Ovary*, *ov.*; and this tapering into a *Style*, *st.*; and on the top of this is the *Stigma*, *stig.* Now cut the ovary through, and it will be found to contain young seeds. Fig. 11 shows the ovary of Fig. 10 cut through lengthwise and magnified by a common hand magnifying-glass. Fig. 12 is the lower part of another one, cut in two crosswise. The young seeds, or more correctly the bodies which are to become seeds, are named *Ovules.* In the Lily these are very numerous. In the Morning-Glory they are few, only six.

[Figure ag]

[Figure ah]

[Figure ai]

18. These are all the parts of the flower, — all that any flower has. But many flowers have not all these parts. Some have only one flower-cup or one set of blossom-leaves. Lilies appear to have only one set. Some have neither calyx nor corolla; some stamens have no filament, and some pistils have no style: for the style and the filament are not necessary parts, as the anther and the ovary and stigma are. These cases will all be noticed when we come to study flowers more particularly. Meanwhile, please to commit to memory the names of the parts of the flower, Calyx, Corolla, Stamens, and Pistils, and the parts of these also, and learn to distinguish them in all the common blossoms you meet with, until they are as familiar as root, stem, and leaves are to everybody.

[Figure aj]

19. Notice, also, that the calyx and the corolla, one or both, often consist of separate leaves; as they do in the true Lilies. Each separate piece or leaf of a corolla is called a *Pétal:* and each leaf or piece of a calyx is called a *Sépal.*

20. The corolla, the stamens, and generally the calyx, fall off or wither away after blossoming; while the ovary of the pistil remains, grows larger, and becomes

21. The Fruit. So that the fruit is the ripened ovary. It may be a berry, a stone-fruit, a nut, a grain, or a pod. The fruit of the Lily and also of the Morning-Glory is a pod. Here is the pod or fruit of the Morning-Glory (Fig. 4, *fr.* and Fig. 13), with the calyx remaining beneath, and the remains of the bottom of the style resting on its summit. And Fig. 14 shows the same pod, fully ripe and dry, and splitting into three pieces that the seeds may fall out. This pod has three cavities (called *Cells*) in it; and in each cell two pretty large seeds. Lily-pods have three cells, as we may see in the ovary in the flower (Fig. 12), and many seeds in each.

[Figure ak]

[Figure al]

22. Seeds. These are the bodies produced by the ripened pistil, from which new plants may spring. Here (Fig. 15) is a seed of Morning-Glory, a little enlarged. Also two seeds cut through lengthwise in two different directions, and viewed with a magnifying-glass, to show what is inside (Fig 16, 17). The part of the seed that grows is

[Figure am]

[Figure an]

[Figure ao]

23. The Embryo, or Germ. This is a little plantlet ready formed in the seed. In the Morning-Glory it is pretty large, and may readily be got out whole from a fresh seed, or from a dried one after soaking it well in hot water. In Fig. 16 it is shown whole and flatwise in the seed, where it is a good deal crumpled up to save room. In Fig. 17, merely the thickness of the embryo is seen, edgewise, in the seed, surrounded by the pulpy matter, which is intended to nourish it when it begins to grow. In Fig. 18, the embryo is shown taken out whole, and spread out flat. In Fig. 19, its two little leaves are separated, and we plainly see what it consists of. It is a pair of tiny leaves on the summit of a little stem. The leaves (Fig. 19, *c*, *c*) are named *Seed-leaves* or *Cotylèdons;* the little stem or *stemlet* is named the *Radicle*, *r.*

[Figure ap]

[Figure aq]

Analysis of the Section.

1.⁎ Plants consist of two kinds of Organs: those of Vegetation; what they are: 2. those of Reproduction; what they are, what their use.

Footnote: ⁎ The numbers are those of the paragraphs.

4. The Root; what it is; rootlets. 5. The Stem; what it is, what it bears. 6. Leaves. 7. The Plant in Vegetation; action of the root, stem, and leaves: they change earth, air, and water into nourishment, and use this nourishment in growing. 8. Shrub or tree like an herb, only more extended.

9. The plant reproduces itself, by seed; blossoming. 10. Object of flowers, fruit, seed: all intended for producing the germ or embryo; what this is.

11. Flowers, why particularly interesting to the botanist. 12. What the parts of a flower are; Floral Envelopes; Essential Organs, why so called.

13. Calyx. 14. Corolla. 15. Stamens; what they consist of; Filament; Anther; Pollen. 16. Pistils; how situated; parts of a pistil; Ovary, Style, Stigma; its use. 17. Stamens and pistil shown in another flower, and the parts explained: Ovules, what they are. 18. All these parts not always present; what ones often wanting. 19. Leaves of a corolla, called Petals; of a calyx, Sepals. 20. What becomes of the parts of a blossom.

21. Fruit, what it is, what it contains. 22. Seeds, what they are, what the part is that grows. 23. Embryo or Germ; what it consists of: Cotyledons or Seed-leaves; Radicle or Stemlet.

Section II. — How Plants grow from the Seed

24. Illustrated by the Morning-Glory. We now know what all the parts of a plant are; that a plant, after growing or vegetating awhile, blossoms; that flowers give rise to fruit; that the fruit contains one or more seeds; and that the essential part of a seed is the embryo or germ of a new plant. To produce, protect, and nourish this germ, is the object of the flower, the fruit, and the seed. The object of the embryo is to grow and become a new plant. How it grows, is what we have now to learn.

25. Life in a Seed. But first let us notice that it does not generally grow at once. Although alive, a seed may for a long while show no signs of life, and feel neither the summer's heat nor the winter's cold. Still it lives on where it falls, in this slumbering way, until the next spring in most plants, or sometimes until the spring after that, before it begins to grow. There is a great difference in this respect in different seeds. Those of Red Maple ripen in the spring, and start about the middle of the summer. Those of Sugar Maple ripen in the fall, and lie quiet until the next spring. When gathered and laid up in a dry place, many seeds will keep alive for two, three, or several years; and in this state plants may be safely transported all around the world. How long seeds will live is uncertain. The stories of seeds growing which have been preserved for two or more thousand years with Egyptian mummies, are not to be believed. But it is well known that Sensitive Plants have been raised from seeds over sixty years old. Few kinds of seeds will grow after keeping them for five or six years; many refuse to grow after the second year; and some will not grow at all unless allowed to fall at once to the ground. There is no way of telling whether the germ of a seed is alive or not, except by trying whether it will grow, that is, will *germinate.*

26. Germination and Early Growth. *Germination* is the sprouting of a plant from the seed. Having just illustrated the parts of a plant by the Morning-Glory, from the root up to the seed and the embryo in the seed, we may take this same plant as an example to show how a plant grows from the seed. If we plant some of the seeds in a flower-pot, covering them lightly with soil, water them, and give them warmth, or if in spring we watch those which sowed themselves naturally in the garden the year before, and are now moistened by showers and warmed by sunshine, we shall soon see how they grow. And what we learn from this one kind of plant will be true of all ordinary plants, but with some differences in the circumstances, according to the kind.

27. The seed first imbibes some moisture through its coats, swells a little, and, as it feels the warmth, the embryo gradually wakes from its long and deep sleep, and stretches itself, as it were. That is, the tiny stem of the embryo lengthens, and its end bursts through the coats of the seed; at the same time, the two leaves it bears grow larger, straighten themselves, and so throw off the seed-coats as a loose husk; this allows the seed-leaves to spread out, as leaves naturally do, and so the seedling plantlet stands revealed. Observe the whole for yourselves, if possible, and compare with these figures. Fig. 19 is repeated from p. 9, and represents the embryo taken out of the seed, straightened, enlarged, and the two leaves a little opened. Fig. 16 and 17 show how the embryo lies snugly packed away in the seed. Fig. 20 shows it coming up, the seed-leaves above just throwing off the coats or husk of the seed. Fig. 21 is the same, a little later and larger, with the seed-leaves spread out in the air above, and a root well formed beneath. And Fig. 22 is the same a little later still.

28. At the very beginning of its growth, the end of the little stem which first comes out of the seed turns downward and points into the earth. From it the root is formed, which continues downwards, branching as it grows, and burying itself more and more in the soil. The other end of the stem always turns upwards, and, as the whole lengthens, the seed-leaves are brought up out of the ground, so that they expand in the light and air, — which is the proper place for leaves, as the dark and damp soil is for the root.

29. What makes the root always grow downwards into the ground, and the stem turn upwards, so as to rise out of it, we no more know, than we know why newly-hatched ducklings take to the water at once, while chickens avoid it, although hatched under the same fowl and treated just alike. But the fact is always so. And although we know not *how*, the *why* is evident enough; for the root is thereby at once placed in the soil, from which it has to absorb moisture and other things, and the leaves appear in the air and the light, where they are to do their work.

[Figure ar]

30. Notice how early the seedling plant is complete, that is, becomes a real vegetable, with all its parts, small as the whole thing is (Fig. 21). For it already possesses a root, to connect it with the ground and draw up what it needs from that; a stem, to elevate the foliage into the light and air; and leaves, to take in what it gets directly from the air, and to digest the whole in the light (as explained in the last section, Par. 7). That is, it already has all the Organs of Vegetation (Par. 1), all that any plant has before blossoming, so that the little seedling can now take care of itself, and live — just as any larger plant lives — upon the soil and the air. And all it has to do in order to become a full-grown plant, like Fig. 4, is to increase the size of its organs, and to produce more of them; namely, more stem with more leaves above, and more roots below. We have only to watch our seedling plantlets a week or two longer, and we shall see how this is done.

[Figure as]

31. The root keeps on growing under ground, and sending off more and more small branches or *rootlets*, each one adding something to the amount of absorbing surface in contact with the moist soil. The little stem likewise lengthens upwards, and the pair of leaves on its summit grow larger. But these soon get their full growth; and we do not yet see, perhaps, where more are to come from. But now a little bud, called the *Plumule*, appears on the top of the stem (Fig. 22), just between the stalks of the two seed-leaves; it enlarges and unfolds into a leaf; this soon is raised upon a new piece of stem, which carries up the leaf, just as the pair of seed-leaves were raised by the lengthening of the radicle or first joint of stem in the seed. Then another leaf appears on the summit of this joint of stem, and is raised upon its own joint of stem, and so on. Fig. 23 shows the same plant as Fig. 22 (leaving out the root and the lower part of the stem), at a later stage; *c*, *c*, are the seed-leaves; *l* is the next leaf, which came from the plumule of Fig. 22, now well raised on the second joint of stem; and *l′* is the next, still very small and just unfolding. And so the plant grows on, the whole summer long, producing leaf after leaf, one by one, and raising each on its own joint of stem, arising from the summit of the next below; — as we see in Fig. 4, at the beginning of the chapter, where many joints of stem have grown in this way (the first with a pair of leaves, the rest with one apiece), and still there are some unfolding ones at the slender young summit.

[Figure at]

32. How the Seedling is nourished at the Beginning. *Growth* requires *food*, in plants as well as in animals. To grow into a plant, the embryo in a seed must be fed with vegetable matter, or with something out of which vegetable matter can be made. When a plant has established itself, — that is, has sent down its roots into the soil, and spread out some leaves in the air, — it is then able to change mineral matter (viz. earth, air, and water) which it takes in, into vegetable matter, and so to live and grow independently. But at the beginning, before its organs are developed and established in their proper places, the forming plant must be supplied by ready-made vegetable matter, furnished by the mother plant. On this supply the embryo germinating from the seed feeds and grows, — just as the newborn animal does upon the mother's milk, or as the chick developing in the egg does upon the prepared nourishment the parent had laid up for the purpose in the yolk.

33. Tear open a fresh Morning-Glory seed, or cut a dried one in two, as in Fig. 17, and this supply will be seen, in the form of a rich and sweetish jelly-like matter, packed away with the embryo, and filling all the spaces between its folds. This is called the *Albumen* of the seed (that being the Latin name of the white of an egg); and this is what the embryo feeds upon, and what enables its little stemlet (Fig. 19, *r*) to grow, and form its root downwards, and carry up and expand its seed-leaves (*c*, *c*) in the air, and so become at once a plantlet (Fig. 21), with root, stem, and leaves, able to take care of itself, just as a chicken does when it escapes from the shell.

34. This moist nourishing jelly would not keep long in that state. So, when the seed ripens and dries, it hardens into a substance like thin dried glue or gum, which will keep for any length of time. And whenever the seed is sown, and absorbs moisture, this matter softens into a jelly again, or gradually liquefies, and the seed-leaves crumpled up among it drink it in at every pore. A portion is consumed in their growth, while the rest is carried into the growing stemlet, thence into the root forming at one end of it, and into the bud (or *plumule*, Fig. 22) which soon appears at the other end of it, — supplying the materials for their growth.

35. Notice the same thing in Wheat, Oats, or Indian Corn. The last is the best example, because the grain is so large that all the parts may be clearly seen without magnifying. The abundant *milk* or soft and rich pulp of green corn is the same as the jelly in the seed of the Morning-Glory; namely, it is the *albumen* of the seed, provided for the embryo (the chit or germ) to feed upon when growth begins. See Figures 44, 45, &c. This nourishing food (as we well know it to be) was produced by the mother-plant during the summer, was accumulated in the stalk at flowering-time, in the form of sugar, or syrup, was conveyed into the flowers and forming seeds; a part was used to form the germ or embryo, and the rest was stored up with it in the seed, to serve for its growth into a plantlet the next spring. That it may keep through the winter, or longer, the sweet milk is changed into a starchy pulp, which hardens as the grain ripens into the firm and dry mealy part (or *albumen*), which here makes the principal bulk of the seed. But when sown, this meal softens and is slowly changed back into sugar again. And this, dissolved in the water the seed takes in, makes a sweet sap, which the embryo imbibes and feeds on as it sprouts. That the meal or starch of the grain is actually changed into sugar at this time is clearly shown by malting, which is merely causing heaps of grain to sprout a little, and then destroying the life of the embryo by dry heat; when the grain (now malt) is found to be sweet, and to contain much sugar.

36. The nourishment which the mother-plant provides in the seed is not always stored up outside of the embryo. In many cases it is deposited *in the embryo* itself, most commonly in the seed-leaves. Then the seed consists of nothing but the embryo within its coats. Maple-seeds are of this sort. Fig. 24 represents a seed of Red Maple in the lower part of the winged seed-vessel, which is cut away so as to show it in its place. Fig. 25 is the seed a little magnified, and with the coats cut away, bringing to view its embryo coiled up within and filling the seed completely. Fig. 26 is the embryo taken out, and a little unfolded; below is the radicle or stemlet; above are the two seed-leaves partly crumpled together. Fig. 27 is the embryo when it has straightened itself out, thrown off the seed-coats, and begun to grow. Here the seed-leaves are rather thick when they first unfold; this is on account of the nourishing matter which was contained in their fabric, and which is used mainly for the earliest growth of the radicle or stemlet, and for the root formed at its lower end, as we see in the next figure (Fig. 28: *a*, the radicle or stemlet of the embryo; *b*, *b*, the two seed-leaves; *c*, the root). By this time the little stock of nourishment is exhausted. But the plant, having already a root in the soil and a pair of leaves in the air, is able to shift for itself, to take in air, water, &c., and by the aid of sunshine on its foliage to make the nourishment for its future growth. In a week or two it will have made enough to enable the next step to be taken. Then a little bud appears at the upper end of the stemlet, between the two seed-leaves, and soon it shows the rudiments of a new pair of leaves (Fig. 28, *d*); a new joint of stem forms to support them (Fig. 29); this lengthens just as the stemlet of the embryo did, and so the plantlet gets a second pair of leaves, raised on a second joint of stem. springing from the top of the first (Fig. 30). Meanwhile the root has grown deeper into the soil, and sent out branches. Having now more roots below, and, above, a pair of leaves besides the seed-leaves to work with, the seedling plantlet all the sooner makes vegetable matter enough to form a third pair of leaves and raise them on a third joint of stem (as in Fig. 31); and so it goes on, step by step. This nourishment in the embryo of the Red-Maple seed was a few weeks before in the trunk of the mother tree, as a sweet sap, that is, as *Maple-sugar.*

[Figure au]

[Figure av]

[Figure aw]

[Figure ax]

[Figure ay]

[Figure az]

[Figure ba]

37. Variations of the Plan of Growth. In the Morning-Glory, after the pair of seed-leaves, only one leaf is found upon each joint of stem (see Fig. 23 and 4). In the Maple there is a pair of leaves to every joint of stem, as long as it grows. In the Morning-Glory the food in the seed, for the growth to begin with, was stored up *outside of the embryo;* in the Maple it was stored up *in it*, that is, in its seed-leaves. The plan is evidently the same in both; but there are differences in the particulars. While the same kind of plant always grows in exactly the same way, different kinds differ almost as much at the beginning as they do afterwards. The great variety which we observe among the herbs and shrubs and trees around us, — in foliage, flower, fruit, and everything, — gives to vegetation one of its greatest charms. We should soon tire of plants or flowers made all after one exact pattern, however beautiful. We enjoy variety. But the botanist finds a higher interest in all these differences than any one else, because he discerns one simple plan running through all this diversity, and everywhere repeated in different forms. He sees that in every plant there is root growing downwards, connecting the vegetable with the soil; stem rising into the light and air, and bearing leaves at regular places, and then blossoms, and that the parts of one kind of blossom answer to those of another, only differing in shape; and he delights in observing how the tens of thousands of kinds of plants all harmonize with each other, like the parts of concerted music, — plainly showing that they were all contrived, as parts of one system, by one Divine Mind.

38. So in the beginning, in the growth of plants from the seed, although the general plan is the same in all, the variations are many and great. The plan is well shown in the two seedling plants which have served for illustration, namely, the Morning-Glory and the Maple. Let us now notice some of the variations, as exhibited in a few very common plants. A great deal may be learned from the commonest plants, if we will only open our eyes to see them, and "consider how they grow," and why they differ in the way they do. Take, for instance,

39. The Bean. Soak a bean in warm water (if a fresh one is not to be had) and remove the coats. The whole kernel consists of an embryo, as seen in Fig. 32. And almost the whole bulk of this embryo consists of two thick pieces, *c*, *c*, which are the cotyledons or seed-leaves. We may make out the plan of the whole thing better by spreading these thick seed-leaves wide open, as in Fig. 33. Here the two thick seed-leaves are seen from the inside, *c*, *c;* they are connected with the upper end of a stemlet, which is the radicle, *r;* and above this already shows the bud or plumule, *p.*

[Figure bb]

[Figure bc]

40. So the embryo of the Bean is the same in plan as that of the Maple (Fig. 27), only the stemlet is much shorter in proportion, and the seed-leaves very much larger and thicker. What is the reason of this difference?

41. The seed-leaves of the Bean are thickened by having so much nourishment stored up in them, so much of it that they make good food for men. And the object of this large supply is that the plant may grow more strongly and rapidly from the seed. It need not and it does not wait, as the Maple and the Morning-Glory do, slowly to make the second pair of leaves; but is able to develop these at once. Accordingly, the rudiments of these next leaves may be seen in the seed before growth begins, in the form of a little bud (Fig. 33, *p*), ready to grow and unfold as soon as the thick seed-leaves themselves appear above ground (Fig. 34), and soon making the first real foliage (Fig. 35). For the seed-leaves of the Bean are themselves so thick and ungainly, that, although they turn green, they hardly serve for foliage. But, having given up their great stock of nourishment to the forming root and new leaves, and enabled these to grow much stronger and faster than they otherwise could, they wither and fall off. It is nearly the same in

[Figure bd]

42. The Cherry, Almond, &c. Fig. 36 is an Almond taken out of the shell, soaked a little, and the thin seed-coat removed. The whole is an embryo, consisting of a pair of large and thick seed-leaves, loaded with sweet nourishment. These are borne on a very short radicle, or stemlet, which is seen at the lower end. Pull off one of the seed-leaves, as in Fig. 37, and you may see the plumule or little bud, *p*, ready to develop leaves and stem upwards, while the other end of the radicle grows downward and makes the root; the rich store of nourishment in the seed-leaves supplying abundant materials for the growth. A cherry-seed is just like an almond, only on a smaller scale. Fig. 38 is the embryo of a Cherry, with the very thick seed-leaves a little separated. Fig. 39 is the same developed into a young plantlet. Fed by the abundant nourishment in the seed-leaves, it shoots up its stem and unfolds three or four leaves before the Maple (Fig. 28, 29) or the Morning-Glory (Fig. 20–22) would have made any. It is the same in the Chestnut and the Beech. In these, as in the Cherry and the Bean, the thick seed-leaves, which make the whole kernel, come up, turn green, and become thinner as they give up their load of nourishment to the growing parts; they evidently try to become useful green leaves; but having been used for holding nourishment, they remain too thick and clumsy for foliage, and they soon die or fall off. But in

[Figure be]

[Figure bf]

[Figure bg]

[Figure bh]

[Figure bi]

[Figure bj]

[Figure bk]

[Figure bl]

43. The Horsechestnut, the Acorn, and the Pea, the seed-leaves are so very thick, and so heavily loaded, that they never undertake to serve any other purpose than that of feeding the other parts as they grow. So they remain in the shell or husk; and, as they are not to rise out of the ground, there is no need for their stemlet, or radicle, to lengthen, except enough to get out of the seed, and let the root form from the lower end of it, while the plumule develops from its upper end directly into a strong leafy stem. Fig. 40 is an acorn cut through lengthwise. The whole kernel consists of a pair of very thick seed-leaves, loaded with starch, &c., and completely enclosing the very small and short stemlet, or radicle, seen at the bottom. Fig. 41 is the acorn with the seedling Oak growing from it; the seed-leaves remaining in the shell, but feeding the strong root which grows downwards and the stem which shoots so vigorously upwards.

44. Acorns and horsechestnuts may not always be found germinating; but in the Pea we have a familiar case of this way of growing, which may be observed at any season by planting a few peas. Fig. 42 is a pea with the seed-coat taken off, after soaking. Here the seed-leaves are so thick that the pair makes a little ball; and the stout radicle or stemlet appears on the side turned to the eye. Fig. 43 shows the plantlet growing. The whole seed remains in the soil; the plumule, well nourished by the great stock of food in the buried seed-leaves, alone rises out of the ground as a strong shoot, bearing an imperfect scale-like leaf upon each of its earlier joints, and then producing the real leaves of the plant, while the radicle at the same time, without lengthening itself, sends down three or four roots at once. So the whole plant is quickly established, and all the early growth is made out of food provided for it the year before by the mother plant, and stored up in the seed. One more illustration we may take from

45. Indian Corn. Here the food provided for the early growth is laid up partly in the embryo, but mostly around it. Fig. 44 is a grain cut through flat-wise; Fig. 45, another cut through the middle across its thickness; and Fig. 46, the embryo, or germ, of another grain, taken out whole, — which may readily be done in green corn, or in an old grain after soaking it for some time in warm water. The separate embryo is placed to match that which is seen, divided, in the seed; *r* is the radicle; *p*, the plumule; and *c*, the seed-leaf or cotyledon, which in this plant is single; while in all the foregoing there was a pair of seed-leaves. The greater part of the grain is the meal, or albumen, the stock of nourishment outside of the embryo. In germinating, this meal is slowly changed into sugar, and dissolved in the water which is absorbed from the ground; the cotyledon imbibes this, and sends it into the radicle, *r*, to make the root, and into the plumule, *p*, enabling it to develop the set of leaves, wrapped up one within another, of which it consists, and expand them one after another in the air. Fig. 47 shows a sprouting grain, sending down its first root, and sending up the plumule still rolled together. Fig. 48 is the same, more advanced, having made a whole cluster of roots, and unfolded two or three leaves. Nourished abundantly as it is, both by the maternal stock in the grain, and by what these roots and leaves obtain and prepare from the soil and the air, the young corn gets a good start, is ready to avail itself of the summer's heat, to complete its vegetation, to blossom, and to make and lay up the great amount of nourishment which we gather in the crop.

[Figure bm]

[Figure bn]

[Figure bo]

[Figure bp]

46. The Onion. The cotyledon in Indian Corn, and most other plants which have only one, stays under ground. In the Onion it comes up and makes the first leaf, — a slender, thread-shaped one, — and indeed it carries up the light seed on its summit. In Indian Corn, all the early joints of stem remain so short as not to be seen; although later it makes long joints, carrying up the upper leaves to some distance from one another. In the Onion, on the contrary, the stem never lengthens at all, but remains as a thin plate, broader than it is long, with the roots springing from one side of it and the sheathing bases of the leaves covering it on the other.

47. Number of Cotyledons or Seed-Leaves. Indian Corn (Fig. 46) and all such kinds of grain-plants, the Onion, Lilies, and the like, have only one seed-leaf or cotyledon to their embryo; therefore they are called Monocotyledonous Plants, and the embryo is called *monocotylédonous*, — a long word, meaning "with one cotyledon."

48. The embryo of the Morning-Glory (Fig. 19), of the Maple (Fig. 27), Bean (Fig. 32–34), Almond, Peach, and Cherry (Fig. 36–38), Oak (Fig. 40), Pea (Fig. 42), and of all such plants, is *dicotylédonous*, that is, has a pair of cotyledons, or seed-leaves, which is what the word means. Therefore all such plants are called Dicotyledonous Plants.

49. Pine-trees, and plants like them, generally have more than two cotyledons, in a circle; so their embryo is said to be *polycotylédonous;* meaning "with several or many cotyledons." Fig. 49 is a magnified view of a Pine-seed, divided lengthwise, and showing the long and straight embryo lying in the middle of the albumen. The slender lower part is the radicle or stemlet; the upper part is a cluster of cotyledons or seed-leaves, in a close bundle; three of them can be seen as it lies, and there are as many more behind. Fig. 50 is this embryo as it comes up from the seed, its cotyledons (six in number) expanding at once into a circle of slender, needle-shaped leaves.

[Figure bq]

[Figure br]

50. It is a pity these three words are so long; for the pupil should fix them thoroughly in his memory; because these differences in the embryo, or plantlet in the seed, run through the whole life of the plant, and show themselves in many other differences which very strikingly distinguish one class of plants from another. Let it be remembered, therefore, that

*Monocotyledonous Plants*, or *Monocotyledons*, are those which have only one cotyledon or seed-leaf to their embryo.

*Dicotyledonous Plants*, or *Dicotyledons*, are those which have a pair of cotyledons or seed-leaves to their embryo.

*Polycotyledonous Plants*, or *Polycotyledons*, are those which have more than one pair of cotyledons or seed-leaves to their embryo.

Analysis of the Section.

24. Flowers produce Fruit; this, the Seed; of this the essential part is the Embryo which grows. 25. It is alive; but lies dormant awhile. How long seeds may live.

26. Germination, the beginning of growth; what is needful for it. 27. What takes place, illustrated from the Morning-Glory. 28. How the stemlet grows by lengthening, and carries up the seed-leaves: how the root is formed and grows downwards. 29. Instinct of each part to turn in its proper direction; and why. 30. The little seedling a complete plant in miniature; its parts. 31. How it goes on to grow: growth of the root; rootlets; of the stem. The Plumule or Bud. Development of the stem piece by piece, each with its leaf.

32. How the seedling is nourished at the beginning. Growth requires food. 33. How this is supplied by a deposit in the seed; Albumen. 34. It is kept in a solid form until the embryo starts, and is then dissolved, turned into sugar, &c., and feeds the plantlet. 35. This illustrated in Wheat and Indian Corn. 36. Or else the same nourishment is deposited in the embryo itself, in its seed-leaves; illustrated by the Maple. 37, 38. Variations of the same plan of growth in different plants. The Maple compared with the Morning-Glory. 39–45. A great abundance of food stored up in the embryo causes a rapid and strong growth; illustrated by the Bean; 42. by the Cherry, Almond, &c.; 43, 44. by the Horsechestnut, Acorn, Pea, &c.; in these the seed-leaves do not come up in germinating; why. 45. In Indian Corn; the stock of food partly in the strong embryo, partly outside of it. 46. The Onion; its seed-leaf lengthens and comes up, but the stem never lengthens at all.

47. Number of cotyledons or seed-leaves in different kinds of plants; Monocotyledonous. 48. Dicotyledonous; Polycotyledonous. 50. These differences always accompany other differences in the plant; Monocotyledonous, Dicotyledonous, and Polycotyledonous Plants.

Section III. — How Plants grow Year after Year

51. They Grow on as they Began. The seedling has all the organs that any plant has, — even the largest and oldest, — excepting what belongs to blossoms: it has all it needs for its life and growth, that is, for vegetation. It has only to go on and produce more of what it already has, — more roots beneath to draw up more moisture from the soil, and more stem above, bearing more leaves, exposing a larger surface to the light and air, in which to digest what is taken in from the soil and the air, and turn it into real nourishment, that is, into the stuff which vegetables are made of. So, as fast as a young plant makes new vegetable material, it uses it for its growth; it adds to its root below, and to its stem above, and unfolds a new leaf or pair of leaves on every joint. Each joint of stem soon gets its full length, and its leaf or pair of leaves the full size; and now, instead of growing, they work, or prepare nourishment, for the growth of the younger parts forming above.

52. Simple Stems. In this way, piece by piece, the stem is carried up higher and higher, and its leaves increased in number; and the more it grows, the more it is able to grow, — as we see in a young seedling, beginning feebly and growing slowly for a while, but pushing on more and more vigorously in proportion to the number of leaves and roots it has produced. In this way, by developing joint after joint, each from the summit of its predecessor, a *Simple Stem* is made. Many plants make only simple stems, at least until they blossom, or for the first year. The Lilies, figured on the first page, and corn-stalks, are of this kind. Fig. 51 is a sort of diagram of the simple stem of Indian Corn, divided into its component pieces, to show how it consists of a set of similar growths, each from the summit of the preceding one. There are old trees even, which consist of a simple, unbranched stem. Palm-trees, such as our Southern Palmetto (Fig. 79) are of this kind. But more commonly, as stems grow they multiply themselves by forming

[Figure bs]

53. Branches, or *side-shoots.* These are formed both by roots and by stems. Roots generally branch much sooner than stems do. See Fig. 4, 20, 30, &c.

54. Roots send off their branches from any part of the main root, or start from any part of a stem lying on or in the soil; and they have no particular arrangement.

55. But the branches of stems spring only from particular places, and are arranged on a regular plan. They arise from the *Axil* of a leaf and nowhere else, except in some few peculiar cases. The *axil* (from a Latin word meaning the armpit) of a leaf is the hollow or angle, on the upper side, where the leaf is attached to the stem. As branches come only from the axils of leaves, and as leaves have a perfectly regular and uniform arrangement in each particular plant, the places where branches will appear are fixed beforehand by the places of the leaves, and they must follow their arrangement. In the axils, commonly one in each, branches first appear in the form of

56. Buds. A *Bud* is an undeveloped stem or branch. If large enough to have its parts distinguishable, these are seen to be undeveloped or forming leaves; and large buds which are to stand over winter are generally covered with protecting scales, — a kind of dry, diminished leaves.

57. Terminal Bud. So the *plumule* or first shoot of the embryo (see Fig. 22, &c.) is a bud. But this first bud makes the main stem, and its growth, week after week, or year after year, carries on the main stem. Palms (as Fig. 79) grow in this way, by this bud only. Being always on the end of the stem, that is, terminating the stem, it is called the *Terminal Bud.*

58. Axillary Buds. But the buds which are to form branches appear on the sides of the stem; and since they are situated in the axils of the leaves, as just explained (55), they are named *Axillary Buds.* (See Fig. 52, 53.) These buds grow into branches, just as the first or terminal bud of the seedling grows to make the main stem.

59. The Arrangement of Branches, therefore, follows that of the axillary buds, and this that of the leaves. Now leaves are placed on the stem in two principal ways; they are either *alternate* or *opposite.* They are *alternate* when they follow one after another, there being only one to each joint of the stem, as in Morning-Glory (Fig. 4, all after the seed-leaves), and in the Linden or Basswood (Fig. 52), as well as the greater part of trees or plants. They are *opposite* when there are two leaves upon each joint of stem, as in Horsechestnut, Lilac, and Maple (Fig. 31, 53); one leaf in such cases being always exactly on the opposite side of the stem from its fellow. Now in the axil of almost every leaf of these trees a bud is soon formed, and in general plainly shows itself before summer is over. In Fig. 52, *a*, *a*, *a*, *a*, are the *axillary buds* on a twig of Basswood, — they are *alternate*, like the leaves, — and *t* is the *terminal bud.* Fig. 53, a twig of Red Maple, has its axillary buds *opposite*, like the leaves; and on the very summit is the *terminal bud.* Next spring or sooner, the former grow into *alternate branches;* the latter grow into *opposite branches.* These branches in their turn form buds in the axils of their leaves, to grow in time into a new generation of similar branches, and so on, year after year. So the reason is plain why the branching or spray of one tree or bush differs from that of another, each having its own plan, depending upon the way the leaves are arranged on the stem.

[Figure bt]

[Figure bu]

60. The spray (or *ramification*) of trees and shrubs is more noticeable in winter, when most leaves have fallen. Even then we can tell how the leaves were placed, as well as in summer. We have only to notice the *leaf-scars:* for each fallen leaf has left a scar to mark where its stalk separated from the stem. And in most cases the bud above each scar is now apparent or conspicuous, ready to grow into branches in the spring, and showing plainly the arrangement which these are to have. Here, for instance, is a last year's shoot of Horsechestnut (Fig. 54), with a large terminal bud on its summit, and with very conspicuous leaf-scars, *l s;* and just above each is an axillary bud, *b.* Here the leaves were opposite each other; so the buds are also, and so will the branches be, unless one of the buds on each joint should fail. Fig. 55 is a similar shoot of a Hickory, with its leaf-scars (*l s*) and axillary buds (*b*) *alternate*, that is, single on the joints and one after another on different sides of the stem; and these buds when they grow will make alternate branches.

[Figure bv]

[Figure bw]

61. The branching would be more regular than it is, if all the buds grew. But there is not room for all; so only the stronger ones grow. The rest stand ready to take their place, if those happen to be killed. Sometimes there are more buds than one from the same axil. There are three placed side by side on those shoots of Red Maple which are going to blossom. There are several in a row, one above another, on some shoots of Tartarean Honeysuckle.

62. The appearance of plants, the amount of their branching, and the way in which they continue to grow, depend very much upon their character and duration.

63. The Duration of Plants of different kinds varies greatly. Some live only for a few months or a few weeks; others may endure for more than a thousand years. The most familiar division of plants according to their duration and character is into *Herbs*, *Shrubs*, and *Trees.*

64. Herbs are plants of soft texture, having little wood in their stems, and in our climate dying down to the ground, or else dying root and all, in or before winter.

65. Shrubs are plants with woody stems, which endure and grow year after year, but do not rise to any great height, say to not more than four or five times the height of a man. And if they reach this size, it is not as a single main trunk, but by a cluster of stems all starting from the ground.

66. Trees are woody plants rising by a trunk to a greater height than shrubs.

67. Herbs are divided, according to their character and duration, into *Annuals*, *Biennials*, and *Perennials.*

68. Annuals grow from the seed, blossom, and die all in the same season. In this climate they generally spring from the seed in spring, and die in the autumn, or sooner if they have done blossoming and have ripened their seed. Oats, Barley, Mustard, and the common Morning-Glory (Fig. 4) are familiar annuals. Plants of this kind have *fibrous* roots, i. e. composed of long and slender threads or fibres. Either the whole root is a cluster of such fibres, as in Indian Corn (Fig. 48), Barley (Fig. 56), and all such plants; or when there is a main or tap root, as in Mustard, the Morning-Glory, &c., this branches off into slender fibres. It is these fibres, and the slender root-hairs which are found on them, that mainly absorb moisture and other things from the soil; and the more numerous they are, the more the plant can absorb by its roots. As fast as nourishment is received and prepared by the roots and leaves, it is expended in new growth, particularly in new stems or branches and new leaves, and finally in flowers, fruit, and seed. The latter require a great deal of nourishment to bring them to perfection, and give nothing back to the plant in return. So blossoming and fruiting weaken the plant very much. Annual plants usually continue to bear flowers, often in great numbers, upon every branch, until they exhaust themselves and die, but not until they have ripened seeds, and stored up in them (as in the mealy part of the grain of Corn, &c., Fig. 44, 45) food enough for a new generation to begin growth with.

[Figure bx]

69. Biennials follow a somewhat different plan. These are herbs which do not blossom at all the first season, but live over the winter, flower the second year, and then die when they have ripened their seeds. The Turnip, Carrot, and Parsnip, the Beet, the Radish (Fig. 57), and the Celandine, are familiar examples of biennial plants.

70. The mode of life in biennials is to prepare and store up nourishment through the first season, and to expend it the next season in flowering and fruiting. Accordingly, biennials for the first year are nearly all root and leaves; these being the organs by which the plant works, and prepares the materials it lives on. Stem they must have, in order to bear leaves; for leaves do not grow on roots. But what stem they make is so very short-jointed that it rises hardly any; so that the leaves seem to spring from the top of the root, and all spread out in a cluster close to the ground. As the plant grows, it merely sends out more and more branches of the root into the soil beneath, and adds more leaves to the cluster just above, close to the surface of the warm ground, and well exposed to the light and heat of the sun. Thus consisting of its two working organs only, — root and leaves, — the young biennial sets vigorously to work. The moisture and air which the leaves take in from the atmosphere, and all that the roots take from the soil, are digested or changed into vegetable matter by the foliage while exposed to sunshine; and all that is not wanted by the leaves themselves is generally carried down into the body of the root and stored up there for next year's use. So the biennial root becomes large and heavy, being a storehouse of nourishing matter, which man and animals are glad to use for food. In it, in the form of starch, sugar, mucilage, and in other nourishing and savory products, the plant (expending nothing in flowers or in show) has laid up the avails of its whole summer's work. For what purpose? This plainly appears when the next season's growth begins. Then, fed by this great stock of nourishment, a stem shoots forth rapidly and strongly, divides into branches, bears flowers abundantly, and ripens seeds, almost wholly at the expense of the nourishment accumulated in the root, which is now light, empty, and dead; and so is the whole plant by the time the seeds are ripe.

[Figure by]

71. By stopping the flowering, biennials can sometimes be made to live another year, or for many years, or annuals may be made into biennials. So a sort of biennial is made of wheat by sowing it in autumn, or even in the spring and keeping it fed down in summer. But here the nourishment is stored up in the leaves rather than in the roots.

72. The Cabbage is a familiar and more striking example of a biennial in which the store of nourishment, instead of being deposited in the root, is kept in the leaves and in the short stem or stalk. These accordingly become thick and nutritious in the Cabbage, just as the root does in the Turnip, or the base of the short stem alone in Kohlrabi, or even the flower-stalks in the Cauliflower; all of which belong to the same family, and exhibit merely different ways of accomplishing the same result.

73. Perennials are plants which live on year after year. Shrubs and trees are of course perennial. So are many herbs; but in these only a portion generally survives. Most of our perennial herbs die down to the ground before winter; in many species all but certain separate portions under ground die at the close of the year; but some parts of the stem containing buds are always kept alive to renew the growth for the next season. And a stock of nourishment to begin the new growth with is also provided. Sometimes this stock is laid up in the roots, as for instance in the Peony, the Dahlia (Fig. 58), and the Sweet Potato. Here some thick roots, filled with food made by last year's vegetation, nourish in spring the buds on the base of the stem just above (*a*, *a*), enabling them to send up stout leafy stems, and send down new roots, in some of which a new stock of food is laid up during summer for the next spring, while the exhausted old ones die off; and so on, from year to year.

[Figure bz]

[Figure ca]

74. Sometimes this stock of food is laid up in particular portions of branches of the stem itself, formed under ground, and which contain the buds; as in the Ground Artichoke and the Potato. Here these parts, with their buds, or eyes, are all that live over winter. These thickened ends of stems are called *Tubers.* In Fig. 59, *a* is a tuber of last year, now exhausted and withering away, which grew in spring by one of its buds to make the stem (*b*) bearing the foliage of the season. This sends out some branches under ground, which in the course of the season thicken at the end as they receive a stock of nourishment prepared by this year's foliage, and become new tubers (*c*, a forming one; *d*, *d*, well-grown tubers of the season), to live over winter and make the next year's growth.

[Figure cb]

[Figure cc]

[Figure cd]

75. Because they live under ground, these tubers are commonly supposed to be roots; but they are not, as any one may see. Their eyes are buds; and the little scales behind the eyes answer to leaves; while roots bear neither buds nor leaves. The fibrous roots which grow from these subterranean branches are very different in appearance from under-ground stems, as is plain to see in the Potato-plant. Fig. 60 shows a few of the real roots, as well as several branches of the stem, with potatoes forming in all stages at their tips. Fig. 61 is one of these forming potatoes magnified, showing a little scale behind each eye which answers to a leaf. Fig. 62 is a part of a slice through an eye, more magnified, to show that the eye is really a bud, covered with little scales.

[Figure ce]

76. In some perennial herbs, prostrate stems or branches under ground are thickened with this store of nourishment for their whole length, making stout *Rootstocks*, as they are called; as in Sweet Flag, Solomon's Seal (Fig. 63), and Iris, or Flower-de-Luce (Fig. 64). These are perennial, and grow on a little way each year, dying off as much behind after a while; and the newer parts every year send out a new set of fibrous roots. The buds which rootstalks produce, and the leaves or the scales they bear, or the scars or rings which mark where the old leaves or scales have fallen or decayed away, all plainly show that rootstocks are forms of stem, and not roots. The large round scars on the rootstock of Solomon's Seal, which give the plant its name, (from their looking like impressions of a seal,) are the places from which the stalk bearing the leaves and flowers of each season has fallen off in autumn. Fig. 63, *a* is the bud at the end, to make the growth above ground next spring; *b*. is the bottom of the stalk of this season; *c*, the scar or place from which the stalk of last year fell; *d*, that of the year before; and *e*, that of two years ago.

[Figure cf]

77. Finally, the nourishment for the next year's growth may be deposited in the leaves themselves. Sometimes it occupies all the leaf, as in the Houseleek (Fig. 65) and other *fleshy plants.* Here the close ranks of the thickened leaves are wholly above ground. Sometimes the deposit is all in the lower end of the leaf, and on the ground, or underneath, as in common *Bulbs.* Take a White Lily of the gardens, for example, in the fall, or in spring before it sends up the stalk of the season (Fig. 66). From the bottom of the bulb, roots descend into the soil to absorb moisture and other matters from it, while, above, it sends up leaves to digest and convert these matters into real nourishment. As fast as it is made, this nourishment is carried down to the bottom of each leaf, which is enlarged or thickened for containing it. These thick leaf-bases, or scales, crowded together, make up the bulb; all but its very short stem, concealed within, which bears these scales above, and sends down the roots from underneath. Fig. 67 shows one of the leaves of the season, taken off, with its base cut across, that the thickness may be seen. After having done its work, the blade dies off, leaving the thick base as a bulb-scale. Every year one or more buds in the centre of the bulb grow, feeding on the food laid up in the scales, and making the stalk of the season, which bears the flowers, as in Fig. 1, 2.

[Figure cg]

[Figure ch]

78. An Onion is like a Lily-bulb, only each scale or leaf-base is so wide that it enwraps all within, making coat after coat.

[Figure ci]

79. In shrubs and trees a great quantity of nourishment, made the summer before, is stored up in the young wood and bark of the shoots, the trunk, and the roots. Upon this the buds feed the next spring; and this enables them to develop vigorously, and clothe the naked branches with foliage in a few days; or with blossoms immediately following, as in the Horsechestnut; or with blossoms and foliage together, as in Sugar Maple; or with blossoms before the leaves appear, as in Red Maples and Elms. The rich mucilage of the bark of Slippery Elm, and the sweet spring sap of Maple-trees, belong to this store, deposited in the wood the previous summer, and in spring dissolved and rapidly drawn into the buds, to supply the early and sudden leafing and blossoming.

80. In considering plants, as to "how they grow," it should be noticed that all of them, from the Lily of the field to the tree of the forest, teach the same lesson of industry and provident preparation. No great result is attained without effort, and long preceding labor. Not only was the tender verdure which, after a few spring showers and sunny days, is so suddenly spread out over field and forest, all prepared beforehand, — most of the leaves, even, made the summer before, and snugly packed away in winter-buds, — but the nourishment which enables them to unfold and grow so fast was also prepared for this purpose by the foliage of the year before, and laid up until it was wanted. The grain grows with vigor, because fed with the richest products of the mother plant, the results of a former year's vegetation. The Lily-blossom develops in all its glory without toil of its own, because all its materials were gathered from the earth and the air long before, by the roots and the leaves, manufactured by the latter into vegetable matter, and this stored up for a year or two under ground in the bottoms of the leaves (as starch, jelly, sugar, &c.), and in many cases actually made into blossoms in the dark earth, where the flower-buds lie slumbering in the protecting bulb through the cold winter, and in summer promptly unfold in beauty for our delight.

Analysis of the Section.

51. The seedling is a complete plant on the simplest scale; in growth it merely increases its parts, and multiplies them in number, as fast as it makes materials for growth. 52. Simple stems, how formed and carried up, piece by piece. 53. Branches: 54. of Roots, how they differ from those, 55. of Stems. Where these arise from; in what form they appear. 56. Buds, what they are. 57. Terminal Bud, what it makes. 58. Axillary Buds; why so named; what they make. 59. How branches are arranged, and what their arrangement depends upon: alternate; opposite. 60. The spray and buds of shrubs and trees in winter; Leaf-scars. 61. Why branches are not as regular and as many as the buds or leaves.

62, 63. The Duration and Character of Plants as affecting the way they grow. 64. Herbs. 65. Shrubs. 66. Trees. 67. Herbs are annuals, biennials, or perennials.

68. Annuals; their mode of life; character of their roots, intended only for absorbing; duration, &c.

69. Biennials; how defined; examples. 70. Character of their roots, and illustrations of their mode of life; the first year, food made and stored up; the second year, food expended, for what purpose. 71. How biennials may sometimes be made perennial, and annuals biennial. 72. The store of food may be kept in the leaves, or in the stems above ground; Cabbage, &c.

73. Perennials; what they are; mode of life of perennial herbs from year to year; accumulation of food in roots. 74. Accumulation of food in under-ground branches; Tubers, as of Ground Artichoke. 75. Potato illustrated. 76. Accumulation in whole stems or branches under ground; Rootstocks. 77. Accumulation of food in leaves, above ground, as in Houseleek; or in the bottoms of leaves, usually under ground; Bulbs; as of Lily, and, 78. of Onion.

79. Food, how stored up in shrubs and trees, and for what purpose; used in leafing and blossoming in spring. 80. A lesson taught by vegetation.

Section IV. — Different Forms or Kinds of Roots, Stems, and Leaves

81. The Organs of Vegetation, or those that have to do with the life and growth of a plant, are only three, Root, Stem, and Leaf. And the plan upon which plants are made is simple enough. So simple and so few are the kinds of parts that one would hardly expect plants to exhibit the almost endless and ever-pleasing diversity they do. This diversity is owing to the wonderful variety of forms under which, without losing their proper nature, each of these three organs may appear.

82. The study of the different shapes and appearances which the same organ takes in different plants, or in different parts of the same plant, comparing them with one another, is called *Morphology*, and is one of the most interesting parts of Botany. But in this book for young beginners, we have only room to notice the commonest forms, and those very briefly, — although sufficiently to enable students to study all common plants and understand botanical descriptions. Those who would learn more of the structure and morphology of plants should study the Lessons in Botany.

§ 1. *Of Roots.*

83. The Root is the simplest and least diversified of the three organs. Yet it exhibits some striking variations.

84. As to origin, there is the *primary* or original root, formed from the embryo as it grows from the seed, and the branches it makes. Annuals, biennials, and many trees are apt to have only such roots. But when any portion of their stems is covered by the soil, it makes *secondary* roots. These are roots which spring from the sides of the stem. Every one knows that most stems may be made to strike root when so covered and having the darkness and moisture which are generally needful for roots. Perennial herbs and most shrubs strike root naturally in this way under ground. All the roots of plants raised from tubers, rootstocks, and the like (74–76), are of this sort, and also of plants raised from slips or cuttings. In warm and damp climates there are likewise many

85. Aerial Roots, namely, roots which strike from the stem in the open air. In summer we often find them springing from the joints of the stalks of Indian Corn, several inches above the soil. Some of these reach the ground, and help to feed the plant. In the famous Banyan-tree of India aerial roots on a larger scale strike from the spreading branches, high up in the air, grow down to the ground and into it, and so make props or additional trunks. Growing in this way, there is no limit to the extent of the branches, and a single Banyan will spread over several acres of ground and have hundreds of trunks all made from aerial roots.

86. Aerial Rootlets, or such roots on a small scale, are produced by several woody vines to climb by. English Ivy, our Poison Ivy, and Trumpet-Creeper are well-known cases of the sort.

87. Air-Plants. Roots which never reach the ground are also produced by certain plants whose seeds, lodged upon the boughs or trunks of trees, high up in the air, grow there, and make an *Epiphyte*, as it is called (from two Greek words meaning a plant on a plant), or an *Air-Plant.* The latter name refers to the plant's getting its living altogether from the air; as it must, for it has no connection with the ground at any time. And if these plants can live on air, in this way, it is easy to understand that common vegetables get part of what they live on directly from the air. In warm countries there are many very handsome and curious air-plants of the Orchis family. A great number are cultivated in hot-houses, merely fixed upon pieces of wood and hung up. They take no nourishment from the boughs of the tree they happen to grow upon.

[Figure cj]

88. Parasitic Plants are those which strike their roots, or what answer to roots, into the bark or wood of the species they grow on, and feed upon its sap. The Mistletoe is a woody parasitic plant, which engrafts itself when it springs from the seed upon the branches of Oaks, Hickories, or other trees. The Dodder is a common parasitic herb, consisting of orange-color or whitish stems, looking like threads of yarn. These coil round the stalks of other plants, fasten themselves by little suckers in place of roots, and feed upon their juices. Living as such a plant does by robbing other plants of their prepared food, it has no leaves of its own, except little scales in their place, and has no need of any.

89. Shapes and Uses of Roots. Common roots, however, grow in the soil. And their use is to absorb moisture and other matters from the soil, and sometimes to hold prepared food until it is wanted for use, as was explained in the last section (70, 73). Those for absorbing are

[Figure ck]

*Fibrous roots*, namely, slender and thread-shaped, as in Fig. 48, 56, and generally branching. Very slender roots of the sort, or their branches, are called *Rootlets;* and these do most of the absorbing. The roots of annuals are mostly fibrous, as they have nothing to do but to absorb; and so are the smaller branches of the roots of shrubs, trees, and other plants.

*Fleshy roots* are those of herbs which form a thick and stout body, from having much nourishment deposited in them. They belong particularly to biennial herbs (69), and to many perennials (73). Some sorts have names according to their shapes. The root is a

[Figure cl]

*Tap-root*, when of one main body, and tapering downwards to a point; as that of a Carrot (Fig. 71), and of a seedling Oak (Fig. 41). And a tap-root is

*Conical*, when stout, and tapering gradually from the upper end to a point below; as a carrot (Fig. 71), parsnip, or beet.

*Spindle-shaped*, when thicker in the middle, and tapering upwards as well as downwards, like a radish (Fig. 57); and

*Turnip-shaped*, or *Napiform*, when wider than long, or with a suddenly tapering tip, as a turnip (Fig. 70). Roots are

*Clustered* or *Fascicled* when, instead of one main root, there are several or many of about the same size; as in Indian Corn (Fig. 48), and other grain (Fig. 56). Here the clustered roots are *fibrous*, being for absorbing only. When such roots, or some of them, are thick and fleshy, as they are when used as storehouses of food, they become *Tuberous.* The roots of the Dahlia, for instance (Fig. 58), are *clustered* and *tuberous*, or *tuber-like.*

§ 2. *Of Stems.*

90. Forms or Kinds of Stems. Differences in the size and consistence of stems, such as distinguish plants into *herbs*, *shrubs*, and *trees*, have already been noticed, in paragraphs 64, 65, and 66. A stem is

*Herbaceous*, when it belongs to an herb, that is, has very little wood in its composition, and does not live over winter above ground:

*Shrubby*, when it belongs to a shrub, or is woody:

*Arboreous* or *Arborescent*, when the plant is a tree, or like a tree; that is, when it is tall and grows by a single *trunk.*

91. The peculiar straw-stem of a grass or grain is named a *Culm.* It is generally hollow, except at the joints, which are hard and solid; but in Indian Corn, Sugar-Cane, and some other Grasses, it is not at all hollow.

92. As to the mode of growth or the direction it takes in growing, the stem is

*Erect* or *Upright*, when it grows directly upwards, or nearly so:

*Ascending*, when it rises upwards at first in a slanting direction:

*Declined* or *Reclined*, when turned or bent over to one side:

*Decumbent*, when the lower part reclines on the ground, as if too weak to stand, but the end turns upwards more or less:

*Procumbent* or *Trailing*, when the whole stem trails along the ground:

*Prostrate*, when it naturally lies flat on the ground:

*Creeping* or *Running*, when a trailing or prostrate stem strikes root along its lower side, where it rests on the ground:

*Climbing*, where it rises by laying hold of other objects for support; either by tendrils, as in the Pea, Gourd, and Grape-Vine; or by twisting its leafstalks around the supporting body, as in the Virgin's Bower; or by rootlets acting as holdfasts, as in the Ivy and Trumpet-Creeper (86):

*Twining*, when stems rise by coiling themselves spirally around any support, as in the Morning-Glory (Fig. 4), Hop, and Bean.

93. Several sorts of branches are different enough from the common to have particular names. Indeed, some are so different, that they would not be taken for branches without considerable study. Such, for instance, as

94. Thorns or Spines. Most of these are imperfect, leafless, hardened, stunted branches, tapering to a point. That they are branches is evident in the Hawthorn and similar trees, from their arising from the axil of leaves, as branches do. And on Pear-trees and Plum-trees many shoots may be found which begin as a leafy branch, but taper off into a thorn. *Prickles*, such as those on the stems of Roses and Brambles, must not be confounded with thorns. These are growths from the bark (like hairs or bristles, only stouter), and peel off with it; while thorns are connected with the wood.

95. Tendrils, such as those of the Grape-Vine, Virginia Creeper (Fig. 72), and the Melon or Squash, are very slender, leafless branches, used to enable certain plants to climb. They grow out straight or nearly so until they reach some neighboring support, such as a stem, when the end hooks around it to secure a hold, and the whole tendril then shortens itself by coiling up spirally, so drawing the growing shoot nearer to the supporting object. When the Virginia Creeper climbs the side of a building, the face of a rock, or the smooth bark of a tree, which the tendrils cannot lay hold of in the usual way, their tips expand into a flat plate (as shown in Fig. 73, the ends of a tendril magnified), which adheres very firmly to the surface. This enables the plant to climb up a smooth surface by tendrils, just as the Ivy and Trumpet-Creeper climb by rootlets (86).

[Figure cm]

96. Peduncles or Flower-stalks are a kind of branches, or stems, as is clear from their situation. They are either a continuation of the stem, as in the Lily of the Valley and the Chalcedonian Lily, represented on the first page; or else they rise out of the axil of a leaf, as in the Morning-Glory (Fig. 4). Plainly, whatever comes from the axil of a leaf must be of the nature of a branch. So

97. Buds, that is axillary buds, are undeveloped branches, as already explained in paragraphs 55 to 58.

98. The following kinds of branches are all connected with the ground in some way, and most of them act in such a way as to make new plants.

99. A Stolon is a branch which reclines on the ground, or bends over to it, and strikes root (Fig. 74). Currant-bushes spread naturally by stolons, and so does White Clover. The gardener imitates the process where it does not naturally occur, or facilitates it where it does, by bending branches to the ground, and pinning them down, when they strike root where they are covered by the soil, and then the branch, having leaves and roots of its own, may be separated as an independent plant. In this way the gardener multiplies many plants by *layering* which he cannot so readily propagate by seed.

[Figure cn]

100. A Runner (Fig. 74) is a very slender, thread-like, leafless stolon, much like a tendril, lying on the ground, and rooting and budding at the point; so giving rise to a new plant at some distance from the parent, and connected with it during the first year. But the runner dies in winter and leaves the young plant independent. The Strawberry-plant affords the most familiar illustration of runners. Each plant or offshoot, as soon as established, sends out runners of its own, which make new plants at their tip. In this way a single Strawberry-plant produces a numerous progeny in the course of the summer, and establishes them at convenient distances all around.

101. A Sucker (Fig. 74) is a branch which springs from a parent stem under ground, where it makes roots of its own, while farther on it rises above ground into a leafy stem, and becomes an independent plant whenever the connection with the parent stem dies or is cut off. It is by suckers that Rose and Raspberry bushes multiply and spread so "by the root," as is generally said. But that these subterranean shoots are stems, and not roots (though they produce roots), will plainly appear by uncovering them.

102. An Offset is a short branch, next the ground or below its surface, like a short stolon or sucker, bearing a tuft of leaves at the end, and taking root where this rests on the soil; as in the Houseleek (Fig. 65), where one plant will soon produce a cluster of young plants or offsets all around it.

103. A Rootstock is any kind of horizontal stem or branch growing under ground. Slender rootstocks occur in the subterranean part of the suckers of Roses, of Peppermint, or of Canada Thistle, and of Quick-Grass or Couch-Grass (Fig. 75), which spreads so widely, and becomes so troublesome to farmers. They are well distinguished from roots by the leaves which they bear at every joint, in the form of scales, and by the buds which they produce, one in the axil of each scale. These buds, which are very tenacious of life, are what renders the plant so exceedingly difficult to destroy. For ploughing and hoeing only cut up the rootstock into pieces, each with a tuft of roots ready formed and with a bud to each joint, all the more ready to grow for the division. So that the attempt to destroy Quick-Grass by cutting it up by the roots (as these shoots are called), unless the pieces are carefully taken out of the soil, is apt to produce many active plants in place of one.

[Figure co]

104. Thickened or fleshy rootstocks, such as those of Solomon's Seal (Fig. 63) and Iris (Fig. 64), have already been illustrated (76).

105. A Tuber is a rootstock thickened at the end, as already explained in the Potato and Ground Artichoke (74, 75, Fig. 59, 60). The eyes of a tuber are lively buds, well supplied with nourishment for their growth.

106. A Corm or Solid Bulb, as of Gladiolus and Crocus (Fig. 76), is a sort of rounded tuber. If well covered with thick scales it would become

[Figure cp]

107. A Bulb. This is a (mostly subterranean) stem, so short as to be only a flat plate, producing roots from its lower surface and above covered with thickened scales, — as was fully explained in the last section (77).

108. Bulbs are *scaly*, as in the Lily (Fig. 66), when the scales are narrow; or *coated*, as an onion, when the scales enwrap each other, and form coats.

109. Bulblets are little bulbs, or fleshy buds, formed in the axils of leaves above ground, as in the Bulb-bearing Lily. Or in some Leeks and Onions they take the place of flower-buds. Falling off, they take root and grow into new plants.

110. The Internal Structure of Stems. Plants are composed of two kinds of material, namely, *Cellular Tissue* and *Wood.* The former makes the softer, fleshy, and pithy parts; the latter forms the harder, fibrous, or woody parts. The stems of herbs contain little wood, and much cellular tissue; those of shrubs and trees abound in the woody part.

111. There are two great classes of stems, which differ in the way the woody part is arranged in the cellular tissue. They are named the *Exógenous*, and the *Endógenous.*

112. For examples of the first class we may take a Bean-stalk, a stem of Flax, Sunflower, or the like, among herbs, and for woody stems any common stick of wood. For examples of the second class take an Asparagus-shoot or a Corn-stalk, and in trees a Palm-stem. These names express the different ways in which the two kinds grow in thickness when they live more than one year. But the difference between the two is almost as apparent the first year, and in the stems of herbs, which last only one year.

[Figure cq]

113. The Endogenous Stem. *Endógenous* means "inside-growing." Fig. 77 shows an Endogenous stem in a Corn-stalk, both in a cross-section, at the top, and also split down lengthwise. The peculiarity is that the wood is all in separate threads or bundles of fibres running lengthwise, and scattered among the cellular tissue throughout the whole thickness of the stem. On the cross-section their cut ends appear as so many dots; in the slice lengthwise they show themselves to be threads or fibres of wood. Fig. 78 is a similar view of a Palm-stem (namely, of our Carolina Palmetto, of which whole trees are represented in Fig. 79). It shows the endogenous plan in a stem several years old. Here the bundles of wood are merely increased very much in number, new threads having been formed throughout intermixed with the old, and any increase in diameter that has taken place is from a general distention or enlargement of the whole. Such stems may well enough be called *inside-growers*, because their wood increases in amount, as they grow older, by the formation of new threads or fibres of wood within or among the old.

[Figure cr]

114. Moreover, endogenous stems are apt to make few or no branches. Asparagus is the only common example to the contrary; that branches freely. But the stalks of Corn and other grain, and those of Lilies (Fig. 1, 2) and the like, seldom branch until they come to flower; and Palms are trees of this sort, with perfectly simple or branchless trunks, rising like columns, and crowned with a tuft of conspicuous and peculiar foliage, which all comes from the continued growth of a terminal bud.

[Figure cs]

115. The Exogenous Stem is the kind we are familiar with in ordinary wood. But it may be observed in the greater part of our herbs as well. It differs from the other class, even at the beginning, by the wood all occupying a certain part of the stem, and by its woody bundles soon appearing to run together into a solid layer. This layer of wood, whether much or little, is always situated around a central part, or *pith*, which has no wood in it, being pure cellular tissue, and is itself surrounded by a bark which is mainly or at first entirely cellular tissue. So that a slice across an exogenous stem always has a separate cellular part, as bark, on the circumference, then a ring of wood, and in the centre a pith; as is seen in Fig. 80, representing a piece of Flax-stem magnified; and also in Fig. 81, which shows the same structure in a woody stem, namely, in a shoot of Maple of a year old, cut both crosswise and lengthwise.

116. The difference becomes still more marked in stems more than one year old. During the second year a new layer of wood is formed outside of the first one, between it and the bark; the third year, another layer outside of the second, and so on, a new layer being formed each year outside of that of the year before. The increase is all on the surface, and buries the older wood deeper and deeper in the trunk. For this reason such stems are said to be *exógenous* or outside-growing (from two Greek words which mean just this), a new layer being added to the wood on the outside each year as long as the tree or shrub lives. And so the oldest wood, or *Heart-wood*, is always in the centre, and the newest and freshest, the *Sap-wood*, at the circumference, just beneath the bark.

[Figure ct]

[Figure cu]

117. The heart-wood is dead, or soon becomes so. The sap-wood is the only active part; and this, with the inner bark, which is renewed from its inner face every year, is all of the trunk that is concerned in the life and growth of the tree.

118. Plants with exogenous or outside-growing stems, especially those that live year after year, almost always branch freely. All common shrubs and trees of the exogenous class make a new set of branches every year, and so present an appearance very different from that of most of those of the endogenous or inside-growing class.

§ 3. *Of Leaves.*

119. Leaves exhibit an almost endless variety of forms in different plants; and their forms afford easy marks for distinguishing one species from another. So the different shapes of leaves are classified and named very particularly, — which is a great convenience in describing plants, as it enables a botanist to give a correct idea of almost any leaf in one or two words. We proceed to notice some of the principal kinds.

120. Their Parts. A leaf with all its parts complete has a *Blade*, a *Footstalk*, and a pair of *Stipules* at the base of the footstalk. Fig. 82 shows all three parts in a Quince-leaf: *b*, the blade; *p*, the footstalk; and *st*, the stipules, looking like a pair of little blades, one on each side of the stalk. But many leaves have no stipules; many have no footstalk, and then the blade sits directly on the stem (or is *sessile*), as in Fig. 138. Some leaves even have no blade; but this is uncommon; for in foliage the blade is the essential part. Therefore, in describing the shape of leaves, it is always the blade that is meant, unless something is said to the contrary.

[Figure cv]

121. Leaves are either *simple* or *compound.* They are *simple* when the blade is all of one piece; *compound*, when of more than one piece or blade. Fig. 128 to 132, and 133, are examples of compound leaves, the latter very compound, having as many as eighty-one little blades.

122. Their Structure and Veining. Leaves are composed of the same two kinds of material as stems (110), namely, of wood or fibre, and of cellular tissue. The woody or fibrous part makes a framework of ribs and veins, which gives the leaf more strength and toughness than it would otherwise have. The cellular tissue forms the *green pulp* of the leaf. This is spread, as it were, over the framework, both above and below, and supported by it; and the whole is protected by a transparent skin, which is termed the *Epidermis.*

123. Ribs. The stouter pieces or timbers of the framework are called *Ribs.* In the leaf of the Quince (Fig. 82), Pear, Oak (Fig. 120), &c. there is only a single main rib, running directly through the middle of the blade from base to point; this is called the *Midrib.* But in the Mallow, the Linden (Fig. 83), the Maple (Fig. 84), and many others, there are three, or five, or seven ribs of nearly the same size. The branches of the ribs and the branchlets from them are called

124. Veins and Veinlets. The former is the general name for them; but the finest branches are particularly called *Veinlets.* Straight and parallel veins or fine ribs, like those of Indian Corn, or of any Grass-leaf, or of the Lily of the Valley (Fig. 3, 85), are called *Nerves.* This is not a sensible name, for even if in some degree like the nerves of animals in shape, they are not in the least like them in use. Nor are what we call *veins* to be likened particularly to the bloodvessels of animals. But this name is not so bad; for the minute fibres which, united in bundles, make up the ribs and veins, are hollow tubes, and serve more or less for conveying the sap.

125. As to the *veining*, or the arrangement of the framework in the blade, leaves are divided into two classes, viz.: 1st, the *Netted-veined* or *Reticulated*, and, 2d, the *Parallel-veined* or *Nerved.*

126. Netted-Veined or Reticulated leaves are those in which the veins branch off from the rib or ribs, and divide again and again, and some of the veins and veinlets run into one another, so forming reticulations or meshes of network throughout the leaf. This is shown in the Quince-leaf (Fig. 82); also in the Linden or Basswood (Fig. 83), and the Maple (Fig. 84), where the finer meshes appear in one or two of the leaves.

[Figure cw]

[Figure cx]

127. Netted-veined leaves belong to plants which have a pair of seed-leaves to their embryo (48), and stems of the exogenous structure (115). That is, these three kinds of structure, in embryo, stem, and leaf, generally go together.

128. Parallel-veined or Nerved leaves are those in which the ribs and veins run side by side without branching (or with minute cross-veinlets, if any) from the base to the point of the blade, as in Indian-Corn, Lily of the Valley (Fig. 85), &c., or sometimes from the midrib to the margins, as in the Banana and Calla (Fig. 86). Such parallel veins have been called *Nerves*, as just explained (124). Leaves of this sort belong to plants with one cotyledon to their embryo (47), and with endogenous stems (113).

129. *Parallel-veined* leaves, we see, are of two sorts; — 1. those with the veins or nerves all running from the base of the leaf to the point (Fig. 85); and, 2. those where they mostly run from the midrib to the margin, as in Fig. 86. *Netted-veined* leaves likewise are of two sorts, the *Feather-veined* and the *Radiate-veined.*

130. *Feather-veined* (also called *pinnately veined*) leaves are those in which the main veins all spring from the two sides of one rib, viz. the midrib, like the plume of a feather from each side of the shaft. Figures 82, 88–97, 120, 122, &c. represent feather-veined leaves.

[Figure cy]

[Figure cz]

131. *Radiate-Veined* (also called *palmately veined*) leaves are those which have three or more main ribs rising at once from the place where the footstalk joins the blade, and commonly diverging, like rays from a centre; the veins branching off from these. Of this sort are the leaves of the Maple (Fig. 84), Mallow, Currant, Grape-Vine, and less distinctly of the Linden (Fig. 83). Such leaves are generally roundish in shape. It is evident that this kind of veining is adapted to round leaves, and the other kind for those longer than wide.

132. Shapes of Leaves. As to general shape, the following are the names of the principal sorts. (It will be a good exercise for students to look up examples which fit the definitions.)

*Linear;* narrow, several times longer than wide, and of about the same width throughout, as in Fig. 87.

*Lance-shaped* or *Lanceolate;* narrow, much longer than wide, and tapering upwards, or both upwards and downwards, as in Fig. 88.

*Oblong;* two or three times longer than broad, as in Fig. 89.

*Oval;* broader than oblong, and with a flowing outline, as in Fig. 90.

*Ovate;* oval, but broader towards the lower end; of the shape of a hen's egg cut through lengthwise, as in Fig. 91.

*Orbicular* or *Round;* circular or nearly circular in outline, as in Fig. 93.

[Figure da]

[Figure db]

[Figure dc]

[Figure dd]

[Figure de]

[Figure df]

[Figure dg]

133. Some leaves taper downwards more than upwards. Of these the commonest forms are the

*Oblanceolate*, or *Inversely lance-shaped;* that is, shaped like a lance with the point downwards, as in Fig. 94.

*Spatulate;* roundish above, and tapering into a long and narrow base, like the old form of the apothecary's spatula, Fig. 95.

[Figure dh]

[Figure di]

[Figure dj]

[Figure dk]

*Obovate*, or *Inversely ovate;* that is, ovate with the narrow end at the bottom of the leaf, as in Fig. 96.

*Cuneate* or *Wedge-shaped;* like the last, but with the sides narrowing straight down to the lower end, in the shape of a wedge, as in Fig. 97.

134. Of course these shapes all run into one another by imperceptible degrees in different cases. The botanist merely gives names to the principal grades. Intermediate shapes are described by combining the names of the two shapes the leaf in question most resembles. For example: —

*Lance-linear*, or *linear-lanceolate*, means between linear and lance-shaped.

*Lance-oblong*, or *oblong-lanceolate*, means between oblong and lanceolate in shape.

*Ovate-lanceolate*, between ovate and lance-shaped; and so on.

135. Or else a qualifying word may be used, as *somewhat* ovate, *slightly* heart-shaped, and the like. Thus, Fig. 92 is ovate in general form, but with the base a little notched, i. e. *somewhat* heart-shaped. It is one of the kinds which depend upon

136. *The shape at the base.* This is concerned in all the following sorts: —

*Heart-shaped*, or *Cordate;* when of the shape in which a heart is painted, the base having a recess or notch, as in Fig. 98.

*Kidney-shaped*, or *Reniform;* like heart-shaped, but rounder, and broader than long, as in Fig. 99.

*Auricled*, or *Eared;* having a small projection or *lobe* on each side at the base, like a pair of ears, as in Fig. 101.

*Arrow-shaped*, or *Arrow-headed;* when such lobes at the base are pointed and turned backwards, like the base of an arrow-head, as in Fig. 100.

[Figure dl]

[Figure dm]

[Figure dn]

*Halberd-shaped*, or *Hastate;* when such lobes point outwards, giving the whole blade the shape of the halberd of the olden time, as in Fig. 102.

*Shield-shaped*, or *Peltate;* when the footstalk is attached to some part of the lower face of the blade, which may be likened to a shield borne by the hand with the arm extended. Fig. 104 represents the shield-shaped leaf of a Water-Pennywort. Fig. 103 is the leaf of another species, which is not shield-shaped. A comparison of the two shows how the shield-shaped leaf is made.

[Figure do]

[Figure dp]

137. *As to the Apex or Point*, we have the following terms, the first six of which apply to the base as well as to the apex of a leaf: —

*Pointed*, *Taper-pointed*, or *Acuminate;* narrowed into a tapering tip, as in Fig. 105.

*Acute;* ending in an acute angle, Fig. 106.

*Obtuse;* ending in an obtuse angle, or with a blunt or rounded apex; as in Fig. 107.

*Truncate;* as if cut off square at the apex, as in Fig. 108.

*Retuse*; having a blunt or rounded apex slightly indented, as in Fig. 109.

*Emarginate*, or *Notched*; as if a notch were cut out of the apex; Fig. 110.

*Obcordate*, or *Inversely heart-shaped*; that is, with the strong notch at the apex instead of the base, as in Fig. 111 and the leaflets of White Clover.

*Cuspidate*; tipped with a rigid or sharp and narrow point, as in Fig. 112.

*Mucronate*; abruptly tipped with a short and weak point, like a small projection of the midrib, as in Fig. 113.

*Awned*, *Awn-pointed*, or *Aristate*; tipped with a long bristle-shaped appendage, like the beard (*awn*) of Oats, &c.

[Figure dq]

138. *As to the margin*, whether whole, toothed, or cut, leaves are said to be

*Entire*; when the margin is an even line, as in Fig. 99 to 102.

*Toothed*; when beset with teeth or small indentations; of this there are two or three varieties, as,

*Serrate* or *Saw-toothed*; when the teeth turn forwards, like those of a saw, as in Fig. 114.

[Figure dr]

*Dentate*; when they point outward, as in Fig. 115.

*Crenate*; when *scalloped* into broad and rounded teeth, as in Fig. 116.

*Wavy* (*Repand* or *Undulate*); when the margin bends slightly in and out, as in Fig. 117.

*Sinuate*; strongly wavy or sinuous, as in Fig. 118.

*Incised* or *Jagged*; cut into deep and irregular, jagged teeth or incisions, as in Fig. 119. This leads to truly

139. Lobed or Cleft Leaves, &c.: those with the blade cut up, as it were, into parts, i. e. *lobes* or *divisions.* In a general way, such leaves are said to be *lobed*; and the number of projecting parts, or lobes, may be expressed by saying *two-lobed*, *three-lobed* (Fig. 121), &c., according to their number. Or, more particularly, a leaf is

*Lobed*; when the pieces are roundish, or the incisions open or blunt, as in Fig. 120, 121; and

*Cleft*; when cut about half-way down, with sharp and narrow incisions, as in Fig. 122, 123; and so *two-cleft*, *three-cleft*, *five-cleft*, &c., according to the number.

*Parted*; when the cutting extends almost through, as in Fig. 124, 125. And we say *two-parted*, *three-parted*, &c., to express the number of the parts.

*Divided*; when the divisions go through to the base of the leaf (as in Fig. 127), or to the midrib (as in Fig. 126), which cuts up the blade into separate pieces, or nearly so.

[Figure ds]

140. As the cutting is always *between* the veins or ribs, and not across them, the arrangement of the lobes depends upon the kind of veining. Feather-veined leaves have the incisions all running in towards the midrib (as in the upper row of figures), because the principal veins all spring from the midrib; while radiate or palmately veined leaves have them all running towards the base of the blade, where the ribs all spring from the footstalk, as in the lower row of figures. So those of the upper row are called *pinnately lobed*, *cleft*, *parted*, or *divided*, as the case may be, and those of the lower row *palmately lobed*, *cleft*, &c. The number of the lobes or pieces may also be expressed in the same phrase. Thus, Hepatica has a *palmately three-lobed* leaf (Fig. 121); the Red Maple a *palmately five-cleft* leaf (Fig. 84), and so on.

141. In this way almost everything about the shape and veining of a leaf may be told in very few words. How useful this is, will be seen when we come to study plants to find out their names by the descriptions.

142. All these terms apply as well to the lobes or parts of a leaf, when they are themselves toothed, or lobed, or cleft, &c. And they also apply to the parts of the flower, and to any flat body like a leaf. So that the language of Botany, which the student has to learn, does not require so very many technical words as is commonly supposed.

143. Compound Leaves (121) are those which have the blade cut up into two or more separate smaller blades. The separate blades or pieces of a compound leaf are called *Leaflets.* The leaflets are generally *jointed* with the main footstalk, just as that is jointed with the stem, and when the leaf dies the leaflets fall off separately.

[Figure dt]

[Figure du]

[Figure dv]

144. There are two kinds of compound leaves, the *pinnate* and the *palmate.*

145. *Pinnate* leaves have their leaflets arranged along the sides of the main footstalk, as in Fig. 128, 129, 130.

146. *Palmate* (also called *Digitate*) leaves bear their leaflets all at the very end of the footstalk; as in Fig. 131.

147. There are several varieties of pinnate leaves. The principal sorts are:—

*Interruptedly pinnate*, when some of the leaflets of the same leaf are much smaller than the rest, and placed between them, as in the Water Avens.

*Abruptly pinnate*, when there is no odd leaflet at the end, as in Honey-Locust, Fig. 130.

[Figure dw]

*Odd-pinnate*, when there is an odd leaflet at the end, as in the Common Locust (Fig. 128) and in the Ash.

*Pinnate with a tendril*, when the footstalk is prolonged into a tendril, as in Fig. 129, and all of the Pea tribe.

148. Pinnate leaves may have many or few leaflets. The Bean has pinnate leaves of only three leaflets.

149. Palmate leaves generally have few leaflets; there is not room for many on the very end of the footstalk. Common Clover has a palmate leaf of three leaflets (Fig. 136); Virginia Creeper, one of five leaflets (Fig. 72), as well as the Buckeye (Fig. 131); while the Horsechestnut has seven, and some Lupines from eleven to seventeen.

[Figure dx]

150. Twice or Thrice Compound Leaves are not uncommon, both of the pinnate and of the palmate sorts. While some leaves of Honey-Locust are only once pinnate, as in Fig. 130, others are doubly or *twice pinnate*, as in Fig. 132. Those of many Acacias are *thrice pinnate.* Fig. 133 represents one of the root-leaves of Meadow-Rue, which is of the palmate kind, and its general footstalk is divided into threes for four times in succession, making in all eighty-one leaflets! When a leaf is divided three or four times, it is said to be *decompound.* This is *ternately* decompound, because it divides each time into threes.

151. Leaves without Distinction of Footstalk and Blade, or with no very obvious distinction of parts. Of this kind, among several others, may be mentioned, —

*Needle-shaped* leaves, such as those of Pine-trees and Larches (Fig. 134). These are long, slender, and rigid, and often with little if any distinction of sides.

[Figure dy]

*Awl-shaped* or *Subulate* leaves are those which from a broadish base taper into a sharp and rigid point, like one sort of those of the Red Cedar and Arbor Vitæ (Fig. 135, those on the larger branchlets). Those on other branchlets, as at *a*, are shorter, blunt, and *scale-shaped.*

[Figure dz]

[Figure ea]

*Thread-shaped* or *Filiform* leaves; round and stalk-like, as those of the Onion.

*Equitant* leaves, like those of Iris (Fig. 64), which are folded together lengthwise, as may be seen at the base, where they override each other. They grow upright, with their faces looking horizontally, instead of having an upper and a lower surface, as most leaves do.

152. Stipules, as already explained (120), are a pair of appendages at the base of the leaf, one on each side. These often grow fast to the base of the leafstalk, as they do in the Rose and in Clover (Fig. 136; *st*, the stipules). Or they may join with each other and form a kind of sheath round the stem, as they do in the Buttonwood and in Polygonum (Fig. 137). Many leaves have no stipules at all. In many cases they fall off very early, especially those that serve for bud-scales, as in Magnolia.

[Figure eb]

153. The Arrangement of Leaves on the stem has already been explained as to the two principal ways (59). Leaves are either

*Alternate*, when they follow each other one by one, as in the Morning-Glory (Fig. 4) and the Linden (Fig. 83); or

*Opposite*, when in pairs, that is, two on each joint of stem, one opposite the other, as in Maples (Fig. 84). To these may be added a third, but less common arrangement, viz. the

[Figure ec]

*Whorled*; where there are three, four, or more leaves on the same joint of stem, forming a circle or *whorl*; as in Madder and Bedstraw (Fig. 137′). But this is only a variety of the opposite mode.

Analysis of the Section.

81. Vegetation very simple in plan, very diversified in particulars. 82. The study of the forms of the organs is Morphology.

83-89. Roots, their forms and kinds. 84. Primary or original; secondary; how they originate. 85. Aerial roots. 86. Aerial rootlets. 87. Air-Plants; how they live. 88. Parasitic Plants, their economy. 89. Shapes of roots: fibrous; fleshy; the principal sorts.

90. Forms or kinds of stem; herbaceous, shrubby, arboreous. 91. Culm or straw-stem. 92. Directions or positions of stems. 93. Peculiar sorts. 94. Thorns or Spines, how shown to be branches; Prickles. 95. Tendrils. 96. Peduncles or Flower-stalks. 97. Buds. 98. Branches connected with the ground. 99. Stolons. 100. Runners. 101. Suckers. 102. Offsets. 103. Rootstocks. 104. Fleshy Rootstocks. 105. Tubers. 106. Corms. 107. Bulbs; 108. scaly and coated. 109. Bulblets.

110. Internal Structure of Stems; Cellular Tissue; Wood. 111. The two classes of stems. 112. Examples, both in herbs and trees. 113. Endogenous stem; how its wood is arranged. 114. External appearance and growth. 115. Exogenous stem; common wood. 116. How it increases in diameter year after year: Sap-wood and Heart-wood. 117. The latter dead, the former annually renewed. 118. External appearance and mode of growth.

119. Leaves; their varieties, why useful to learn. 120. Their parts: Blade, Footstalk, Stipules. 121. Simple and Compound. 122. Structure and Veining of leaves: woody or fibrous part; cellular tissue or green pulp; Epidermis or Skin. 123. Ribs. 124. Veins and Veinlets; Nerves, so called. 125. Two kinds of veining. 126. Netted-veined or Reticulated. 127. Class of plants that have this kind of veining. 128. Parallel-veined or Nerved; class of plants that have this kind of veining. 129. Both kinds of two sorts. 130. Feather-veined or Pinnately veined. 131. Radiate-veined or Palmately veined.

132 Shapes of leaves enumerated; as to general outline. 133. Those that taper downward. 134, 135. Intermediate shapes, how expressed. 136. Shapes depending upon the base. 137. Forms of apex. 138. As to margin or toothing, &c. 139. Lobing or division. 140. How this is related to the veining; how both the kind of lobing and the number of parts may be expressed, 141, so that a short phrase will describe the leaf completely. 142. All the various terms apply as well to other parts, as to calyx, corolla, petals, &c.

143. Compound Leaves; Leaflets. 144. The two kinds. 145. Pinnate leaves. 146. Palmate or Digitate. 147. Varieties of pinnate leaves. 148. Number of leaflets. 149. Also of palmate leaves; why their leaflets are generally fewer than those of pinnate leaves. 150. Twice or thrice compound and decompound leaves.

151. Leaves without distinction of blade and footstalk; Needle-shaped; Thread-shaped; Awl-shaped; Equitant. 152. Stipules; often united with the footstalk, or with each other.

153. The arrangement of leaves on the stem: the three modes, viz. alternate, opposite, whorled.
