Chapter III: Why Plants Grow, What They Are Made for, and What They Do

261. We have now become acquainted with all the organs of plants, both those concerned in their life and growth, or *vegetation*, and those concerned in multiplying their numbers, that is, in *reproduction.* The first being the root, stem, and leaves; the second, the flowers (essentially the stamens and pistils), with their result, fruit and seed. We have learned, also, how plants grow from the seed, produce part after part, branch after branch, and leaf after leaf, and at length blossom and go to seed. We see that plants, with their organs, that is, *instruments*, are a kind of living machines at work; and it is now time to ask, *How they operate*, *What they bring to pass*, and *What is the object or the result* of their doings. Such questions as these, young people, with their curiosity awakened, would be likely to ask, and they ought to be answered. To understand these things completely, one must know something of chemistry and vegetable anatomy,⁎ — which we do not propose here to teach. But a general account of the matter may be given in a simple way, which shall be perfectly intelligible, and may give a clear idea of the purpose which plants were created to fulfil in the world, and how they do it. Let us begin by considering

Footnote: ⁎ After studying this chapter, the pupil will be ready to learn more of the subject in the *Lessons in Botany and Vegetable Physiology.* Lessons 22, 23, 24, and 25 treat of Vegetable Anatomy; and Lesson 26, of the Plant doing its work.

262. The Plant in Action. Take any living plant, — it matters not what one, — and consider what it is doing. For greater simplicity, take some young plant or seedling, where vegetation goes on just as in a full-grown herb or tree, only on a smaller scale. The plant is

263. Absorbing, or drawing in what it lives upon, from the soil and the air. This is moisture, air, and other matters which the rain, as it soaks into the ground, may have dissolved on its way to the roots. It is by the roots, lodged in the damp soil, that most of the moisture which plants feed upon is taken in, and with this they always get some earthy matter. This earthy matter makes the ashes which are left after burning a piece of wood, a leaf, or any part of a plant. Moisture is also absorbed by the leaves, either from drops of rain or dew, or from the vapor of water in the air. Air is largely absorbed by the leaves, and some also by the roots, either as dissolved in water, or else directly from the crevices and pores of the soil, which are filled with air.

264. *Plants absorb their food by their surface.* Animals have an internal cavity, — a *stomach*, — to hold their food; and from the stomach it is taken into the system. Plants have nothing of this kind. They absorb their food by their surface, — by the skin, as it were; and when very young and with the whole surface fresh and thin, by one part almost as much as another. But as they grow older and the skin hardens, they absorb mostly by their fresh rootlets and the tips of the roots, and by the leaves, — the former spread out in the soil, the latter spread out in the air. For while the skin or bark of the older parts of the roots is hardening, new tips and rootlets are always forming in growing plants, with a fresh surface, which absorbs freely. And as to the leaves, they are renewed every year (even evergreens produce a new crop annually, and the old ones fall after a year or two); and the skin of every leaf, especially that of the under side, is riddled with thousands of holes or little mouths (called *Breathing-pores*), which open into the chambers or winding passages of the pulp of the leaf, so that the air may circulate freely throughout the whole.

265. *Plants absorb their food all in the fluid form.* They are unable to take in anything in a solid state. They *imbibe* or drink in all their food, in the form of water, with whatever the water has dissolved, and of air or vapor, by one or both of which their leaves and roots are surrounded. The reason they imbibe only fluid is this. The roots, leaves, and all the rest of the plant, under the microscope, are seen to be made up of millions of separate little cavities, each cut off from the surrounding ones by closed partitions of membrane. All that the plants take into their system has to pass through these partitions of membrane, — which fluid (air or moisture) alone can do.

266. The common juices of plants are called *Sap.* What they take in from the soil and the air, not being digested or made into vegetable matter, is called *Crude Sap.* All that the roots imbibe has to be carried up to the leaves to be digested there. So while the roots are absorbing, the stem is

267. Conveying the Crude Sap to the Leaves. There is no separate set of vessels, and no open tubes or pipes for the sap to rise through in an unbroken stream, in the way people generally suppose. The stem is made up, like the root, of cavities, or cells divided off by whole partitions; and to rise an inch the sap generally has to pass through several hundred such partitions. When there is much wood, the sap rises mostly through that. Now the fibres and the vessels of the wood are tubes, most of them several times longer than wide; but their ends do not open into each other; a closed partition divides each cavity from the next, which the sap has to get through some way or other. How it gets through so readily, we do not altogether know; but there is no doubt about the fact.

268. Carried into the leaves, and distributed through their broad surface, the crude sap is exposed to the light and air. A large part of it is water; and each drop of this serves to bring up a minute portion of earthy matter, which it dissolved out of the soil. Most of the water, no longer wanted, is evaporated from the leaves by the warmth of the sun, and *exhaled*; that is, it escapes in vapor into the air, mostly through the breathing-pores (264). What remains, the plant is at the same time

269. Digesting or Assimilating. Assimilating is the proper word. To assimilate is to make similar, or to turn into its own substance. This is just what plants do in their leaves. They change into vegetable matter that which was mineral matter (air, earth, or water) before. This they do only in the leaves, or other green parts, and in these only when they are exposed to the light of day, that is, to the influence of the sun. We see, therefore, why plants are so dependent on the light. They cannot grow without it, except so far as they are fed by vegetable matter prepared beforehand; — as the seedling is fed at the beginning, by vegetable matter of the parent plant stored up in the seed (Chap. II. Sect. II.); and potato-shoots, by that provided in the tuber or potato (74, 75), &c. This enables them to begin their growth in the dark. But the inheritance only serves to set up the young plants; when they have exhausted it, they have to work for themselves, to take in air and water, and a little earth, and *assimilate* it, — i. e. make vegetable matter of it, — in their leaves or other green parts, with the help of sunshine. This they do throughout the whole growing season.

270. The new-made vegetable matter is dissolved in the water or the sap in the leaf, and forms a thin mucilage. This is prepared or *Elaborated Sap*, fit to be used in growth; for it contains the same material as that which the plant itself is built of. It is to the plant just what the prepared clay is to the earthen vessel, or to the bricks of which the house is built. It has only to be conveyed where it is wanted and used for growing.

271. Some Forms and Changes of Vegetable Matter. It may be used at once, or it may be stored up until it is wanted. In annual herbs, as already explained (68), nearly all of it is used for growth or for blossoming, as fast as it is made. In biennials, like the Beet, Carrot, and Turnip (70), a great part of it is stored up somewhere, generally in the root, and used the next year. In such perennials as the Potato, a part is laid up in the tubers (which are all of the plant that survives the winter), to begin a vigorous growth the next season. In shrubs and trees a part is annually deposited in the newest wood and bark, to be used for developing the buds the next spring. In all, a portion is deposited, as we know, sometimes in the fruit, always in the seed, for the use of the embryo or new plant, at the beginning of its growth.

272. When vegetable matter is laid up for future use, a large part of it is generally in the form of starch. Nearly the whole bulk of a potato, or of a grain of corn, is starch. This consists of little grains which are like mucilage solidified, and they may be turned into mucilage again. When the plant takes up a deposit of starch into its system, as fast as it dissolves it in the sap it generally changes it into sugar. Mucilage, starch, sugar, and plant-fabric, all have the same chemical composition, or very nearly; and the plant readily changes one into the other as it needs. Notice the changes of vegetable matter in a plant of Indian Corn. In the leaves, where it is made, the elaborated sap is in the form of mucilage; in the stalk, at flowering-time, while on its way to form and nourish the blossoms and grains, it turns sweet, being changed into sugar; in the grain, a part is changed into starch and laid up there: when the grain germinates, the starch is dissolved and changed back into sugar; and in the growing plantlet which it nourishes, the sugar is at length changed into plant-fabric.

273. Circulation or Conveyance of Elaborated Sap, or Dissolved Vegetable Matter. The new-made vegetable matter rarely accumulates in the leaves where it is made, except in the Century-plant, Houseleek (Fig. 65), and other fleshy-leaved plants. It is generally distributed through all the plant (that is, through all its living parts), or carried especially to where a stock is to be laid up, or where growth is taking place. So the elaborated sap, passing out of the leaves, is received into the inner bark, at least in trees and shrubs, — or in herbs it may descend through the soft parts generally, — and a part of what descends finds its way even to the ends of the roots, and is all along diffused laterally into the stem, where it meets and mingles with the ascending crude sap or raw material. So there is no separate circulation of the two kinds of sap; and no crude sap exists separately in any part of the plant. Even in the root, where it enters, this mingles at once with some elaborated sap already there, and as it rises through the stem they mix more and more. But whatever is not assimilated must be, before the plant can use it; that which has been assimilated, can be used wherever it may be.

274. The elaborated sap, like the crude, is contained in the cavities, cells, or short closed tubes which make up the fabric of the plant, and circulates or passes from one to another through the partitions. How it passes through, and what attracts it where it is wanted, we do not very well know. And what we do know could not be well explained to the young beginner, for whom this book is written. The same may be said about

275. Growth. Growth is the increase of a living thing in size and substance. In plants it is done by the increase in the number of the *cells* (or cavities divided off by partitions) which make up the fabric, and by the increase of each in size to a certain extent. That is, growth is the building-up of the plant, or of additions to it, out of vegetable matter. And this vegetable matter was made in the leaves (either of the same plant or of its parent), out of mineral matter drawn from the earth and the air, — was mostly made of air and water. For the earthy part which is left behind when we burn a plant (and so turn all the vegetable matter back into air and vapor of water again) forms only a very small part of its bulk.

276. If the pupil would learn more particularly how growth takes place, and how plants change mineral into vegetable matter, they must study three or four lessons of the Lessons in Botany already referred to. But our short and simple account of the plant in action, i. e. *vegetating*, is sufficient for answering the main question, viz.: —

277. What Plants do. *Vegetation* consists essentially of two things, namely, *assimilation* and *growth.* In assimilation plants are changing mineral matter — air, water, and a little earth — into vegetable matter; and in growth this vegetable matter is wrought into all manner of beautiful and useful forms. This is the work which the vast variety and infinite number of plants over all the earth are busily engaged in. It is *their peculiar work*; for only plants can live upon (or assimilate) mineral matter; they only have the power of changing air, water, and earth into organic matter.

278. What is the effect of this action of plants, especially upon the air we breathe? And what becomes of all the vast amount of vegetable matter which plants have been making, day by day, since God said, *Let the earth bring forth grass, and the herb yielding seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth, — and it was so?* The answer to these questions will show us plainly

279. What Plants are made for. In the first place, in the very act of making vegetable matter, plants fulfil one great purpose of their existence, that is,

280. *They purify the air for animals.* That part of the air which renders it fit for breathing is called *oxygen*; this makes up about one fifth part of the air we breathe. At every breath animals take in some of this *oxygen* and change it into *carbonic acid*; that is, they combine the oxygen with carbon from their blood, which makes carbonic acid, and breathe out this carbonic acid into the air, in place of the oxygen they drew in. Now this carbonic acid is unfit for the breathing of animals, — so much so, that, if it were to increase so as to make any considerable part of the atmosphere, man and other animals could not live in it. But plants prevent the carbonic acid from accumulating in the air. While animals need the oxygen of the air, and in using it change it into carbonic acid, hurtful to them, plants need the carbon of this carbonic acid; indeed, it makes a very large portion of their food, — as we plainly see it must, when we know that about half of every part of a plant is carbon, that is, charcoal. And this carbonic acid is the very part of the air that plants use; they constantly take it from the air, decompose it in their leaves during sunshine, keep the carbon, and give back the oxygen pure, so keeping the air fit for the breathing of animals. The carbon which plants take from the air in this way, along with water, &c., they assimilate, that is, change into vegetable matter: and in doing this

281. *They make all the food which animals live upon.* Animals cannot live upon air, water, or earth, nor are they able to change these into food which they may live upon. This work is done for them by plants. Vegetable matter in almost every form — especially as herbage, or more concentrated in the accumulations of nourishment which plants store up in roots, in bulbs and tubers, in many stalks, in fruits, and in seeds — is food for animals. "*And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth,*" as well as to men, is given "*every green herb for meat.*" Some animals take it by feeding directly upon vegetables; others, in feeding upon the flesh of herbivorous animals, receive what they have taken from plants. Man and a few other animals take in both ways what plants have prepared for them. But however received, and however changed in form in the progress from plant to animal or from one animal to another, all the food and all the substance of all animals were made by plants. And this is what plants are made for.

282. Notice also that plants furnish us not merely needful sustenance, but almost every comfort and convenience. *Medicine* for restoring, as well as food for supporting health and strength, mainly comes from plants.

283. *They furnish all the clothing of man*; — not only what is made from the woolly hairs of certain seeds (*cotton*), or from the woody fibres of bark (*linen*), and what is spun from Mulberry-leaves by the grubs of certain moths (as *silk*), but also the skin and the fur or wool of animals, owe their origin to plants, just as their flesh does.

284. *They furnish utensils, tools, and building materials,* in great variety; and even the materials which the mineral kingdom yields for man's service (such as iron) are unavailable without vegetables, to supply fuel for working and shaping them.

285. *They supply all the fuel in the world*; and this is one special service of that vegetable matter which, in the solid form of wood, does not naturally serve for food. Burned in our fire-places, one part of a plant may be used to cook the food furnished by another part, or to protect us against cold; or burned under a steam-boiler it may grind our corn, or carry us swiftly from place to place. Even the coal dug from the bowels of the earth is vegetable matter, the remains of forests and herbage which flourished for ages before man existed, and long ago laid up for his present use. We may proceed one step farther, and explain where the heat of fuel comes from; for even a child may understand it. Plants make vegetable matter only in the light, mostly in the direct light of the sun. With every particle of carbonic acid that is decomposed, and vegetable matter that is made, a portion of the sun's heat and light is absorbed and laid up in it. And whenever this vegetable matter is decomposed, as in burning it, this heat and light (how much of each, depends upon the mode of burning) are given out.

286. So all our *lighting* as well as warming, which we do not receive directly from the sun, we receive from plants, in which sunlight has been stored up for our use. And equally so, whether we burn olive-oil or pine-oil of the present day, or candles made from old peat, or coal-gas, or lard, tallow, or wax, — the latter a vegetable matter which has been somewhat changed by animals. And, finally,

287. *The natural warmth of the bodies of animals comes from the food they eat, and so is supplied by plants.* A healthy animal, no longer growing, receives into his system a daily supply of food without any corresponding increase in weight, or often without any increase at all. This is because he decomposes as much as he receives. If a vegetable-feeder, far the greater part of his food (all the starch of grain and bread, the sugar, oil, &c.), after being added to the blood, is decomposed, and breathed out from the lungs in the form of carbonic acid and water. That is just what it would become if set on fire and burned, as when we burn oil or tallow in our lamps or candles, or wood in our fire-places; and in the process, in animals no less than in our lamps and fire-places, the heat which was absorbed from the sun, when the vegetable matter was produced from carbonic acid and water, is given out when this matter is decomposed into carbonic acid and water again. And this is what keeps up the natural heat of animals. We are warmed by plants in the food we consume, as well as by the fuel we burn.

288. In learning, as we have done, How Plants Grow, and Why they Grow, have we not learned more of the lesson of the text placed at the beginning of this book, and of the verses that follow? "*Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, shall he not much more clothe you? . . . . Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? For your Heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.*" And we now perceive that causing plants to grow is the very way in which He bountifully supplies these needs, and feeds, clothes, warms, and shelters the myriads of beings He has made, and especially *Man*, whom He made to have dominion over them all.
