Chapter IV: How Plants Are Classified, Named, and Studied

Section I. — Classification

289. Classification in Botany is the arrangement of plants according to their kinds and according to their resemblances.

290. In order that the vegetable creation might be adapted to every soil, situation, and climate, and to the different wants of the greatest variety of animals, as well as to the many peculiar needs of mankind, God created plants in a vast number of kinds. And in order that these should be perpetuated and kept distinct, He ordained that each should yield fruit and seed "*after its kind.*" So each sort of plant multiplies and perpetuates itself from generation to generation. Each of these sorts is a

291. Species. The individuals, or separate plants, of each sort represent that species, just as men and women represent the human species. The individuals of the same species are not always, or not commonly, exactly alike. They may differ in size according to their greater or less vigor; they may vary in the color of their blossoms, or the shape and flavor of their fruit, and yet plainly be of one species. It is very apt to be so in cultivated plants. The different sorts of Apples belong to one species; all the sorts of Pears are of one species; and so of Peaches. Such sorts, which have arisen in the course of time and under change of circumstances, are called Varieties.

292. Varieties may be kept up with certainty by propagating from buds, that is, by cuttings, grafts, offsets, and the like (Chap. II. Sect. I.), but not by seeds, — at least when left to themselves. And varieties have nothing definite about them, but shade off into one another; while the species are always separate. Apple-trees never vary into Pear-trees, nor Pear-trees into Quince-trees. The cultivator pays much attention to varieties, and takes particular pains to preserve and multiply them. To the botanist, who is concerned mainly with wild plants, they are of much less account. The botanist studies *species.*

293. According to their degrees of resemblance species form *Genera*, *Orders* or *Families*, and *Classes.*

294. Genus: plural Genera. Species which are very much alike belong to the same genus. The genus is a group of species which have the flower and fruit constructed on exactly the same plan. The Cabbage and the Turnip belong to the same genus. The different species of Raspberry and Blackberry belong to one genus, — the *Bramble genus.* The different species of Roses compose the *Rose genus*; of Oaks, the *Oak genus*; and so on.

295. An Order or Family (the two words meaning the same thing in Botany) is a kind of genus on a wider scale, consisting of genera, just as a genus consists of species. For example, while all the Oaks belong to the Oak genus, there are other trees which are a good deal like Oaks in the whole plan of their flowers, fruit, and seeds, so much so that we say they belong to the Oak family. Among them are the Chestnut, the Beech, and the Hazel; each a genus by itself, containing several species. So the Pear genus, the Quince genus, the Hawthorn genus, the Rose genus, and the Bramble genus, with many more, belong to one great order. The Pea genus, the Bean genus, the Locust genus, the Clover genus, and the like, make up another order.

296. A Class is a great group of orders or families, all on the same general plan. The Rose family, the Oak family, and a hundred others, all belong to one great class. Lilies, Amaryllises, Irises, Palms, Rushes, and Grasses belong to another great class.

297. There are other divisions; but these are the principal ones in all classifications, both of the vegetable and of the animal kingdom. And these four stages always rank in this way: the species under the genus, the genera under the order or family, and orders under the class, viz.: —

	Class,
	  Order or Family,
	    Genus,
	      Species.

Section II. — Names

298. The name of any plant is the name of its genus and of its species. The name of the genus answers to the surname or family name of people, as *Smith* or *Brown.* The name of the species answers to the baptismal name, as *John* or *James.* We distinguish persons by these two names, as *John Smith* and *James Smith*; *John* *Brown* and *James Brown*, &c. In the same way, we name a plant by giving the name of the genus along with that of the species; as *White Oak*, *Red Oak*, *Water Oak.* Here the first word is the name of the species, which is nothing by itself, but joined to the second word, which is the name of the genus, it designates the species of Oak; and the two together completely name the plant we mean. These are

299. *Popular Names*, or the common names in our own language. Plants also have truly *Scientific Botanical Names*, which are the same in all countries. On this account they are in Latin. Some of them are the ancient Latin or Greek names; others are words made in later times, but all are in Latin form. Thus, the scientific name of the Oak genus is *Quercus*; of the Ash genus, *Fraxinus*; of the Rose genus, *Rosa*; of the Pear genus, *Pyrus*; of the Bramble or Blackberry genus, *Rubus*, &c. The names of some genera are in honor of botanists or discoverers; as, *Linnæa*, named in honor of Linnæus; *Magnolia*, after Magnol; *Kalmia*, after Kalm, a pupil of Linnæus, who travelled in this country; *Claytonia*, after Clayton, a botanist of Virginia.

300. In the Latin or scientific name, that of the genus comes before the species. So the scientific name of the White Oak is *Quercus alba*; of Red Oak, *Quercus rubra*; of Water Oak, *Quercus aquatica.* In fact, these are just the popular names turned into Latin. It is not always so; for what we call Post Oak is botanically named *Quercus obtusiloba*, which means an Oak with blunt lobes to the leaves. And our White Ash is *Fraxinus Americana*, meaning "American Ash"; Red Ash is *Fraxinus pubescens*, meaning "Downy Ash"; Black Ash is *Fraxinus sambucifolia*, meaning "Elder-leaved Ash." But our Green Ash is *Fraxinus viridis*, which means the same thing as the common name.

301. The name of the genus is a substantive. That of the species is generally an adjective; as, *viridis*, green; *sambucifolia*, Elder-leaved; *Americana*, American; *aquatica*, growing in water; and so forth.

302. Accordingly, any plant is named in two words, that is, by giving the name of its genus and of its species.

303. The names of the class, order, &c. make no part of the name of the plant itself. And these names differ in different systems of classification, while those of the genus and species are the same in all systems.

Section III. — The Natural System

304. There are two kinds of classification in Botany, viz. *Natural* and *Artificial.* They differ in the way the genera are arranged in orders, classes, &c.

305. An Artificial Classification is one in which plants are arranged for convenience of reference, or for finding out their names, without any particular care for bringing like things together. Tournefort made an artificial classification of plants by their flowers, mainly by their corolla, which was in common use in the last century until Linnæus contrived a better one, in which the classes and orders were founded upon the number, position, &c. of the stamens and pistils. This was in general use for many years. But now we use artificial classifications only in the form of *Tables* or *Analyses*, as a key for finding out the family a plant we are studying belongs to, and so readily referring it to its place in

306. The Natural System. In this system plants are classified according to their relationships, that is, according to their resemblances in all respects. The most important resemblances are used for the classes, &c.; the most important after these for the orders; more particular ones mark the genera; and matters of shape, proportion, color, &c. mark the species. So the whole together forms a *system*, in which all known plants are to be ranked in their natural order, each standing next those which it is most like in all respects; the whole forming, as it were, a great map, in which the classes and other great divisions might answer to countries, the orders to counties, and the genera to towns or parishes.

307. Such a system is not a mere convenience for ascertaining the name of a plant, but is an illustration, as far as may be, of the *plan of the Creator* in the vegetable kingdom. And the Botanist sees as much to admire, and as plain evidences of design, in the various relations of the species of plants to each other (i. e. in their resemblances and their differences), as he does in the adaptation of one part of a plant to another, and in the various forms under which any one organ may appear. The different kinds of plants are parts of a great whole, like the members of a body, or the pieces of an harmonious but complex edifice or structure; and this whole is the *Vegetable Kingdom.*

308. What the main divisions in the system are, may be gathered from what is stated in several places in Part I. In the first place, the whole vegetable kingdom divides into two great *Series* or *Grades*, — a higher and a lower. The higher series contains all

Flowering or Phænogamous Plants, namely, those that are propagated by means of real flowers, producing seeds, which contain an embryo ready formed. The lower series consists of

Flowerless or Cryptogamous Plants, which produce no real flowers and no true seeds, but only something of a simpler sort, answering to flowers and giving rise to *spores*, which serve the purpose of seeds.

309. This has been explained in Chapter II. Section II. p. 58. Next, the great series of Flowering Plants is divided into two *Classes.* These classes are distinguishable by the stem, the leaves, the flower, and the embryo or germ of the seed. They are: —

Class I. Exogens, or Dicotyledons (more fully named, *Exogenous or Dicotyledonous Plants*). Plants of this class, as to their *stems*, have the wood all between a separate pith in the centre and a bark on the surface, and each year the stem lives, it forms a new layer of wood on the surface of that of the previous year (111, 115–118). As to the *leaves*, they are netted-veined or reticulated, the veins branching and forming meshes (126, 127). As to the *flowers*, their parts are generally in fives or fours (or the double or treble of these numbers), very rarely in threes. As to the *embryo*, or germ, it always has a pair of cotyledons or seed-leaves (48), or sometimes more than a pair (49).

Class II. Endogens, or Monocotyledons (or more fully, *Endogenous* or *Monocotyledonous Plants*). Plants of this class, as to their *stems*, have their wood in threads mixed with the pith and scattered throughout every part, never forming layers, and the bark is never to be peeled off clean from the wood (112–114). The *leaves* are almost always parallel-veined (127–129). The *flowers* have their parts in threes (or twice three), very rarely in twos or fours, never in fives, which is much the commonest number in the other class. And the *embryo* has but one cotyledon or seed-leaf (47, 50).

310. So the class of any plant may be told from a piece of its stem alone; or from a single leaf, in most cases; or from a blossom; or from a seed; or from the plantlet as it springs from the seed, and in its first leaves shows the nature of the embryo. The seeds generally are not easy to study without a dissecting microscope, nor can we always have them growing. But the student will hardly ever fail to tell the class at once, by the stem, the leaves, or the flowers, and by the whole look of the plant.

311. The first Class divides into two *Subclasses*, of very unequal size, viz.: —

Subclass I. Angiosperms (or *Angiospermous Plants*), which have pistils of the common sort, in which the seed is formed and contained (16, 219). This takes all of the first class except the Pine family, and one or two small orders little known in this country. These form the

Subclass II. Gymnosperms, that is, *Gymnospermous* or *Naked-seeded Plants* (218, 250). Here the ovules and seeds are naked, there being no pistil at all, as in the Yew, or only an open scale that answers to it, as in Pines, Cedars, &c.

312. The first class contains about a hundred common orders or natural families; the second not half so many.

313. The lower or second series, that of *Flowerless* or *Cryptogamous Plants*, divides into three classes, viz.: —

Class III. Acrogens, which includes the Fern family, the Horsetail family, and the Club-moss family.

Class IV. Anophytes, which consists of the orders of Mosses and Liverworts.

Class V. Thallophytes, which includes Lichens, the Algæ or Seaweeds, and the Fungi or Mushroom family.

314. But Flowerless plants, being too difficult for the beginner, need not be further mentioned here.

315. The orders or families in the natural system are pretty numerous. They are named, in general, after some well-known genus which may be said to represent the family. Thus the order to which the Rose belongs is called the *Rose family*; that to which Crowfoots or Buttercups belong, the *Crowfoot family*; that to which Cress and Mustard belong, the *Cress family*; the Oak gives its name to the *Oak family*, the Birch to the *Birch family*, the Pine to the *Pine family*, and so on. Their Latin or scientific names are also generally made from the Latin name of a leading or well-known genus. For example, *Rosa*, the Rose, gives its name to the Rose family, viz. *Rosaceæ*, meaning Rosaceous plants; *Ranunculus*, the Crowfoot genus, gives to its family the name of *Ranunculaceæ*; and *Papaver*, the Poppy, gives to its family that of *Papaveraceæ*; *Berberis*, the Barberry, that of *Berberidaceæ*; and so on.

316. The student's principal difficulty at the beginning will be to find out the order or family to which a plant belongs. This is because the orders are so numerous, and commonly not to be certainly distinguished by any one point. But after some practice, the order will be as easy to make out as the class; and in many cases it will be known at a glance by the strong family likeness to some plant which has been examined before.

317. Let us now introduce our pupils to the *Popular Flora*, by which they may study the common plants they meet with, and find out their structure and their names.

Section IV. — How to study Plants by the Popular Flora

318. Directions for gathering Specimens to Examine. Gather specimens with flowers, flower-buds, and also with fruits, either forming or full grown, when all these are to be had at the same time, as they frequently are, at least in herbs, except in spring. Sometimes the remains of last year's fruit are to be found, enough to tell what the kind of fruit was. Very often the nature of the fruit can be told beforehand, from the pistil, either at flowering-time or soon after. However, most of our common plants may be made out from the blossoms and leaves only. Small herbs should be taken up by the roots.

319. Specimens which are to be kept for some time, or carried to some distance before they are studied, should be put at once into a close-shutting tin box, where they will keep long without withering. Botanical boxes are made for the purpose. A candle-box, or any tin box with a lid, and of convenient size for carrying, will answer.

320. For examining Plants to make out the structure of the flowers, fruits, &c., the instruments most needed are, —

A sharp, thin-bladed pocket-knife, such as a common penknife, for making sections or slices;

A pair of small forceps, which, although not always necessary, are very convenient for holding little parts; and

A hand microscope or magnifying-glass, such as may be purchased for a dollar or less. A single glass, mounted in horn, or in metal, and (for carrying in the pocket) shutting into a case of the same material, which serves as a handle when open, is the commonest and best for our purpose.

A stand-microscope is a most convenient thing, when it can be had. This has a glass stage under the lens or magnifying-glass, on which small flowers, or their parts, may be laid. This leaves both hands free for dissecting or displaying the minute parts, with needles mounted in handles, while the eye is examining them under the microscope. Common needles, mounted in the bone handles used for holding *crochet* needles, are very convenient, and cost little. A compound microscope, however necessary for studying vegetable anatomy, is of no use for our common botanical purposes, which require no high magnifying. A pocket magnifying-glass, held in the hand, is all that is absolutely necessary.

321. Lessons in examining Plants. How a pupil, or a class, is to proceed in examining any plant by our *Popular Flora*, for the purpose of finding out its class, its order or family, and then its genus and species, — that is, its name, — we will show by a few plain examples.

322. Technical words or terms are used all along, which you may not remember the meaning of, as defined in the first part of the book; and some of them may not have been mentioned or explained there. Whenever you come to a word which you do not *perfectly understand*, turn at once to the Index and Dictionary, beginning on page 217, and look it out. There you will find it explained, or will be referred to the page of the book where the term is explained or illustrated. Turn back to the place, and read what is said about it. Do not attempt to proceed faster than you understand things. But by looking out and understanding the words as you meet with them, the principal terms used in botanical descriptions (here made as simple as possible) will soon be familiar, and your subsequent progress will be all the more rapid for the pains taken in the earlier steps.

323. For the first example we will take a Buttercup or Crowfoot, such as may anywhere be met with in spring and early summer. With specimens in hand, turn to page 105. You ask in the first place, —

Does the plant belong to the *First Series*, that of Phænogamous or Flowering Plants? Certainly; for it bears flowers, with stamens and pistils. (The Second Series, that of Flowerless Plants (p. 97), consisting of Ferns, Mosses, &c., we do not meddle with in this book, they requiring too much magnifying, and being too difficult for the young beginner.) Next you ask, —

To which class does it belong? The differences between the two classes are mentioned on page 97, and the characteristics of Class I. are illustrated on page 105. As the stem is hollow, it may not be easy to see that it has a delicate ring of wood under the bark and outside of the pith (as in Fig. 230); but this may be perceived in a cross slice under the microscope. And even if we had ripe seeds, a microscope and some skill in dissection would be required to take out the minute embryo, and see that it has a pair of cotyledons. But we may tell the class by the two other points, viz. by the leaves, and by the number of parts to the blossom. The leaves are plainly netted-veined, and the parts of the flower, that is, the sepals and the petals, are five. So the plant belongs to Class I. Proceed then with the "Key to the Families or Orders of Class I." on page 106. This class has two subclasses. So you next ask, —

To which subclass does the plant belong, to Angiosperms or to Gymnosperms? For the character of the Gymnosperms, see the end of the Key, at the foot of page 111; that of Angiosperms begins the Key. The centre of the flower we are examining is occupied with a great number of small one-seeded pistils, each tipped with its short style and stigma; and the ovary is a closed bag containing an ovule or young seed. So the plant clearly belongs to Subclass I. Proceed then with the Key; which leads you next to ask, —

To which division does the plant belong, — the *Polypetalous?* (in black letters immediately under the subclass), or the *Monopetalous?* (top of page 109), or the *Apetalous?* (lower part of page 110). Plainly to the first or *Polypetalous* division; for there is both a calyx and a corolla, and the latter is of five separate petals.

This division, in the Key, subdivides into, "A. Stamens more than 10," and "B. Stamens 10 or fewer" (p. 107). Our plant has many stamens, and so falls under the head A.

This head subdivides into three (marked 1, 2, 3), by differences as to where and how the stamens are borne. Pull off the calyx and the corolla, or split a flower through the middle lengthwise (as in Fig. 238), and you will plainly see that the stamens stand on the receptacle, under the pistils, unconnected either with the calyx or the corolla. So the plant falls under the head 1.

Under this is an analysis of some of the characters (i. e. distinguishing marks) of the fifteen or sixteen families which belong here. The lines that are *set in* are subdivisions under the longer line above them. The lines which rank directly under one another (and begin with the same or a corresponding word) make alternatives, among which you are to choose that with which your plant agrees. In this instance the lines of the first rank here begin with the word "Pistils" or "Pistil," and there are five of them. Try the first: "Pistils more than one, entirely separate from each other." That is the case with our plant. Under this line, in the next rank, is a triplet, or a choice between three. Our plant is an "herb, with perfect flowers," and so falls under the first line. Under this is a couple of equivalent lines, relating to the leaves. Our plant agrees not with the second, but with the first of these; and that line ends with the English name of the family we are seeking for, viz. the Crowfoot Family, and refers to page 112, where this family is described.

Turn now to the account of this family, and read over the descriptive marks given, to see if you have been led to a right conclusion. The description agrees, as far as it goes. Knowing the family, you now ask, —

To what genus of this family does the plant belong? The genus gives the principal name of the plant; so this is the same as asking, What is the plant's name? Now, in every family which has several genera or kinds under it, we have a key to the genera, like that which we have just used under the class to find out the family. Try the key, then, under this family, to find out the genus.

This key begins with a pair of lines, viz. "Climbing plants," &c., and "Not climbing," &c. Our plant agrees with the latter. Under this, in the next rank, is a pair of lines, beginning with "Pistils" (the second line of the pair is the sixth on p. 113). You perceive that our plant falls under the first. Under this is the line beginning "Petals none." Our flower has petals; so pass on to the other one of the pair, which is the fifth line on p. 113. This reads "Petals present as well as sepals, the latter falling off early" (which agrees); and leads to the name of the genus, i. e. "(*Ranunculus*) Crowfoot."

The first name, in parentheses and in Italic type, is the scientific or Latin name of the genus; the other, in small capitals, is the popular English name of the genus. When we have only one species to the genus, we do not in this book proceed farther. But there are many Crowfoots, so you next inquire, —

What is the species? Look on, till you come to the name of the genus in dark letters, on p. 114. Here a few more marks of the Crowfoot genus are given; and then the marks of ten common species of Crowfoot follow, under several heads. We are supposed to have in our hands one of the two large yellow-flowered species, commonly called Buttercups. Compare the specimens with the divisions marked by stars. It cannot belong to that with one star, for the petals are not white; it does belong to that with two stars, for the petals are yellow, and bear a little scale on the inside just above the bottom. Under this are two divisions, marked with daggers. Not growing under water, our plant belongs to that marked † †. Under this are two further divisions, marked ‡ and ‡ ‡: our plant, having the "petals much longer than the calyx," belongs to the second of these.

Under this head are four species. The English name is given at the beginning of the line, in small capital letters; a short description follows, and the scientific or Latin name is appended, in Italic letters, at the end. Here the *R.* of course stands for *Ranunculus.* A comparison with the description will show which species it is that we happen to have. If a field plant flowering in May, and with a bulbous base of the stem just underground, it is the Bulbous Crowfoot or Buttercup, or in Latin, *R. bulbosus.* If the taller species, without a bulb, and flowering in summer (which is the most common kind throughout the country), it is Tall Crowfoot or Buttercup, or *R. acris.* Having in this way made out one Crowfoot, you will be sure to know any other one as soon as you see it, and will only have to find out the species, comparing your specimen with the descriptions, on p. 114.

324. Suppose, for the next example, you have specimens, with flowers and young fruit, of a common plant in wet grounds in spring, here called Cowslip, though this is not its correct English name. With specimens in hand, turn to p. 105.

To which class does it belong? Its netted-veined leaves (and the structure of the stem, as seen in a slice under a good magnifying-glass) plainly refer it to Class I. You next ask, —

To which subclass? The pistils and pods plainly refer it to Subclass I.

To which division? At first view you may think it has a corolla; but there is no calyx outside of these yellow leaves of the flower, even in the bud. So you will conclude that these leaves are the calyx, notwithstanding their rich color and petal-like appearance; and you will turn to the *Apetalous* division, on p. 110.

Continue the analysis under that division. The flowers are separate, and "not in catkins"; so it falls under A. The seeds are numerous in each ovary or pod; so it falls under No. 1. The "calyx is free from the ovary," according to the second of the first pair of lines. So you have only to choose between the three lines of the triplet under this, beginning with "Pod." As the pistils and pods are one-celled and simple, we are brought to the name †Crowfoot Family, p. 112. The mark † denotes that you have in this case an apetalous plant belonging to a family in which the flowers generally have petals. You turn to this family, p. 112, and proceed as before. You are led along the same track, until you reach the line "Pistils many or several, becoming akenes in fruit." Your flowers have a number of pistils, but these contain numerous seeds, and make pods in fruit, as in Fig. 240. So you pass on to the other line of the couplet, which reads, "Pistils more than one-seeded, becoming pods"; which agrees with the plant in hand. The first line in the next rank reads: "Sepals petal-like, not falling when the flower first opens" (so it is in your plant); and, of the four lines of the next rank, you can take only the first: "(Sepals) golden-yellow: petals none: leaves rounded, not cut." This brings you to the name of the genus, — in Latin or scientific form, *Caltha*; in English, Marsh-Marigold. Being the only species, we need go no farther with it.

325. On reflection and comparison, you will perceive the family likeness between the Marsh-Marigold and the Crowfoot, different as they are in some particulars; and between these and the Globe-flower, the Gold-thread, the Anemony, and even the Larkspur and Aconite, when you have studied these plants. But the family likeness is not quite so strong at first view in this family as it is in most others.

326. Another example we will take from the plant figured on p. 5 and the following pages (Fig. 4–19), a very common ornamental twiner about houses, flowering all through the summer. Begin, as before, on p. 105. You perceive at once that the plant belongs to Class I.; for it has netted-veined leaves, the parts of the flower are in fives, and the embryo (which is easily extracted from the fresh seed, Fig. 16–19) has a pair of seed-leaves. There is a regular pistil, and the seeds in a pod; so the plant belongs to Subclass I. There is both calyx and corolla, the latter of one piece; so the plant belongs to the Monopetalous division, p. 109. The corolla is borne on the receptacle below the ovary; so you pass to the head B. The stamens are just as many as the lobes, or rather here the plaits, of the corolla; so you pass No. 1, and take No. 2. The stamens stand before the plaits, so that they would be alternate with the divisions of the corolla, if it were not that the five petals it consists of are united to the very top; so you take the second of the two lines commencing with the word "Stamens." These are "inserted on the corolla," and are entirely separate and "free from the stigma"; so you take the fourth line of those in the next rank. There is a style (p. 110); so the plant falls under the second of the two lines of the next rank. The ovary and pod have 3 cells; so it falls under the third of the lines beginning with the word "Ovary." The stamens are 5, and the pod few-seeded (2 seeds in each cell); so it falls under the third of the lines beginning with "Stamens." The plant twines, and the seeds are large; so you are brought to the name of the family, the Convolvulus Family, and are referred to p. 184. Read over the marks of the family, and then search for the genus in the key or arrangement; and you will find that the name of the genus is, in scientific language, *Ipomœa*, in popular English, Morning-Glory.

327. One more example, to show how plants are to be studied by the Flora, will be sufficient. Take the Lily of the Valley (Fig. 3 on p. 1), which in this country adorns almost every flower-garden.

328. With plants in hand, turn to p. 105, and compare with the distinguishing marks of Class I. A slice across the stem shows no ring of wood around a pith. The leaves are not netted-veined. The parts of the flower are not in fives or fours, but in sixes, that is, twice threes. So the plant does not agree with Class I. in any respect. Turn therefore to Class II., on p. 203. Examining slices of the stem with a magnifying-glass, you may find threads of wood interspersed in the cellular part or pith. The leaves are parallel-veined (Fig. 502, 503). The flowers have their parts in threes or twice threes; i. e. the cup of the blossom has six lobes, and there are six stamens; and, although there is only one pistil, the stigma is three-lobed and the ovary has three cells, showing that it is composed of three pistils grown into one. So, without looking for the embryo in a ripe seed, which is not often to be had, you are sure the plant belongs to Class II. Endogens or Monocotyledons.

329. To find out the family or order the plant belongs to, try the Key. There are three divisions of the class. First, the *Spadiceous*, which has the flowers sessile on a spadix or fleshy axis. Not so with the plant in hand, which has drooping blossoms in a slender raceme. Pass on, therefore, to the second or *Petaloideous* division. In this the flowers are not on a spadix, nor enclosed in chaffy bracts or glumes, and they have a calyx and corolla, or a perianth colored like a corolla. Our plant belongs to this division. The first line under it reads: "Perianth free from the ovary"; this is the case in our plant. Proceed to the next rank: "Of 3 green or greenish sepals and 3 distinct and colored petals." Not so in our plant; so we pass to the corresponding line: "Of 6 petal-like leaves in two ranks, or 6-lobed and all colored alike." Here our plant belongs. Proceed to the two lines under this, beginning with the word "Stamens." Our flowers have six stamens; so we take the second line of the pair. Pass to the two lines of the next rank, beginning with "Anthers." These in our plant are turned inwards: so we take the second line of the pair, and are led to the Lily Family, p. 209. Turn to that page: read over the marks of the family, and go on to ascertain the genus. Having few seeds or ovules in the ovary, small flowers, and running rootstocks, we find our plant to agree with the first line of the key to the genera of the Lily Family. The simple and naked scape or flower-stalk from the ground, &c. accords with the third line of the next rank; and the flowers in a raceme answer to the first of the two lines under that. And this brings us to the name of the genus, viz. in Latin form, *Convallaria*; in English, Lily of the Valley, — the only species of the genus.

330. Signs and Abbreviations used in the Popular Flora. These are very few and easily understood.

The signs for degrees (°), minutes (′), and seconds (″) are used for size or height; the first for feet, the second for inches, and the third for lines or twelfths of an inch.

Accordingly 1° or 2° means one or two feet long or high, as the case may be.

And 1′ or 2′ means one or two inches long or high.

And 1″ or 2″ means one or two lines or twelfths of an inch long.

An asterisk or star before the name of a genus — as ⁎ Fennel-flower and ⁎ Peony on p. 113, or ⁎ Radish, ⁎ Turnip, ⁎ Candytuft, &c. on p. 125 — denotes that there are no wild species of that genus in this country, but they are to be met with only as cultivated plants.

§ This mark stands for section of a genus, or a *subgenus*, i. e. a section almost distinct enough for a genus. See under Magnolia, p. 117; also p. 147, where *Pyrus*, § *Sorbus*, and *Pyrus*, § *Malus*, &c. denote that *Sorbus* and *Malus* are only sections or subgenera of the genus *Pyrus.*

To save room, the name of the genus generally is not printed in full under each species. So, under Virgin's Bower, p. 113, the first species, Wild Virgin's Bower, is given in full. In the second, "Sweet V." stands for Sweet Virgin's Bower. Also, as to the scientific name, "*C. Flammula*" stands for *Clematis Flammula*, — and so elsewhere.

N., S., E., and W., which are occasionally added after the description of a species, stand for North, South, East, and West, and indicate the part of the country where the plant naturally grows. For example, the Long-fruited Anemony, p. 114, is found North and West (N. and W.), &c. When there is no such reference, the species may be found in almost any part of the Northern United States.

Fl. is an abbreviation for flowering, or sometimes for flower. P. 115, line 1, &c. "Fl. spring," means flowering in spring, "Fl. summer," line 8, means flowering in summer. Cult. is an abbreviation for cultivated.

*Accents.* In the Latin or scientific names, the syllable upon which the accent falls is marked with a ˊ or ˋ. When the accented vowel has a long sound, it is marked ˋ; as *Anemòne*, p. 115, *Aconìtum*, p. 116. When the vowel has the short sound, it is marked ˊ; as *Clématis* and *Hepática*, p. 115.

All Latin or Latinized names, when of only two syllables, take the accent on the first syllable, and therefore do not need to be marked.

Part Second.
