62. Vervain Family. Order Verbenaceæ

Herbs or shrubby plants, with opposite leaves, a 2-lipped or unequally 5- (or rarely 4-) lobed corolla, and 4 stamens in pairs (i. e. 2 long and 2 short ones): the pistil with a single ovary and only one seed in each cell; the fruit either berry-like with 4 stones, or dry and splitting into 2 or 4 akenes, or in Lopseed consisting of a single akene. This family is intermediate between the foregoing order and the next. The two following are the commonest genera.

	Calyx cylindrical, 2-lipped. Corolla 2-lipped. Ovary 1-celled, simple. Herb, in woods, with small whitish flowers in slender and loose spikes; the calyx containing the akene, turned down in fruit, · · · (*Phryma*) Lopseed.
	Calyx tubular, 5-toothed. Corolla salver-shaped, with 5 slightly unequal lobes. Flowers in spikes or heads, summer and autumn, · · · (*Verbèna*) Vervain.

Vervain. *Verbèna.*

⁎ Showy Verbenas: low and showy-flowered species, in gardens in summer, the greater part from South America, viz. *V. Melindres* (red) and others, now much mixed. And there is one species of this sort wild in Western prairies, viz.: —

1. Aublet's Verbena. Rather hairy; leaves pinnatifid or cut; spikes flat-topped in blossom, like a corymb; corolla light purple, &c.  *V. Aublètia.*

⁎ ⁎ Common Vervains: weeds or weed-like plants, in fields and road-sides, with small flowers in long spikes, which are generally panicled.

2. Common V. Erect, slenderly branched, 1° to 3° high; leaves sessile, cleft or pinnatifid and cut-toothed; spikes very slender; flowers very small, purplish.  *V. officinàlis.*

3. White V. Leaves petioled, ovate or oval, serrate; spikes of white flowers very slender.  *V. urticifòlia.*

4. Blue V. Leaves petioled, lance-shaped or lance-oblong, the lower often cut or 2-lobed at the base; spikes of blue flowers thick and close; stem 4° to 6° high.  *V. hastàta.*

5. Low V. Stems ½° to 1° high; leaves lance-linear, sessile, scarcely toothed; spikes one or few, thickish; flowers purple. S. and W.  *V. angustifòlia.*
