79. Buckwheat Family. Order Polygonaceæ

Herbs with alternate entire leaves, and mostly perfect flowers; with a calyx of 4 to 6 sepals (separate or united at the base), and 3 to 9 stamens inserted on its base: ovary one-celled making a one-seeded akene; its styles or stigmas 2 or 3. Besides, this family may always be known by the stipules which form a sheath above each joint (as in Fig. 137). The watery juice is often sour, as in Rhubarb and Sorrel, sometimes sharp and biting.

	Calyx of 5 (rarely 4) nearly similar sepals, all more or less petal-like.
	  Stamens 4 to 9: akene generally small: cotyledons narrow, · · · (*Polýgonum*) Knotweed.
	  Stamens 8: styles 3: akene triangular, shaped like a beechnut, much longer than the calyx: cotyledons very broad and folded in the mealy albumen: root annual: leaves nearly halberd-shaped: flowers white, corymbed, · · · (*Fagopýrum*) ⁎Buckwheat.
	Calyx of 6 sepals, and
	  All alike and petal-like (white): stamens 9: styles 3, · · · (*Rheum*) ⁎Rhubarb.
	  Three outer ones herbaceous and spreading: three inner larger, especially after flowering, when they close over the triangular akene: flowers diœcious: leaves sour, eared or halberd-shaped, · · · (*Rumex*, § *Acetosélla*) Sorrel.
	    Flowers perfect or polygamous: leaves bitter: coarse herbs, · · · (*Rumex*) Dock.

Knotweed. *Polýgonum.*

⁎ Flowers single or several together in the axils of the leaves, greenish or whitish: sheaths (stipules) cut-fringed or torn into narrow shreds.

1. Common Knotweed, Knotgrass, or Goosegrass. Spreading on the ground, small; leaves sessile, lance-shaped or oblong, pale; a variety has nearly upright stems and oblong or oval leaves. The commonest weed in yards and waste places.  *P. aviculàre.*

2. Slender K. Upright, somewhat branched; leaves linear, acute, sheaths fringed. Dry soil.  *P. ténue.*

⁎ ⁎ Flowers in terminal heads, spikes, or racemes.

† Not twining nor climbing, and leaves not heart-shaped nor arrow-shaped: calyx petal-like and 5-parted, except in No. 10.

3. Oriental K. or Prince's Feather. Tall annual, 4° to 7° high; leaves ovate; spikes of rose-colored flowers long and nodding; stamens 7; akene flattish. Gardens.  *P. orientàle.*

4. Water K. Stems floating in water, or rooting in mud, or upright; leaves lance-shaped or oblong; spike thick and short; flowers rose-red; stamens 5; styles 2.  *P. amphibium.*

5. Pennsylvania K. Stem upright, 1° to 3° high; leaves lance-shaped; spike oblong, thick, erect, its peduncle beset with club-shaped bristles or glands; flowers rose-colored; stamens 8; akene flat. Moist ground.  *P. Pennsylvánicum.*

6. Lady's-Thumb K. Stems, &c. like the last and next, but no bristles on the peduncle; leaves with a darker spot on the upper side; spike short and thick, erect; flowers greenish-purple; stamens 6. Very common in waste places.  *P. Persicària.*

7. Smartweed or Water-Pepper K. Upright, annual, 1° or 2° high, very acrid and biting to the taste; leaves and also the greenish sepals marked with fine transparent dots; spikes short but loose, drooping; akene flattish or bluntly triangular. Moist ground, common in waste places, yards, and near dwellings.  *P. Hydropìper.*

8. Wild Smartweed K. Upright, 1° to 3° high from a perennial root, biting like the last, and the leaves dotted; spikes very slender, erect, whitish or flesh-color; stamens 8; styles 3; akene sharply triangular. Wet places.  *P. acre.*

9. Mild Water-Pepper K. Upright, 1° to 3° high; often creeping at the base and rooting in water; leaves roughish, not biting, narrowly lance-shaped; spikes slender, erect, rose-color; stamens 8; style 3-cleft at the top; akene sharply triangular. Shallow water.  *P. hydropiperoìdes.*

10. Virginia K. Stem 2° to 4° high, angled; leaves large, ovate or lance-ovate, taper-pointed; flowers scattered in a long and naked slender spike; calyx greenish, 4-parted; stamens 5; styles 2, bent down in fruit. Thickets.  *P. Virginiànum.*

† † Somewhat climbing, or supported by recurved sharp prickly bristles on the strong angles of the stems, &c.; flowers white or flesh-color in small racemes or heads; root annual. The prickly angles cut like a saw, whence the plants are called *Tear-Thumb.*

11. Arrow-leaved K. Leaves arrow-shaped (Fig. 100), short-stalked; akene 3-angled.  *P. sagittàtum.*

12. Halberd-leaved K. Leaves halberd-shaped (Fig. 102), long-stalked; akene flattish. Low grounds.  *P. arifòlium.*

† † † Twining annuals, with smooth stems and greenish or whitish flowers in panicled racemes; leaves heart-shaped and partly halberd-shaped.

13. Climbing K. Smooth, climbing high over shrubs, &c.; racemes leafy; 3 of the calyx-lobes more or less winged in fruit. Thickets in low ground.  *P. dumetòrum.*

14. Bindweed K. Low, stems roughish; racemes corymbed; three of the calyx-lobes ridged in the middle. Cult. and waste grounds.  *P. Convólvulus.*
