84. Walnut Family. Order Juglandaceæ

Timber and nut trees, with alternate pinnate leaves, no stipules; the sterile flowers in hanging catkins and with an irregular calyx; the fertile ones single or few together at the end of a shoot; their calyx coherent with the ovary, and 4-toothed at its summit. Fruit a kind of stone-fruit; the outer part becoming dry when ripe, and forming a husk, the stone incompletely 2-celled or 4-celled, but with only one ovule and seed. The whole kernel is a great embryo, with the cotyledons separated, lobed, and crumpled. — Only two genera: —

	Catkins of the sterile flowers single; the bracts or scales united with the calyx: stamens 8 to 40. Fertile flowers with 4 small petals between the teeth of the calyx: short styles and stigmas 2, fringed: husk of the fruit thin, and not separating into valves or regular pieces. Bark and bruised leaves strong-scented and staining brown. Leaf-buds nearly naked, · · · (*Juglans*) Walnut.
	Catkins 3 or more on one peduncle: stamens 3 to 8; anthers almost sessile. No petals in the fertile flowers: stigma large, 4-lobed. Husk of the fruit splitting into four pieces or valves, which separate from the smooth stone or shell. Wood very hard and tough. Leaf-buds scaly (Fig. 55), · · · (*Cárya*) Hickory.

Walnut. *Juglans.*

1. Black Walnut. Leaves and stalks smoothish; leaflets many, lance-ovate, taper-pointed; fruit round, the thin husk drying on the very rough stone. Common W.  *J. nigra.*

2. Butternut, or Gray-barked W. Leaves, stalks, and oblong fruit clammy-downy when young, the stone with more ragged ridges, and tree smaller than No. 1.  *J. cinèrea.*

3. True or English W. Smooth; leaflets only about 9, oblong; fruit round; husk separating from the thin and nearly smooth stone. Cultivated, from the South of Europe.  *J. règia.*

Hickory. *Cárya.*

⁎ Fruit and stone round or roundish.

1. Shagbark H. (also called Shellbark or Sweet H.) Bark on the trunk shaggy and scaling off; leaflets generally 5, three of them lance-obovate, the lower pair smaller and oblong-lanceolate, finely serrate; husk thick; stone roundish, thick or thin; seed very sweet: furnishes the hickory-nuts of the market.  *C. alba.*

2. Mockernut H. Bark cracked on the larger trunks; leaflets 7 to 9, roughish-downy beneath, slightly serrate, oblong-lanceolate; catkins hairy; husk and stone very thick; seed sweetish but small. Common S. and W.  *C. tomentòsa.*

3. Pignut H. Bark close and smooth; leaflets 5 to 7, smooth, lance-ovate, serrate; fruit pear-shaped or obovate, the husk and stone rather thin; seed sweetish or bitterish, small.  *C. glabra.*

4. Bitternut or Swamp H. Bark of trunk smooth; buds little scaly: leaflets 7 to 11, lance-oblong, smooth; husk and stone of the fruit thin and tender; seed very bitter. Wet woods.  *C. amàra.*

⁎ ⁎ Fruit and thin stone narrowly oblong: husk thin.

5. Pecan-nut H. Leaflets 13 or 15, oblong-lanceolate, oblique, serrate; stone olive-shaped, thin; seed very sweet. W. & S.  *C. olivæfórmis.*
