94. Trillium Family. Order Trilliaceæ

Herbs with simple stems rising from a short rootstock, rather conspicuously netted-veined leaves in a whorl, and perfect and regular flowers: — containing in this country only the genus Trillium and the Indian Cucumber-root, which are here described.

Trillium.⁎ *Trillium.*

Footnote: ⁎ Also called Birthroot, Wake-Robin, and Three-leaved Nightshade.

Stem bearing at the summit a whorl of 3 broad leaves and one rather large flower. Calyx of 3 green spreading sepals. Corolla of 3 spreading petals. Stamens 6, with short filaments and long erect anthers turned inwards, inserted on the receptacle. Pistil one, 3-celled, commonly with 3 to 6 lobes or ridges, and making a purple many-seeded berry in fruit: styles or long sessile stigmas 3, spreading. — They all grow in rich woods, and blossom in spring or early summer.

1. Sessile flowered T. Flower and the ovate leaves both sessile; petals rather erect, dark dull purple or greenish. W. & S.  *T. séssile.*

2. Recurved T. Leaves narrowed at the base into a footstalk; sepals turned down; petals narrowed at both ends; otherwise like No. 1. W.  *T. recurvàtum.*

3. Nodding T. Leaves nearly sessile, rhombic-ovate; flower small, on a short peduncle curved down under the leaves; petals oblong-ovate, pointed, recurved, wavy. E. & S.  *T. cérnuum.*

4. Erect T. or Birthroot. Leaves sessile, round-rhombic with a very abrupt point; flower on a nearly upright peduncle; petals ovate, acutish, spreading, dull purple or sometimes greenish-white. Common N.  *T. eréctum.*

[Figure rl]

5. Great-flowered T. Leaves and peduncle nearly as in No. 4; petals obovate, erect at the base, then gradually spreading much longer and broader than the sepals, white, turning rose-color when old. N. and W.  *T. grandiflòrum.*

6. Painted T. Leaves petioled, pale green, ovate, taper-pointed; flower on an upright peduncle; petals lance-ovate, pointed, widely spreading, longer than the sepals, wavy, white, adorned with delicate pink-purple stripes at the base. Cold damp woods, &c. N.  *T. erythrocárpum.*

Indian Cucumber-root. *Medèola.*

Stem 1° to 3° high, from a white tuberous horizontal rootstock, having the taste of a cucumber, bearing near the middle a whorl of 5 to 9 obovate-lanceolate pointed sessile leaves, and at the top one of 3 ovate smaller leaves, and a few small greenish-yellow flowers in an umbel, on recurved stalks. Sepals and petals each 3, oblong and alike, recurved. Stamens 6: filaments longer than the anthers. Stigmas 3, sessile, long and thread-shaped. Ovary one, making a round 3-celled and few-seeded berry. One species, in damp woods; flowering in summer.  *M. Virginica.*
