
i 




&tate Colltqt of Agriculture 

Sit Cornell IHntbetaittp 

atbata, A. £. 



ILttrarp 



Cornell University Library 
Q 171.H9 

Discourses: biological & geological; essa 





3 1924 002 924 201 



s^y^^^ys^ 



DISCOURSES: 

BIOLOGICAL & GEOLOGICAL 



ESSAYS 



THOMAS H. HUXLEY 



ILontion 

MACMILLAN AND CO. 
1894 



Richard Clay and Sons, limited, 
london and bungay. 



PREFACE 

The contents of the present volume, with three 
exceptions, are either popular lectures, or addresses 
delivered to scientific bodies with which I have 
been officially connected. I am not sure which 
gave me the more trouble. For I have not been 
one of those fortunate persons who are able to 
regard a popular lecture as a mere hors d'ceuvre, 
unworthy of being ranked among the serious efforts 
of a philosopher; and who keep their fame as 
scientific hierophants unsullied by attempts — at 
least of the successful sort — to be understanded 
of the people. 

On the contrary, I found that the task of 
putting the truths learned in the field, the 
laboratory and the museum, into language which, 
without bating a jot of scientific accuracy shall be 
generally intelligible, taxed such scientific and 
literary faculty as I possessed to the uttermost ; 
indeed my experience has furnished me with no 
better corrective of the tendency to scholastic 
pedantry which besets all those who are absorbed 



Va PREFACE 

in pursuits remote from the common ways of men, 
and become habituated to think and speak in the 
technical dialect of their own little world, as if 
there were no other. 

If the popular lecture thus, as I believe, 
finds one moiety of its justification in the self- 
discipline of the lecturer, it surely finds the 
other half in its effect on the auditory. For 
though various sadly comical experiences of the 
results of my own efforts have led me to entertain 
a very moderate estimate of the purely intellectual 
value of lectures ; though I venture to doubt if 
more than one in ten of an average audience 
carries away an accurate notion of what the 
speaker has been driving at; yet is that not 
equally true of the oratory of the hustings, of the 
House of Commons, and even of the pulpit ? 

Yet the children of this world are wise in their 
generation ; and both the politician and the priest 
are justified by results. The living voice has an 
influence over human action altogether indepen- 
dent of the intellectual worth of that which it 
utters. Many years ago, I was a guest at a great 
City dinner. A famous orator, endowed with a 
voice of rare flexibihty and power ; a born actor, 
ranging with ease through every part, from refined 
comedy to tragic unction, was called upon to reply 
to a toast. The orator was a very busy man, a 
charming conversationalist and by no means 
despised a good dinner ; and, I imagine, rose with- 



PREFACE VI 1 

out having given a thought to what he was going 
to say. The rhythmic roll of sound was admirable, 
the gestures perfect, the earnestness impressive ; 
nothing was lacking save sense and, occasionally, 
grammar. When the speaker sat down the 
applause was terrific and one of my neighbours 
was especially enthusiastic. So when he had 
quieted down, I. asked him what the orator had 
said. And he could not tell me. 

That sagacious person John Wesley, is reported 
to have replied to some one who questioned the 
propriety of his adaptation of sacred words to 
extremely secular airs, that he did not see why the 
Devil should be left in possession of all the best 
tunes. And I do not see why science should not 
turn to account the peculiarities of htiman nature 
thus exploited by other agencies : all the more 
because science, by the nature of its being, can- 
not desire to stir the passions, or profit by the 
weaknesses, of human nature. The most zealous 
of popular lecturers can aim at nothing more 
than the awakening of a sympathy for abstract 
truth, in those who do not really follow his argu- 
ments ; and of a desire to know more and better in 
the few who do. 

At the same time it must be admitted that the 
popularization of science, whether by lecture or 
essay, has its drawbacks. Success in this depart- 
ment has its perils for those who succeed. The 
" people who fail " take their revenge, as we have 



via PREFACE 

recently had occasion to observe, by ignoring all 
the rest of a man's work and glibly labelling him 
a mere popularizer. If the falsehood were not too 
glaring, they would say the same of Faraday and 
Helmholtz and Kelvin. 

On the other hand, of the affliction caused by 
persons who think that what they have picked up 
from popular exposition qualifies them for discuss- 
ing the great problems of science, it may be said, 
as the Radical toast said of the power of the Crown 
in bygone days, that it " has increased, is increas- 
ing, and ought to be diminished." The oddities 
of " English as she is spoke " might be abundantly 
paralleled by those of " Science as she is misunder- 
stood " in the sennon, the novel, and the leading 
article ; and a collection of the grotesque trav- 
esties of scientific conceptions, in the shape of 
essays on such trifles as " the Nature of Life " and 
the " Origin of All Things," which reach me, from 
time to time, might well be bound up with them. 

The tenth essay in this volume unfortunately 
brought me, I will not say into collision, but into 
a position of critical remonstrance with regard 
to some charges of physical heterodoxy, brought 
by my distinguished friend Lord Kelvin, against 
British Geology. As President of the Geological 
Society of London at that time (1869), I thought 
I might venture to plead that we were not such 
heretics as we seemed to be ; and that, even if 



PREFACE ]X 

we were, recantation would not affect the 
question of evolution. 

I am glad to see that Lord Kelvin has just 
reprinted his reply to my plea,^ and I refer the 
reader to it. I shall not presume to question any- 
thing, that on such ripe consideration. Lord Kelvin 
has to say upon the physical problems involved. 
But I may remark that no one can have asserted 
more strongly than I have done, the necessity 
of looking to physics and mathem.atics, for help 
in regard to the earliest history of the globe. 
(See pp. 108 and 109 of this volume.) 

And I take the opportunity of repeating the 
opinion, that, whether what we call geological 
time has the lower limit assigned to it by Lord 
Kelvin, or the higher assumed by other philoso- 
phers; whether the germs of aU hving things 
have originated in the globe itself, or whether 
they have been imported on, or in, meteorites 
from without, the problem of the origin of those 
successive Faunae and Florse of the earth, the 
existence of which is fully demonstrated by 
paleontology remains exactly where it was. 

For I think it will be admitted, that the germs 
brought to us by meteorites, if any, were not ova 
of elephants, nor of crocodiles ; not cocoa-nuts nor 
acorns ; not even eggs of shell-fish and corals ; 
but only those of the lowest forms of animal and 
vegetable life. Therefore, since it is proved that, 
' Popular Lectures and Addresses. II. Maemillan and Co. 1894. 



X PREFACE 

from a very remote epoch of geological time, the 
earth has been peopled by a continual succession 
of the higher forms of animals and plants, these 
either must have been created, or they have arisen 
by evolution. And in respect of certain groups of 
animals, the well-established facts of paleontology 
leave no rational doubt that they arose by the 
latter method. 

In the second place, there are no data what- 
ever, which justify the biologist in assigning 
any, even approximately definite, period of time, 
either long or short, to the evolution of one 
species from another by the process of variation 
and selection. In the ninth of the following 
essays, I have taken pains to prove that the change 
of animals has gone on at very different rates in 
different groups of living beings ; that some types 
have persisted with little change from the paleo- 
zoic epoch till now, while others have changed 
rapidly within the limits of an epoch. In 1862 
(see below p. 303, 304) in 1863 (vol. II., p. 461) 
and again in 1864 (ibid., p. 89 — 91) I argued, not 
as a matter of speculation, but, from paleonto- 
logical facts, the bearing of which I believe, up to 
that time, had not been shown, that any ade- 
quate hypothesis of the causes of evolution must 
be consistent with progression, stationariness and 
retrogression, of the same type at different epochs ; 
of different types in the same epoch ; and that 
Darwin's hypothesis fulfilled these conditions. 



PEEFACE XI 

According to that hypothesis, two factors are at 
work, variation and selection. Next to nothing is 
known of the causes of the former process ; nothing 
whatever of the time required for the production 
of a certain amount of deviation from the existing 
type. And, as respects selection, which operates 
by extinguishing all but a small minority of 
variations, we have not the slightest means of 
estimating the rapidity with which it does its 
work. All that we are justified in saying is that 
the rate at which it takes place may vary almost 
indefinitely. If the famous paint-root of Florida, 
which kills white pigs but not black ones, were 
abundant and certain in its action, black pigs 
might be substituted for white in the course of 
two or three years. If, on the other hand, it was 
rare and uncertain in action, the white pigs might 
linger on for centuries. 

T. H. Huxley. 



HODESLEA, EASTBOUKNE, 
April, 1894. 



CONTENTS 



I 

PAGE 
ON A PIECE OF CHALK [1868] 1 

(A. Lecture delivered to the working men of 
Norwich during the meeting of the British 
Association.) 



II 

THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA [1873] 37 



III 

on some of the kesolts of the expedition of h.m.s. 
"challensek" [1875] ... 



IV 

YEAST [1871] . . 110 



XIV CONTENTS 

V 

PAGE 
ON THE FOKMATION OF COAL [1870] 137 

(A Lecture delivered at the Philosophical 
Institute, Bradford. ) 

VI 

ox THE BORDER TERRITOEY BETWEEN THE ANIMAL AND 

THE VEGETABLE KINGDOMS [1876] 162 

(A Friday evening Lecture delivered at the 
Eoyal Institution.) 

VII 

A LOBSTER ; OR, THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY [1861] . . • . . 196 

(A Lecture delivered at the South Kensington 
Museum. ) 

VIII 

BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS [1870] 229 

(The Presidential Address to the Meeting of 
the British Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science at Liverpool.) 



IX 

GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY AND PERSISTENT TYPES 

OF LIFE [1862] . . 272 

(Address to the Geological Society on behalf 
of the President hy one of the Secretaries. ) 



CONTENTS XV 

X 

PACE 

GEOLOGICAL KEFOEM [1869] 305 

(Presidential Address to the Geological 
Society. ) 

XI 

PAL^ffiONTOLOGY AND THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION [1870] 340 

(Presidential Address to the Geological 
Society. ) 



ON A PIECE OF CHALK 

[1868] 

If a well were sunk at our feet in the midst of 
the city of Norwich, the diggers would very soon 
find themselves at work in that white substance 
almost too soft to be called rock, with which we 
are all familiar as " chalk." 

Not only here, but over the whole county of 
Norfolk, the well-sinker might carry his shaft 
down many hundred feet without coming to the 
end of the chalk; and, on the sea-coast, where 
the waves have pared away the face of the land 
which breasts them, the scarped faces of the high 
cliffs are often wholly formed of the same material. 
Northward, the chalk may be followed as far as 
Yorkshire ; on the south coast it appears abruptly 
in the picturesque western bays of Dorset, and 
breaks into the Needles of the Isle of Wight ; 
while on the shores of Kent it suppHes that long 

VOL. VIII !E B 



2 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

line of white cliffs to which England owes her 
name of Albion. 

Were the thin soil which covers it all washed 
away, a curved band of white chalk, here broader, 
and there narrower, might be followed diagonally 
across England from Lulworth in Dorset, to Flam- 
borough Head in Yorkshire — a distance of over 
280 miles as the crow flies. From this band to 
the North Sea, on the east, and the Channel, on 
the south, the chalk is largely hidden by other 
deposits ; but, except in the Weald of Kent and 
Sussex, it enters into the very foundation of all 
the south-eastern counties. 

Attaining, as it does in some places, a thickness 
of more than a thousand feet, the English chalk 
must be admitted to be a mass of considerable 
magnitude. Nevertheless, it covers but an insig- 
nificant portion of the whole area occupied by the 
chalk formation of the globe, much of which has 
the same general characters as ours, and is found 
in detached patches, some less, and others more 
extensive, than the English. Chalk occurs in 
north-west Ireland ; it stretches over a large part 
of France, — the chalk which underlies Paris being, 
in fact, a continuation of that of the London basin ; 
it runs through Denmark and Central Europe, and 
extends southward to North Africa; while east- 
ward, it appears in the Crimea and in Syria, and 
may be traced as far as the shores of the Sea of 
Aral, in Central Asia. If all the points at which 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 3 

true chalk occurs were circumscribed, they would 
lie within an irregular oval about 3,000 miles in 
long diameter — the area of which would be as 
great as that of Europe, and would many times 
exceed that of the largest existing inland sea — 
the Mediterranean. 

Thus the chalk is no unimportant element in 
the masonry of the earth's crust, and it impresses 
a peculiar stamp, varying with the conditions to 
which it is exposed, on the scenery of the districts 
in which it occurs. The undulating downs and 
rounded coombs, covered with sweet-grassed turf, 
of our inland chalk country, have a peacefully 
domestic and mutton-suggesting prettiness, but 
can hardly be called either grand or beautiful. 
But on our southern coasts, the wall-sided cliffs, 
many hundred feet high, with vast needles and 
pinnacles standing out in the sea, sharp and 
solitary enough to serve as perches for the wary 
cormorant, confer a wonderful beauty and grandeur 
upon the chalk headlands. And, in the East, 
chalk has its share in the formation of some of 
the most venerable of mountain ranges, such as 
the Lebanon. 

What is this wide-spread component of the 
surface of the earth ? and whence did it come ? 

You may think this no very hopeful inquiry. 
You may not unnaturally suppose that the 
attempt to solve such problems as these can lead 

B 2 



4 ON A PIECE OP CHALK 1 

to no result, save that of entangling the inquirer 
in vague speculations, incapable of refutation and 
of verification. If such were really the case, I 
should have selected some other subject than a 
" piece of chalk " for my discourse. But, in truth, 
after much deliberation, I have been unable to 
think of any topic which would so well enable me 
to lead you to see how solid is the foundation 
upon which some of the most startling conclusions 
of physical science rest. 

A great chapter of the history of the world is 
written in the chalk. Few passages in the history 
of man can be supported by such an overwhelm- 
ing mass of direct and indirect evidence as that 
which testifies to the truth of the fi:agment of the 
history of the globe, which I hope to enable you 
to read, with your own eyes, to-night. Let me 
add, that few chapters of human history have a 
more profound significance for ourselves. I weigh 
my words well when I assert, that the man who 
should know the true history of the bit of chalk 
which every carpenter carries about in his 
breeches-pocket, though ignorant of all other 
history, is likely, if he will think his knowledge 
out to its ultimate results, to have a truer, and 
therefore a better, conception of this wonderful 
universe, and of man's relation to it, than the 
most learned student who is deep-read in the 
records of hvimanity and ignorant of those of 
Nature. 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 5 

The language of the chalk is not hard to learn, 
not nearly so hard as Latin, if you only want to 
get at the broad features of the story it has to 
tell ; and I propose that we now set to work to 
spell that story out together. 

We all know that if we " burn " chalk the 
result is quicklime. Chalk, in fact, is a compound 
of carbonic acid gas, and lime, and when you 
make it very hot the carbonic acid flies away and 
the lime is left. By this method of procedure 
we see the lime, but we do not see the carbonic 
acid. If, on the other hand, you were to powder 
a little chalk and drop it into a good deal of strong 
vinegar, there would be a great bubbHng and 
fizzing, and, finally, a clear liquid, in which no 
sign of chalk would appear. Here you see the 
carbonic acid in the bubbles ; the lime, dissolved 
in the vinegar, vanishes from sight. There are a 
great many other ways of showing that chalk is 
essentially nothing but carbonic acid and quick- 
lime. Chemists enunciate the result of all the 
experiments which prove this, by stating that 
chalk is almost wholly composed of "carbonate 
of lime." 

It is desirable for us to start from the knowledge 
of this fact, though it may not seem to help us 
very far towards what we seek. For carbonate 
of lime is a widely-spread substance, and is met 
with under very various conditions. All sorts of 
limestones are composed of more or less pure 



6 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

carbonate of lime. The crust which is often 
deposited by waters which have drained through 
limestone rocks, in the form of what are called 
stalagmites and stalactites, is carbonate of lime. 
Or, to take a more familiar example, the fur on 
the inside of a tea-kettle is carbonate of lime; 
and, for anything chemistry tells us to the con- 
trary, the chalk might be a kind of gigantic fur 
upon the bottom of the earth-kettle, which is 
kept pretty hot below. 

Let us try another method of making the chalk 
tell us its own history. To the unassisted eye 
chalk looks simply like a very loose and open 
kind of stone. But it is possible to grind a slice 
of chalk down so thin that you can see through 
it — until it is thin enough, in fact, to be examined 
with any magnifying power that may be thought 
desirable. A thin slice of the fur of a kettle 
might be made in the same way. If it were 
examined microscopically, it would show itself to 
be a more or less distinctly laminated mineral sub- 
stance, and nothing more. 

But the slice of chalk presents a totally different 
appearance when placed under the microscope. 
The general mass of it is made up of very minute 
granules ; but, imbedded in this matrix, are in- 
numerable bodies, some smaller and some larger, 
but, on a rough average, not more than a 
hundredth of an inch in diameter, having a well- 
defined shape and structure. A cubic inch of 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 7 

some specimens of chalk may contain hundreds of 
thousands of these bodies, compacted together 
with incalculable millions of the gi-anules. 

The examination of a transparent slice gives a 
good notion of the manner in which the com- 
ponents of the chalk are arranged, and of their 
relative proportions. But, by rubbing up some 
chalk with a brush in water and then pouring off 
the milky fluid, so as to obtain sediments of 
different degrees of fineness, the granules and 
the minute rounded bodies may be pretty well 
separated from one another, and submitted to 
microscopic examination, either as opaque or as 
transparent objects. By combining the views 
obtained in these various methods, each of the 
rounded bodies may be proved to be a beautifully- 
constructed calcareous fabric, made up of a 
number of chambers, communicating freely with 
one another. The chambered bodies are of 
various forms. One of the commonest is some- 
thing like a badly-grown raspberry, being formed 
of a number of nearly globular chambers of 
different sizes congregated together. It is called 
Glohigcrina, and some specimens of chalk consist 
of little else than Glohigcrincc and granules. Let 
us fix our attention upon the Glohigcrina. It is 
the spoor of the game we are tracking. If we can 
learn what it is and what are the conditions of its 
existence, we shall see our way to the origin and 
past history of the chalk. 



8 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

A suggestion which may naturally enough pre- 
sent itself is, that these curious bodies are the 
result of some process of aggi-egation which has 
taken place in the carbonate of lime ; that, just 
as in winter, the rime on our windows simulates 
the most delicate and elegantly arborescent foliage 
— -proving that the mere mineral water may, 
under certain conditions, assume the outward 
form of organic bodies — so this mineral substance, 
carbonate of lime, hidden away in the bowels of 
the earth, has taken the shape of these chambered 
bodies. I am not raising a merely fanciful and 
unreal objection. Very learned men, in former 
days, have even entertained the notion that all the 
formed things found in rocks are of this nature ; 
and if no such conception is at present held to be 
admissible, it is because long and varied ex- 
perience has now shown that mineral matter 
never does assume the form and structure we find 
in fossils. If any one were to try to persuade 
you that an oyster-shell (which is also chiefly 
composed of carbonate of lime) had crystallized 
out of sea-water, I suppose you would laugh at 
the absurdity. Your laughter would be justified 
by the fact that all experience tends to show that 
oyster-shells are formed by the agency of oysters, 
and in no other way. And if there were no better 
reasons, we should be justified, on like grounds, 
in believing that GloUgcrina is not the product of 
anything but vital activity. 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 9 

Happily, however, better evidence in proof of 
the organic nature of the Glohigerinm than that 
of analogy is forthcoming. It so happens that 
calcareous skeletons, exactly similar to the 
Glohigerinm of the chalk, are being formed, at 
the present moment, by minute living creatures, 
which flourish in multitudes, literally more 
numerous than the sands of the sea-shore, over a 
large extent of that part of the earth's surface 
which is covered by the ocean. 

The history of the discovery of these living 
Glohigerinm, and of the part which they play in 
rock building, is singular enough. It is a 
discovery which, like others of no less scientific 
importance, has arisen, incidentally, out of work 
devoted to very different and exceedingly practical 
interests. When men first took to the sea, they 
speedily learned to look out for shoals and rocks ; 
and the more the burthen of their ships increased, 
the more imperatively necessary it became for 
sailors to ascertain with precision the depth of 
the waters they traversed. Out of this necessity 
grew the use of the lead and sounding line ; and, 
ultimately, marine-surveying, which is the re- 
cording of the form of coasts and of the depth 
of the sea, as ascertained by the sounding-lead, 
upon charts. 

At the same time, it became desirable to ascer- 
tain and to indicate the nature of the sea-bottom, 
since this circumstance greatly affects its goodness 



10 ON A PIECE OF CHALK 1 

as holding ground for anchors. Some ingenious 
tar, whose name deserves a better fate than the 
oblivion into which it has fallen, attained this 
object by "arming" the bottom of the lead with 
a lump of grease, to which more or less of the 
sand or mud, or broken shells, as the case might 
be, adhered, and was brought to the surface. But, 
however well adapted such an apparatus might 
be for rough nautical purposes, scientific accuracy 
could not be expected from the armed lead, and 
to remedy its defects (especially when applied to 
sounding in great depths) Lieut. Brooke, of the 
American Navy, some years ago invented a most 
ingenious machine, by which a considerable por- 
tion of the superficial layer of the sea-bottom can 
be scooped out and brought up from any depth to 
which the lead descends. In 1853, Lieut. Brooke 
obtained mud from the bottom of the North 
Atlantic, between Newfoundland and the Azores, 
at a depth of more than 10,000 feet, or two miles, 
by the help of this sounding apparatus. The 
specimens were sent for examination to Ehrenberg 
of Berlin, and to Bailey of West Point, and those 
able microscopists found that this deep-sea mud 
was almost entirely composed of the skeletons of 
living organisms — the greater proportion of these 
being just like the Glohigerinw already known to 
occur in the chalk. 

Thus far, the work had been carried on simply 
in the interests of science, but Lieut. Brooke's 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 11 

method of sounding acquired a high commercial 
value, when the enterprise of laying down the 
telegraph-cable between this country and the 
United States was undertaken. For it became a 
matter of immense importance to know, not only 
the depth of the sea over the whole line along 
which the cable was to be laid, but the exact 
nature of the bottom, so as to guard against 
chances of cutting or fraying the strands of that 
costly rope. The Admiralty consequently ordered 
Captain Dayman, an old friend and shipmate of 
mine, to ascertain the depth over the whole line 
of the cable, and to bring back specimens of the 
bottom. In former days, such a command as this 
might have sounded very much like one of the 
impossible things which the young Prince in the 
Fairy Tales Ls ordered to do before he can obtain 
the hand of the Princess. However, in the months 
of June and July, 1857, my friend performed the 
task assigned to him with great expedition and 
precision, without, so far as I know, having met 
with any reward of that kind. The specimens oi 
Atlantic mud which he procured were sent to me 
to be examined and reported upon.^ 



' See Appendix to Captain Dayman's Deep-sea Soundings in 
the North Atlantic Ocean between Ireland and Newfoiundland, 
madein H.M.S. "Cyclops." Published by order of the Lords 
Commissioners of the Admiralty, 1858. They have since 
formed the subject of an elaborate Memoir by Messrs. Parker 
and Jones, published in the Philosophical Transactions for 
1865. 



12 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

The result of all these operations is, that we 
know the contours and the nature of the surface- 
soil covered by the North Atlantic for a distance 
of 1,700 miles from east to west, as well as we 
know that of any part of the dry land. It is a 
prodigious plain — one of the widest and most even 
plains in the world. If the sea were drained off, 
you might drive a waggon all the way from 
Valentia, on the west coast of Ireland, to Trinity 
Bay, in Newfoundland. And, except upon one 
sharp incline about 200 miles from Valentia, I am 
not quite sure that it would even be necessary to 
put the skid on, so gentle are the ascents and 
descents upon that long route. From Valentia 
the road would lie down-hill for about 200 miles 
to the point at which the bottom is now covered 
by 1,700 fathoms of sea-water. Then would come 
the central plain, more than a thousand miles wide, 
the inequalities of the surface of which would be 
hardly perceptible, though the depth of water 
upon it now varies from 10,000 to 15,000 feet; 
and there are places in which Mont Blanc might 
be sunk without showing its peak above water. 
Beyond this, the ascent on the American side 
commences, and gradually leads, for about 300 
miles, to the Newfoundland shore. 

Almost the whole of the bottom of this central 
plain (which extends for many hundred miles in a 
north and south direction) is covered by a fine 
mud, which, when brought to the surface, dries 



1 ON A PIECE OF CHALK 13 

into a greyish white friable substance. You can 
write with this on a blackboard, if you are so 
inclined ; and, to the eye, it is quite like very soft, 
grayish chalk. Examined chemically, it proves to 
be composed almost wholly of carbonate of Hme ; 
and if you make a section of it, in the same way 
as that of the piece of chalk was made, and view 
it with the microscope, it presents innumerable 
Glohigerinm embedded in a granular matrix. Thus 
this deep-sea mud is substantially chalk. I say 
substantially, because there are a good many 
minor differences ; but as these have no bearing on 
the question immediately before us, — which is the 
nature of the GlohigerincB of the chalk, — it is un- 
necessary to speak of them. 

GlobigerincB of every size, from the smallest to 
the largest, are associated together in the Atlantic 
mud, and the chambers of many are filled by a soft 
animal matter. This soft substance is, in fact, the 
remains of the creature to which the Gldbigerina 
shell, or rather skeleton, owes its existence — and 
which is an animal of the simplest imaginable 
description. It is, in fact, a mere particle of living 
jelly, without defined parts of any kind — without 
a mouth, nerves, muscles, or distinct organs, and 
only manifesting its vitality to ordinary observa- 
tion by thrusting out and retracting from all parts of 
its surface, long filamentous processes, which serve 
for arms and legs. Yet this amorphous particle, 
devoid of everything which, in the higher animals. 



14 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

we call organs, is capable of feeding, growing, and 
multiplying ; of separating from the ocean the 
small proportion of carbonate of lime which is 
dissolved in sea-water ; and of building up that 
substance into a skeleton for itself, according to a 
pattern which can be imitated by no other known 
agency. 

The notion that animals can live and flourish in 
the sea, at the vast depths from which apparently 
living Glohigerinai have been brought up, does 
not agree very well with our usual conceptions re- 
specting the conditions of animal life ; and it is not 
, so absolutely impossible as it might at first sight 
appear to be, that the Gldbigerinm of the Atlantic 
sea-bottom do not live and die where they are 
found. 

As I have mentioned, the soundings from the 
great Atlantic plain are almost entirely made up 
of Glohigerinw, with the granules which have been 
mentioned, and some few other calcareous shells ; 
but a small percentage of the chalky mud — per- 
haps at most some five per cent, of it — is of a 
different nature, and consists of shells and skele- 
tons composed of silex, or pure flint. These 
silicious bodies belong partly to the lowly vege- 
table organisms which are called Biatomacem, and 
partly to the minute, and extremely simple, 
animals, termed Badiolaria. It is quite certain 
that these creatures do not live at the bottom of 
the ocean, but at its siu'face — ^where they may be 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 15 

obtained in prodigious numbers by the use of a 
properly constructed net. Hence it follows that 
these silicious organisms, though they are not 
heavier than the lightest dust, must have fallen, 
in some cases, through fifteen thousand feet of 
water, before they reached their final resting- 
place on the ocean floor. And considering how 
large a surface these bodies expose in proportion 
to their weight, it is probable that they occupy a 
great length of time in making their burial 
journey from the surface of the Atlantic to the 
bottom. 

But if the Eadiolaria and Diatoms are thus 
rained upon the bottom of the sea, from the 
superficial layer of its waters in which they pass 
their lives, it is obviously possible that the 
Olohigcrinw may be similarly derived ; and if they 
were so, it would be much more easy to under- 
stand how they obtain their supply of food than 
it is at present. Nevertheless, the positive and 
negative evidence all points the other way. The 
skeletons of the full-grown, deep-sea Glohigcrinm 
are so remarkably solid and heavy in proportion to 
their surface as to seem little fitted for floating ; 
and, as a matter of fact, they are not to be found 
along with the Diatoms and Badiolaria in the 
uppermost stratum of the open ocean. It has 
been observed, again, that the abundance of 
GlobigeriruB, in proportion to other organisms, of 
like kind, increases with the depth of the sea ; and 



16 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

that deep-water GldbigeriTwe are larger than those 
which live in shallower parts of the sea ; and such 
facts negative the supposition that these organisms 
have been swept by currents from the shallows 
into the deeps of the Atlantic. It therefore seems 
to be hardly doubtful that these wonderful 
creatures live and die at the depths in which they 
are found.'^ 

However, the important points for us are, that 
the living Glohigerinm are exclusively marine 
animals, the skeletons of which abound at the 
bottom of deep seas ; and that there is not a 
shadow of reason for believing that the habits of 
the GlobigeriTtce of the chalk differed from those 
of the existing species. But if this be true, there 
is no escaping the conclusion that the chalk itself 
is the dried mud of an ancient deep sea. 

In working over the soundings collected by 
Captain Dayman, I was surprised to find that 
many of what I have called the " granules '' of that 
mud were not, as one might have been tempted 

1 During the cruise of H.M.S. Bulldog, commanded by Sir 
Leopold M'Clintock, in 1860, living star-iisli were brought up, 
clinging to the lowest part of the sounding-line, from a depth 
of 1,260 fathoms, midway between Cape Farewell, in Green- 
land, and the Eockall banks. Dr. Wallich ascertained that 
the sea-bottom at this point consisted of the ordinary Globi- 
gerina ooze, and that the stomachs of the star-fishes were full 
of Globigerirue. This discovery removes all objections to the 
existence of living Glohigmnm at great depths, which are based 
upon the supposed difiiculty of maintaining animal life under 
such conditions ; and it throws the burden of proof upon those 
who object to the supposition that the Glohigeriiue live and 
die where they are found. 



I ON A PIECE OP CHALK 17 

to think at first, the mere powder and waste of 
Gldbigerinoe, but that they had a definite form and 
size. I termed these bodies " coccoliths,'' and 
doubted their organic nature. Dr. Wallich verified 
my observation, and added the interesting dis- 
covery that, not unfrequently, bodies similar to 
these '■■ coccoHths '' were aggregated together into 
spheroids, which he termed " coccosphens." So far 
as we knew, these bodies, the nature of which 
is extremely puzzling and problematical, were 
peculiar to the Atlantic soundings. But, a few 
years ago, Mr. Sorby, in making a careful examina- 
tion of the chalk by means of thin sections and 
otherwise, observed, as Ehrenberg had done before 
him, that much of its granular basis possesses a 
definite forih. Comparing these formed particles 
with those in the Atlantic soundings, he found 
the two to be identical ; and thus proved that the 
chalk, like the surroundings, contains these mys- 
terious coccoliths and coccospheres. Here was a 
further and most interesting confirmation, from 
internal evidence, of the essential identity of the 
chalk with modern deep-sea mud. Gloligerincc, 
coccoliths, and coccospheres are found as the chief 
constituents of both, and testify to the general 
similarity of the conditions under which both have 
been formed.^ 

The evidence furnished by the hewing, facing, 

^ I have recently traced oat the development of the ' ' cocco- 
liths " from a diameter of 7-Airth of an inch up to their largest 

vol/. VIII C 



18 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

and superposition of the stones of the Pyramids, 
that these structures were built by men, has no 
greater weight than the evidence that the chalk 
was built by GlohigerincB ; and the belief that 
those ancient pyramid-builders were terrestrial 
and air-breathing creatures like ourselves, is not 
better based than the conviction that the chalk- 
makers lived in the sea. But as our belief in the 
building of the Pyramids by men is not only 
grounded on the internal evidence afforded by 
these structures, but gathers strength from multi- 
tudinous collateral proofs, and is clinched by the 
total absence of any reason for a contrary belief ; 
so the evidence drawn from the Globigerinco that 
the chalk is an ancient sea-bottom, is fortified by 
innumerable independent lines of evidence ; and 
our belief in the truth of the conclusion to which 
all positive testimony tends, receives the like 
negative justification from the fact that no other 
hypothesis has a shadow of foundation. 

It may be worth while briefly to consider a few 
of these collateral proofs that the chalk was de- 
posited at the bottom of the sea. The great 
mass of the chalk is composed, as we have seen, 
of the skeletons of Glohigerinm, and other simple 
organisms, imbedded in granular matter. Here 
and there, however, this hardened mud of the 

size (which is about Tc^nnsth), and no longer doubt that they 
are produced by independent organisms, which, like the Globi- 
gerince, live and die at the bottom of the sea, 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 19 

ancient sea reveals the remains of higher animals 
which have lived and died, and left their hard 
parts in the mud, just as the oysters die and 
leave their shells behind them, in the mud of the 
present seas. 

There are, at the present day, certain groups of 
animals which are never found in fresh waters, 
being unable to live anywhere but in the sea. 
Such are the corals ; those corallines which are 
called Polyzoa ; those creatures which fabricate 
the lamp-shells, and are called Brachiopoda ; the 
pearly Nautihts, and all animals allied to it ; and 
all the forms of sea-urchins and star-fishes. Not 
only are all these creatures confined to salt water 
at the present day ; but, so far as our records of 
the past go, the conditions of their existence have 
been the same : hence, their occurrence in any 
deposit is as strong evidence as can be obtained, 
that that deposit was formed in the sea. Now 
the remains of animals of all the kinds which have 
been enumerated, occur in the chalk, in greater or 
less abundance ; while not one of those forms of 
shell-fish which are characteristic of fresh water 
has yet been observed in it. 

When we consider that the remains of more 
than three thousand distinct species of aquatic 
animals have been discovered among the fossils of 
the chalk, that the great majority of them are of 
such forms as are now met with only in the sea, 
and that there is no reason to believe that any 

c 2 



20 ON A PIKCE OF CHALK I 

one of them inhabited fresh water — the collateral 
evidence that the chalk represents an ancient sea- 
bottom acquires as great force as the proof 
derived from the nature of the chalk itself I 
think you will now allow that I did not overstate 
my case when I asserted that we have as strong 
grounds for believing that all the vast area of 
dry land, at present occupied by the chalk, was 
once at the bottom of the sea, as we have for any 
matter of history whatever; while there is no 
justification for any other belief 

No less certain it is that the time during which 
the countries we now call south-east England, 
France, Germany, Poland, Russia, Egypt, Arabia, 
Syria, were more or less completely covered by a 
deep sea, was of considerable duration. We have 
already seen that the chalk is, in places, more 
than a thousand feet thick. I think you will 
agree with me, that it must have taken some 
time for the skeletons of animalcules of a 
hundredth of an inch in diameter to heap up 
such a mass as that. I have said that through- 
out the thickness of the chalk the remains of 
other animals are scattered. These remains are 
often in the most exquisite state of preservation. 
The valves of the shell-fishes are commonly 
adherent; the long spines of some of the sea- 
urchins, which would be detached by the smallest 
jar, often remain in their places. In a word, it is 
certain that these animals have lived and died 



1 ON A PIECE OF CHALK 21 

when the place which they now occupy was the 
surface of as much of the chalk as had then been 
deposited ; and that each has been covered up by 
the layer of Glohigerina mud, upon which the 
creatures imbedded a little higher up have, in 
like manner, lived and died. But some of these 
remains prove the existence of reptiles of vast 
size in the chalk sea. These lived their time, 
and had their ancestors and descendants, which 
assuredly implies time, reptiles being of slow 
growth. 

There is more curious evidence, again, that the 
process of covering up, or, in other words, the 
deposit of Glohigerina skeletons, did not go on 
very fast. It is demonstrable that an animal of 
the cretaceous sea might die, that its skeleton 
might lie uncovered upon the sea-bottom long 
enough to lose all its outward coverings and 
appendages by putrefaction ; and that, after this 
had happened, another animal might attach itself 
to the dead and naked skeleton, might giow to 
maturity, and might itself die before the calcareous 
mud had buried the whole. 

Cases of this kind are admirably described by 
Sir Charles Lyell. He speaks of the frequency 
with which geologists find in the chalk a fossilized 
sea-urchin, to which is attached the lower valve of 
a Crania. This is a kind of shell-fish, with a shell 
composed of two pieces, of which, as in the oyster, 
one is fixed and the other free. 



22 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

" The upper valve is almost invariably wanting, 
though occasionally found in a perfect state of 
preservation in the white chalk at some distance. 
In this case, we see clearly that the sea-urchin 
first lived from youth to age, then died and lost 
its spines, which were earned away. Then the 
young Crania adhered to the bared shell, grew 
and perished in its turn ; after which, the upper 
valve was separated from the lower, before the 
Echinus became enveloped in chalky mud."^ 

A specimen in the Museum of Practical 
Geology, in London, still further prolongs the 
period which must have elapsed between the 
death of the sea-urchin, and its burial by the 
Glohigerinw. For the outward face of the valve 
of a Crania, which is attached to a sea-urchin, 
(Micraster), is itself overrun by an incrusting 
coralline, which spreads thence over more or less 
of the surface of the sea-urchin. It follows that, 
after the upper valve of the Crania fell off, the 
surface of the attached valve must have remained 
exposed long enough to allow of the growth of 
the whole coralline, since corallines do not live 
embedded in mud.^ 

The progress of knowledge may, one day, enable 
us to deduce from such facts as these the maxi- 
mum rat© at which the chalk can have ac- 
cumulated, and thus to arrive at the minimum 

' EMients of Geology, by Sir Charles Lyell, Bart. F.E.S., 
p. 23. 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 23 

duration of the chalk period. Suppose that the 
valve of the Crania upon which a coralline has 
fixed itself in the way just described, is so attached 
to the sea-urchin that no part of it is more than an 
inch above the face upon which the sea-urchin 
rests. Then, as the coralliue could not have fixed 
itself, if the Crania had been covered up with 
chalk mud, and could not have lived had itself 
been so covered, it follows, that an inch of chalk 
mud could not have accumulated within the time 
between the death and decay of the soft parts of 
the sea-urchin and the growth of the coralline to 
the full size which it has attained. If the decay 
of the soft parts of the sea-urchin ; the attachment, 
growth to maturity, and decay of the Crania ; and 
the subsequent attachment and growth of the 
coralline, took a year (which is a low estimate 
enough), the accumulation of the inch of chalk 
must have taken more than a year: and the 
deposit of a thousand feet of chalk must, conse- 
quently, have taken more than twelve thousand 
years. 

The foundation of all this calculation is, of 
course, a knowledge of the length of time the 
Crania- and the coralline needed to attain their 
full size ; and, on this head, precise knowledge is 
at present wanting. But there are circumstances 
which tend to show, that nothing like an inch of 
chalk has accumulated during the life of a Crania ; 
and, on any probable estimate of the length of 



24 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

that life, the chalk period must have had a much 
longer duration than that thus roughly assigned 
to it. 

Thus, not only is it certain that the chalk 
is the mud of an ancient sea-bottom ; but it is no 
less certain, that the chalk sea existed during an 
extremely long period, though we may not be 
prepared to give a precise estimate of the length 
of that period in years. The relative duration is 
clear, though the absolute duration may not be 
definable. The attempt to affix any precise date 
to the period at which the chalk sea began, or 
ended, its existence, is baffled by difficulties of the 
same kind. But the relative age of the cretaceous 
epoch may be determined with as great ease 
and certainty as the long duration of that epoch. 

You will have heard of the interesting dis- 
coveries recently made, in various parts of Western 
Europe, of flint implements, obviously worked into 
shape by human hands, under circumstances which 
show conclusively that man is a very ancient 
denizen of these regions. It has been proved that 
the whole populations of Europe, whose existence 
has been revealed to us in this way, consisted of 
savages, such as the Esquimaux are now ; that, in 
the country which is now France, they hunted the 
reindeer, and were famihar with the ways of the 
mammoth and the bison. The physical geography 
of France was in those days different from what it 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 25 

is now — the river Somme, for instance, having cut 
its bed a hundred feet deeper between that time 
and this ; and, it is probable, that the cKmate was 
more like that of Canada or Siberia, than that of 
Western Europe. 

The existence of these people is forgotten even 
in the traditions of the oldest historical nations. 
The name and fame of them had utterly vanished 
until a few years back ; and the amount of physical 
change which has been effected since their day 
renders it more than probable that, venerable as 
are some of the historical nations, the workers of 
the chipped flints of Hoxne or of Amiens are to 
them, as they are to us, in point of antiquity. But, 
if we assign to these hoar reHcs of long-vanished 
generations of men the greatest age that can 
possibly be claimed for them, they are not older 
than the drift, or boulder clay, which, in com- 
parison with the chalk, is but a very juvenile 
deposit. You need go no further than your own 
sea-board for evidence of this fact. At one of the 
most charming spots on the coast of Norfolk, 
Cromer, you will se.e the boulder clay forming a 
vast mass, which lies upon the chalk, and must 
consequently have come into existence after it. 
Huge boulders of chalk are, in fact, included in 
the clay, and have evidently been brought to the 
position they now occupy by the same agency as 
that which has planted blocks of syenite from 
Norway side by side with them. 



26 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

The chalk, then, is certainly older than the 
boulder clay. If you ask how much, I will again 
take you no further than the same spot upon your 
own coasts for evidence. I have spoken of the 
boulder clay and drift as resting upon the chalk. 
That is not strictly true. Interposed between the 
chalk and the drift is a comparatively insignifi- 
cant layer, containing vegetable matter. But that 
layer tells a wonderful history. It is full of stumps 
of trees standing as they grew. Fir-trees are there 
with their cones, and hazel-bushes with their 
nuts ; there stand the stools of oak and yew trees, 
beeches and alders. Hence this stratum is appro- 
priately called the " forest-bed." 

It is obvious that the chalk must have been 
upheaved and converted into dry land, before the 
timber trees could grow upon it. As the bolls of 
some of these trees are from two to three feet in 
diameter, it is no less clear that the dry land thus 
formed remained in the same condition for long 
ages. And not only do the remains of stately 
oaks and well-grown firs testify to the duration of 
this condition of things, but additional evidence to 
the same effect is afforded by the abundant re- 
mains of elephants, rhinoceroses, hippopotamuses, 
and other gi-eat wild beasts, which it has yielded 
to the zealous search of such men as the Eev. Mr. 
Gunn. When you look at such a collection as he 
has formed, and bethink you that these elephan- 
tine bones did veritably carry their owners about. 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 27 

and these great grinders crunch, in the dark woods 
of which the forest-bed is now the only trace, it is 
impossible not to feel that they are as good 
evidence of the lapse of time as the annual rings 
of the tree stumps. 

Thus there is a writing upon the wall of cliffs 
at Cromer, and whoso runs may read it. It tells 
us, with an authority which cannot be impeached, 
that the ancient sea-bed of the chalk sea was 
raised up, and remained dry land, until it was 
covered with forest, stocked with the great game the 
spoils of which have rejoiced your geologists. How 
long it remained in that condition cannot be said ; 
but " the whirligig of time brought its revenges " 
in those days as in these. That dry land, with 
the bones and teeth of generations of long-lived 
elephants, hidden away among the gnarled roots 
and dry leaves of its ancient trees, sank gradually 
to the bottom of the icy sea, which covered it with 
huge masses of drift and boulder clay. Sea-beasts, 
such as the walrus, now restricted to the extreme 
north, paddled about where birds had twittered 
among the topmost twigs of the fir-trees. How 
long this state of things endured we know not, 
but at length it came to an end. The upheaved 
glacial mud hardened into the soil of modern 
Norfolk. Forests grew once more, the wolf and 
the beaver replaced the reindeer and the elephant ; 
and at length what we call the history of England 
dawned. 

Thus you have, within the limits of your own 



28 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

county, proof that the chalk can justly claim a 
very much greater antiquity than even the oldest 
physical traces of mankind. But we may go fur- 
ther and demonstrate, by evidence of the same 
authority as that which testifies to the existence 
of the. father of men, that the chalk is vastly older 
than Adam himself. The Book of Genesis informs 
us that Adam, immediately upon his creation, and 
before the appearance of Eve, was placed in the 
Garden of Eden. The problem of the geographical 
position of Eden has greatly vexed the spirits of 
the learned in such matters, but there is one 
point respecting which, so far as I know, no com- 
mentator has ever raised a doubt. This is, that 
of the four rivers which are said to run out of it, 
Euphrates and Hiddekel are identical with the 
rivers now known by the names of Euphrates and 
Tigris. But the whole country in which these 
mighty rivers take their origin, and through 
which they run, is composed of rocks which are 
either of the same age as the chalk, or of later 
date. So that the chalk must not only have been 
formed, but, after its formation, the time required 
for the deposit of these later rocks, and for then- 
upheaval into dry land, must have elapsed, before 
the smallest brook which feeds the swift stream 
of " the great river, the river of Babylon,'' began 
to flow. 

Thus, evidence which cannot be rebutted, and 
which need not be strengthened, though if time 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 29 

permitted I might indefinitely increase its quantity, 
compels you to believe that the earth, from the 
time of the chalk to the present day, has been the 
theatre of a series of changes as vast in their 
amount, as they were slow in their progress. The 
area on which we stand has been first sea and 
then land, for at least four alternations ; and has 
remained in each of these conditions for a period 
of great length. 

Nor have these wonderful metamorphoses of sea 
into land, and of land into sea, been confined to one 
corner of England. During the chalk period, or 
" cretaceous epoch," not one of the present great 
physical features of the globe was in existence. 
Our great mountain ranges, Pyrenees, Alps, 
Himalayas, Andes, have all been upheaved since 
the chalk was deposited, and the cretaceous sea 
flowed over the sites of Sinai and Ararat. All 
this is certain, because rocks of cretaceous, or still 
later, date have shared in the elevatory movements 
which gave rise to these mountain chains; and 
may be found perched up, in some cases, many 
thousand feet high upon their flanks. And evi- 
dence of equal cogency demonstrates that, though, 
in Norfolk, the forest-bed rests directly upon the 
chalk, yet it does so, not because the period at 
which the forest grew immediately followed that 
at which the chalk was formed, but because an 
immense lapse of time, represented elsewhere by 
thousands of feet of rock, is not indicated at Cromer. 



30 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

I must ask you to believe that there is no less 
conclusive proof that a still more prolonged suc- 
cession of similar changes occurred, before the 
chalk was deposited. Nor have we any reason to 
think that the first term in the series of these 
changes is known. The oldest sea-beds preserved 
to us are sands, and mud, and pebbles, the wear 
and tear of rocks which were formed in still older 
oceans. 

But, great as is the magnitude of these physical 
changes of the world, they have been accompanied 
by a no less striking series of modifications in its 
living inhabitants. All the great classes of 
animals, beasts of the field, fowls of the air, 
creeping things, and things which dwell in the 
waters, flourished upon the globe long ages before 
the chalk was deposited. Very few, however, if 
any, of these ancient forms of animal life were 
identical with those which now live. Certainly 
not one of the higher animals was of the same 
species as any of those now in existence. The 
beasts of the field, in the days before the chalk, 
were not our beasts of the field, nor the fowls of 
the air such as those which the eye of men has 
seen flying, unless his antiquity dates infinitely 
further back than we at present surmise. If we 
could be carried back into those times, we should 
be as one suddenly set down in Australia before it 
was colonized. We should see mammals, birds, 
reptiles, fishes, insects, snails, and the like, clearly 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 31 

recognizable as such, and yet not one of them 
would be just the same as those with which we 
are familiar, and many, would be extremely 
different. 

From that time to the present, the population 
of the world has undergone slow and gradual, but 
incessant, changes. There has been no grand 
catastrophe — no destroyer has swept away the 
forms of life of one period, and replaced them by 
a totally new creation : but one species has 
vanished and another has taken its place ; 
creatures of one type of structure have diminished, 
those of another have increased, as time has 
passed on. And thus, while the differences be- 
tween the living creatures of the time before the 
chalk and those of the present day appear 
startling, if placed side by side, we are led from 
one to the other by the most gradual progress, if 
we follow the course of Nature through the 
whole series of those relics of her operations which 
she has left behind. It is by the population of 
the chalk sea that the ancient and the modern 
inhabitants of the world are most completely con- 
nected. The groups which are dying out flourish, 
side by side, with the groups which are now the 
dominant forms of life. Thus the chalk contains 
remains of those strange flying and swimming 
reptiles, the pterodactyl, the ichthyosaurus, and 
the plesiosaurus, which are found in no later 
deposits, but abounded in preceding ages. The 



32 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

chambered shells called ammonites and belemnites, 
which are so characteristic of the period pre- 
ceding the cretaceous, in like manner die with it. 

But, amongst these fading remainders of a 
previous state of things, are some very modem 
forms of life, looking like Yankee pedlars among 
a tribe of Red Indians. Crocodiles of modern 
type appear; bony fishes, many of them very 
similar to existing species, almost supplant the 
forms of fish which predominate in more ancient 
seas; and many kinds of hving shell-fish first 
become known to us in the chalk. The vegetation 
acquires a modem aspect. A few living animals 
are not even distinguishable as species, from those 
which existed at that remote epoch. The Globi- 
gerina of the present day, for example, is not 
different specifically from that of the chalk ; and 
the same may be said of many other Foraminifera. 
I think it probable that critical and unprejudiced 
examination will show that more than one species 
of much higher animals have had a similar lon- 
gevity; but the only example which I can at 
present give confidently is the snake's-head lamp- 
shell (Terebrahdina caput scrpentis), which lives in 
our English seas and abounded (as Terebratulina 
striata of authors) in the chalk. 

The longest line of human ancestry must hide 
its diminished head before the pedigree of this 
insignificant shell-fish. We Englishmen are proud 
to have an ancestor who was present at the 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 33 

Battle of Hastings. The ancestors of Terebratulina 
cwput serpentis may have been present at a battle 
of Ichthyosauria in that part of the sea which, 
when the chalk was forming, flowed over the site 
of Hastings. While all around has changed, this 
Terebratulina has peacefully propagated its species 
from generation to generation, and stands to this 
day, as a living testimony to the continuity of the 
present with the past history of the globe. 

Up to this moment I have stated, so far as I 
know, nothing but well-authenticated facts, and 
the immediate conclusions which they force upon 
the mind. But the mind is so constituted that it 
does not willingly rest in facts and immediate 
causes, but seeks always after a knowledge of the 
remoter links in the chain of causation. 

Taking the many changes of any given spot of 
the earth's surface, from sea to land and from land 
to sea, as an established fact, we cannot refrain 
from asking ourselves how these changes have 
occurred. And when we have explained them — 
as they must be explained — by the alternate slow 
movements of elevation and depression which 
have affected the crust of the earth, we go still 
farther back, and ask, Why these movements ? 

I am not certain that any one can give you a 
satisfactory answer to that question. Assuredly I 
cannot. All that can be said, for certain, is, that 
such movements are part of the ordinary course 

VOL. VIII D 



34 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

of nature, inasmuch as they are going on at the 
present time. Direct proof may be given, that 
some parts of the land of the northern hemisphere 
are at this moment insensibly rising and others 
insensibly sinking ; and there is indirect, but per- 
fectly satisfactory, proof, that an enormous area 
now covered by the Pacific has been deepened 
thousands of feet, since the present inhabitants of 
that sea came into existence. Thus there is not 
a shadow of a reason for believing that the 
physical changes of the globe, in past times, have 
been effected by other than natural causes. Is 
there any more reason for beheving that the con- 
comitant modifications in the forms of the living 
inhabitants of the globe have been brought about 
in other ways ? 

Before attempting to answer this question, let 
us try to form a distinct mental picture of what 
has happened in some special case. The crocodiles 
are animals which, as a group, have a very vast 
antiquity. They abounded ages before the chalk 
was deposited ; they throng the rivers in warm 
climates, at the present day. There is a difference 
in the form of the joints of the back-bone, and in 
some minor particulars, between the crocodiles of 
the present epoch and those which hved before 
the chalk ; but, in the cretaceous epoch, as I have 
already mentioned, the crocodiles had assumed 
the modern type of structure. Notwithstand- 
ing this, the crocodiles of the chalk are not 



I ON A PIECE OF CHALK 35 

identically the same as those which lived in the 
times called " older tertiary," which succeeded the 
cretaceous epoch ; and the crocodiles of the older 
tertiaries are not identical with those of the 
newer tertiaries, nor are these identical with 
existing forms. I leave open the question whether 
particular species may have lived on from epoch 
to epoch. But each epoch has had its peculiar 
crocodiles; though all, since the chalk, have 
belonged to the modern type, and differ simply in 
their proportions, and in such stnictural particulars 
as are discernible only to trained eyes. 

How is the existence of this long succession of 
different species of crocodiles to be accounted for ? 
Only two suppositions seem to be open to us— 
Either each species of crocodile has been specially 
created, or it has arisen out of some pre-existing 
form by the operation of natural causes. Choose 
your hypothesis ; I have chosen mine. I can find 
no warranty for believing in the distinct creation 
of a score of successive species of crocodiles in the 
course of countless ages of time. Science gives 
no countenance to such a wild fancy ; nor can 
even the perverse ingenuity of a commentator 
pretend to discover this sense, in the simple words 
in which the writer of Genesis records the pro- 
ceedings of the fifth and six days of the Creation. 

On the other hand, I see no good reason for 
doubting the necessary alternative, that aU these 
varied species have been evolved from pre-existing 

D 2 



36 ON A PIECE OF CHALK I 

crocodilian forms, by the operation of causes as 
completely a part of the common order of nature 
as those which have effected the changes of the 
inorganic world. Few will venture to affirm that 
the reasoning which applies to crocodiles loses its 
force among other animals, or among plants. If 
one series of species has come into existence by 
the operation of natural causes, it seems folly to 
deny that all may have arisen in the same way. 

A small beginning has led us to a great ending. 
If I were to put the bit of chalk with which we 
started into the hot but obscure flame of burning 
hydrogen, it would presently shine like the sun. 
It seems to me that this physical metamorphosis 
is no false image of what has been the result of 
our subjecting it to a jet of fervent, though no- 
wise brilliant, thought to-night. It has become 
luminous, and its clear rays, penetrating the abyss 
of the remote past, have brought within our ken 
some stages of the evolution of the earth. And 
in the shifting " without haste, but without rest " 
of the land and sea, as in the endless variation of 
the forms assumed by living beings, we have 
observed nothing but the natural product of the 
forces originally possessed by the substance of the 
universe. 



II 

THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 

[1873] 

On the 21st of December, 1872, H.M.S. Challenger, &i^ 
eighteen gun corvette, of 2,000 tons burden, sailed 
from Portsmouth harbour for a three, or perhaps four, 
years' cruise. No man-of-war ever left that famous 
port before with so singular an equipment. Two of 
the eighteen sixty-eight pounders of the Challenger's 
armament remained to enable her to speak with 
effect to sea-rovers, haply devoid of any respect 
for science, in the remote seas for which she is 
bound ; but the main-deck was, for the most part, 
stripped of its war-like gear, and fitted up with 
physical, chemical, and biological laboratories; 
photography had its dark cabin ; while apparatus 
for dredging, trawling, and sounding ; for photo- 
meters and for thermometers, filled the space 
formerly occupied by guns and gun-tackle, pistols 
and cutlasses. 



38 THE PEOBLEMS OP THE DEEP SEA II 

The crew of the Challenger match her fittings. 
Captain Nares, his officers and men, are ready to 
look after the interests of hydrography, work the 
ship, and, if need be, fight her as seamen should ; 
while there is a staff of scientific civilians, under 
the general direction of Dr. Wjrville Thomson, 
F.E.S. (Professor of Natural History in Edinburgh 
University by rights, but at present detached for 
duty in partibus), whose business it is to turn all 
the wonderfully packed stores of appliances to 
account, and to accumulate, before the ship returns 
to England, such additions to natural knowledge 
as shall justify the labour and cost involved in the 
fitting out and maintenance of the expedition. 

Under the able and zealous superintendence of 
the Hydrographer, Admiral Richards, every pre- 
caution which experience and forethought could 
devise has been taken to provide the expedition 
with the material conditions of success; and it 
would seem as if nothing short of wreck or pesti- 
lence, both most improbable contingencies, could 
prevent the Challenger from doing splendid work, 
and opening up a new era in the history of scien- 
tific voyages. 

The dispatch of this expedition is the culmina- 
tion of a series of such enterprises, gradually in- 
creasing in magnitude and importance, which the 
Admiralty, greatly to its credit, has carried out for 
some years past ; and the history of which is given 
by Dr. Wyville Thomson in the beautifully illus- 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 39 

trated volume entitled " The Depths of the Sea," 
published since his departure. 

" In the spring of the year 1868, my friend Dr. "W. B. Car- 
penter, at that time one of the Vice-Presidents of the Royal 
Society, was with me in Ireland, where we were working out 
together the structure and development of the Crinoids. I had 
long previously had a profound conviction that the land of 
promise for the naturalist, the only remaining region where 
there were endless novelties of extraordinary interest ready to 
the hand which had the means of gathering them, was the 
hottom of the deep sea. I had even had a glimpse of some of 
these treasures, for I had seen, the year before, with Prof. Sars, 
the forms which I have already mentioned dredged by his son 
at a depth of -300 to 400 fathoms off the Loffoten Islands. I 
propounded my views to my fellow-labourer, and we discussed 
the subject many times over our microscopes. I strongly urged 
Dr. Carpenter to use his influence at head-quai-tei's to induce the 
Admiralty, probably through the Council of the Royal Society, 
to give us the use of a vessel properly fitted with dredging gear 
and all necessary scientific apparatus, that many heavy questions 
as to the state of things in the depths of the ocean, which were 
still in a state of uncertainty, might be definitely settled. 
After full consideration, Dr. Carpenter i)romised his hearty co- 
operation, and we agreed that I should write to him on his 
return to London, indicating generally the results which I an- 
ticipated, and sketching out what I conceived to be a promising 
line of inquiry. The Council of the Royal Society warmly 
supported the proposal ; and I give here in chronological order 
the short and eminently satisfactoiy correspondence which led 
to the Admiralty placing at the disposal of Dr. Carpenter and 
myself the gunboat Lightning, under the command of Staff- 
Commander May, R.N., in the summer of 1868, for a trial 
cruise to the North of Scotland, and afterwards to the much 
wider surveys in H.M.S. Porcupine, Captain Calver, R.N., 
which were made with the additional association of Mr. Gwyn 
Jeffreys, in the summers of the 3'oars 1869 and 1870." ^ 

1 The Depths of the Sea, pp. 49-50. 



40 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA II 

Plain men may be puzzled to understand why 
Dr. Wyville Thomson, not being a cynic, should 
relegate the " Land of Promise " to the bottom of 
the deep sea ; they may still more wonder what 
mamaer of " milk and honey " the Challenger 
expects to find; and their perplexity may well 
rise to its maximum, when they seek to divine the 
manner in which that milk and honey are to be 
got out of so inaccessible a Canaan. I will, there- 
fore, endeavour to give some answer to these 
questions in an order the reverse of that in which 
I have stated them. 

Apart from hooks, and lines, and ordinary nets, 
fishermen have, from time immemorial, made use 
of two kinds of implements for getting at sea- 
creatures which live beyond tide-marks — these are 
the " dredge " and the " trawl." The dredge is 
used by oyster-fishermen. Imagine a large bag, 
the mouth of which has the shape of an elongated 
parallelogram, and is fastened to an iron frame of 
the same shape, the two long sides of this rim 
being fashioned into scrapers. Chains attach the 
ends of the frame to a stout rope, so that when 
the bag is dragged along by the rope the edge of one 
of the scrapers rests on the ground, and scrapes 
whatever it touches into the bag. The oyster- 
dredger takes one of these machines in his boat, 
and when he has reached the oyster-bed the 
dredge is tossed overboard ; as soon as it has sunk 
to the bottom the rope is paid out sufficiently 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 41 

to prevent it from pulling the dredge directly 
upwards, and is then made fast while the boat 
goes ahead. The dredge is thus dragged along 
and scrapes oysters and other sea-animals and 
plants, stones, and mud into the bag. When the 
dredger judges it to be full he hauls it up, picks 
out the oysters, throws the rest overboard, and 
begins again. 

Dredging in shallow water, say ten to twenty 
fathoms, is an easy operation enough ; but the 
deeper the dredger goes, the heavier must be his 
vessel, and the stouter his tackle, while the opera- 
tion of hauling up becomes more and more 
laborious. Dredging in 150 fathoms is very hard 
work, if it has to be carried on by manual labour ; 
but by the use of the donkey-engine to supply 
power ,1 and of the contrivances known as " accumu- 
lators," to diminish the risk of snapping the dredge 
rope by the rolUng and pitching of the vessel, the 
dredge has been worked deeper and deeper, until 
at last, on the 22nd of July, 1869, H.M.S. Porcupine 
being in the Bay of Biscay, Captain Calver, her 
commander, performed the unprecedented feat of 
dredging in 2,435 fathoms, or 14,610 feet, a depth 

' The emotional side of the scientific nature has its singi^lari- 
ties. Many per.sons will call to mind a certain philosopher's 
tenderness over his watch — "the little creature" — which was 
so singularly lost and found again. But Dr. Wyville Thomson 
surpasses the owner of the watch in his loving-kindness towards 
a donkey-engine. "This little engine was the comfort of our 
lives. Once or twice it was oversti-ained, and then we pitied the 
mlling little thing, panting like an overtaxed horse. " 



42 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA n 

nearly equal to the height of Mont Blanc. The 
dredge " was rapidly hauled on deck at one o'clock 
in the morning of the 23rd, after an absence of 
7| hours, and a journey of upwards of eight statute 
miles," with a hundred weight and a half of solid 
contents. 

The trawl is a sort of net for catching those fish 
which habitually live at the bottom of the sea, 
such as soles, plaice, turbot, and gumett. The 
mouth of the net may be thirty or forty feet wide, 
and one edge of its mouth is fastened to a beam 
of wood of the same length. The two ends of the 
beam are supported by curved pieces of iron, 
which raise the beam and the edge of the net 
which is fastened to it, for a short distance, while 
the other edge of the mouth of the net trails upon 
the ground. The closed end of the net has the 
form of a great pouch; and, as the beam is 
dragged along, the fish, roused fi:om the bottom 
by the sweeping of the net, readily pass into its 
mouth and accumulate in the pouch at its end. 
After drifting with the tide for six or seven hours 
the trawl is hauled up, the marketable fish are 
picked out, the others thrown away, and the trawl 
sent overboard for another operation. 

More than a thousand sail of well-found trawlers 
are constantly engaged in sweeping the seas 
around our coast in this way, and it is to them 
that we owe a very large proportion of our supply 
of fish. The difiiculty of trawling, Hke that of 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 43 

dredging, rapidly increases with the depth at 
which the operation is performed ; and, until the 
other day, it is probable that trawHng at so great 
a depth as 100 fathoms was something unheard of. 
But the first news from the Challenger opens up 
new possibilities for the trawL 

Dr. WyviUe Thomson writes (" Nature," March 
20, 1873) :— 

"For the firet two or three hauls in veiy deep water off the 
coast of Portugal, the dredge came up filled with the usual 
'Atlantic ooze,' tenacious and uniform throughout, and the 
work of hours, in sifting, gave the very smallest possible result. 
We were extremely anxious to get some idea of the general 
character of the Fauna, and particularly of the distiibution of 
the higher groups ; and after various suggestions for modification 
of the dredge, it was proposed to try the oi-dinary trawL We 
had a compact trawl, with a 15-feet beam, on board, and we 
sent it down off Cape St. Vincent at a depth of 600 fathoms. 
The experiment looked hazardous, but, to our gi'eat satisfaction, 
the trawl came up all right and contained, with many of the 
larger invertebrata, several fishes. . . . After the first attempt 
we tried the trawl several times at depths of 1090, 1525, and, 
finally, 2125 fathoms, and always with success." 

To the coral-fishers of the Mediterranean, who 
seek the precious red coral, which grows firmly 
fixed to rocks at a depth of sixty to eighty 
fathoms, both the dredge and the trawl would be 
useless. They, therefore, have recourse to a sort 
of frame, to which are fastened long bundles of 
loosely netted hempen cord, and which is lowered 
by a rope to the depth at which the hempen cords 
can sweep over the surface of the rocks and break 



44 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA n 

off the coral, which is brought up entangled in the 
cords. A similar contrivance has arisen out of the 
necessities of deep-sea exploration. 

In the course of the dredging of the Porcupine, 
it was frequently found that, while few objects of 
interest were brought up within the dredge, many 
living creatures came up sticking to the outside of 
the dredge-bag, and even to the first few fathoms 
of the dredge-rope. The mouth of the dredge 
doubtless rapidly filled with mud, and thus the 
things it should have brought up were shut out. 
To remedy this inconvenience Captain Calver 
devised an arrangement not unlike that employed 
by the coral-fishers. He fastened half a dozen 
swabs, such as are used for dr3dng decks, to the 
dredge. A swab is something like what a birch- 
broom would be if its twigs were made of long, 
coarse, hempen yarns. These dragged along after 
the dredge over the surface of the mud, and en- 
tangled the creatures living there — ^multitudes of 
which, twisted up in the strands of the swabs, 
were brought to the surface with the dredge. A 
further improvement was made by attaching a 
long iron bar to the bottom of the dredge bag, and 
fastening large bunches of teased-out hemp to the 
end of this bar. These "tangles" bring up 
immense quantities of such animals as have long 
arms, or spines, or prominences which readily 
become caught in the hemp, but they are very 
destructive to the fragile organisms which they 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 45 

imprison ; and, now that the trawl can be success- 
fully worked at the greatest depths, it may be 
expected to supersede them ; at least, wherever 
the ground is soft enough to permit of trawHng. 

It is obvious that between the dredge, the trawl, 
and the tangles, there is Kttle chance for any 
organism, except such as are able to burrow 
rapidly, to remain safely at the bottom of any part 
of the sea which the Clmllenger undertakes to 
explore. And, for the first time in the history of 
scientific exploration, we have a fair chance of learn- 
ing what the population of the depths of the sea is 
like in the most widely different parts of the world. 

And now arises the next question. The means 
of exploration being fairly adequate, what forms 
of life may be looked for at these vast depths ? 

The systematic study of the Distribution of 
living beings is the most modem branch of Biolo- 
gical Science, and came into existence long after 
Morphology and Physiology had attained a con- 
siderable development. This naturally does not 
imply that, fi'om the time men began to observe 
natural phenomena, they were ignorant of the fact 
that the animals and plants of one part of the 
world are different fi'om those in other regions ; or 
that those of the hills are different firom those of 
the plains in the same region; or finally that 
some marine creatures are found only in the 
shallows, while others inhabit the deeps. Never- 
theless, it was only after the discovery of America 



46 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA n 

that the attention of naturahsts was powerfully 
drawn to the wonderful differences between the 
animal population of the central and southern 
parts of the new woi:ld and that of those parts of 
the old world which lie under the same parallels of 
latitude. So far back as 1667 Abraham Mylius, 
in his treatise " De Animalium origine et migratione 
populorum," argues that, since there are innumer- 
able species of animals in America which do not 
exist elsewhere, they must have been made and 
placed there by the Deity : Buffon no less forcibly 
insists upon the difference between the Faunae of 
the old and new world. But the first attempt to 
gather facts of this order into a whole, and to co- 
ordinate them into a series of generalizations, or 
laws of Geographical Distribution, is not a century 
old, and is contained in the " Specimen Zoologiae 
Geographicae Quadrupedum Doifticilia et Migra- 
tiones sistens," published, in 1777, by the learned 
Brunswick Professor, Eberhard Zimmermann, who 
illustrates his work by what he calls a " Tabula 
Zoographica," which is the oldest distributional 
map known to me. 

In regard to matters of fact, Zimmermann's 
chief aim is to show that among terrestrial 
mammals, some occur all over the world, while 
others are restricted to particular areas of greater 
or smaller extent ; and that the abundance of 
species follows temperature, being greatest in warm 
and least in cold climates. But marine animals. 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 47 

he thinks, obey no such law. The Arctic and 
Atlantic seas, he says, are as full of fishes and 
other animals as those of the tropics. It is, there- 
fore, clear that cold does not affect the dwellers 
in the sea as it does land animals, and that this 
inust be the case follows from the fact that sea 
water, "propter varias quas continet bituminis 
spiritusque particulas," fi-eezes with much more 
difficulty than fresh water. On the other hand, 
the heat of the Equatorial sun penetrates but a 
short distance below the surface of the ocean. 
Moreover, according to Zimmermann, the incessant 
disturbance of the mass of the sea by winds and 
tides, so mixes up the warm and the cold that 
hfe is evenly diffused and abundant throughout 
the ocean. 

In 1810, Risso, in his work on the Ichthyology 
of Nice, laid the foundation of what has since been 
termed '' bathymetrical " distribution, or distribu- 
tion in depth, by showing that regions of the sea 
bottom of different depths could be distinguished 
by the fishes which inhabit them. There was the 
littoral region between tide marks with its sand- 
eels, pipe fishes, and blennies : the seaweed region, 
extending from lowwater-mark to a depth of 450 
feet, with its wrasses, rays, and flat fish ; and the 
deep-sea region, from 450 feet to 1500 feet or more, 
with its file-fish, sharks, gurnards, cod, and sword- 
fish. 

More than twenty years later, MM. Audouin and 



48 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA n 

Milne Edwards carried out the principle of distin- 
guishing the Faunae of different zones of depth 
much more minutely, in their " Eecherches pour 
servir k I'Histoire NatureUe du Littoral de la 
France," pubhshed in 1832. 

They divide the area included between high- 
water-mark and lowwater-mark of spring tides 
(which is very extensive, on account of the great 
rise and fall of the tide on the Normandy coast 
about St. Malo, where their observations were 
made) into four zones, each characterized by its 
peculiar invertebrate inhabitants. Beyond the 
fourth region they distinguish a fifth, which is 
never uncovered, and is inhabited by oysters, 
scallops, and large starfishes and other animals. 
Beyond this they seem to think that animal life 
is absent.^ 

Audouin and Milne Edwards were the first to 
see the importance of the bearing of a knowledge 
of the manner in which marine animals are 
distributed in depth, on geology. They suggest 
that, by this means, it wiU be possible to judge 
whether a fossiliferous stratum was formed upon 
the shore of an ancient sea, and even to determine 
whether it was deposited in shallower or deeper 
water on that shore ; the association of shells of 
animals which live in different zones of depth will 

^ ' ' Enfin plus bas encore, c'est-k-dire alors loin des c8tes, le 
fond des eaux ne paralt plus gtre habite, du moins dans nos 
mers, par auciin de ces animaux" (1. c. torn. i. p. 237). The 
" ces animaux " leaves the meaning of the authors doubtful. 



H THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 49 

prove that the shells have been transported into 
the position in which they are found ; while, on 
the other hand, the absence of shells in a deposit 
will not justify the conclusion that the waters in 
which it was formed were devoid of animal in- 
habitants, inasmuch as they might have been only 
too deep for habitation. 

The new line of investigation thus opened by 
the French naturalists was followed up by the 
Norwegian, Sars, in 1835, by Edward Forbes, in 
our own country, in 1840,^ and by (Ersted, in 
Denmark, a few years later. The genius of 
Forbes, combined with his extensive knowledge of 
botany, invertebrate zoology, and geology, enabled 
him to do more than any of his compeers, in 
bringing the importance of distribution in depth 
into notice ; and his researches in the JEgean Sea, 

^ In the paper in the Memoirs of the Survey cited further on, 
Forbes writes ; — 

"In an essay 'On the Association of MoUusca on the 
British Coasts, considered with reference to Pleistocene 
Geology,' printed in [the Edinburgh Academic AnmiMlior] 1840, 
I described the molhisca, as distributed on our shores and seas, 
in four great zones or regions, usually denominated ' The Lit- 
toral Zone,' 'The region of Laminarias, ' 'The region of Coral- 
lines,' and 'The region of Coials.' An extensive series of 
researches, chiefly conducted by the members of the committee 
appointed by the British Association to investigate the marine 
geology of Britain by means of the dredge, have not invalidated 
this classification, and the researches of Professor Loven, in the 
Norwegian and Lapland seas, have borne out their correctness. 
The first two of the regions above mentioned had been previ- 
ously noticed by Lamouroux, in his account of the distribution 
(vertically) of sea-weeds, by Audouin and Milne Edwards in 
their Observations on the Natural History of the coast of France, 
and by Sars in the preface to Iris Bcshrivelser og Jagttagelser." 

VOL. VIII E 



50 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA II 

and still more his remarkable paper " On the Geo- 
logical Relations of the existing Fauna and Flora of 
the British Isles," published in 1846, in the first 
volume of the " Memoirs of the Geological Survey 
of Great Britain," attracted universal attention. 

On the coasts of the British Islands, Forbes 
distinguishes four zones or regions, the Littoral 
(between tide marks), the Laminarian (between 
lowwater-mark and 15 fathoms), the Coralline 
(from 15 to 50 fathoms), and the Deep sea 
or Coral region (from 50 fathoms to beyond 100 
fathoms). But, in the deeper waters of the Mgean 
Sea, between the shore and a depth of 300 
fathoms, Forbes was able to make out no fewer 
than eight zones of life, in the course of which the 
number and variety of forms gradually diminished ; 
until, beyond 300 fathoms, life disappeared alto- 
gether. Hence it appeared as if descent in the 
sea had much the same effect on life, as ascent 
on land. Recent investigations appear to show 
that Forbes was right enough in his classification 
of the facts of distribution in depth as they are to 
be observed in the Mgean ; and though, at the 
time he wrote, one or two observations were 
extant which might have warned him not to 
generalize too extensively from his ^gean ex- 
perience, his own dredging work was so much 
more extensive and systematic than that of any 
other naturalist, that it is not wonderful he should 
have felt justified in building upon it. Never- 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 51 

theless, so far as the limit of the range of life in 
depth goes, Forbes' conclusion has been completely 
negatived, and the greatest depths yet attained 
show not even an approach to a " zero of life " : — 

"During the several cruises of H.M. ships Lightning and 
Pormpiiie in the years 1868, 1869, and 1870," says Dr. Wyville 
Thomson, " fifty-seven hauls of the dredge were taken in the 
Atlantic at depths beyond 500 fathoms, and sixteen at depths 
beyond 1,000 fathoms, and, in all cases, life was abundant. In 
1869, we took two casts in depths greater than 2,000 fathoms. 
In both of these life was abundant ; and with the deepest cast, 
2,435 fathoms, off the mouth of the Bay of Biscay, we took 
living, well-marked and characteiistic examples of all the five 
invertebrate sub-kingdoms. And thus the question of the 
existence of abundant animal life at the bottom of the sea has 
been finally settled and for all depths, for there is no reason 
to suppose that the depth anywhere exceeds between three and 
four thousand fathoms ; and if there be nothing in the condi- 
tions of a depth of 2,500 fathoms to prevent the full develop- 
ment of a varied Fauna, it is impossible to suppose that even an 
additional thousand fathoms would make any great difference."' 

As Dr. Wyville Thomson's recent letter, cited 

above, shows, the use of the trawl, at great depths, 

has brought to light a still greater diversity of life. 

Fishes came up from a depth of 600 to more than 

' The Depths of the Sea, p. 30. Kesults of a similar kind, 
obtained by previous observere, are stated at length in the sixth 
chapter, pp. 267-280. The dredgings earned out by Count 
Pourtales, under the authority of Professor Peirce, the Super- 
intendent of the United States Coast Survey, in the years 
1867, 1868, and 1869, are particularly noteworthy, and it is 
probably not too much to say, in the words of Professor 
Agassiz, "that we owe to the coast survey the first broad aud 
comprehensive basis for an exploration of the sea bottom on a 
large scale, opening a new era in zoological and geological 
research. " 

E 2 



52 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA ii 

1,000 fathoms, all " in a peculiar condition from 
the expansion of the air contained in their bodies. 
On their relief from the extreme pressure, their 
eyes, especially, had a singular appearance, pro- 
truding like great globes from their- heads." 
Bivalve and univalve moUusca seem to be rare at 
the greatest depths; but starfishes, sea urchins, 
and other echinoderms, zoophytes, sponges, and 
protozoa abound. 

It is obvious that the Gliallengcr has the 
privilege of opening a new chapter in the history 
of the living world. She cannot send down her 
dredges and her trawls into these virgin depths of 
the great ocean without bringing up a discovery. 
Even though the thing itself may be neither 
" rich nor rare," the fact that it came from that 
depth, in that particular latitude and longitude, 
will be a new fact in distribution, and, as such, 
have a certain importance. 

But it may be confidently assumed that the 
things brought up will very frequently be zoo- 
logical novelties; or, better still, zoological 
antiquities, which, in the tranquil and little- 
changed depths of the ocean, have escaped the 
causes of destruction at work in the shallows, and 
represent the predominant population of a past 
age. 

It has been seen that Audouin and Milne 
Edwards foresaw the general influence of the 
study of distribution in depth upon the interpreta- 



II THE PEOBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 53 

tion of geological phenomena. Forbes connected 
the two orders of inquiry still more closely ; and 
in the thoughtful essay " On the connection be- 
tween the distribution of the existing Fauna and 
Flora of the British Isles, and the geological 
changes which have affected their area, especially 
during the epoch of the Northern drift," to which 
reference has already been made, he put forth a 
most pregnant suggestion. 

In certain parts of the sea bottom in the imme- 
diate vicinity of the British Islands, as in the 
Clyde district, among the Hebrides, in the Moray 
Firth, and in the German Ocean, there are de- 
pressed areae, forming a kind of submarine valleys, 
the centres of which are from 80 to 100 fathoms, 
or more, deep. These depressions are inhabited 
by assemblages of marine animals, which differ 
from those found over the adjacent and shallower 
region, and resemble those which are met with 
much farther north, on the Norwegian coast. 
Forbes called these Scandinavian detachments 
" Northern outliers." 

How did these isolated patches of a northern 
population get into these deep places? To 
explain the mystery, Forbes called to mind the 
fact that, in the epoch which immediately pre- 
ceded the present, the climate was much colder 
(whence the name of " glacial epoch " applied to 
it) ; and that the shells which are found fossil, or 
sub-fossil, in deposits of that age are precisely such 



54 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA ii 

as are now to be met with only in the Scandinavian, 
or still more Arctic, regions. Undoubtedly, during 
the glacial epoch, the general population of our 
seas had, universally, the northern aspect which 
is now presented only by the " northern outliers "; 
just as the vegetation of the land, down to the 
sea-level, had the northern character which is, at 
present, exhibited only by the plants which live 
on the tops of our mountains. But, as the glacial 
epoch passed away, and the present climatal con- 
ditions were developed, the northern plants were 
able to maintain themselves only on the bleak 
heights, on which southern forms could not com- 
pete with them. And, in like manner, Forbes sug- 
gested that, after the glacial epoch, the northern 
animals then inhabiting the sea became restricted 
to the deeps in which they could hold their 
own against invaders from the south, better fitted 
than they to flourish in the warmer waters of the 
shallows. Thus depth in the sea corresponded in 
its effect upon distribution to height on the 
land. 

The same idea is applied to the explanation of 
a similar anomaly in the Fauna of the Mgean : — 

" In the deepest of the regions of depth of the Mgeaji, the 
representation of a Northern Fauna is maintained, partly by 
identical and partly by representative forms. . . . The presence 
of the latter is essentially due to the law (of representation of 
parallels of latitude by zones of depth), whilst that of the 
former species depended on their transmission from their parent 
seas during a former epoch, and subsequent isolation. That 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 55 

epoch was doubtless the newer Pliocene or Glacial Era, when the 
Mya truncata and other northern forms now extinct in the 
Mediteri'anean, and found fossil in the Sicilian tertiaries, 
ranged into that sea. The changes which there destroyed the 
shallow water glacial forms, did not affect those living in the 
depths, and which still survive. " ^ 

The conception that the inhabitants of local 
depressions of the sea bottom might be a remnant 
of the ancient population of the area, which had 
held their own in these deep fastnesses against an 
invading Fauna, as Britons and Gaels have held 
out in Wales and in Scotland against encroaching 
Teutons, thus broached by Forbes, received a 
■ wider application than Forbes had dreamed of 
when the sounding machine first brought up 
specimens of the mud of the deep sea. As I have 
pointed out elsewhere,^ it at once became obvious 
that the calcareous sticky mud of the Atlantic 
was made up, in the main, of shells of Gldbigeriiia 
and other Foraminifera, identical with those of 
which the true chalk is composed, and the identity 
extended even to the presence of those singular 
bodies, the Coccoliths and Coccospheres, the true 
nature of which is not yet made out. Here then 
were organisms, as old as the cretaceous epoch, 
still alive, and doing their work of rock -making at 
the bottom of existing seas. What if Glohigcrina 

' Memoirs of the Geological Survey of Great Britain, Vol. i. 
p. 390. 

' See above, "On a Piece of Chalk,'' p. 13. 



56 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA n 

and the Coccoliths should not be the only sur- 
Tivors of a world passed away, which are hidden 
beneath three miles of salt water? The letter 
which Dr. W)rville Thomson wrote to Dr. Car- 
penter in May, 1868, out of which aU these expe- 
ditions have grown, shows that this query had 
become a practical problem in Dr. Thomson's 
mind at that time ; and the desirableness of 
solving the problem is put in the foreground of 
his reasons for urging the Government to under- 
take the work of exploration : — 

" Two years ago, M. Sars, Swedish GoTemment Ii^ertw of 
Fisheries, had an opportnnity, in his ofBeial capacity, of dredg- 
ing off the Loffoten Islands at a depth of 300 fathoms. I 
visited Norway shortly after his return, and had an opportnnity 
of studying with his father, Professor Sars, some of bis results. 
Animal forms were abundant ; many of them were new to 
science ; and among them was one of surpassing interest, the 
small crinoid, of which you have a specimen, and which we at 
once recognised as a degraded type of the Apiocrinidw, an order 
hitherto regarded as extinct, which attained its maximum in 
the Pear Encrinites of the Jurassic period, and whose latest 
representative hitherto known was the Sourgiicttocrimis of the 
chalk. Some years previously, Mr. Ahsjomsen, dredging in 200 
fathoms in the Hardangerfjord, procured several examples of » 
Starfish [Brisinga), which seems to find its nearest ally in the 
fossil genus Protaster. These observations place it beyond a 
doubt that animal life is abundant in the ocean at depths 
varying from 200 to 300 fathoms, that the forms at these great 
depths differ greatly from those met with in ordinary dredgings, 
and that, at all events in some cases, these animals are closely 
allied to, and would seem to be directly descended from, the 
Fauna of the early tertiaries. 

"I think the latter result might almost have been antici- 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 57 

pated ; and, probably, further investigation will largely add to 
this class of data, and will give us an opportunity of testing 
our determinations of the zoological position of some fossil 
types by an examination of the soft parts of their recent 
representatives. The main cause of the destruction, the migra- 
tion, and the extreme modification of animal types, appear to 
be change of climate, chiefly depending upon oscillations of the 
earth's crust. These oscillations do not appear to have ranged, 
in the Northern portion of the Northern Hemisphere, much 
beyond 1,000 feet since the commencement of the Tertiary 
Epoch. The temperature of deep waters seems to be constant 
for all latitudes at 39° ; so that an immense area of the North 
Atlantic must have had its conditions unaffected by tertiary or 
post-tertiary oscillations. " ' 

As we shall see, the assumption that the tem- 
perature of the deep sea is everjTvhere 39° F. (4° 
Cent.) is an error, which Dr. Wyville Thomson 
adopted from eminent physical writers ; but the 
general justice of the reasoning is not affected by 
this circumstance, and Dr. Thomson's expectation 
has been, to some extent, aheady verified. 

Thus besides Glohigerina, there are eighteen 
species of deep-sea Foraminifera identical with 
species found in the chalk. Imbedded in the 
chalky mud of the deep sea, in many locali- 
ties, are innumerable cup-shaped sponges, pro- 
vided with six-rayed sihcious spicula, so disposed 
that the wall of the cup is formed -of a 
lacework of flinty thread. Not less abundant, 
in some parts of the chalk formation, are the 
fossils known as Ventriculites, well described by 

1 TTie Depths of the Sea, pp. 51-52. 



58 THE PEOBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA n 

Dr. Thomson as " elegant vases or cups, with 
branching root-hke bases, or groups of regularly 
or irregularly spreading tubes delicately fretted 
on the surface with an impressed network like 
the finest lace " ; and he adds, " When we com- 
pare such recent forms as Aphrocallistes, Fphiteon, 
Holtenia, and Askonema, with certain series of the 
chalk Ventriculites, there cannot be the slightest 
doubt that they belong to the same family — in 
some cases to very nearly allied genera." ^ 

Professor Duncan finds " several corals from the 
coast of Portugal more nearly allied to chalk forms 
than to any others." 

The Stalked Crinoids or Feather Stars, so 
abundant in ancient times, are now exclusively 
confined to the deep sea, and the late explorations 
have yielded forms of old affinity, the existence 
of which has hitherto been unsuspected. The 
general character of the group of star fishes 
imbedded in the white chalk is almost the same 
as in the modern Fauna of the deep Atlantic. 
The sea urchins of the deep sea, while none of 
them are specifically identical with any chalk 
form, belong to the same general groups, and 
some closely approach extinct cretaceous genera. 

Taking these facts in conjunction with the 
positive evidence of the existence, during the 
Cretaceous epoch, of a deep ocean where now lies 
the dry land of central and southern Europe, 

1 The Depths of the Sea, p. 484. 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 59 

northern Africa, and western and southern Asia ; 
and of the gradual diminution of this ocean 
during the older tertiary epoch, until it is 
represented at the present day by such teacup- 
fuls as the Caspian, the Black Sea, and the 
Mediterranean; the supposition of Dr. Thomson 
and Dr. Carpenter that what is now the deep 
Atlantic, was the deep Atlantic (though merged 
in a vast easterly extension) in the Cretaceous 
epoch, and that the Glohigerina mud has been 
accumulating there from that time to this, seems 
to me to have a great degree of probability. And 
I agree with Dr. Wyville Thomson against Sir 
Charles Lyell (it takes two of us to have any 
chance against his authority) in demurring to the 
assertion that " to talk of chalk having been 
uninterruptedly formed in the Atlantic is as 
inadmissible in a geographical as in a geological 
sense." 

If the word " chalk " is to be used as a 
stratigraphical term and restricted to Glohigerina 
mud deposited during the Cretaceous epoch, of 
course it is improper to call the precisely similar 
mud of more recent date, chalk. If, on the other 
hand, it is to be used as a mineralogical term, I 
do not see how the modem and the ancient 
chalks are to be separated — and, looking at the 
matter geographically, I see no reason to doubt 
that a boring rod driven from the surface of the 
mud which forms the floor of the mid- Atlantic 



60 THE PEOBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA II 

would pass through one continuous mass of 
Globigerina mud, first of modern, then of tertiary, 
and then of mesozoic date; the "chalks" of 
different depths and ages being distinguished 
merely by the different forms of other organisms 
associated with the Glohigerince. 

On the other hand, I think it must be admitted 
that a belief in the continuity of the modem with 
the ancient chalk has nothing to do with the 
proposition that we can, in any sense whatever, 
be said to be still living in the Cretaceous epoch. 
When the Challenger's trawl brings up an Ich- 
thyosaurus, along with a few living specimens 
of Belemnites and Turrilites, it may be admitted 
that she has come upon a cretaceous " outlier." 
A geological period is characterized not only 
by the presence of those creatures which lived 
in it, but by the absence of those which have 
only come into existence later; and, however 
large a proportion of true cretaceous forms may 
be discovered in the deep sea, the modem types 
associated with them must be abolished before 
the Fauna, as a whole, could, with any propriety, 
be termed Cretaceous. 

I have now indicated some of the chief lines of 
Biological inquiry, in which the Challenger has 
special opportunities for doing good service, and 
in following which she will be carrjdng out the 
work already commenced by the Lightning and 



II THE PKOBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 61 

Porcupine in their cruises of 1868 and subsequent 
years. 

But biology, in the long run, rests upon physics, 
and the first condition for arriving at a sound 
theory of distribution in the deep sea, is the 
precise ascertainment of the conditions of life; 
or, in other words, a full knowledge of all those 
phenomena which are embraced under the head 
of the Physical Geography of the Ocean. 

Excellent work has already been done in this 
direction, chiefly under the superintendence of Dr. 
Carpenter, by the Lightning and the Porcupine} 
and some data of fundamental importance to the 
physical geography of the sea have been fixed 
beyond a doubt. 

Thus, though it is true that sea-water steadily 
contracts as it cools down to its freezing point, 
instead of expanding before it reaches its freezing 
point as fresh water does, the truth has been 
steadily ignored by even the highest authorities 
in physical geography, and the eiToneous con- 
clusions deduced from their eiToneous premises 
have been widely accepted as if they were 
ascertained facts. Of course, if sea-water, like 
fresh water, were heaviest at a temperature of 
39° F. and got lighter as it approached 32° F., 
the water of the bottom of the deep sea could not 
be colder than 39°. But one of the first results 
of the careful ascertainment of the temperature 
1 Proceedings of the Boyal Society, 1870 and 1872 



62 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA n 

at dilEferent depths, by means of thermometers 
specially contrived for the avoidance of the errors 
produced by pressure, was the proof that, below 
1000 fathoms in the Atlantic, down to the greatest 
depths yet sounded, the water has a temperature 
always lower than 38° Fahr., whatever be the 
temperature of the water at the surface. And 
that this low temperature of the deepest water 
is probably the universal rule for the depths of 
the open ocean is shown, among others, by Captain 
Chimmo's recent observations in the Indian ocean, 
between Ceylon and Sumatra, where, the surface 
water ranging from 85° — 81° Fahr., the tempera- 
ture at the bottom, at a depth of 2270 to 2656 
fathoms, was only from 34° to 32° Fahr. 

As the mean temperature of the superficial 
layer of the crust of the earth may be taken at 
about 50° Fahr., it follows that the bottom layer 
of the deep sea in temperate and hot latitudes, 
is, on the average, much colder than either of the 
bodies with which it is in contact ; for the tem- 
perature of the earth is constant, while that of 
the air rarely falls so low as that of the bottom 
water in the latitudes in question ; and even when 
it does, has time to affect only a comparatively 
thin stratum of the surface water before the 
return of warm weather. 

How does this apparently anomalous state of 
things come about ? If we suppose the globe to 
be covered with a universal ocean, it can hardly 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 63 

be doubted that the cold of the regions towards 
the poles must tend to cause the superficial water 
of those regions to contract and become specifically 
heavier. Under these circumstances, it would 
have no alternative but to descend and spread 
over the sea bottom, while its place would be 
taken by warmer water drawn from the adjacent 
regions. Thus, deep, cold, polar-equatorial currents, 
and superficial, warmer, equatorial-polar currents, 
would be set up ; and as the former would have 
a less velocity of rotation from west to east than 
the regions towards which they travel, they would 
not be due southerly or northerly currents, but 
south-westerly in the northern hemisphere, and 
north-westerly in the southern ; while, by a parity 
of reasoning, the equatorial-polar warm currents 
would be north-easterly in the northern hemi- 
sphere, and south-easterly in the southern. Hence, 
as a north-easterly current has the same direction 
as a south-westerly wind, the direction of the 
northern equatorial-polar current in the extra- 
tropical part of its course would pretty nearly 
coincide with that of the anti-trade winds. The 
freezing of the surface of the polar sea would not 
interfere with the movement thus set up. For, 
however bad a conductor of heat ice may be, the 
unfrozen sea-water immediately in contact with 
the undersurface of the ice must needs be colder 
than that further off; and hence will constantly tend 
to descend through the subjacent warmer water. 



64 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA ii 

In this way, it would seem inevitable that the 
surface waters of the northern and southern frigid 
zones must, sooner or later, find their way to the 
bottom of the rest of the ocean; and there ac- 
cumulate to a thickness dependent on the rate at 
which they absorb heat from the crust of the earth 
below, and from the surface water above. 

If this hypothesis be correct, it follows that, if 
any part of the ocean in warm latitudes is shut 
off from the influence of the cold polar underflow, 
the temperature of its deeps should be less cold 
than the temperature of corresponding depths in 
the open sea. Now, in the Mediterranean, Nature 
offers a remarkable experimental proof of just the 
kind needed. It is a landlocked sea which runs 
nearly east and west, between the twenty-ninth 
and forty-fifth parallels of north latitude. Eoughly 
speaking, the average temperature of the air over 
it is 75° Fahr. in July and 48° in January. 

This great expanse of water is divided by the 
peninsula of Italy (including Sicily), continuous 
with which is a submarine elevation carrying less 
than 1,200 feet of water, which extends from 
Sicily to Cape Bon in Africa, into two great pools 
— an eastern and a western. The eastern pool 
rapidly deepens to more than 12,000 feet, and 
sends off to the north its comparatively shallow 
branches, the Adriatic and the .^gean Seas. The 
western pool is less deep, though it reaches some 
10,000 feet. And, just as the western end of the 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 65 

eastern pool communicates by a shallow passage, 
not a sixth of its greatest depth, with the western 
pool, so the western pool is separated from the 
Atlantic by a ridge which runs between Capes 
Trafalgar and Spartel, on which there is hardly 
1,000 feet of water. All the water of the Mediter- 
ranean which lies deeper than about 150 fathoms, 
therefore, is shut off from that of the Atlantic, 
and there is no communication between the cold 
layer of the Atlantic (below 1,000 fathoms) and 
the Mediterranean. Under these circumstances, 
what is the temperature of the Mediterranean?. 
Everywhere below 600 feet it is about 55° Fahr. ; 
and consequently, at its greatest depths, it is some 
20° warmer than the corresponding depths of the 
Atlantic. 

It seems extremely difficult to account for this 
difference in any other way, than by adopting 
the views so strongly and ably advocated by Dr. 
Carpenter, that, in the existing distribution of 
land and water, such a circulation of the water of 
the ocean does actually occur, as theoretically must 
occur, in the universal ocean, with which we 
started. 

It is quite another question, however, whether 
this theoretic circulation, true cause as it may be, 
is competent to give rise to such movements of 
sea-water, in mass, as those currents, which have 
commonly been regarded as northern extensions of 
the Gulf-stream, I shall not venture to touch 

VOL. VIII F 



66 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA li 

upon this complicated problem ; but I may take 
occasion to remark that the cause of a much 
simpler phenomenon— =the stream of Atlantic 
water which sets through the Straits of Gibraltar, 
eastward, at the rate of two or three miles an hour 
or more, does not seem to be so clearly made out 
as is desirable. 

The facts appear to be that the water of the 
Mediterranean is very shghtly denser than that of 
the Atlantic (1-0278 to 1-0265), and that the deep 
water of the Mediterranean is slightly denser than 
that of the surface ; while the deep water of the 
Atlantic is, if anything, lighter than that of the 
surface. Moreover, while a rapid superficial cur- 
rent is setting in (always, save in exceptionally 
violent easterly winds) through the Straits of 
Gibraltar, from the Atlantic to the Mediterranean, 
a deep undercurrent (together with variable side 
currents) is setting out through the Straits, from 
the Mediterranean to the Atlantic. 

Dr. Carpenter adopts, without hesitation, the 
view that the cause of this indraught of Atlantic 
water is to be sought in the much more rapid 
evaporation which takes place from the surface of 
the Mediterranean than from that of the Atlantic ; 
and thus, by lowering the level of the former, gives 
rise to an indraught from the latter. 

But is there any sound foundation for the three 
assumptions involved here? Firstly, that the 
evaporation from the Mediterranean, as a whole, 



II THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA 67 

is much greater than that from the Atlantic under 
corresponding parallels ; secondly, that the rainfall 
over the Mediterranean makes up for evaporation 
less than it does over the Atlantic ; and thirdly, 
supposing these two questions answered affirm- 
atively : Are not these sources of loss in the 
Mediterranean fuUy covered by the prodigious 
quantity of fresh water which is poured into it by 
great rivers and submarine springs ? Consider 
that the water of the Ebro, the Rhine, the Po, the 
Danube, the Don, the Dnieper, and the Nile, all 
flow directly or indirectly into the Mediterranean ; 
that the volume of fresh water which they pour 
into it is so enormous that fresh water may some- 
times be baled up from the surface of the sea off 
the Delta of the Nile, while the land is not yet in 
sight ; that the water of the Black Sea is half fresh, 
and that a current of three or four miles an hour 
constantly streams from it Mediterraneanwards 
through the Bosphorus; — consider, in addition, 
that no fewer than ten submarine springs of fresh 
water are known to burst up in the Mediten-anean, 
some of them so large that Admiral Smyth calls 
them " subterranean rivers of amazing volume and 
force " ; and it would seem, on the face of the 
matter, that the sun must have enough to do to 
keep the level of the Mediterranean down ; and 
that, possibly, we may have to seek for the cause 
of the small superiority in saline contents of the 
Mediterranean water in some condition other than 
solar evaporation. 

F 2 



68 THE PROBLEMS OF THE DEEP SEA n 

Again, if the Gibraltar indraught is the effect of 
evaporation, why does it go on in winter as well 
as in summer ? 

All these are questions more easily asked than 
answered ; but they must be answered before we 
can accept the Gibraltar stream as an example 
of a current produced by indraught with any 
comfort. 

The Mediterranean is not included in the 
Challenger's route, but she will visit one of the 
most promising and little explored of hydro- 
graphical regions — the North Pacific, between 
Polynesia and the Asiatic and American shores ; 
and doubtless the store of observations upon the 
currents of this region, which she will accumulate, 
when compared with what we know of the North 
Atlantic, will throw a powerful light upon the 
present obscurity of the Gulf-stream problem. 



Ill 



ON SOME OF THE EESULTS OF THE 
EXPEDITION OF H.M.S. GHAZLENGEB 

[1875] 

In May, 1873, I drew attention ^ to the im- 
portant problems connected with the physics 
and natural history of the sea, to the solu- 
tion of which there was every reason to hope 
the cruise of H.M.S. Challenger would furnish 
important contributions. The expectation then 
expressed has not been disappointed. Reports to 
the Admiralty, papers communicated to the Royal 
Society, and large collections which have already 
been sent home, have shown that the Challenger's 
staff have made admirable use of their sTeat 
opportunities ; and that, on the return of the 
expedition in 1874, their performance will be fully 
up to the level of their promise. Indeed, I am 
disposed to go so far as to saj', that if nothing 
more came of the Challenger's expedition than 

' Sec tho preceding Essay. 



70 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" m 

has hitherto been yielded by her exploration of 
the nature of the sea bottom at great depths, a 
full scientific equivalent of the trouble and ex- 
pense of her equipment would have been obtained. 
In order to justify this assertion, and yet, at the 
same time, not to claim more for Professor WyviUe 
Thomson and his colleagues than is their due, I 
must give a brief history of the observations which 
have preceded their exploration of this recondite 
field of research, and endeavour to make clear 
what was the state of knowledge in December, 
1872, and what new facts have been added by the 
scientific staff of the ChMllenger. So far as I have 
been able to discover, the first successful attempt 
to bring up from gi'eat depths more of the sea 
bottom than would adhere to a sounding-lead, was 
made by Sir John Ross, in the voyage to the 
Arctic regions which he undertook in 1818. In 
the Appendix to the narrative of that voyage, 
there will be found an account of a very ingenious 
apparatus called " clams " — a sort of double scoop 
— of his own contrivance, which Sir John Ross 
had made by the ship's armourer ; and by which, 
being in Baffin's Bay, in 72° 30' N. and 77° 15' W., 
he succeeded in bringing up from 1,050 fathoms 
(or 6,300 feet), " several pounds " of a " fine green 
mud," which formed the bottom of the sea in this 
region. Captain (now Sir Edward) Sabine, who 
accompanied Sir John Ross on this cmise, says of 
this mud that it was " soft and greenish, and that 



Ill EXPEDITION OP THE "CHALLENGER" 71 

the lead sunk several feet into it." A similar 
" fine green mud " was found to compose the sea 
bottom in Davis Straits by Goodsir in 1845. 
Nothing is certainly known of the exact nature of 
the mud thus obtained, but we shall see that the 
mud of the bottom of the Antarctic seas is de- 
scribed in curiously similar terms by Dr. Hooker, 
and there is no doubt as to the composition of this 
deposit. 

In 1850, Captain Penny collected in Assistance 
Bay, in Kingston Bay, and in MelviUe Bay, 
which lie between 73° 45' and 74° 40' N., speci- 
mens of the residuum left by melted surface ice, 
and of the sea bottom in these localities. Dr. 
Dickie, of Aberdeen, sent these materials to 
Ehrenberg, who made out ^ that the residuum of 
the melted ice consisted for the most part of the 
silicious cases of diatomaceous plants, and of the 
silicious spicula of sponges ; while, mixed with 
these, were a certain number of the equally 
silicious skeletons of those low animal organisms, 
which were termed Polycistinem by Ehrenberg, but 
are now known as Radiolaria. 

In 1856, a very remarkable addition to our 
knowledge of the nature of the sea bottom in high 
northern latitudes was made by Professor Bailey 
of West Point. Lieutenant Brooke, of the United 
States Navy, who was employed in surveying the 

^ Ueber ncue Ansclmuuiiqen des Tdeiiisten nordlichcn Polar- 
?ci(!)is.— Monatsljerichte d. K. Akad. Berlin, 1853. 



72 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" III 

Sea of Kamschatka, had succeeded in obtaining 
specimens of the sea bottom from greater depths 
than any hitherto reached, namely from 2,700 
fathoms (16,200 feet) in 56° 46' N., and 168° 18' E. ; 
and from 1,700 fathoms (10,200 feet) in 60° 15' N- 
and 170° 53' E. On examining these microscopically, 
Professor Bailey found, as Ehrenberg had done in 
the case of mud obtained on the opposite side of 
the Arctic region, that the fine mud was made up 
of shells of Biatomacm, of spicula of sponges, and 
of Radiolaria, with a small admixture of mineral 
matters, but without a trace of any calcareous 
organisms. 

Still more complete information has been ob- 
tained concerning the nature of the sea bottom 
in the cold zone around the south pole. Between 
the years 1839 and 1843, Sir James Clark Ross 
executed his famous Antarctic expedition, in the 
course of which he penetrated, at two widely dis- 
tant points of the Antarctic zone, into the high 
latitudes of the shores of Victoria Land and of 
Graham's Land, and reached the parallel of 80° S. 
Sir James Eoss was himself a naturalist of no 
mean acquirements, and Dr. Hooker,^ the present 
President of the Royal Society, accompanied him 
as naturalist to the expedition, so that the obser- 
vations upon the fauna and flora of the Antarctic 
regions made during this cruise were sure to have 
a peculiar value and importance, even had not the 

1 rNow Sir Joseiih Hooker. 1894.] 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGEE " 73 

attention of the voyagers been particularly directed 
to the importance of noting the occurrence of the 
minutest forms of animal and vegetable life in the 
ocean. 

Among the scientific instructions for the voyage 
drawn up by a committee of the Eoyal Society, 
however, there is a remarkable letter from Von 
Humboldt to Lord Minto, then First Lord of the 
Admiralty, in which, among other things, he 
dwells upon the significance of the researches into 
the microscopic composition of rocks, and the dis- 
covery of the great share which microscopic organ- 
isms take in the formation of the crust of the earth 
at the present day, made by Ehrenberg in the years 
1836-39. Ehrenberg, in fact, had shown that the 
extensive beds of " rotten-stone " or " Tripoh " 
which occur in various parts of the world, and 
notably at Bilin in Bohemia, consisted of accumu- 
lations of the silicious cases and skeletons of Diato- 
macem, sponges, and Badiolaria ; he had proved 
that similar deposits were being formed by 
Diatomacece, in the pools of the Thiergarten in 
Berhn and elsewhere, and had pointed out that, if 
it were commercially worth while, rotten-stone 
might be manufactured by a process of diatom- 
culture. Observations conducted at Cuxhaven in 
1839, had revealed the existence, at the surface of 
the waters of the Baltic, of living Diatoms and 
Badiolaria of the same species as those which, in 



74 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " m 

a fossil state, constitute extensive rocks of tertiary 
age at Caltanisetta, Zante, and Oran, on the 
shores of the Mediterranean. 

Moreover, in the fresh-water rotten-stone beds 
of Bilin, Ehrenberg had traced out the metamor- 
phosis, effected apparently by the action of perco- 
lating water, of the primitively loose and friable 
deposit of organized particles, in which the silex 
exists in the hydrated or soluble condition. The 
silex, in fact, undergoes solution and slow redepo- 
sition, until, in ultimate result, the excessively 
fine-grained sand, each particle of which is a 
skeleton, becomes converted into a dense opaline 
stone, with only here and there an indication of an 
organism. 

From the consideration of these facts, Ehren- 
berg, as early as the year 1839, had arrived at the 
conclusion that rocks, altogether similar to those 
which constitute a large part of the crust of the 
earth, must be forming, at the present day, at the 
bottom of the sea ; and he threw out the sugges- 
tion that even where no trace of organic structure 
is to be found in the older rocks, it may have been 
lost by metamorphosis.^ 



' Vcbcr die noch jetzf zahlrcich Ubende Thierarien der Kreide- 
bildung und den Organismus der Polylhalamien. AbhandluTigen 
der Kon. Alead. der JJ'issencJiaften. 1839. Berlin. 1841. I am 
afvaid that thLs remarkable paper has been somewhat overlooked 
in the recent discussions of the relation of ancient rocks to 
modem deposits. 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 75 

The results of the Antarctic exploration, as 
stated by Dr. Hooker in the " Botany of the Ant- 
arctic Voyage," and in a paper which he read 
before the British Association in 1847, are of the 
greatest importance in connection with these 
views, and they are so clearly stated in the former 
work, which is somewhat inaccessible, that I make 
no apology for quoting them at length — 

" The waters and the ice of the South Polar Ocean were alike 
found to abound with microscopic vegetables belonging to the 
order Viatomaceoe. Though much too small to be discernible 
by the naked eye, they occui-red in such countless myriads as 
to stain the berg and the pack ice wherever they were washed by 
the swell of the sea ; and, when enclosed in the congealing 
surface of the water, they imparted to the brash and pancake 
ice a pale ochreous colour. In the open ocean, northward of 
the frozen zone, this order, though no doubt almost universally 
present, generally eludes the search of the naturalist; except 
when its species are congregated amongst that mucous scum 
which is sometimes seen floating on the waves, and of whose 
real nature we are ignorant ; or when the coloured contents of 
the marine animals who feed on these Alg£e are examined. To 
the south, however, of the belt of ice which encircles the globe, 
between the parallels of 50° and 70° S., and in the watera com- 
prised between that belt and the highest latitude ever attained by 
man, this vegetation is very conspicuous, from the contrast 
between its colour and the white snow and ice in which it is 
imbedded. Insomuch, that in the eightieth degree, all the 
surface ice carried along by the currents, the sides of eveiy 
berg, and the base of the great Victoria Barrier itself, within 
reach of the swell, were tinged brown, as if the polar waters 
wore charged with oxide of iron. 

"As the majority of these plants consist of very simple vege- 
table cells, enclosed in indestructible silex (as other Alga; are in 
carbonate of lime), it is obvious that the death and decomposi- 



76 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER HI 

tion of such multitudes must form sedimentary deposits, propor- 
tionate in their extent to the length and exposure of the coast 
against which they are washed, in thickness to the power of 
such agents as the winds, currents, and sea, which sweep 
them more energetically to certain positions, and in purity, to 
the depth of the water and nature of the bottom. Hence we 
detected their remains along eveiy icebound shore, in the depths 
of the adjacent ocean, between 80 and 400 fathoms.. Off 
Victoria Barrier (a pei'pendicular wall of ice between one and 
two hundred feet above the level of the sea) the bottom of the 
ocean was covered with a stratum of pure white or green mud, 
composed pi-incipally of the silicious shells of the Diaiomaceai. 
These, on being put into water, rendered it cloudy like milk, 
and took many hours to subside. In the very deep water oft 
Victoria and Graham's Land, this mud was particularly pure and 
fine ; but towards the shallow shores there existed a greater or 
less admixture of disintegrated rock and sand ; so that the 
organic compounds of the bottom frequently bore but a small 
proportion to the inorganic." . . . 

" The universal existence of such an invisible vegetation as 
that of the Antarctic Ocean, is a tmly wonderful fact, and the 
more from its not being accompanied by plants of a high order. 
During the years we spent there, I had been accustomed to 
regard the phenomena of life as differing totally from what obtains 
throughout all other latitudes; for everything living appeared 
to be of animal origin. The ocean swarmed with MoUtisca, and 
particularly entomostracous Cntstacca, small whales, and por- 
poises ; the sea abounded with penguins and seals, and the air 
with birds ; the animal kingdom was ever present, the larger 
creatures preying on the smaller, and these again on smaller 
still ; all seemed carnivorous. The herbivorous were not recog- 
nised, because feeding on a microscopic herbage, of whose true 
nature I had formed an erroneous impression. It is, therefore, 
with no little satisfaction that I now class the Dialomaceoc with 
plants, probably maintaining in the South Polar Ocean that 
balance between the vegetable and the animal kingdoms which 
prevails over the surface of our globe. Nor is the su.stenance 
and nutritioii of the animal Icingdom the only function these 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 77 

minute productions may perfonn ; they may also be the purifiers 
of the vitiated atmosphere, and thus execute in the Antarctic 
latitudes the office of our trees and gi'ass turf in the temperate 
regions, and the broad leaves of the jialm, &o., in the 
tropics." .... 

With respect to the distribution of the 
Biatomaccw, Dr. Hooker remarks : — 

" There is probably no latitude between that of Spitzbergen 
and Victoria Land, where some of the species of either country 
do not exist : Iceland, Britain, the Mediterranean Sea, North and 
South America, and the South Sea Islands, all possess Antarctic 
Diatomacece. The silicious coats of species only known living 
in the waters of the South Polar Ocean, have, during past 
ages, contributed to the formation of rocks ; and thus they out- 
live several successive creations of organized beings. The 
phonolite stones of the Khine, and the Tripoli stone, contain 
species identical with what are now contributing to form a sedi- 
mentary deposit (and perhaps, at some future period, a bed of 
rock) extending in one continuous stratum for 400 measured 
miles. I allude to the shores of the Victoria Bai-rier, along 
whose coast the soundings examined were invariably charged 
with diatomaceous remains, constituting a bank which stretches 
200 miles north from the base of Victoria Bamer, while the 
average depth of water above it is 300 fathoms, or 1, 800 feet. 
Again, some of the Antarctic species have been detected floating 
in the atmosphere which overhangs the wide ocean between 
Africa and America. The knowledge of this marvellous fact we 
owe to Mr. Darwin, who, when he was at sea off the Cape de 
Verd Islands, collected an impalpable powder which fell on 
Captain Fitzroy's ship. He transmitted this dust to Ehrenberg, 
who ascertained it to consist of the silicious coats, chiefly of 
American Diatoinacece, which were being wafted through the 
upper region of the air, when some meteorological phenomena 
checked them in their course and deposited them on the ship 
and surface of the ocean. 

" The existence of the remains of many species of this order 



78 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " m 

(and amongst them some Antarctic ones) in the volcanic ashes, 
pumice, and scoriae of active and extinct volcanoes (those of the 
Mediterranean Sea and Ascension Island, for instance) is a fact 
hearing immediately upon the present subject. Mount Erebus, 
a volcano 12,400 feet high, of the first class in dimensions and 
energetic action, rises at once from the ocean in the seventy- 
eighth degree of south latitude, and abreast of the Diatomacem 
bank, which reposes in part on its base. Hence it may not 
appear preposterous to conclude that, as Vesuvius receives the 
waters of the Mediterranean, with its fish, to eject them by its 
ciuter, so the subterranean and subaqueous forces which maintain 
Mount Erebus in activity may occasionally receive organic 
matter from the bank, and disgorge it, together with those 
volcanic products, ashes and pumice. 

' ' Along the shores of Graham's Land and the South Shetland 
Islands, we have a parallel combination of igneous and aqueous 
action, accompanied with an equally copious supply otDiatom- 
acece. In the Gulf of Erebus and Terror, fifteen degrees north 
of Victoria Land, and placed on the opposite side of the globe, 
the soundings were of a similar nature with those of the Victoria 
Land and Barrier, and the sea and ice as full of Diatomaceie, 
This was not only proved by the deep sea lead, but by the 
examination of bergs which, once stranded, had floated off and 
become reversed, exposing an accumulation of white friable mud 
frozen to their bases, which abounded with these vegetable 
remains. " 

The Challenger has explored the Antarctic seas 
in a region intermediate between those examined 
by Sir James Eoss's expedition ; and the observa- 
tions made by Dr. Wyville Thomson and his 
colleagues in every respect confirm those of Dr. 
Hooker : — 

" On the 11th of February, lat. 60° 62' S., long. 80° 20' E., 
and March 3, lat. 53° 55' S., long. 108° 35' E., the sounding 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" 79 

instrument came up filled with a very fine cream-coloured paste, 
which scarcely effervesced with acid, and dried into a very light, 
impalpable, white powder. This, when examined under the 
microscope, was found to consist almost entirely of the frustules 
of Diatoms, some of them wonderfully perfect in all the details 
of their ornament, and many of them broken up. The species 
of Diatoms entering into this deposit have not yet been worked 
up, but they appear to be referable chiefly to the genera Fragil- 
laria, C'oscinodisiytis, Choetoceros, Asteromphahis, and Dictyocha, 
with fragments of the separated rods of a singular silicious 
organism, with which we were unacquainted, and which made 
up a large proportion of the finer matter of this deposit. Mixed 
with the Diatoms there were a few small Globigeri'iue, some of the 
tests and spicules of Radiolarians, and some sand particles ; but 
these foreign bodies were in too small proportion to affect the 
formation as consisting practically of Diatoms alone. On the 
4th of February, in lat. 52°, 29' S., long., 71° 36' E., a little to 
the north of the Heard Islands, the tow-net, dragging a few 
fathoms below the surface, came up nearly filled with a pale yellow 
gelatinous mass. This was found to consist entirely of Diatoms 
of the same species as those found at the bottom. By far the 
most abundant was the little bundle of silicious rods, fastened 
together loosely at one end, separating from one another at the 
other end, and the whole bundle loosely twisted into a spindle. 
The rods are hollow, and contain the characteristic endochromo 
of the Diatomacece. Like the GloMgerina ooze, then, which it 
succeeds to the southward in a band apparently of no great 
width, the materials of this silicious deposit are derived entirely 
from the surface and intermediate depths. It is somewhat 
singular that Diatoms did not appear to be in such large num- 
bers oh the surface over the Diatom ooze as they were a little 
further north. This may perhaps be accounted for by our not 
having struck their belt of depth with the tow-net ; or it is 
possible that when we found it on the 11th of Febniary the bottom 
deposit was really shifted a little to the south by the warm 
current, the excessively fine flocculent debris of the Diatoms 
taking a certain time to sink. The belt of Diatom ooze is 
certainly a little further to the southward in long. 83° E., in 



80 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " m 

the path of the reflux of the Agulhas current, than in long. 
108° E. 

"All along the edge of the ice-pack^everywhere, in fact, to 
the south of the two stations — on the 11th of February on our 
southward voyage, and on the 3rd of March on our return, we 
brought up fine sand and grayish mud, with small pebbles of 
quartz and felspar, and small fragments of mioa-slate, chlorite- 
slate, clay-slate, gneiss, and granite. This deposit, I have no 
doubt, was derived from the surface like the othere, but in this 
case by the melting of icebergs and the precipitation of foreign 
matter contained in the ice. 

' ' We never saw any trace of gravel or sand, or any material 
necessarily derived from land, on an iceberg. Several showed 
vertical or iiTegular fissures filled with discoloured ice or snow ; 
but, when looked at closely, the discoloration proved usually to 
be very slight, and the effect at a distance was usually due to 
the foreign material filling the fissure reflecting light less per- 
fectly than the general surface of the berg. I conceive that 
the upper suiface of one of these great tabular southern ice- 
bergs, including by far the gi'eater part of its bulk, and culmin- 
ating in the portion exposed above the surface of the sea, was 
formed by the piling up of successive layers of snow during the 
period, amounting perhaps to several centuries, during which 
the ice-cap was slowly forcing itself over the low land and out 
to sea over a long extent of gentle slope, until it reached a depth 
considerably above 200 fathoms, when the lower specific weight 
of the ice caused an upward strain which at length overcame the 
cohesion of the mass, and portions were rent off and floated 
away. If this be the true history of the formation of these 
icebergs, the absence of all land lUiris in the portion exposed 
above the surface of the sea is readily understood. If any such 
exist, it must be confined to the lower part of the berg, to that 
part which has at one time or other moved on the floor of the 
ice-cap. 

' ' The icebergs, when they are first dispersed, float in from 
200 to 250 fathoms. When, therefore, they have been drifted 
to latitudes of 65° or 64° S., the bottom of the berg just reaches 
the layer at which the temperature of the water is distinctly 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" 81 

rising, and it is rapidly melted, and the mud and pebbles witli 
which it is more or less charged are precipitated. That this 
precipitation take's place all over the area where the icebergs are 
breaking up, constantly, and to a considerable extent, is evident 
from the fact of the soundings being entirely composed of such 
deposits ; for the Diatoms, Globigeriiue, and radiolarians are 
present on the surface in large numbers ; and unless the deposit 
from the ice were abundant it would soon be covered and 
masked by a layer of the exuvia of surface organisms. " 

The observations which have been detailed 
leave no doubt that the Antarctic sea bottom, 
from a little to the south of the fiftieth parallel, 
as far as 80° S., is being covered by a fine deposit of 
silicious mud, more or less mixed, in some parts, 
with the ice-borne ddbris of polar lands and with 
the ejections of volcanoes. The silicious particles 
which constitute this mud, are derived, in part, 
from the diatomaceous plants and radiolarian 
animals which throng the surface, and, in part, 
from the spicula of sponges which live at the 
bottom. The evidence respecting the correspond- 
ing Arctic area is less complete, but it is sufficient to 
justify the conclusion that an essentially similar 
silicious cap is being formed around the northern 
pole. 

There is no doubt that the constituent particles 
of this mud may agglomerate into a dense rock, 
such as that formed at Oran, on the shores of the 
Mediterranean, which is made up of similar 
materials. Moreover, in the case of freshwater 
deposits of this kind, it is certain that the action 

VOL. vin G 



82 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " III 

of percolating water, may convert the originally 
soft and friable, fine-grained sandstone into a 
dense, semi-transparent opaline stone, the silicious 
organized skeletons being dissolved, and the silex 
re-deposited in an amorphous state. Whether 
such a metamorphosis as this occurs in submarine 
deposits, as well as in those formed in fresh water, 
does not appear; but there seems no reason to 
doubt that it may. And hence it may not be 
hazardous to conclude that very ordinary meta- 
morphic agencies may convert these polar caps into 
a form of quartzite. 

In the great intermediate zone, occupying some 
110° of latitude, which separates the circumpolar 
Arctic and Antarctic areas of silicious deposit, the 
Diatoms and Radiolaria of the surface water and 
the sponges of the bottom do not die out, and, so 
far as some forms are concerned, do not even 
appear to diminish in total number ; though, on a 
rough estimate, it would appear that the propor- 
tion of Radiolaria to Diatoms is much greater than 
in the colder seas. Nevertheless the composition 
of the deep-sea mud of this intermediate zone is 
entirely different from that of the circumpolar 
regions. 

The first exact information respecting the 
nature of this mud at depths greater than 1,000 
fathoms was given by Ehrenberg, in the account 
which he published in the " Monatsberichte " of 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 83 

the Berlin Academy for the year 1853, of the 
.soundings obtained by Lieut. Berryman, of the 
United States Navy, in the North Atlantic, 
between Newfoundland and the Azores. 

Observations which confirm those of Ehrenberg 
in aU essential respects have been made by 
Professor Bailey, myself, Dr. Wallich, Dr. Car- 
penter, and Professor Wyville Thomson, in their 
earlier cruises; and the continuation of the 
Glohigerina ooze over the South Pacific has been 
proved by the recent work of the Challenger, by 
which it is also shown, for the first time, that, in 
passing from the equator to high southern lati- 
tudes, the number and variety of the Foraminifera 
diminishes, and even the Glohigerince become 
dwarfed. And this result, it will be observed, is 
in entire accordance with the fact already men- 
tioned that, in the sea of Kamschatka, the deep- 
sea mud was found by Bailey to contain no cal- 
careous organisms. 

Thus, in the whole of the " intermediate zone," 
the silicious deposit which is being formed there, 
as elsewhere, by the accumulation of sponge- 
spicula, Badiolaria, and Diatoms, is obscured and 
overpowered by the immensely greater amount of 
calcareous sediment, which arises from the aggre- 
gation of the skeletons of dead Foraminifera. The 
similarity of the deposit, thus composed of a 
large percentage of carbonate of lime, and a small 
percentage of silex, to chalk, regarded merely as a 

G 2 



84 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " ill 

kind of rock, which was first pointed out by 
Ehrenberg/ is now admitted on all hands ; nor 
can it be reasonably doubted, that ordinary meta- 
morphic agencies are competent to convert the 
" modern chalk " into hard limestone or even into 
crystalline marble. 

Ehrenberg appears to have taken it for gi-anted 
that the Globigerinm and other Foraminifera which 
are found in the deep-sea mud, live at the great 
depths in which their remains are found ; and he 
supports this opinion by producing evidence that 
the soft parts of these organisms are preserved, 
and may be demonstrated by removing the cal- 
careous matter with dilute acids. In 1857, the 

^ The following passages in Elirenberg's memoir on Tlui 
Organisms in the Chalk which are still living (1839), are con- 
clusive : — 

' ' 7. The dawning period of the existing living organic creation, 
if such a period is distinguishable (which is doubtful), can only 
be supposed to have existed on the other side of, and below, the 
chalk foi-mation ; and thus, either the chalk, with its wide- 
spread and thick beds, must enter into the series of newer 
formations ; or some of the accepted four great geological periods, 
the quaternary, tertiary, and secondary formations, contain 
organisms which still live. It is more probable, in the propor- 
tion of 3 to 1, that the transition or primary period is not 
different, but that it is only more difficult to examine and 
understand, by reason of the gradual and prolonged chemical 
decomposition and metamoi-phosis of many of its organic 
constituents. " 

"10. By the mass-forming Infusoria and Polythalamia, 
secondary are not distinguishable from tertiary formations ; and, 
from what has been said, it is possible that, at this very day, 
rock masses are forming in the .sea, and being raised by volcanic 
agencies, the constitution of which, on the whole, is altogether 
similar to that of the chalk. The chalk remains distinguishable 
by its organic remains as a formation, but not as a kind of 
rock. " 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 85 

evidence for and against this conclusion appeared 
to me to be insuflScient to warrant a positive con- 
clusion one way or the other, and I expressed 
myself in my report to the Admiralty on Captain 
Dayman's soundings in the following terms : — 

"When we consider the immense area over which this 
deposit is spread, the depth at which its formation is going on, 
and its similarity to chalk, and still more to such rocks as the 
marls of Caltanisetta, the question, whence are all these organ- 
isms derived ? hecomes one of high scientific interest. 

"Three answers have suggested themselves : — • 

"In accordance with the prevalent view of the limitation of 
life to comparatively small depths, it is imagined either : 1, that 
these organisms have drifted into their present position from 
shallower waters ; or 2, that they hahitually live at the surface 
of the ocean, and only fall down into their present position. 

" 1. I conceive that the first supposition is negatived by the 
extremely marked zoological peculiarity of the deep-sea fauna. 

" Had the Glohigeriiue been drifted into their present position 
from shallow water, we should find a very large proportion of 
the characteristic inhabitants of shallow watei-s mixed with 
them, and this would the more certainly be the case, as the 
large GloUgerince, so abundant in the deep-sea soundings, are, 
in proportion to their size, more solid and massive than almost 
any other Foraminifera. But the fact is that the proportion of 
other Foraminifera is exceedingly small, nor have I found as 
yet, in the deep-sea deposits, any such matters as fragments 
of molluscous shells, of Echini, &c. , which abound in shallow 
waters, and are quite as likely to be drifted as the heavy OloM- 
gerince. Again, the relative proportions of young and fully 
formed Gloiigerince seem inconsistent with the notion that they 
have travelled far. And it seems difficult to imagine why, had 
the deposit been accumulated in this way, Coscinodisci should 
so almost entirely represent the Diatmnacea:. 

"2. The second hypothesis is far more feasible, and is 
strongly supported by the fact that many Pohjcistineoe. [Eadiola- 



86 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " iii 

ria] and Coscinodisci are well known to live at the sui'face of the 
ocean. Mr. Macdonald, Assistant-Surg«on of H.M.S. Herald, 
now in the South-Western Pacific, has lately sent home some 
veiy valuable observations on living forms of this kind, met 
with in the stomachs of oceanic moUusks, and therefore cei'tainly 
inhabitants of the superficial layer of the ocean. But it is a 
singular circumstance that only one of the forms figured by Mr. 
Macdonald is at all like a Globigerina, and there are some 
peculiarities about even this which make me gi'eatly doubt its 
affinity with that genus. The form, indeed, is not unlike 
that of a Globigerina, but it is provided with long radiating 
processes, of which I have never seen any trace in Globigerina. 
Did they exist, they might explain what otherwise is a great 
objection to this view, viz., how is it conceivable that the heavy 
Globigerina should maintain itself at the surface of the 
water ? 

"If the organic bodies in the deep-sea soundings have neither 
been drifted, nor have fallen from above, there remains but one 
alternative — they must have lived and died where they are. 

" Important objections, however, at once suggest themselves 
to this view. How can animal life be conceived to exist 
under such conditions of light, temperature, pressure, and 
aeration as must obtain at these vast depths ? 

' ' To this one can only reply that we know for a certainty 
that even very highly-organized animals do continue to live at 
a depth of 300 and 400 fathoms, inasmuch as they have been 
dredged up thence ; and that the diiference in the amount of 
light and heat at 400 and at 2,000 fathoms is probably, so to 
speak, very far less than the difiference in complexity of organi- 
sation between these animals and tlie humbler Protozoa and 
Protophyta of the deep-sea soundings. 

" I confess, though as yet far from regarding it proved that 
the Glolngerinai live at these depths, the balance of probabilities 
seems to me to incline in that direction. And there is one 
circumstance which weighs strongly in my mind. It may be 
taken as a law that any genus of animals which is found far 
back in time is capable of living under a great variety of circum- 
stances as regards light, temperatiire, and pressure. Now, the 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 87 

genus Gloligerina is abundantly represented in the cretaceous 
epoch, and perhaps earlier. 

' ' I abstain, however, at present from drawing any positive 
conclusions, preferring rather to await the result of more 
extended observations. " ' 

Dr. Wallich, Professor Wyville Thomson, and 
Dr. Carpenter concluded that the Gldbigcrinoi live 
at the bottom. Dr. Wallich writes in 1862 — " By 
sinking very fine gauze nets to considerable depths, 
I have repeatedly satisfied myself that Gldbigerina 
does not occur in the superficial strata of the 
ocean." ^ Moreover, having obtained certain living 
star-fish fi-om a depth of 1,260 fathoms, and found 
their stomachs full of " fresh-looking Glohigerincc " 
and their Mbris—he adduces this fact in support 
of his belief that the Glohigerincc live at the 
bottom. 

On the other hand, MliUei", Haeckel, Major 
Owen, Mr. Gwyn Jeffries, and other observers, 
found that Glohigerincc, with the allied genera 
Orhulina and Pulvinulina, sometimes occur abund- 
antly at the surface of the sea, the shells of these 
pelagic forms being not unfrequently provided 
with the long spines noticed by Macdonald ; and 
in 1865 and 1866, Major Owen more especially 
insisted on the importance of this fact. The 
recent work of the Challenger fully confirms Major 
Owen's statement. In the paper recently pub- 

^ Appendix to Report on Deep-sea Soundings in the Atlantic 
Ocean, by Lieut. -Commander Joseph Dayman. 1857. 
- The Noj-th AtlmUic Seabed, p. 137. 



88 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" iii 

lished in the proceedings of the Royal Society,^ 
from which a quotation has already been made, 
Professor Wyrille Thomson says : — 

" I had formed and expressed a very strong opinion on the 
matter. It seemed to me that the evidence was conclusive that 
the Foraminifera which formed the Glotigerina ooze lived on 
the bottom, and that the occurrence of individuals on the surface 
was accidental and exceptional ; but after going into the thing 
carefully, and considering the mass of evidence which has been 
accumulated by Mr. Murray, I now admit that I was in error ; 
and I agree with him that it may be taken as proved that all 
the materials of such deposits, with the exception, of course, of 
the remains of animals which we now know to live at the 
bottom at all depths, which occur in the deposit as foreign 
bodies, are derived from the surface. 

"Mr. Murray has combined with a careful examination of the 
soundings a constant use of the tow-net, usually at the surface, 
but also at depths of from ten to one hundred fathoms ; and he 
finds the closest relation to exist between the surface fauna of 
any particular locality and the deposit which is taking place at 
the bottom. In all seas, from the equator to the polar ice, the 
tow-net contains Oloiigerince. They are more abundant and of 
a larger size in wanner seas ; several varieties, attaining a large 
size and presenting marked varietal characters, are found in the 
intertropical area of the Atlantic. In the latitude of Kerguelen 
they are less numerous and smaller, while further south they are 
still more dwarfed, and only one variety, the typical GloUgerina 
hulloides, is represented. The living Oloiigerince from the tow- 
net are singularly different in appearance from the dead shells 
we find at the bottom. The shell is cigar and transparent, and 
each of the pores which penetrate it is surrounded by a raised 
crest, the crest round adjacent pores coalescing into a roughly 

1 "Preliminary Notes on the Nature of the Sea-bottom pro- 
cured by the soundings of H.M.S. Challenger during her cruise 
in the Southern Seas, in the early part of the year 1874." — 
Proceedings of the Hoy al Society, Nov. 26, 1874. 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER 89 

hexagonal network, so that the pores appear to lie at the 
bottom of a hexagonal pit. At each angle of this hexagon the 
crest gives off a delicate flexible calcareous spine, which is some- 
times four or five times the diameter of the shell in length. 
The spines radiate symmetrically from the direction of the 
centre of each chamber of the shell, and the sheaves of long 
transparent needles crossing one another in different directions 
have a very beautiful effect. The smaller inner chambers of the 
shell are entirely filled with an orange-yellow granular sarcode ; 
and the large terminal chamber usually contains only a small 
irregular mass, or two or three small masses ran together, of 
the same yellow sarcode stuck against one side, the remainder of 
the chamber being empty. No definite arrangement and no 
approacTi to straeture was observed in the sarcode, and no 
differentiation, with the exception of round bright-yellow oil- 
globules, very much like those found in some of the radiolarians, 
which are scattered, apparently irregularly, in the sarcode. Wo 
never have been able to detect, in any of the large number of 
Globigerince which we have examined, the least ti'ace of pseudo- 
podia, or any extension, in any form, of the sarcode beyond the 

shell. 

* ♦ # * * 

"In specimens taken with the tow-net the spines are very 
usually absent ; but that is probably on account of their extreme 
tenuity ; they arc broken off' by the slightest touch. In fresh 
examples from the surface, the dots indicating the origin of the 
lost spines may almost always be made out with a high power. 
There are never spines on the Globigerince from the bottom, 
even in the shallowest water." 



There can now be no doubt, therefore, that 
Globigerince live at the top of the sea ; but the 
question may still be raised whether they do not 
also hve at the bottom. In favour of this view, it 
has been urged that the shells of the Glohigerince 
of the surface never possess such thick walls as 



90 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER" in 

those which are found at the bottom, but I confess 
that I doubt the accuracy of this statement. 
Again, the occurrence of minute GlohigerincB in all 
stages of development, at the greatest depths, is 
brought forward as evidence that they live in situ. 
But considering the extent to which the surface 
organisms are devoured, without discrimination of 
young and old, by Salpm and the like, it is not 
wonderful that shells of all ages should be among 
the rejectamenta. Nor can the presence of the 
soft parts of the body in the shells which form 
the Gldbigerina ooze, and the fact, if it be one, 
that animals living at the bottom use them as 
food, be considered as conclusive evidence that 
the Globigerinw live at the bottom. Such as die 
at the surface, and even many of those which are 
swallowed by other animals, may retain much of 
their protoplasmic matter when they reach the 
depths at which the temperature sinks to 34° or 
32° Fahrenheit, where decomposition must become 
exceedingly slow. 

Another consideration appears to me to be in 
favour of the view that the GlobigerincB and their 
allies are essentially surface animals. This is the 
fact brought out by the Challenger's work, that 
they have a southern limit of distribution, which 
can hardly depend upon anything but the tem- 
perature of the surface water. And it is to 
be remarked that this southern limit occurs at a 
lower latitude in the Antarctic seas than it does 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 91 

in the North Atlantic. According to Dr. Wallich 
(" The North Atlantic Sea Bed," p. 157) Glohi- 
gerina is the prevaHing form in the deposits 
between the Faroe Islands and Iceland, and be- 
tween Iceland and East Greenland — or, in other 
words, in a region of the sea-bottom which lies 
altogether north of the parallel of 60° N. ; while 
in the southern seas, the Glohigerince become 
dwarfed and almost disappear between 50° and 
55° S. On the other hand, in the sea of 
Kamschatka, the Glohigerince have vanished in 
56° N., so that the persistence of the Globigerina 
ooze in high latitudes, in the North Atlantic, 
would seem to depend on the northward curve of 
the isothermals peculiar to this region ; and it is 
difficult to understand how the formation of 
Globigerina ooze can be affected by this climatal 
peculiarity unless it be effected by surface animals. 
Whatever may be the mode of life of the 
Foraminifera, to which the calcareous element of 
the deep-sea " chalk " owes its existence, the fact 
that it is the chief and most widely spread 
material of the sea-bottom in the intermediate 
zone, throughout both the Atlantic and Pacific 
Oceans, and the Indian Ocean, at depths from a 
few hundred to over two thousand fathoms, is 
established. But it is not the only extensive 
deposit, which is now taking place. In 1853, 
Count Pourtal^s, an officer of the United States 
Coast Survey, which has done so muck., for 



92 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER m 

scientific hydrography, observed, that the mud 
forming the sea-bottom at depths of one hundred 
and fifty fathoms, in 31° 32' N, 79° 35' W., oflf 
the Coast of Florida, was " a mixture, in about 
equal proportions, of Glohigerince and black sand, 
probably greensand, as it makes a green mark 
when crushed on paper." Professor Bailey, 
examining these grains microscopically, found 
that they were casts of the interior cavities of 
Foraminifcra, consisting of a mineral known as 
Glauconite, which is a silicate of iron and alumina. 
In these casts the minutest cavities and finest 
tubes in the Foraminifer were sometimes repro- 
duced in solid counterparts of the glassy mineral, 
while the calcareous original had been entirely 
dissolved away. 

Contemporaneously with these observations, 
the indefatigable Ehrenberg had discovered that 
the "greensands" of the geologist were largely 
made up of casts of a similar character, and proved 
the existence of Foraminifcra at a very ancient 
geological epoch, by discovering such casts in a 
greensand of Lower Silurian age, which occurs 
near St. Petersburg. 

Subsequently, Messrs. Parker and Jones dis- 
covered similar casts in process of formation, the 
original shell not having disappeared, in specimens 
of the sea-bottom of the Australian seas, brought 
home by the late Professor Jukes. And the 
Challenger has observed a deposit of a similar 



tli EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 93 

character in the course of the Agulhas current, 
near the Cape of Good Hope, and in some other 
locahties not yet defined. 

It would appear that this infiltration of Fora- 
minifera shells with Glauconite does not take place 
at great depths, but rather in what may be 
termed a sublittoral region, ranging from a 
hundred to three hundred fathoms. It cannot be 
ascribed to any local cause, for it takes place, not 
only over large areas in the Gulf of Mexico and 
the Coast of Florida, but in the South Atlantic 
and in the Pacific. But what are the conditions 
which determine its occurrence, and whence the 
silex, the iron, and the alumina (with perhaps 
potash and some other ingredients in small 
quantity) of which the Glauconite, is composed, 
proceed, is a point on which no light has yet been 
thrown. For the present we must be content 
with the fact that, in certain areas of the 
" intermediate zone," greensand is replacing and 
representing the primitively calcareo-silicious 
ooze. 

The investigation of the deposits which are 
now being formed in the basin of the Mediterra- 
nean, by the late Professor Edward Forbes, by 
Professor Williamson, and more recently by Dr. 
Carpenter, and a comparison of the results thus 
obtained with what is kno^vn of the surface fauna, 
have brought to light the remarkable fact, that 
while the surface and the shallows abound with 



94 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" ill 

Fm-aminifera and other calcareous shelled organ- 
isms, the indications of life become scanty at 
depths beyond 500 or 600 fathoms, while almost 
all traces of it disappear at greater depths, and at 
1,000 to 2,000 fathoms the bottom is covered with 
a fine clay. 

Dr. Carpenter has discussed the significance of 
this remarkable fact, and he is disposed to attri- 
bute the absence of life at great depths, partly 
to the absence of any circulation of the water of 
the Mediterranean at such depths, and partly to 
the exhaustion of the oxygen of the water by the 
organic matter contained in the fine clay, which 
he conceives to be formed by the finest particles 
of the mud brought down by the rivers which 
flow into the Mediterranean. 

However this may be, the explanation thus 
offered of the presence of the fine mud, and of the 
absence of organisms which ordinarily live at the 
bottom, does not account for the absence of 
the skeletons of the organisms which undoubtedly 
abound at the surface of the Mediterranean ; and 
it would seem to have no application to the re- 
markable fact discovered by the Challenger, that 
in the open Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, in the 
midst of the great intermediate zone, and 
thousands of miles away from the embouchure of 
any river, the sea-bottom, at depths approaching 
to and beyond 3,000 fathoms, no longer consists of 
GldbigeHna ooze, but of an excessively fine red clay. 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 95 

Professor Thomson gives the following account 
of this capital discovery : — 

" According to our present experience, the deposit of Ghhi- 
gerina ooze is limited to water of a certain depth, the extreme 
limit of the pure characteristio formation heing placed at a depth 
of somewhere ahout 2, 250 fathoms. Crossing from these shal- 
lower regions occupied by the ooze into deeper soundings, we 
find, univereally, that the calcareous formation gi'adually passes 
into, and is finally replaced by, an extremely fine pure clay, 
which occupies, speaking generally, all depths below 2,500 
fathoms, and consists almost entirely of a silicate of the red 
oxide of iron and alumina. The transition is veiy slow, and 
extends over several hundred fathoms of increasing depth ; the 
shells gradually lose their sharpness of outline, and assume a 
kind of ' rotten ' look and a brownish colour, and become more 
and more mixed with a fine amorphous red-brown powder, 
which increases steadily in proportion until the lime has almost 
entirely disappeared. This brown matter is in the finest possible 
state of subdivision, so fine that when, after sifting it to separate 
any organisms it might contain, we put it into jars to settle, it 
remained for days in suspension, giving the water very much 
the appearance and colour of chocolate. 

" In indicating the nature of the bottom on the charts, we 
came, from experience and without any theoretical considera- 
tions, to Use three terms for soundings in deep water. Two of 
these, Gl. oz. and r. cl., were very definite, and indicated 
strongly -marked formations, with apparently but few charactera 
in common ; but we frequently got soundings which we could 
not exactly call ' Globigerina ooze' or 'red clay,' and before we 
were fully aware of the nature of these, we were in the habit of 
indicating them as ' grey ooze ' (gr. oz. ) We now recognise the 
' grey ooze ' as an intermediate stage between the Globigerina 
ooze and the red clay ; we find that on one side, as it were, of 
an ideal line, the red clay contains more and more of the material 
of the calcareous oozo, while on the other, the ooze is mixed 
with an increasing proportion of ' red clay. ' 



96 EXtEDITlON OF THE '' CHALLENGER ' ill 

' "Although we have met with the same phenomenon so 
frequently, that we were at length able to predict the nature of 
the bottom from the depth of the soundings with absolute cer- 
tainty for the Atlantic and the Southern Sea, we had, perhaps, 
the best opportunity of observing it in our first section across 
the Atlantic, between Teneriffe and St. Thomas. The first four 
stations on this section, at depths from 1,525 to 2,220 fathoms, 
show Globigerina ooze. From the last of these, which is about 
300 miles from Teneriffe, the depth gradually increases to 2, 740 
fathoms at 500, and 2, 950 fathoms at 750 miles from Teneriffe, 
The bottom in these two soundings might have been called 
' gi'ey ooze, ' for although its nature has altered entirely from the 
Olobigerina ooze, the red clay into which it is rapidly passing 
still contains a considerable admixture of carbonate of lime. 

" The depth goes on increasing to a distance of 1,150 miles 
from Teneriffe, when it reaches 3,150 fathoms ; there the clay 
is pure and smooth, and contains scarcely a trace of lime. From 
this great depth the bottom gradually rises, and, with decreas- 
ing depth, the grey colour and the calcareous composition of the 
oozereturn. Three soundings in 2, 050, 1,900, and 1,950 fathoms 
on the ' Dolphin Rise ' gave highly characteristic examples of 
the Globigerina formation. Passing from the middle plateau of 
the Atlantic into the western trough, with depths a little over 
3, 000 fathoms, the red clay returned in aU its purity ; and our 
last sounding, in 1,420 fathoms, before reaching Sombrero, 
restored the Globigerina ooze with its peculiar associated fauna. 

"This section shows also the wide extension and the vast 
geological importance of the red clay formation. The total 
distance from Teneriffe to Sombrero is about 2,700 mUes. Pro- 
ceeding fi'om east to west, we have — 

About 80 miles of volcanic mud and sand. 



„ 350 


, Globigerina ooze, 


„ 1,050 


, red clay, 


„ 330 


, Globigerina ooze 


, 850 


, red clay, 


„ 40 


, Globigerina ooze ; 


giving a total of 1,900 miles of red clay to 720 miles of Globi- 


gerina ooze. 





Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 97 

" The nature and origin of this vast deposit of clay is a ques- 
tion of the very greatest interest ; and although I think there 
can be no douht that it is in the main solved, yet some matters 
of detail are still involved in diflSculty. My iirst impression 
was that it might be the most minutely divided material, the 
ultimate sediment produced by the disintegration of the land, 
by rivers and by the action of the sea on exposed coasts, and 
held in suspension and distributed by ocean currents, and only 
making itself manifest in places unoccupied by the Olohigerina 
ooze. Several cii-cumstances seemed, however, to negative this 
mode of origin. The formation seemed too unifonn : wherever 
we met with it, it had the same character, and it only varied in 
composition in containing less or more carbonate of lime. 

" Again, we were gradually becoming more and more con- 
vinced that all the important elements of the Gflobigerijia ooze 
lived on the surface, and it seemed evident that, so long as the 
condition on the surface remained the same, no alteration of 
contour at the bottom could possibly prevent its accumulation ; 
and the surface conditions in the Mid -Atlantic were very 
uniform, a moderate current of a very equal temperature passing 
continuously over elevations and depressions, and everywhere 
yielding to the tow-net the ooze-forming Foraminifera in the 
same proportion. The Mid-Atlantic swarms with pelagic 
MoUiisca, and, in moderate depths, the shells of these are con- 
stantly mixed with the Glohigerina ooze, sometimes in number 
sufficient to make up a considerable portion of its bulk. It is 
clear that these shells must fall in equal numbers upon the red 
clay, but scarcely a trace of one of them is ever brought up by 
the dredge on the red clay area. It might be possible to explain 
the absence of shell-secreting animals living on the bottom, on 
the supposition that the nature of the deposit was injurious to 
them ; but then the idea of a current sufficiently sti'ong to 
sweep them away is negatived by the extreme fineness of the 
sediment which is being laid down ; the absence of surface 
shells appears to be intelligible only on the supposition that they 
are in some way removed. 

"We conclude, therefore, that the 'red clay' is not an addi- 
tional substance introduced from without, and occupying certain 

VOL. VIII H 



98 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" m 

depressed regions on account of some law regulating its deposi- 
tion, but that it is produced by the removal, by some means or 
other, over these areas, of the carbonate of lime, which forms 
probably about 98 per cent, of the material of the Globigerina 
ooze. We can trace, indeed, every successive stage in the 
removal of the carbonate of lime in descending the slope of the 
ridge or plateau where the Globigerina ooze is forming, to 
the region of the clay. We find, first, that the shells of 
pteropods and other surface MoUusca which are constantly 
falling on the bottom, are absent, or, if a few remain, they 
are brittle and yellow, and evidently decaying rapidly. These 
shells of MoUusca decompose more easily and disappear sooner 
than the smaller, and apparently more delicate, shells of 
rhizopods. The smaller Foraminifera now give way, and are 
found in lessening proportion to the larger ; the coccoliths first 
lose their thin outer border and then disappear ; and the clubs 
of the rhabdoliths get worn out of shape, and are last seen, 
under a high power, as infinitely minute cylinders scattered over 
the field. The larger Foraminifera are attacked, and instead 
of being vividly white and delicately sculptured, they become 
brown and worn, and finally they break up, each according to 
its fashion ; the chamber-walls of Globigerina fall into wedge- 
shaped pieces, which quickly disappear, and a thick rough crast 
breaks away from the surface of Orbulina, leaving a thin inner 
sphere, at fii-st beautifully transparent, but soon becoming 
opaque and crumbling away. 

' ' In the meantime the proportion of the amorphous ' red 
clay' to the calcareous elements of all kinds increases, until 
the latter disappear, with the exception of a few scattered shells 
of the larger Foraminifera, which are still found even in the 
most characteristic samples of the ' red clay. ' 

"There seems to be no room left for doubt that the red clay 
is essentially the insoluble residue, the ash, as it were, of the 
calcareous organisms which form the Globigerina ooze, after the 
calcareous matter has been by some means removed. An 
ordinary mixture of calcareous Foraminifera with the shells of 
pteropods, forming a fair sample of Globigerina ooze from near 
St. Thomas, was carefully washed, and subjected by Mr. 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" 99 

Buclianan to the action of weak acid ; and he fovmd that there 
remained after the carbonate of lime had been removed, about 
1 per cent, of a reddish mud, consisting of silica, alnmina, and 
the red oxide of iron. This experiment has been frequently 
repeated with different samples of Globigerina ooze, and always 
with the result that a, small proportion of a red sediment re- 
mains, which possesses all the characters of the red clay. " 
***** 

" It seems evident from the observations here recorded, that 
clay, which we have hitherto looked upon as essentially the 
product of the disintegration of older rocks, may be, under 
certain circumstances, an organic formation like chalk ; that, as 
a matter of fact, an area on the surface of the globe, which we 
have shown to be of vast extent, although we are still far from 
having ascertained its limits, is being covered by such a deposit 
at the present day. 

" It is impossible to avoid associating such a formation with 
the fine, smooth, homogeneous clays and schists, poor in fossils, 
but showing worm-tubes and tracks, and bunches of doubtful 
branching things, such as Oldhamia, silicious sponges, and 
thin-shelled peculiar shrimps. Such formations, more or less 
metamorphosed, are very familiar, especially to the student of 
palseozoic geology, and they often attain a vast thickness. One 
is inclined, from the gi-eat resemblance between them in com- 
position and in the general character of the included fauna, to 
suspect that these may be organic formations, like the modern 
red clay of the Atlantic and Southern Sea, accumulations of the 
insoluble ashes of shelled creatures. 

"The dredging in the red clay on the 13th of March was 
unusually rich. The bag contained examples, those with cal- 
careous shells rather stunted, of most of the characteristic deep- 
water groups of the Southern Sea, including Umbellularia, - 
Eiiplectella, Ptcrocrinus, Brisinga, OphioglypJia, Pmirtalesia, 
and one or two Mollusca. This is, however, very rarely the 
case. Generally the red clay is barren, or contains only a veiy 
small number of forms. 

It must be admitted that it is very difficult, at 

H 2 



100 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" in 

present, to frame any satisfactory explanation of 
the mode of origin of this singular deposit of red 
clay. 

I cannot say that the theory put forward 
tentatively, and with much reservation by Pro- 
fessor Thomson, that the calcareous matter is 
dissolved out by the relatively fresh water of the 
deep currents from the Antarctic regions, appears 
satisfactory to me. Nor do I see my way to the 
acceptance of the suggestion of Dr. Carpenter, that 
the red clay is the result of the decomposition of 
previously-formed greensand. At present there is 
no evidence that greensand casts are ever formed 
at great depths; nor has it been proved that 
Glauconite is decomposable by the agency of water 
and carbonic acid. 

I think it probable that we shall have to wait 
some time for a sufficient explanation of the origin 
of the abyssal red clay, no less than for that of the 
sublittoral greensand in the intermediate zone. 
But the importance of the establishment of the 
fact that these various deposits are being formed 
in the ocean, at the present day, remains the same, 
whether its rationale be understood or not. 
. For, suppose the globe to be evenly covered with 
sea, to a depth say of a thousand fathoms — then, 
whatever might be the mineral matter composing 
the sea-bottom, little or no deposit would be 
formed upon it, the abrading and denuding action 
of water, at such a depth, being exceedingly slight. 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" 101 

Next, imagine sponges, Badiolaria, Foraminifera, 
and diatomaceous plants, such as those which now 
exist in the deep-sea, to be introduced : they 
would be distributed according to the same laws 
as at present, the sponges (and possibly some of 
the Foraminifera) covering the bottom, while other 
Foraminifera, with the Sadiolaria and Diatomacem, 
would increase and multiply in the surface waters. 
In accordance with the existing state of things, 
the Badiolaria and Diatoms would have a universal 
distribution, the latter gathering most thickly in 
the polar regions, while the Foraminifera would 
be largely, if not exclusively, confined to the inter- 
mediate zone ; and, as a consequence of this distri- 
bution, a bed of " chalk " would begin to form in 
the intermediate zone, while caps of silicious rock 
would accumulate on the circumpolar regions. 

Suppose, further, that a part of the intermediate 
area were raised to within two or three hundred 
fathoms of the surface — for anjrthing that we know 
to the contrary, the change of level might deter- 
mine the substitution of greensand for the 
" chalk " ; while, on the other hand, if part of 
the same area were depressed to three thousand 
fathoms, that change might determine the substi- 
tution of a different silicate of alumina and iron — 
namely, clay — for the " chalk " that would other- 
wise be formed. 

If the Challenger hypothesis, that the red 
clay is the residue left by dissolved Foraminiferous 



102 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" III 

skeletons, is correct, then all these deposits alike 
would be directly, or indirectly, the product of 
living organisms. But just as a silicious deposit 
may be metamorphosed into opal or quartzite, and 
chalk into marble, so known metamorphic agencies 
may metamorphose clay into schist, clay-slate, slate, 
gneiss, or even granite. And thus, by the agency 
of the lowest and simplest of organisms, our 
imaginary globe might be covered with strata, of 
all the chief kinds of rock of which the known 
crust of the earth is composed, of indefinite thick- 
ness and extent. 

The bearing of the conclusions which are now 
either established, or highly probable, respecting 
the origin of silicious, calcareous, and clayey rocks, 
and their metamorphic derivatives, upon the 
archaeology of the earth, the elucidation of which 
is the ultimate object of the geologist, is of no 
small importance. 

A hundred years ago the singular insight of 
Linnaeus enabled him to say that " fossils are not 
the children but the parents of rocks," ^ and the 

1 "Petrificata monthun calcariorum non filii sed parentes 
sunt, cum omnis calx oriatur ab animalibus." — Systema Naturce, 
Ed. xii,, t. iii., p. 154. It must be recollected that LinnEeus 
included silex, as well as limestone, under the name of " calx," 
and that he would probably have arranged Diatoms among 
animals, as part of "chaos." Ehrenberg quotes another even 
more pithy passage, which I have not been able to find in any 
edition of the Systema accessible to me: "Sic lapides ab 
animalibus, nee vice versa. Sic ruiies saxei non primuevi, sed 
temporis filise." 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" 108 

whole effect of the discoveries made since his time 
has been to compile a larger and larger comment- 
ary upon this text. It is, at present, a perfectly 
tenable hypothesis that all sihcious and calcareous 
rocks are either directly, or indirectly, derived from 
material which has, at one time or other, formed 
part of the organized framework of living organ- 
isms. Whether the same generalization may be 
extended to aluminous rocks, depends upon the 
conclusion to be drawn from the facts respecting 
the red clay areas brought to light by the 
Challenger. If we accept the view taken by 
Wyville Thomson and his colleagues — that the 
red clay is the residuum left after the calcareous 
matter of the Gldbigerinm ooze has been dissolved 
away— then clay is as much a product of life as 
limestone, and all known derivatives of clay may 
have formed part of animal bodies. 

So long as the Glohigerince, actually collected at 
the surface, have not been demonstrated to con- 
tain the elements of clay, the Challenger hypo- 
thesis, as I may term it, must be accepted with 
reserve and provisionally, but, at present, I cannot 
but think that it is more probable than any other 
suggestion which has been made. 

Accepting it provisionally, we arrive at the 
remarkable result that all the chief known con- 
stituents of the crust of the earth may have 
formed part of living bodies ; that they may be 
the " ash " of protoplasm ; that the " o'upes saxei " 



104 EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" ill 

axe not only " temporis," but " vitce filice " ; and, 
consequently, that the time during which life has 
been active on the globe may be indefinitely 
greater than the period, the commencement of 
which is marked by the oldest known rocks, 
whether fossiliferous or unfossiliferous. 

And thus we are led to see where the solution 
of a great problem and apparent paradox of 
geology may lie. Satisfactory evidence now exists 
that some animals in the existing world have been 
derived by a process of gradual modification from 
pre-existing forms. It is undeniable, for example, 
that the evidence in favour of the derivation of 
the horse from the later tertiary Hipparion, and 
that of the Hipparion from Anchitherium, is as 
complete and cogent as such evidence can reason- 
ably be expected to be ; and the further investiga- 
tions into the history of the tertiary mammalia are 
pushed, the greater is the accumulation of evidence 
having the same tendency. So far from palae- 
ontology lending no support to the doctrine of 
evolution — as one sees constantly asserted — that 
doctrine, if it had no other support, would have 
been irresistibly forced upon us by the palseonto- 
logical discoveries of the last twenty years. 

If, however, the diverse forms of life which now 
exist have been produced by the modification of 
previously-existing less divergent forms, the recent 
and extinct species, taken as a whole, must fall 
into series which must converge as we go back in 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 105 

time. Hence, if the period represented by the 
rocks is greater than, or co-extensive with, that 
during which life has existed, we ought, some- 
where among the ancient formations, to arrive at 
the point to which all these series converge, or 
from which, in other words, they have diverged — 
the primitive undifferentiated protoplasmic living 
things, whence the two great series of plants and 
animals have taken their departure. 

But, as a matter of fact, the amount of conver- 
gence of series, in relation to the time occupied by 
the deposition of geological formations, is extra- 
ordinarily small. Of all animals the higher 
Vertebrata are the most complex ; and among 
these the carnivores and hoofed animals ( Ungulata) 
are highly differentiated. Nevertheless, although 
the different lines of modification of the Carnwora 
and those of the Ungulata, respectively, approach 
one another, and, although each group is repre- 
sented by less differentiated forms in the older 
tertiary rocks than at the present day, the oldest 
tertiary rocks do not bring us near the primitive 
form of either. If, in the same way, the conver- 
gence of the varied forms of reptiles is measured 
against the time during which their remains are 
preserved — which is represented by the whole of 
the tertiary and mesozoic formations — the amount 
of that convergence is far smaller than that of the 
lines of mammals, between the present time and 
the beginning of the tertiary epoch. And it is a 



106 EXPEDITION OF, THE " CHALLENGER " m 

broad fact that, the lower we go in the scale of 
organization, the fewer signs are there of con- 
vergence towards the primitive form from whence 
all must have diverged, if evolution be a fact. 
Nevertheless, that it is a fact in some cases, is 
proved, and I, for one, have not the courage to 
suppose that the mode in which some species have 
taken their origin is different from that in which 
the rest have originated. 

What, then, has become of all the marine 
animals which, on the hypothesis of evolution, 
must have existed in myriads in those seas, wherein 
the many thousand feet of Cambrian and Lauren- 
tian rocks now devoid, or almost devoid, of any 
trace of life were deposited ? 

Sir Charles Lyell long ago suggested that the 
azoic character of these ancient formations might 
be due to the fact that they had undergone 
extensive metamorphosis; and readers of the 
" Principles of Geology " will be familiar with the 
ingenious manner in which he contrasts the theory 
of the Gnome, who is acquainted only with the 
interior of the earth, with those of ordinary 
philosophers, who know only its exterior. 

The metamorphism contemplated by the great 
modern champion of rational geology is, mainly, 
that brought about by the exposure of rocks to 
subterranean heat ; and where no such heat could 
be shown to have operated, his opponents as- 
sumed that no metamorphosis could have taken 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " 107 

place. But the formation of greensand, and still 
more that of the "red clay" (if the Challenger 
hypothesis be correct) affords an insight into a 
new kind of metamorphosis — not igneous, but 
aqueous — by which the primitive nature of a 
deposit may be masked as completely as it can be 
by the agency of heat. And, as WyviUe Thomson 
suggests, in the passage I have quoted above (p. 
17), it further enables us to assign a new cause 
for the occurrence, so puzzling hitherto, of 
thousands of feet of unfossiliferous fine-grained 
schists and slates, in the midst of formations 
deposited in seas which certainly abounded in life. 
If the great deposit of " red clay " now forming in 
the eastern vaUey of the Atlantic were meta- 
morphosed into slate and then upheaved, it would 
constitute an " azoic " rock of enormous extent. 
And yet that rock is now forming in the midst of 
a sea which swarms with living beings, the great 
majority of which are provided with calcareous or 
silicious shells and skeletons ; and, therefore, are 
such as, up to this time, we should have termed 
eminently preservable. 

Thus the discoveries made by the Challenger 
expedition, like all recent advances in our 
knowledge of the phenomena of biology, or 
of the changes now being effected in the 
structure of the surface of the earth, are in 
accordance with, and lend strong support to, 
that doctrine of Uniformitarianism, which, fifty 



108 EXPEDITION OF THE " CHALLENGER " III 

years ago, was held only by a small minority of 
English geologists — LyeU, Scrope, and De la Beche 
— ^but now, thanks to the long-continued labours 
of the first two, and mainly to those of Sir Charles 
Lyell, has gradually passed from the position of a 
heresy to that of catholic doctrine. 

Applied within the limits of the time registered 
by the known fraction of the crust of the earth, 
I believe that uniformitarianism is unassailable. 
The evidence that, in the enormous lapse of time 
between the deposition of the lowest Laurentian 
strata and the present day, the forces which have 
modified the surface of the crust of the earth were 
different in kind, or greater in the intensity of 
their action, than those which are now occupied in 
the same work, has yet to be produced. Such 
evidence as we possess all tends in the contrary 
direction, and is in favour of the same slow and 
gradual changes occurring then as now. 

But this conclusion in nowise conflicts with the 
deductions of the physicist from his no less clear 
and certain data. It may be certain that this 
globe has cooled down from a condition in which 
life could not have existed ; it may be certain that, 
in so cooling, its contracting crust must have 
undergone sudden convulsions, which were to our 
earthquakes as an earthquake is to the vibration 
caused by the periodical eruption of a Geyser ; but 
in that case, the earth must, like other respectable 
parents, have sowed her wild oats, and got through 



Ill EXPEDITION OF THE "CHALLENGER" 109 

her turbulent youth, before we, her children, have 
any knowledge of her. 

So far as the evidence afforded by the super- 
ficial crust of the earth goes, the modern geologist 
can, m animo, repeat the saying of Hutton, " We 
find no vestige of a beginning — no prospect of an 
end." However, he wiU add, with Hutton, " But 
in thus tracing back the natural operations which 
have succeeded each other, and mark to us the 
course of time past, we come to a period in which 
we cannot see any further." And if he seek to 
peer into the darkness of this period, he will 
welcome the light proffered by physics and 
mathematics. 



IV 

YEAST 

[1871] 

It has been known, from time immemorial, that 
the sweet liquids which may be obtained by ex- 
pressing the juices of the fruits and stems of 
various plants, or by steeping malted barley in hot 
water, or by mixing honey with water — are liable 
to undergo a series of very singular changes, if 
freely exposed to the air and left to themselves, in 
warm weather. However clear and pellucid the 
liquid may have been when first prepared, however 
carefully it may have been freed, by straining and 
iiltration, from even the finest visible impurities, 
it wiU not remain clear. After a time it will 
become cloudy and turbid ; little bubbles wiU be 
seen rising to the surface, and their abundance will 
increase until the liquid hisses as if it were sim- 
mering on the fire. By degrees, some of the soHd 
particles which produce the turbidity of the liquid 



IV YEAST 111 

collect at its surface into a scum, which is blown 
up by the emerging air-bubbles into a thick, foamy 
froth. Another moiety sinks to the bottom, and 
accumulates as a muddy sediment, or " lees." 

When this action has continued, with more or 
less violence, for a certain time, it gradually 
moderates. The evolution of bubbles slackens, 
and finally comes to an end ; scum and lees ahke 
settle at the bottom, and the fluid is once more 
clear and transparent. But it has acquired 
properties of which no trace existed in the 
original hquid. Instead of being a mere sweet 
fluid, mainly composed of sugar and water, the 
sugar has more or less completely disappeared ; and 
it has acquired that peculiar smell and taste which 
we call " spirituous." Instead of being devoid of 
any obvious effect upon the animal economy, it 
has become possessed of a very wonderful influence 
on the nervous system ; so that in small doses it 
exhilarates, while in larger it stupefies, and may 
even destroy life. 

Moreover, if the original fluid is put into a stUl, 
and heated moderately, the first and last product 
of its distillation is simple water ; while, when the 
altered fluid is subjected to the same process, the 
matter which is first condensed in the receiver is 
found to be a cleaj, volatile substance, which is 
fighter than water, has a pungent taste and smell, 
possesses the intoxicating powers of the fluid in 
an eminent degree, and takes fire the moment it 



112 YEAST IV 

is brought in contact with a flame. The Al- 
chemists called this volatile liquid, which they 
obtained from wine, " spirits of wine," just as they 
called hydrochloric acid " spirits of salt," and as 
we, to this day, call refined turpentine " spirits of 
turpentine." As the "spiritus," or breath, of a 
man was thought to be the most refined and 
subtle part of him, the intelligent essence of man 
was also conceived as a sort of breath, or spirit ; 
and, by analogy, the most refined essence of any- 
thing was called its " spirit." And thus it has 
come about that we use the same word for the 
soul of man and for a glass of gin. 

At the present day, however, we even more 
commonly use another name for this peculiar 
liquid — namely, " alcohol," and its origin is not 
less singular. The Dutch physician. Van Helmont, 
lived in the latter part of the sixteenth and the 
beginning of the seventeenth century — in the 
transition period between alchemy and chemistry 
— and was rather more alchemist than chemist. 
Appended to his " Opera Omnia," published in 1707, 
there is a very needful " Clavis ad obscuriorum 
sensum referendum," in which the following 
passage occurs : — 

"Alcohol. — Chymicis est liquor aut pulvis summ^ subtili- 
satus, vocabulo Orientalibus quoque, cum primis Habessinis, 
familiari, quibus cohol speciatim pulverem impalpabilem ex 
antimonio pro oculis tingendis denotat . . . Hodie autem, ob 
analogiam, quivis pulvis tenerior ut pulvis oculorum cancri 



IV YEAST 113 

summfe subtilisatus alcohol audit, baud aliter ao spiritiis rectifl- 
catissimi alcolisati dicuntur. " 

Similarly, Robert Boyle speaks of a fine powder 
as " alcohol " ; and, so late as the middle of the 
last century, the EngHsh lexicographer, Nathan 
Bailey, defines " alcohol " as " the pure substance 
of anything separated firom the more gross, a very 
fine and impalpable powder, cJr a very pure, well- 
rectified spirit." But, by the time of the publi- 
cation of Lavoisier's " Traite El^mentaire de 
Chimie,"in 1789, the term "alcohol," "alkohol," 
or " alkool " (for it is spelt in all three ways), which 
Van Helmont had applied primarily to a fine 
powder, and only secondarily to spirits of wine, had 
lost its primary meaning altogether; and, from 
the end of the last century until now, it has, I 
believe, been used exclusively as the denotation of 
spirits of wine, and bodies chemically allied to that 
substance. 

The process which gives rise to alcohol in a 
saccharine fluid is known to us as " fermentation " ; 
a term based upon the apparent boihng up or 
" effervescence " of the fermenting liquid, and of 
Latin origin. 

Our Teutonic cousins call the same process 
"gahren," "gasen," "goschen," and "gischen"; 
but, oddly enough, we do not seem to have 
retained their verb or their substantive denot- 
ing the action itself, though we do use names 
identical with, or plainly derived from, theirs for 

VOL. VIII I 



114 YEAST IV 

the scum and lees. These are called, in Low 
German, " gascht " and " gischt " ; in Anglo-Saxon^ 
" gest," " gist," and " yst," whence our " yeast." 
Again, in Low German and in Anglo-Saxon there 
is another name for yeast, having the form " barm," 
or " beorm " ; and, in the Midland Counties, 
" barm " is the name by which yeast is still best 
known. In High German, there is a third name 
for yeast, "hefe," which is not represented in 
English, so far as I know. 

All these words are said by philologers to be 
derived from roots expressive of the intestine 
motion of a fermenting substance. Thus " hefe " 
is derived from " heben," to raise ; " barm " from 
"beren" or "baren," to bear up; "yeast," "yst," 
and " gist," have all to do with seething and foam, 
with " yeasty " waves, and " gusty " breezes. 

The same reference to the swelling up of the 
fermenting substance is seen in the Gallo-Latin 
terms " levure " and " leaven." 

It is highly creditable to the ingenuity of our 
ancestors that the peculiar property of fermented 
liquids, in virtue of which they " make glad the 
heart of man," seems to have been known in the 
remotest periods of which we have any record. 
All savages take to alcoholic fluids as if they 
were to the manner bom. Our Vedic forefathers 
intoxicated themselves with the juice of the 
" soma " ; Noah, by a not unnatural reaction 
against a superfluity of water, appears to have 



IV 



YEAST 115 



taken the earliest practicable opportunity of 
qualifying that which he was obliged to drink; 
and the ghosts of the ancient Egyptians were 
solaced by pictures of banquets in which the 
wine-cup passes round, graven on the walls of 
their tombs. A knowledge of the process of 
fermentation, therefore, was in all probability 
possessed by the prehistoric populations of the 
globe ; and it must have become a matter of great 
interest even to primaeval wine-bibbers to study 
the methods by which fermented liquids could 
be surely manufactured. No doubt it was soon 
discovered that the most certain, as well as 
the most expeditious, way of making a sweet juice 
ferment was to add to it a little of the scum, or 
lees, of another fermenting juice. And it can 
hardly be questioned that this singular excitation 
of fermentation in one fluid, by a sort of infection, 
or inoculation, of a httle ferment taken from some 
other fluid, together with the strange swelling, 
foaming, and hissing of the fermented substance, 
must have always attracted attention from the 
more thoughtful. Nevertheless, the commence- 
ment of the scientific analysis of the phenomena 
dates from a period not earlier than the first half 
of the seventeenth century. 

At this time, Van Hehnont made a first step, 
by pointing out that the peculiar hissing and 
bubbling of a fermented hquid is due, not to the 
evolution of common air (which he, as the inventor 

I 2 



116 YEAST IV 

of the term " gas," calls " gas ventosum "), but to 
that of a peculiar kind of air such as is occasionally 
met with in caves, mines, and wells, and which 
he calls " gas sylvestre." 

But a century elapsed before the nature of this 
"gas sylvestre," or, as it was afterwards called, 
"fixed air," was clearly determined, and it was 
found to be identical with that deadly " choke- 
damp " by which the lives of those who descend 
into old wells, or mines, or brewers' vats, are 
sometimes suddenly ended ; and with the poisonous 
aeriform fluid which is produced by the combus- 
tion of charcoal, and now goes by the name of 
carbonic acid gas. 

During the same time it gradually became 
evident that the presence of sugar was essential to 
the production of alcohol and the evolution of 
carbonic acid gas, which are the two great and 
conspicuous products of fermentation. And finally, 
in 1787, the Italian chemist, Fabroni, made the 
capital discovery that the yeast ferment, the 
presence of which is necessary to fermentation, 
is what he termed a " vegeto-animal " substance ; 
that is, a body which gives off ammoniacal salts 
when it is burned, and is, in other ways, similar 
to the gluten of plants and the albumen and 
casein of animals. 

These discoveries prepared the way for the 
illustrious Frenchman, Lavoisier, who first ap- 
proached the problem of fermentation with a 



IV YEAST 117 

complete conception of the nature of the work to 
be done. The words in which he expresses this 
conception, in the treatise on elementary chemistry 
to which reference has already been made, mark 
the year 1789 as the commencement of a revolu- 
tion of not less moment in the world of science 
than that which simultaneously burst over the 
political world, and soon engulfed Lavoisier himself 
in one of its mad eddies. 



"We may lay it down as an incontestable axiom that, in all 
the operations of art and nature, nothing is created ; an ei^ual 
quantity of matter exists- both before and after the experiment : 
the quality and quantity of the elements remain precisely the 
same, and nothing takes place beyond changes and modifications 
in the combinations of these elements. Upon this priuciple the 
whole art of performing chemical experiments depends ; we 
must always suppose an exact equality between the elements of 
the body examined and those of the products of its analysis. 

" Hence, since from must of grapes we procure alcohol and 
carbonic acid, I have an undoubted right to suppose that must 
consists of carbonic acid and alcohol. From these premisses we 
have two modes of ascertaining what passes during vinous fer- 
mentation : either by determining the nature of, and the elements 
which compose, the fermentable substances ; or by accurately ex- 
amining the products resulting from fermentation ; and it is evi- 
dent that the knowledge of either of these must lead to accurate 
conclusions concerning the nature and composition of the other. 
From these considerations it became necessaiy accurately to 
determine the constituent elements of the fermentable sub- 
stances ; and for this purpose I did not make use of the com- 
pound juices of fruits, the rigorous analysis of which is perhaps 
impossible, but made choice of sugar, which is easily analysed, 
and the nature of which I have already explained. This sub- 
stance is a true vegetable oxyd, with two bases, composed of 



118 YEAST IV 

hydrogen and carbon, brought to the state of an oxyd by means 
of a certain proportion of oxygen ; and these three elements are 
combined in such a way that a very slight force is sufficient to 
destroy the ec^uilibiium of their connection. " 

After giving the details of his analysis of sugar 
and of the products of fermentation, Lavoisier 
continues : — 

"The effect of the vinous fermentation upon sugar is thus 
reduced to the mere separation of its elements into two portions ; 
one part is oxygenated at the expense of the other, so as to form 
carbonic acid ; while the other part, being disoxygenated in 
favour of the latter, is converted into the combustible substance 
called alkohol ; therefore, if it were possible to re-unite alkohol 
and carbonic acid together, we ought to form sugar." ^ 

Thus Lavoisier thought he had demonstrated 
that the carbonic acid and the alcohol which are 
produced by the process of fermentation, are 
equal in weight to the sugar which disappears; 
but the application of the more refined methods 
of modern chemistry to the investigation of the 
products of fermentation by Pasteur, in 1860, 
proved that this is not exactly true, and that 
there is a deficit of from 5 to 7 per cent, of the 
sugar which is not covered by the alcohol and 
carbonic acid evolved. The greater part of this 
deficit is accounted for by the discovery of two 
substances, glycerine and succinic acid, of the 
existence of which Lavoisier was unaware, in the 

1 Elements of Chemistry. By M. Lavoisier. Translated by 
Robert Kerr. Second Edition, 1793 (pp. 186—196). 



IV YEAST 119 

fermented liquid. But about 1| per cent, still 
remains to be made good. According to Pasteur, 
it has been appropriated by the yeast, but the 
fact that such appropriation takes place cannot 
be said to be actually proved. 

However this may be, there can be no doubt 
that the constituent elements of fully 98 per 
cent, of the sugar which has vanished during 
fermentation have simply undergone rearrange- 
ment ; like the soldiers of a brigade, who at the 
word of command divide themselves into the 
independent regiments to which they belong. 
The brigade is sugar, the regiments are carbonic 
acid, succinic acid, alcohol, and glycerine. 

From the time of Fabroni, onwards, it has been 
admitted that the agent by which this surprising 
rearrangement of the particles of the sugar is 
effected is the yeast. But the first thoroughly 
conclusive evidence of the necessity of yeast for 
the fermentation of sugar was furnished by 
Appert, whose method of preserving perishable 
articles of food excited so much attention in 
France at the beginning of this century. Gay- 
Lussac, in his " Memoire sur la Fermentation," ^ 
alludes to Appert's method of preserving beer- 
wort unfermented for an indefinite time, by 
simply boiling the wort and closing the vessel 
in which the boiling fluid is contained, in such 
a way as thoroughly to exclude air; and he 
^ Annates de Chimie, 1810. 



120 YEAST IV 

shows that, if a little yeast be introduced into 
such wort, after it has cooled, the wort at once 
begins to ferment, even though every precaution 
be taken to exclude air. And this statement has 
since received full confirmation from Pasteur. 

On the other hand, Schwann, Schroeder and 
Dusch, and Pasteur, have amply proved that air 
may be allowed to have free access to beer-wort, 
without exciting fermentation, if only efiicient 
precautions are taken to prevent the entry of 
particles of yeast along with the air. 

Thus, the truth that the fermentation of a 
simple solution of sugar in water depends upon 
the presence of yeast, rests upon an unassailable 
foundation; and the inquiry into the exact 
nature of the substance which possesses such a 
wonderful chemical influence becomes profoundly 
interesting. 

The first step towards the solution of this 
problem was made two centuries ago by the patient 
and painstaking Dutch naturahst, Leeuwenhoek, 
who in the year 1680 wrote thus : — 

"Ssepissime examinavi fermentum cerevisiae, semperque hoc 
ex globulis per materiam pellucidam fluitantibus, quam cere- 
visiam esse eensui, constare observavi : vidi etiam evidentissime, 
unumquemque hujus fermenti globulum denuo ex sex distinetis 
globulis constare, accurate eidem quantltate et formse, cui 
globulis sanguinis nostri, respondentibus. 

" Terum talis mihi de horum origine et formatione conceptus 
formabam ; globulis nempe ex quibus farina Tritici, Hoi-dei, 
Avense, Fagotritici, se constat aquse calore dissolvi et aquoe com- 



IV 



YEAST 121 



misceri ; hac, vero aqua, quam oerevisiam vocare licet, refriges- 
cente, multos ex minimis particulis in cerevisia coadimaii, et hoc 
pacto efBcere particulam sive globulum, quae sexta pars est 
globuli fecis, et iterum sex ex hisce globulis conjungi." ' 

Thus Leeuwenhoek discovered that yeast con- 
sists of globules floating in a fluid ; hut he thought 
that they were merely the starchy particles of the 
grain from which the wort was made, rearranged. 
He discovered the fact that yeast had a definite 
structure, hut not the meaning of the fact. A 
century and a half elapsed, and the investigation 
of yeast was recommenced almost simultaneously 
by Cagniard de la Tour in France, and by Schwann 
and Kiitzing in Germany. The French observer 
was the first to publish his results ; and the sub- 
ject received at his hands and at those of his 
colleague, the botanist Turpin, full and satisfactory 
investigation. 

The main conclusions at which they arrived are 
these. The globular, or oval, corpuscles which 
float so thickly in the yeast as to make it muddy, 
though the largest are not more than one two- 
thousandth of an inch in diameter, and the 
smallest may measure less than one seven- 
thousandth of an inch, are hving organisms. They 
multiply with great rapidity by giving off minute 
buds, which soon attaia the size of their parent, 
and then either become detached or remain 
united, forming the compound globules of which 
' Leeuwenhoek, Arcana Naturm Detecta. Ed. Nov., 1721. 



122 YEAST IV 

Leeuwenhoek speaks, though the constancy of 
their arrangement in sixes existed only in the 
worthy Dutchman's imagination. 

It was very soon made out that these yeast 
organisms, to which Turpin gave the name of 
Torula cerevisim, were more nearly allied to the 
lower Fungi than to anything else. Indeed 
Turpin, and subsequently Berkeley and Hofimann, 
believed that they had traced the development of 
the Torula into the weU-known and very common 
mould — the Penicillium glaucum. Other observers 
have not succeeded in verifying these statements ; 
and my own observations lead me to believe, that 
while the connection between Torula and the 
moulds is a very close one, it is of a different 
nature from that which has been supposed. I 
have never been able to trace the development of 
Torula into a true mould ; but it is quite easy to 
prove that species of true mould, such as Peni- 
cillium, when sown in an appropriate nidus, such 
as a solution of tartrate of ammonia and yeast- 
ash, in water, wiljh or without sugar, give rise to 
Torulce, similar in all respects to T. cerevisicB, 
except that they are, on the average, smaller. 
Moreover, Bail has observed the development of a 
Torula larger than T. cerevisice, from a Mucor, a 
mould allied to Penicillium. 

It follows, therefore, that the Torulce, or 
organisms of yeast, are veritable plants ; and con- 
clusive experiments have proved that the power 



IV YEAST 123 

which causes the rearrangement of the molecules 
of the sugar is intimately connected with the life 
and growth of the plant. In fact, whatever arrests 
the vital activity of the plant also prevents it 
from exciting fermentation. 

Such being the facts with regard to the nature 
of yeast, and the changes which it effects in 
sugar, how are they to be accounted for ? Before 
modern chemistry had come into existence, Stahl, 
stumbhng, with the stride of genius, upon the con- 
ception which Hes at the bottom of all modern views 
of the process, put forward the notion that the 
ferment, being in a state of internal motion, com- 
municated that motion to the sugar, and thus 
caused its resolution into new substances. And 
Lavoisier, as we have seen, adopts substantially 
the same view. But Fabroni, fall of the then 
novel conception of acids and bases and double 
decompositions, propounded the hypothesis that 
sugar is an oxide with two bases, and the ferment 
a carbonate with two bases ; that the carbon of 
the ferment unites with the oxygen of the sugar, 
and gives rise to carbonic acid ; while the sugar, 
uniting with the nitrogen of the ferment, pro- 
duces a new substance analogous to opium. This 
is decomposed by distOlation, and gives rise to 
alcohol. Next, in 1803, Th^nard propounded a 
hypothesis which partakes somewhat of the nature 
of both Stahl's and Fabroni's views. " I do not 
beheve with Lavoisier," he says, " that all the 



124 YEAST 



IV 



carbonic acid formed proceeds from the sugar. 
How, in that case, could we conceive the action of 
the ferment on it ? I think that the first por- 
tions of the acid are due to a combination of the 
carbon of the ferment with the oxygen of the 
sugar, and that it is by carrying off a portion of 
oxygen from the last that the ferment causes the 
fermentation to commence — the equilibrium be- 
tween the principles of the sugar being disturbed, 
they combine afresh to form carbonic acid and 
alcohol." 

The three views here before us may be familiarly 
exemphfied by supposing the sugar to be a card- 
house. According to Stahl, the ferment is some- 
body who knocks the table, and shakes the card- 
house down; according to Fabroni, the ferment 
takes out some cards, but puts others in their 
places ; according to Thenard, the ferment simply 
takes a card out of the bottom story, the result 
of which is that all the others fall. 

As chemistry advanced, facts came to light 
which put a new face upon Stahl's hypothesis, and 
gave it a safer foundation than it previously pos- 
sessed. The general nature of these phenomena 
may be thus stated :^A body, A, without giving 
to, or taking from, another body B, any material 
particles, causes B to decompose into other sub- 
stances, C, D, E, the sum of the weights of which 
is equal to the weight of B, which decomposes. 

Thus, bitter almonds contain two substances, 



IT YEAST 125 

amygdalin and STuaptase, which can be extracted, 
in a separate state, from the bitter almonds. The 
amygdalin thus obtained, if dissolved in water, 
undergoes no change ; but if a little s^Tiaptase be 
added to the solution, the amygdalin splits up 
into bitter almond oil, prussic acid, and a kind of 
sugar. 

A short time after Cagniard de la Tour dis- 
covered the yeast plant, Liebig, struck with the 
similarity between this and other such processes 
and the fermentation of sugar, put forward the 
hypothesis that yeast contains a substance which 
acts upon sugar, as synaptase acts upon amj'gdalin. 
And as the s\Tiaptase is certainly neither organized 
nor aUve, but a mere chemical substance, Liebig 
treated Cagniard de la Tour's discovery with no 
small contempt, and, from that time to the pre- 
sent, has steadily repudiated the notion that the 
decomposition of the sugar is, in any sense, the 
result of the vital activity of the TorvAa,. But, 
though the notion that the Tarv.la is a creature 
which eats sugar and excretes carbonic acid and 
alcohol, which is not unjustly ridiculed in the 
most surprising paper that ever made its appear- 
ance in a grave scientific journal,^ may be un- 

1 " Das entrathsclte Geheinmiss der geistigen Gahnuig (Vor- 
lanfige liriefliche Mittieilnng) " is the title of an anonymous 
contribution to 'Wbliler and Liebig's Annalen. der Pharmaeie 
for 1839, in which a somewhat Babelaisian imaginary descrip- 
tion of the organisation of the "yeast animals " and of the 
manner in which their functions are performed, is given with a 



126 YEAST IV 

tenable, the fact that the Torulce are alive, and 
that yeast does not excite fermentation unless it 
contains living Torulce, stands fast. Moreover, of 
late years, the essential participation of hving 
organisms in fermentation other than the alcoholic, 
has been clearly made out by Pasteur and other 
chemists. 

However, it may be asked, is there any necessary 
opposition between the so-called " vital " and the 
strictly physico-chemical views of fennentati'on ? 
It is quite possible that the living Torula may 
excite fermentation in sugar, because it constantly 
produces, as an essential part of its vital manifeSr 
tations, some substance which acts upon the sugar, 
just as the sjmaptase acts upon the amygdalin. 
Or it may be, that, without the formation of any 
such special substance, the physical condition of 
the living tissue of the yeast plant is sufficient to 
effect that small disturbance of the equilibrium of 
the particles of the sugar, which Lavoisier thought 
sufficient to effect its decomposition. 

Platinum in a very fine state of division — 
known as platinum black, or noir de platine — has 

circumstantiality worthy of the author of Gulliver s Travels. 
As a specimen of the writer's humour, his account of what 
happens when fermentation comes to an end may suffice. 
' ' Sobald namlich die Thiere keinen Zucker mehr vorfinden, so 
fressen sie sich gegenseitig selbst auf, was durch eine eigene 
Manipulation geschieht; alles wird verdant bis auf die Eier, 
welche unverandert durch den Darmkanal hineingehen ; man 
hat zuletzt wieder gahrungsfahige Hefe, namlich den Saamen 
der Thiere, der iibrig bleibt." 



IV YEAST 127 

the very singular property of causing alcohol to 
change into acetic acid with great rapidity. The 
vinegar plant, which is closely allied to the yeast 
plant, has a similar effect upon dilute alcohol, 
causing it to absorb the oxygen of the air, and 
become converted into vinegar ; and Liebig's 
eminent opponent, Pasteur, who has done so much 
for the theory and the practice of vinegar-making, 
himself suggests that in this case — 

' ' La cause du phenomtae physique qui acoompague la vie de 
la plante reside dans un etat physique propre, analogue h, celni 
du noir de platine. Mais il est essentiel de remarquer que cet 
dtat physique de la plante est etroitement lie avec la vie de 
cette plante." ^ 

Now, if the vinegar plant gives rise to the oxi- 
dation of alcohol, on account of its merely phy- 
sical constitution, it is at any rate possible that 
the physical constitution of the yeast plant may 
exert a decomposing influence on sugar. 

But, without presuming to discuss a question 
which leads us into the very arcana of chemistry, 
the present state of speculation upon the modus 
ojperandi of the yeast plant in producing fermenta- 
tion is represented, on the one hand, by the 
Stahhan doctrine, supported by Liebig, according 
to which the atoms of the sugar are shaken into 
new combinations, either directly by the Torulm, 
or indirectly, by some substance formed by them ; 

^ Mudes sur les Mycodermes, Comptes-Rendus, liv., 1862. 



128 YEAST IV 

and, on the other hand, by the Th^nardian doc- 
trine, supported by Pasteur, according to which 
the yeast plant assimilates part of the sugar, and, 
in so doing, disturbs the rest, and determines its 
resolution into the products of fermentation. Per- 
haps the two views are not so much opposed as 
they seem at first sight to be. 

But the interest which attaches to the influence 
of the yeast plants upon the medium in which 
they live and grow does not arise solely from its 
bearing upon the theory of fermentation. So long 
ago as 1838, Turpin compared the Torwlce to the 
ultimate elements of the tissues of animals and 
plants — " Les organes elementaires de leurs tissus, 
comparables aux petits v^gdtaux des levures 
ordinaires, sont aussi les d^compositeurs des sub- 
stances qui les environnent." 

Almost at the same time, and, probably, equally 
guided by his study of yeast, Schwann was en- 
gaged in those remarkable investigations into the 
form and development of the ultimate structural 
elements of the tissues of animals, which led him 
to recognise their fundamental identity with the 
ultimate structural elements of vegetable organ- 
isms. 

The yeast plant is a mere sac, or " cell," con- 
taining a semi-fluid matter, and Schwann's micro- 
scopic analysis resolved all living organisms, in the 
long run, into an aggregation of such sacs or cells, 
variously modified ; and tended to show, that all, 



IV YEAST 129 

whatever their ultimate complication, begin their 
existence in the condition of such simple cells. 

In his famous " Mikroskopische Untersuchun- 
gen " Schwann speaks of Torula as a " cell " ; and, 
in a remarkable note to the passage in which he 
refers to the yeast plant, Schwann says : — 

"I have been unable to avoid mentioning fermentation, 
because it is the most fully and exactly known operation of cells, 
and represents, in the simplest fashion, the process which is 
repeated by evei-y cell of the living body. '' 

In other words, Schwann conceives that every 
cell of the living body exerts an influence on the 
matter which surrounds and permeates it, ana- 
logous to that which a Torula exerts on the 
saccharine solution by which it is bathed. A 
wonderfully suggestive thought, opening up views 
of the nature of the chemical processes of the 
living body, which have hardly yet received all 
the development of which they are capable. 

Kant defined the special peculiarity of the living 
body to be that the parts exist for the sake of the 
whole and the whole for the sake of the parts. 
But when Turpin and Schwann resolved the living 
body into an aggregation of quasi-independent 
cells, each, like a Torula, leading its own life and 
having its own laws of growth and development, 
the aggregation being dominated and kept work- 
ing towards a definite end only by a certain 
harmony among these units, or by the superaddition 

VOL. VIII K 



130 YEAST IV 

of a controlling apparatus, such as a nervous system, 
this conception ceased to be tenable. The cell 
lives for its own sake, as well as for the sake of 
the whole organism ; and the cells which float in 
the blood, live at its expense, and profoundly 
modify it, are almost as much independent organ- 
isms as the Tondm which float in beer-wort. 

Schwann burdened his enunciation of the " cell 
theory " with two false suppositions ; the one, 
that the structures he called " nucleus " ^ and " ceU- 
wall " are essential to a cell ; the other, that cells 
are usually formed independently of other cells ; 
but, in 1839, it was a vast and clear gain to arrive 
at the conception, that the vital functions of all 
the higher animals and plants are the resultant of 
the forces inherent in the innumerable minute cells 
of which they are composed, and that each of them 
is, itself, an equivalent of one of the lowest and 
simplest of independent living beings — the Tonda. 

From purely morphological investigations, Tur- 
pin and Schwann, as we have seen, arrived at the 
notion of the fundamental unity of structure of 
living beings. And, before long, the researches of 
chemists gradually led up to the conception of the 
fundamental unity of their composition. 

So far back as 1803, Thenard pointed out, in 



^ [Later investigations have thrown an entirely new light 
upon the structure and the functional importance of the 
nucleus ; and have proved that Schwann did not over-estimate 
its importance. 1894.] 



IV YEAST 131 

most distinct terms, the important fact that yeast 
contains a nitrogenous "animal" substance; and 
that such a substance is contained in all ferments. 
Before him, Fabroni and Fourcroy speak of the 
" vegeto-animal " matter of yeast. In 1844 Mulder 
endeavoured to demonstrate that a peculiar sub- 
stance, which he called " protein," was essentially 
characteristic of living matter. 
In 1846, Payen writes : — 

"Enfin, uue loi sans exception me semble apparaitre dans 
les faits nonibreux que j'ai obsei'ves et conduire a envisage! sous 
un nouveau jour la vie vegetale ; si je ue ni'abuse, tout ce que 
dans les tissus vegetaux la vue directe oil amplifiee nous permet 
de discerner sous la forme de cellules et de vaisseaux, ne represente 
auti-e chose que les enveloppes protectiices, les reservoirs et les 
conduits, h, I'aide desquels les corps animes qui les secretent et les 
fa9onnent, se logent, puisent et charrient leurs aliments, deposeut 
et isolent les matieres excretees. " 

And again : — 

" Afin de completer aujourd'liui I'euonce du fait general, je 
rappellerai que les corps, doud des fonctions accomplies dans 
les tissus des plantes, sont formes des elements qui constituent, 
en proportion peu variable, les organismes animaux ; qu'ainsi 
Ton est conduit h, reconnaitre une immense unite de composition 
elementaire dans tous les coi-ps vivants de la nature." ^ 

In the year (1846) in which these remarkable 
passages were published, the eminent German 
botanist, Von Mohl, invented the word " proto- 
plasm," as a name for one portion of those nitro- 
genous contents of the cells of hving plants, the 

' "Mem. sur les Developpements des Vegetaux," &o. — 3fem. 
Priseniies. ix. 1846. 

K 2 



132 YEAST IV 

close chemical resemblance of which to the essen- 
tial constituents of hving animals is so strongly 
indicated by Payen. And through the twenty- 
five years that have passed, since the matter of 
hfe was first called protoplasm, a host of investi- 
gators, among whom Cohn, Max Schulze, and 
Kuhne must be named as leaders, have accum- 
ulated evidence, morphological, physiological, and 
chemical, in favour of that " immense unite de 
composition ^lementaire dans tous les corps vivants 
de la nature," into which Payen had, so early, a 
clear insight. 

As far back as 1850, Cohn wrote, apparently 
without any knowledge of what Payen had said 
before him : — 

" The protojilasm of the botanist, and the contractile sub- 
stance and sarcode of the zoologist, must he, if not identical, yet 
in a high degree analogous substances. Hence, from this point 
of view, the difference between animals and plants consists in 
this ; that, in the latter, the contractile substance, as a primordial 
utricle, is enclosed within an inert cellulose membrane, which 
permits it only to exhibit an internal motion, expressed by the 
phenomena of rotation and circulation, while, in the former, it 
is not so enclosed. The protoplasm in the form of the primordial 
utricle is, as it were, the animal element in the plant, but 
which is imprisoned, and only becomes free in the animal ; or, 
to strip off the metaphor which obscures simple thought, the 
energy of organic vitality which is manifested in movement is 
especially exhibited by a nitrogenous contractile substance, 
which in plants is limited and fettered by an inert membrane, 
in animals not so. " ^ 

1 Cohn, " Ueber Protococcus pluvialis," in the Nova Acta for 
1850. 



IV YEAST 133 

In 1868, thinking that an untechnical state- 
ment of the views current among the leaders of 
biological science might be interesting to the 
general public, I gave a lecture embodying them in 
Edinburgh. Those who have not made the mis- 
take of attempting to approach biology, either by 
the high cb priori road of mere philosophical specu- 
lation, or by the mere low A posteriori lane offered 
by the tube of a microscope, but have taken the 
trouble to become acquainted with well-ascertained 
facts and with their history, will not need to 
be told that in what I had to say " as regards 
protoplasm " in my lecture " On the Physical 
Basis of Life " (Vol. I. of these Essays, p. 130), 
there was nothing new; and, as I hope, no- 
thing that the present state of knowledge does 
not justify us in believing to be true. Under these 
circumstances, my surprise may be imagined, when 
I found, that the mere statement of facts and of 
views, long familiar to me as part of the common 
scientific property of Continental workers, raised a 
sort of storm in this country, not only by exciting 
the wrath of unscientific persons whose pet pre- 
judices they seemed to touch, but by giving rise to 
quite superfluous explosions on the part of some 
who should have been better informed. 

Dr. Stirling, for example, made my essay the 
subject of a special critical lecture,^ which I have 

' Subsequently published under the title of "As regards 
Protoplasm." 



134 YEAST 



IV 



read with much interest, though, I confess, the 
meaning of much of it remains as dark to me as 
does the " Secret of Hegel " after Dr. Stirling's 
elaborate revelation of it. Dr. Stirling's method 
of dealing with the subject is peculiar. " Proto- 
plasm " is a question of history, so far as it is a 
name ; of fact, so far as it is a thing. Dr. Stirling 
has not taken the trouble to refer to the original 
authorities for his history, which is consequently a 
travesty ; and still less has he concerned himself 
with looking at the facts, but contents himself 
with taking them also at second-hand. A most 
amusing example of this fashion of dealing with 
scientific statements is furnished by Dr. Stirling's 
remarks upon my account of the protoplasm of the 
nettle hair. That account was drawn up from 
careful and often-repeated observation of the facts. 
Dr. Stirling thinks he is offering a valid criticism, 
when he says that my valued friend Professor 
Strieker gives a somewhat different statement 
about protoplasm. But why in the world did not 
this distinguished Hegelian look at a nettle hair for 
himself, before venturing to speak about the matter 
at all ? Why trouble himself about what either 
Strieker or I say, when any tyro can see the facts 
for himself, if he is provided with those not rare 
articles, a nettle and a microscope ? But I suppose 
this would have been "Aiifklarung " — a recurrence 
to the base common-sense philosophy of the 
eighteenth century, which liked to see before it 



IV YEAST 135 

believed, and to understand before it criticised 
Dr. Stirling winds up his paper with the following 
paragraph : — 

"In short, the whole position of Mr. Huxley, (1) that all 
organisms consist alike of the same life-matter, (2) which life- 
matter is, for its part, due only to chemistry, must be pro- 
nounced untenable — nor less untenable (3) the materialism he 
would found on it. " 

The paragraph contains three distinct assertions 
concerning my views, and just the same number of 
utter misrepresentations of them. That which I 
have numbered (1) turns on the ambiguity of the 
word " same," for a discussion of which I would 
refer Dr. Stirling to a great hero of "Aufkldrung" 
Archbishop Whately; statement number (2) is, 
in my judgment, absurd, and certainly I have never 
said anything resembling it ; while, as to number 
(3), one great object of my essay was to show that 
what is called " materialism " has no sound philo- 
sophical basis ! 

As we have seen, the study of yeast has led in- 
vestigators face to face with problems of immense 
interest in pure chemistry, and in animal and 
vegetable morphology. Its physiology is not less 
rich in subjects for inquiry. Take, for example, 
the singular fact that yeast wiU increase indefin- 
itely when grown in the dark, in water containing 
only tartrate of ammonia, a small percentage of 
mineral salts, and sugar. Out of these materials 
the Tondm will manufacture nitrogenous proto- 



136 YEAST IV 

plasm, cellulose, and fatty matters, in any quantity, 
although they are wholly deprived of those rays of 
the sun, the influence of which is essential to the 
growth of ordinary plants. There has heen a 
great deal of speculation lately, as to how the 
living organisms huried beneath two or three 
thousand fathoms of water, and therefore in all 
probability almost deprived of Hght, live. If any 
of them possess the same powers as yeast (and 
the same capacity for living without light is ex- 
hibited by some other fungi) there would seem to 
be no difficulty about the matter. 

Of the pathological bearings of the study of 
yeast, and other such organisms, I have spoken 
elsewhere. It is certain that, in some animals, 
devastating epidemics are caused by fungi of low 
order — similar to those of which Torula is a sort 
of offshoot. It is certain that such diseases are 
propagated by contagion and infection, in just 
the same way as ordinary contagious and infectious 
diseases are propagated. Of course, it does not 
follow from this, that all contagious and infectious 
diseases are caused by organisms of as definite 
and independent a character as the Torula; but, 
I think, it does follow that it is prudent and wise 
to satisfy one's self in each particular case, that the 
"germ theory" cannot and will not explain the 
facts, before having recourse to hypotheses which 
have no equal support from analogy. 



V 

ON THE FOEMATION OF COAL 

[1870] 

The lumps of coal in a coal-scuttle very often 
have a roughly cubical form. If one of them be 
picked out and examined with a little care, it will 
be found that its six sides are not exactly aUke. 
Two opposite sides are comparatively smooth and 
shining, while the other four are much rougher, 
and are marked by lines which run parallel with 
the smooth sides. The coal readily splits along 
these lines, and the split surfaces thus formed 
are parallel with the smooth faces. In other 
words, there is a sort of rough and incomplete 
stratification in the lump of coal, as if it were a 
book, the leaves of which had stuck together very 
closely. 

Sometimes the faces along which the coal splits 
are not smooth, but exhibit a thin layer of dull, 
charred-looking substance, which is known as 
" mineral charcoal," 



138 ON THE FOEMATION OF COAL v 

Occasionally one of the faces of a lump of coal 
will present impressions, which are obviously 
those of the stem, or leaves, of a plant; but 
though hard mineral masses of pyrites, and even 
fine mud, may occur here and there, neither sand 
nor pebbles are met with. 

When the coal burns, the chief ultimate 
products of its combustion are carbonic acid, 
water, and ammoniacal products, which escape 
up the chimney ; and a greater or less amount 
of residual earthy salts, which take the form of 
ash. These products are, to a great extent, such 
as would result from the burning of so much 
wood. 

These properties of coal may be made out 
without any very refined appliances, but the 
microscope reveals something more. Black and 
opaque as ordinary coal is, slices of it become 
transparent if they are cemented in Canada 
balsam, and rubbed down very thin, in the 
ordinary way of making thin sections of non- 
transparent bodies. But as the thin slices, made 
in this way, are very apt to crack and break 
into fragments, it is better to employ marine 
glue as the cementing material. By the use of 
this substance, slices of considerable size and 
.of extreme thinness and transparency may be 
obtained.^ 

' My assistant in the Museum of Practical Geology, Mr. 
Newton, invented this excellent method of obtaining thin slices 
of coal. 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 139 

Now let us suppose two such slices to be 
prepared from our lump of coal — one parallel 
with the bedding, the other perpendicular to it ; 
and let us call the one the horizontal, and the 
other the vertical, section. The horizontal section 
will present more or less rounded yellow patches 
and streaks, scattered irregularly through the 
dark brown, or blackish, ground substance ; while 
the vertical section will exhibit mere elongated 
bars and granules of the same yellow materials, 
disposed in lines which correspond, roughly, with 
the general direction of the bedding of the coal. 

This is the microscopic structure of an ordinary 
piece of coal. But if a great series of coals, from 
different locahties and seams, or even from 
different parts of the same seam, be examined, 
this structure wiU be found to vary in two 
directions. In the anthracitic, or stone-coals, which 
burn like coke, the yellow matter diminishes, 
and the ground substance becomes more pre- 
dominant, blacker, and more opaque, until it be- 
comes impossible to grind a section thin enough 
to be translucent ; while, on the other hand, in 
such as the " Better-Bed " coal of the neighbour- 
hood of Bradford, which bums with much flame, 
the coal is of a far lighter colour, and transparent 
sections are very easily obtained. In the browner 
parts of this coal, sharp eyes will readily detect 
multitudes of curious little coin-shaped bodies, 
of a yellowish brown colour, embedded in the 



140 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

dark brown ground substance. On the average, 
these httle brown bodies may have a diameter of 
about one-twentieth of an inch. They he with 
their flat surfaces nearly parallel with the two 
smooth faces of the block in which they are con- 
tained ; and, on one side of each, there may be 
discerned a figure, consisting of three straight 
linear marks, which radiate from the centre of 
the disk, but do not quite reach its circumference. 
In the horizontal section these disks are often 
converted into more or less complete rings ; while 
in the vertical sections they appear like thick 
hoops, the sides of which have been pressed to- 
gether. The disks are, therefore, flattened bags ; 
and favourable sections show that the three-rayed 
marking is the expression of three clefts, which 
penetrate one wall of the bag. 

The sides of the bags are sometimes closely 
approximated; but, when the bags are less 
flattened, their cavities are, usually, filled with 
numerous, irregularly rounded, hollow bodies, 
having the same kind of wall as the large ones, 
but not more than one seven-hundredth of an 
inch in diameter. 

In favourable specimens, again, almost the 
whole ground substance appears to be made up 
of similar bodies — more or less carbonized or 
blackened — and, in these, there can be no doubt 
that, with the exception of patches of mineral 
charcoal, here and there, the whole mass of the 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 141 

coal is made up of an accumulation of the larger 
and of the smaller sacs. 

But, in one and the same slice, every transition 
can be observed from this structure to that which 
has been described as characteristic of ordinary 
coal. The latter appears to rise out of the 
former, by the breaking-up and increasing car- 
bonization of the larger and the smaller sacs. 
And, in the anthracitic coals, this process appears 
to have gone to such a length, as to destroy the 
original structure altogether, and to replace it by 
a completely carbonized substance. 

Thus coal may be said, speaking broadly, to be 
composed of two constituents : firstly, mineral 
charcoal ; and, secondly, coal proper. The nature 
of the mineral charcoal has long since been 
determined. Its structure shows it to consist of 
the remains of the stems and leaves of plants, 
reduced a little more than their carbon. Again, 
some of the coal is made up of the crushed and 
flattened bark, or outer coat, of the stems of plants, 
the inner wood of which has completely decayed 
away. But what I may term the "saccular 
matter " of the coal, which, either in its primary 
or in its degraded form, constitutes by far the 
greater part of all the bituminous coals I have 
examined, is certainly not mineral charcoal ; nor 
is its structure that of any stem or leaf Hence 
its real nature is, at first, by no means apparent, 
and has been the subject of much discussion. 



142 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

The first person who threw any light upon the 
problem, as far as I have been able to discover, 
was the well-known geologist. Professor Morris. 
It is now thirty-four years since he carefully 
described and figured the coin-shaped bodies, or 
larger sacs, as I have called them, in a note 
appended to the famous paper " On the Coal- 
brookdale Coal-Field," published at that time, 
by the present President of the Geological Society, 
Mr. Prestwich. With much sagacity. Professor 
Monis divined the real nature of these bodies, 
and boldly affirmed them to be the spore-cases 
of a plant allied to the living club-mosses. 

But discovery sometimes makes a long halt; 
and it is only a few years since Mr. Carruthers 
determined the plant (or rather one of the plants) 
which produces these spore-cases, by finding the 
discoidal sacs still adherent to the leaves of the 
fossihzed cone which produced them. He gave 
the name of Flemingites gracilis to the plant of 
which the cones form a part. The branches 
and stem of this plant are not yet certainly 
known, but there is no sort of doubt that it was 
closely allied to the Lepidodendron, the remains 
of which abound in the coal formation. The 
LepidodeTwLra were shrubs and trees which put 
one more in mind of an Araucaria than of any 
other familiar plant ; and the ends of the fruiting 
branches were terminated by cones, or catkins, 
somewhat like the bodies so named in a fir, or a 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 143 

willow. These conical fruits, however, did not 
produce seeds; but the leaves of which they 
were composed bore upon their surfaces sacs fuU 
of spores or sporangia, such as those one sees on 
the under surface of a bracken leaf Now, it is 
these sporangia of the Lepidodendroid plant 
Flejningites which were identified by Mr. Carruthers 
with the free sporangia described by Professor 
Morris, which are the same as the large sacs of 
which I have spoken. And, more than this, 
there is no doubt that the small sacs are the 
spores, which were originally contained in the 
sporangia. 

The living club-mosses are, for the most part, 
insignificant and creeping herbs, which, super- 
ficially, very closely resemble true mosses, and 
none of them reach more than two or three feet 
in height. But, in their essential structure, they 
very closely resemble the earliest Lepidodendroid 
trees of the coal : their stems and leaves are 
similar ; so are their cones ; and no less like are 
the sporangia and spores; while even in their 
size, the spores of the LepidodeTidron and those of 
the existing Lycopodium, or club-moss, very closely 
approach one another. 

Thus, the singular conclusion is forced upon us, 
that the greater and the smaller sacs of the 
"Better-Bed" and other coals, in which the 
primitive structure is weU preserved, are simply 
the sporangia and spores of certain plants, many 



144 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

of which were closely aUied to the existing, club- 
mosses. And if, as I believe, it can be demon- 
strated that ordinary coal is nothing but 
" saccular " coal which has undergone a certain 
amount of that alteration which, if continued, 
would convert it into anthracite ; then, the con- 
clusion is obvious, that the great mass of the 
coal we burn is the result of the accumulation of 
the spores and spore-cases of plants, other parts of 
which have famished the carbonized stems and 
the mineral charcoal, or have left their impressions 
on the surfaces of the layer. 

Of the multitudinous speculations which, at 
various times, have been entertained respecting 
the origin and mode of formation of coal, several 
appear to be negatived, and put out of court, by 
the structural facts the significance of which I 
have endeavoured to explain. These facts, for 
example, do not permit us to suppose that coal is 
an accumulation of peaty matter, as some have 
held. 

Again, the late Professor Quekett was one of 
the first observers who gave a correct description 
of what I have termed the " saccular " structure 
of coal ; and, rightly perceiving that this structure 
was something quite different from that of any 
known plant, he imagined that it proceeded from 
some extinct vegetable organism which was 
peculiarly abundant amongst the coal-forming 
plants. But this explanation is at once shown to 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 145 

be untenable when the smaller and the larger sacs 
are proved to be spores or sporangia. 

Some, once more, have imagined that coal was 
of submarine origin; and though the notion is 
amply and easily refuted by other considerations, 
it may be worth while to remark, that it is 
impossible to comprehend how a mass of light 
and resinous spores should have reached the 
bottom of the sea, or should have stopped in that 
position if they had got there. 

At the same time, it is proper to remark that I 
do not presume to suggest that all coal must 
needs have the same structure ; or that there may 
not be coals in which the proportions of wood and 
spores, or spore-cases, are very different from those 
which I have examined. AH I repeat is, that 
none of the coals which have come under my 
notice have enabled me to observe such a dif- 
ference. But, according to Principal Dawson, who 
has so sedulously examined the fossil remains 
of plants in North America, it is otherwise 
with the vast accumulations of coal in that 
country. 

"The true coa]," says Dr. Dawson, "consists principally of 
the flattened bark of SigiUarioid and other trees, intei-mixed 
with leaves of Ferns and Cordaites, and other herbaceous cUbris, 
and with fragments of decayed wood, constituting ' mineral char- 
coal,' all these materials having manifestly alike grown and 
accumulated where we find them." ' 

'■ Acadian Geology, 2nd edition, p. 138. 
VOL. vin L 



146 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

When I had the pleasure of seeing Principal 
Dawson in London last summer, I showed him 
my sections of coal, and begged him to re-examine 
some of the American coals on his return to 
Canada, with an eye to the presence of spores and 
sporangia, such as I was able to show him in our 
English and Scotch coals. He has been good 
enough to do so ; and in a letter dated September 
26th, 1870, he informs me that— 

" Indications of spore-cases are rare, except in certain coarse 
slialy coals and portions of coals, and in the roofs of the seams. 
The most marked case I have yet met with is the shaly coal 
referred to as containing Sporangites in my paper on the con- 
ditions of accumulation of coal (" Journal of the Geological 
Society," vol. xxii. pp. 115, 139, and 165). The purer coals cer- 
tainly consist principally of cubical tissues with some true woody 
matter, and the spore-cases, &c., are chiefly in the coarse and 
shaly layers. This is my old doctrine in my two papers in the 
" Journal of the Geological Society," and I see nothing to modify 
it. Your observations, however, make it probable that the 
frequent clear spots in the cannels are spore-cases." 

Dr. Dawson's results are the more remarkable, 
as the numerous specimens of British coal, from 
various localities, which I have examined, tell one 
tale as to the predominance of the spore and 
sporangium element in their composition ; and as 
it is exactly in the finest and purest coals, such as 
the "Better-Bed" coal of Lowmoor, that the 
spores and sporangia obviously constitute almost 
the entire mass of the deposit. 

Coal, such as that which has been described, is 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 147 

always found in sheets, or " seams," varying from 
a fraction of an inch to many feet in thickness, 
enclosed in the substance of the earth at very 
various depths, between beds of rock of different 
kinds. As a rule, every seam of coal rests upon a 
thicker, or thinner, bed of clay, which is known 
as " under-clay." These alternations of beds of 
coal, clay, and rock may be repeated many times, 
and are known as the " coal-measures " ; and in 
some regions, as in South Wales and in Nova 
Scotia, the coal-measures attain a thickness of 
twelve or fourteen thousand feet, and enclose 
eighty or a hundred seams of coal, each with its 
under-clay, and separated from those above and 
below by beds of sandstone and shale. 

The position of the beds which constitute the 
coal-measures is infinitely diverse. Sometimes 
they are tilted up vertically, sometimes they are 
horizontal, sometimes curved into great basins; 
sometimes they come to the surface, sometimes 
they are covered up by thousands of feet of rock. 
But, whatever their present position, there is 
abundant and conclusive evidence that every 
under-clay was once a surface soil. Not only do 
carbonized root-fibres frequently abound in these 
under-clays ; but the stools of trees, the trunks of 
which are broken off and confounded with the bed 
of coal, have been repeatedly found passing into 
radiating roots, still embedded in the under-clay. 
On many parts of the coast of England, what are 

L 2 



148 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

commonly known as " submarine forests " are to 
be seen at low water. They consist, for the most 
part, of short stools of oak, beech, and fir-trees, 
still fixed by their long roots in the bed of blue 
clay in which they originally grew. If one of 
these submarine forest beds should be gradually 
depressed and covered up by new deposits, it 
would present just the same characters as an 
under-clay of the coal, if the Sigillaria and 
Zepidodendron of the ancient world were sub- 
stituted for the oak, or the beech, of our own 
times. 

In a tropical forest, at the present day, the 
trunks of fallen trees, and the stools of such trees 
as may have been broken by the violence of 
storms, remain entire for but a short time. Con- 
trary to what might be expected, the dense wood 
of the tree decays, and suffers firom the ravages of 
insects, more swiftly than the bark. And the 
traveller, setting his foot on a prostrate trunk, 
finds that it is a mere shell, which breaks under 
his weight, and lands his foot amidst the insects, 
or the reptiles, which have sought food or refuge 
within. 

The trees of the coal forests present parallel 
conditions. When the fallen trunks which have 
entered into the composition of the bed of coal 
are identifiable, they are mere double shells of 
bark, flattened together in consequence of the 
destruction of the woody core; and Sir Charles 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 149 

Lyell and Principal Dawson discovered, in the 
hollow stools of coal trees of Nova Scotia, the 
remains of snails, millipedes, and salamander-like 
creatures, embedded in a deposit of a different 
character from that which surrounded the exterior 
of the trees. Thus, in endeavouring to compre- 
hend the formation of a seam of coal, we must try 
to picture to ourselves a thick forest, formed for 
the most part of trees like gigantic club-mosses, 
mares' -tails, and tree-ferns, with here and there 
some that had more resemblance to our existing 
yews and fir-trees. We must suppose that, as the 
seasons roUed by, the plants grew and developed 
their spores and seeds; that they shed these in 
enormous quantities, which accumulated on the 
ground beneath ; and that, every now and then, 
they added a dead frond or leaf; or, at longer 
intervals, a rotten branch, or a dead trunk, to 
the mass. 

A certain proportion of the spores and seeds no 
doubt fulfilled their obvious function, and, car- 
ried by the wind to unoccupied regions, ex- 
tended the limits of the forest ; many might be 
washed away by rain into streams, and be lost ; 
but a large portion must have remained, to 
accumulate Hke beech-mast, or acorns, beneath 
the trees of a modem forest. 

But, in this case, it may be asked, why does 
not our English coal consist of stems and leaves 
to a much greater extent than it does ? What is 



150 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

the reason of the predominance of the spores and 
spore-cases in it ? 

A ready answer to this question is afforded by 
the study of a Hving full-grown club-moss. Shake it 
upon a piece of paper, and it emits a cloud of fine 
dust, which falls over the paper, and is the well- 
known Lycopodium powder. Now this powder 
used to be, and I believe still is, employed for two 
objects which seem, at first sight, to have no par- 
ticular connection with one another. It is, or was, 
employed in making lightning, and in making 
pills. The coats of the spores contain so much 
resinous matter, that a pinch of Lycopodium pow- 
der, thrown through the flame of a candle, burns 
with an instantaneous flash, which has long done 
duty for lightning on the stage. And the same 
character makes it a capital coating for pills ; for 
the resinous powder prevents the drug from being 
wetted by the saliva, and thus bars the nauseous 
flavour from the sensitive papillae of the tongue. 

But this resinous matter, which lies in the walls 
of the spores and sporangia, is a substance not 
easily altered by air and water, and hence tends 
to preserve these bodies, just as the bituminized 
cerecloth preserves an Egyptian mummy; while, 
on the other hand, the merely woody stem and 
leaves tend to rot, as fast as the wood of the 
mummy's coffin has rotted. Thus the mixed heap 
of spores, leaves, and stems in the coal-forest would 
be persistently searched by the long-continued 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 151 

action of air and rain ; the leaves and stems would 
gradually be reduced to little but their carbon, or, 
in other words, to the condition of mineral char- 
coal in which we find them ; while the spores and 
sporangia remained as a comparatively unaltered 
and compact residuum. 

There is, indeed, tolerably clear evidence that 
the coal must, under some circumstances, have 
been converted into a substance hard enough to 
be rolled into pebbles, while it yet lay at the 
surface of the earth; for in some seams of coal, 
the courses of rivulets, which must have been 
living water, while the stratum in which their 
remains are found was still at the surface, have 
been observed to contain rolled pebbles of the 
very coal through which the stream has cut its 
way. 

The structural facts are such as to leave no 
alternative but to adopt the view of the origin 
of such coal as I have described, which has just 
been stated; but, happily, the process is not 
without analogy at the present day. I possess a 
specimen of what is called "white coal" from 
Australia. It is an inflammable material, burning 
with a bright flame, and having much the con- 
sistence and appearance of oat-cake, which, I am 
informed, covers a considerable area. It consists, 
almost entirely, of a compacted mass of spores and 
spore-cases. But the fine particles of blown sand 
which are scattered through it, show that it must 



152 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL V 

have accumulated, subaijrially, upon the surface 
of a soil covered by a forest of cryptogamous 
plants, probably tree-ferns. 

As regards this important point of the subaerial 
region of coal, I am glad to find myself in entire 
accordance with Principal Dawson, who bases his 
conclusions upon other, but no less forcible, 
considerations. In a passage, which is the con- 
tinuation of that already cited, he writes : — 

"(3) The microscopical stractuie and chemical composition 
of the beds of cannel coal and earthy bitumen, and of the more 
highly bituminous and carbonaceous shale, show them to have 
been of the nature of the fine vegetable mud which accumulates 
in the ponds and shallow lakes of modern swamps. When such 
fine vegetable sediment is mixed, as is often the case, with clay, 
it becomes similar to the bituminous limestone and calcareo- 
bituminous shales of the coal-measures. (4) A few of the under- 
clays, which support beds of coal, are of the nature of the vege- 
table mud above referred to ; but the greater part are argillo- 
arenaceous in composition, with little vegetable matter, and 
bleached by the drainage from them of water containing the 
products of vegetable decay. They are, in short, loamy or clay 
soils, and must have been sufficiently above water to admit of 
drainage. The absence of sulphurets, and the occurence of 
carbonate of iron in connection with them, prove that, when 
they existed as soils, rain-water, and not sea-water, percolated 
them. (5) The coal and the fossil forests present many evi- 
dences of subaerial conditions. Most of the erect and prostrate 
trees had become hollow shells of bark before they were finally 
embedded, and their wood had broken into cubical pieces of 
mineral charcoal. Land-snails and galley-worms (Xylohius) 
crept into them, and they became dens, or traps, for reptiles. 
Large quantities of mineral charcoal occur on the surface of all 
the large beds of coal. None of these appearances could have 
been produced by subaqueous action. (6) Though the roots of 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 153 

the Sigillaria bear more resemblance to the rhizomes of certain 
aquatic plants ; yet, stnicturally, they are absolutely identical 
with the roots of Cycads, which the stems also resemble. 
Further, the Sigillarim grew on the same soils which supported 
Conifers, Lepidodendra, Cordailes, and Ferns — plants which 
could not have gi'own in water. Again, with the exception 
perhaps of some Pinnularice and Asterophyllilea, there is a 
remarkable absence from the coal measures of any fomi of 
properly aquatic vegetation. (7) The occurrence of marine, or 
brackish-water animals, in the roofs of coal-beds, or even in the 
coal itself, affords no evidence of subaqueous accumulation, 
since the same thing occurs in the case of modern submarine 
forests. For these and other reasons, some of which are more 
fully stated in the papers already refen-ed to, while I admit that 
the areas of coal accumulation were frequently submerged, I 
must maintain that the time coal is a subaerial accumulation by 
vegetable growth on soils, wet and swampy it is true, but not 
submerged. " 

I am almost disposed to doubt whether it is 
necessary to make the concession of "wet and 
swampy " ; otherwise, there is nothing that I know 
of to be said against this excellent conspectus of 
the reasons for believing in the subaerial origin of 
coal. 

But the coal accumulated upon the area covered 
by one of the great forests of the carboniferous 
epoch would, in course of time, have been wasted 
away by the small, but constant, wear and tear of 
rain and streams, had the land which supported it 
remained at the same level, or been gradually 
raised to a greater elevation. And, no doubt, as 
much coal as now exists has been destroyed, after 
its formation, in this way. What are now known 



154 ON THE FOEMATION OF COAL v 

as coal districts owe their importance to the fact 
that they were areas of slow depression, during a 
greater or less portion of the carhoniferous epoch ; 
and that, in virtue of this circumstance, Mother 
Earth was enabled to cover up her vegetable 
treasures, and preserve them from destruction. 

Wherever a coal-field now exists, there must 
formerly have been free access for a great river, or 
for a shallow sea, bearing sediment in the shape of 
sand and mud. When the coal-forest area became 
slowly depressed, the waters must have spread 
over it, and have deposited their burden upon the 
surface of the bed of coal, in the form of layers, 
which are now converted into shale, or sandstone. 
Then followed a period of rest, in which the 
superincumbent shallow waters became completely 
filled up, and finally replaced, by fine mud, which 
settled down into a new under-clay, and furnished 
the soil for a fresh forest growth. This flourished, 
and heaped up its spores and wood into coal, until 
the stage of slow depression recommenced. And, 
in some localities, as I have mentioned, the process 
was repeated until the first of the alternating 
beds had sunk to near three miles below its 
original level at the surface of the earth. 

In reflecting on the statement, thus briefly 
made, of the main facts connected with the 
origin of the coal formed during the carboniferous 
epoch, two or three considerations suggest them- 
selves. 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 155 

In the first place, the great phantom of geo- 
logical time rises before the student of this, as of 
all other, fragments of the history of our earth — 
springing irrepressibly out of the facts, like the 
Djin from the jar which the fishermen so incau- 
tiously opened ; and like the Djin again, being 
vaporous, shifting, and indefinable, but unmis- 
takably gigantic. However modest the bases of 
one's calculation may be, the minimum of time 
assignable to the coal period remains something 
stupendous. 

Principal Dawson is the last person likely 
to be guilty of exaggeration in this matter, and 
it will be well to consider what he has to say 
about it : — 

" The rate of accumulation of coal was veiy slow. The 
climate of the period, in the northern temperate zone, was of 
such a character that the true conifois show rings of growth, 
not larger, nor much less distinct, than those of many of their 
modern congener's. The Sigillariee and Calamiles were not, as 
often supposed, composed wholly, or even principally, of lax 
and soft tissues, or necessarily short-lived. The former had, it 
is time, a very thick inner bark ; but their dense woody axis, 
their thick and nearly imperishable outer bark, and their scanty 
and rigid foliage, would indicate no very rapid growth or decay. 
In the case of the Sigillariai, the variations in the leaf-scars in 
different parts of the trunk, the intercalation of new ridges at 
the surface representing that of new woody wedges in the axis, 
the transverse marks left by the stages of upward growth, all 
indicate that several years must have been required for the 
growth of stems of moderate size. The enormous roots of these 
trees, and the condition of the coal-swamps, must have exempted 
them from the danger of being overthrown by violence. They 



156 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

probably fell in successive generations from natural decay ; and 
making every allowance for other materials, we may safely assert 
that every foot of thickness of pure bituminous coal implies the 
quiet growth and fall of at least fifty generations of Sigillariai, 
and therefore an undisturbed condition of forest growth enduring 
through many centuries. Further, there is evidence that an 
immense amount of loose parenchymatous tissue, and even of 
wood, perished by decay, and we do not know to what extent 
even the most durable tissues may have disappeared in this way ; 
so that, in many coal-seams, we may have only a very small 
part of the vegetable matter produced." 

Undoubtedly the force of these reflections is not 
diminished when the bituminous coal, as in Britain, 
consists of accumulated spores and spore-cases, 
rather than of stems. But, suppose we adopt 
Principal Dawson's assumption, that one foot of 
coal represents fifty generations of coal plants; 
and, further, make the moderate supposition that 
each generation of coal plants took ten years to 
come to maturity — then, each foot-thickness of 
coal represents five hundred years. The super- 
imposed beds of coal ia one coal-field may amount 
to a thickness of fifty or sixty feet, and therefore 
the coal alone, in that field, represents 500 X 50 
= 25,000 years. But the actual coal is but an 
insignificant portion of the total deposit, which, as 
has been seen, may amount to between two and 
three miles of vertical thickness. Suppose it be 
12,000 feet — which is 240 times the thickness of 
the actual coal — is there any reason why we should 
believe it may not have taken 240 times as long to 
form ? I know of none. But, in this case, the 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 157 

time which the coal-field represents would be 
25,000 X 240 = 6,000,000 years. As affording a 
definite chronology, of course such calculations as 
these are of no value ; but they have much use in 
fixing one's attention upon a possible minimum. 
A man may be puzzled if he is asked how long 
Rome took a-building ; but he is proverbially safe 
if he affirms it not to have been built in a day ; 
and our geological calculations are aU, at present, 
pretty much on that footing. 

A second consideration which the study of the 
coal brings prominently before the mind of any one 
who is familiar with palaeontology is, that the 
coal Flora, viewed in relation to the enormous 
period of time which it lasted, and to the still 
vaster period which has elapsed since it flourished, 
underwent little change while it endured, and in 
its peculiar characters, differs strangely little from 
that which at present exist. 

The same species of plants are to be met with 
throughout the whole thickness of a coal-field, and 
the youngest are not sensibly different from the 
oldest. But more than this. Notwithstanding 
that the carboniferous period is separated from us 
by more than the whole time represented by the 
secondary and tertiary formations, the great types 
of vegetation were as distinct then as now. The 
structure of the modern club-moss furnishes a 
complete explanation of the fossil remains of the 
Lepidodendra, and the fronds of some of the ancient 



158 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

ferns are hard to distinguish from existing ones. 
At the same time, it must be remembered, that 
there is nowhere in the world, at present, any 
forest which bears more than a rough analogy with 
a coaJ-forest. The types may remain, but the 
details of their form, their relative proportions, 
their associates, are all altered. And the tree-fern 
forest of Tasmania, or New Zealand, gives one only 
a faint and remote image of the vegetation of 
the ancient world. 

Once more, an invariably-recurring lesson of 
geological history, at whatever point its study is 
taken up : the lesson of the almost infinite slow- 
ness of the modification of living forms. The 
lines of the pedigrees of living things break off 
almost before they begin to converge. 

Finally, yet another curious consideration. Let 
us suppose that one of the stupid, salamander-like 
Labyrinthodonts, which pottered, with much belly 
and little leg, like Falstaff in his old age, among 
the coal-forests, could have had thinking power 
enough in his small brain to reflect upon the 
showers of spores which kept on falling through 
years and centuries, while perhaps not one in ten 
million fulfilled its apparent purpose, and repro- 
duced the organism which gave it birth : surely 
he rnight have been excused for moralizing upon 
the thoughtless and wanton extravagance which 
Nature displayed in her operations. 

But we have the advantage over our shovel- 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 159 

headed predecessor — or possibly ancestor — and can 
perceive that a certain vein of thrift runs through 
this apparent prodigality. Nature is never in a 
hurry, and seems to have had always before her eyes 
the adage, " Keep a thing long enough, and you 
win find a use for it." She has kept her beds of 
coal many millions of years without being able to 
find much use for them ; she has sent them down 
beneath the sea, and the sea-beasts could make 
nothing of them ; she has raised them up into dry 
land, and laid the black veins bare, and still, for 
ages and ages, there was no living thing on the 
face of the earth that could see any sort of value 
in them ; and it was only the other day, so to 
speak, that she turned a new creature out of her 
workshop, who by degrees acquired sufficient wits 
to make a fire, and then to discover that the black 
rock would burn. 

I suppose that nineteen hundred years ago, 
when Julius Caesar was good enough to deal with 
Britain as we have dealt with New Zealand, the 
primaeval Briton, blue with cold and woad, may 
have known that the strange black stone, of 
which he found lumps here and there in his 
wanderings, would bum, and so help to warm his 
body and cook his food. Saxon, Dane, and 
Norman swarmed into the land. The EngHsh 
people grew into a powerful nation, and Nature 
stiU waited for a full return of the capital she 



160 ON THE FORMATION OF COAL v 

had invested in the ancient club-mosses. The 
eighteenth century arrived, and with it James 
Watt. The brain of that man was the spore out of 
which was developed the modem steam-engine, and 
all the prodigious trees and branches of modem in- 
dustry which have grown out of this. But coal is 
as much an essential condition of this growth and 
development as carbonic acid is for that of a club- 
moss. Wanting coal, we could not have smelted 
the iron needed to make our engines, nor have 
worked our engines when we had got them. But 
take away the engines, and the g^reat towns of 
Yorkshire and Lancashire vanish like a dream. 
Manufactures give place to agriculture and 
pasture, and not ten men can live where now ten 
thousand are amply supported. 

Thus, all this abundant wealth of money and of 
vivid hfe is Nature's interest upon her investment 
in club-mosses, and the like, so long ago. But 
what becomes of the coal which is burnt in yield- 
ing this interest ? Heat comes out of it, light 
comes out of it ; and if we could gather together 
all that goes up the chimney, and all that remains 
in the grate of a thoroughly-burnt coal-fire, we 
should find ourselves in possession of a quantity 
of carbonic acid, water, ammonia, and mineral 
matters, exactly equal in weight to the coal. But 
these are the very matters with which Nature 
supplied the club-mosses which made the coal 



V ON THE FORMATION OF COAL 161 

She is paid back principal and interest at the 
same time ; and she straightway invests the car- 
bonic acid, the water, and the ammonia in new 
forms of life, feeding with them the plants that 
now live. Thrifty Nature ! Surely no prodigal, 
but most notable of housekeepers ! 



w 



VI 



ON THE BOEDER TERRITORY BETWEEN 
THE ANIMAL AND THE VEGETABLE 
KINGDOMS 

[1876] 

In the whole history of science there is nothing 
more remarkable than the rapidity of the growth 
of biological knowledge within the last half- 
century, and the extent of the modification which 
has thereby been effected in some of the funda- 
mental conceptions of the naturalist. 

In the second edition of the " Regne Animal," 
published in 1828, Cuvier devotes a special section 
to the " Division of Organised Beings into Animals 
and Vegetables," in which the question is treated 
with that comprehensiveness of knowledge and 
clear critical judgment which characterise his 
writings, and justify us in regarding them as re- 
presentative expressions of the most extensive, 
if not the profoundest, knowledge of his time. 
He tells us that living beings have been sub- 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 163 

divided from the earKest times into animated 
beings, which possess sense and motion, and inani- 
mated beings, which are devoid of these functions 
and simply vegetate. 

Although the roots of plants direct themselves 
towards moisture, and their leaves towards air and 
light, — although the parts of some plants exhibit 
oscillating movements without any perceptible 
cause, and the leaves of others retract when 
touched, — ^yet none of these movements justify the 
ascription to plants of perception or of will. From 
the mobility of animals, Cuvier, with his charac- 
teristic partiality for teleological reasoning, de- 
duces the necessity of the existence in them of an 
alimentary cavity, or reservoir of food, whence 
their nutrition may be drawn by the vessels, which 
are a sort of internal roots ; and, in the presence 
of this alimentary cavity, he naturally sees the 
primary and the most important distinction be- 
tween animals and plants. 

Following out his teleological argument, Cuvier 
remarks that the organisation of this cavity and 
its appurtenances must needs vary according to 
the nature of the aliment, and the operations 
which it has to undergo, before it can be converted 
into substances fitted for absorption ; while the 
atmosphere and the earth supply plants with 
juices ready prepared, and which can be absorbed 
immediately. As the animal body required to be 
independent of heat and of the atmosphere, there 

' ir 2 



164 ANIMALS AND PLANTS VI 

were no means by which the motion of its fluids 
could be produced by internal causes. Hence 
arose the second great distinctive character of 
animals, or the circulatory system, which is less 
important than the digestive, since it was un- 
necessary, and therefore is absent, in the more 
simple animals. 

Animals further needed muscles for loco- 
motion and nerves for sensibility. Hence, says 
Cuvier, it was necessary that the chemical compo- 
sition of the animal body should be more compli- 
cated than that of the plant ; and it is so, inasmuch 
as an additional substance, nitrogen, enters into it 
as an essential element ; while, in plants, nitrogen 
is only accidentally joined with the three other 
fundamental constituents of organic beings — 
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Indeed, he after- 
wards affirms that nitrogen is peculiar to animals ; 
and herein he places the third distinction between 
the animal and the plant. The soil and the 
atmosphere supply plants with water, composed of 
hydrogen and oxygen ; air, consisting of nitrogen 
and oxygen ; and carbonic acid, containing carbon 
and oxygen. They retain the hydrogen and the 
carbon, exhale the superfluous oxygen, and absorb 
little or no nitrogen. The essential character of 
vegetable life is the exhalation of oxygen, which 
is effected through the agency of light. Animals, 
on the contrary, derive their nourishment either 
directly or indii-ectly from plants. They get rid of 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 165 

the superfluous hydrogen and carbon, and accumu- 
late nitrogen. The relations of plants and 
animals to the atmosphere are therefore inverse. 
The plant withdraws water and carbonic acid from 
the atmosphere, the animal contributes both to it. 
Respiration — that is, the absorption of oxygen and 
the exhalation of carbonic acid — is the specially 
animal function of animals, and constitutes their 
fourth distinctive character. 

Thus wrote Cuvier in 1828. But, in the fourth 
and fifth decades of this century, the greatest and 
most rapid revolution which biological science has 
ever undergone was effected by the application of 
the modern microscope to the investigation of 
organic structure ; by the introduction of exact 
and easily manageable methods of conducting the 
chemical analysis of organic compounds; and 
finally, by the employment of instruments of pre- 
cision for the measurement of the physical forces 
which are at work in the living economy. 

That the semi-fluid contents (which we now 
term protoplasm) of the cells of certain plants, 
such as the Ghar<x, are in constant and regular 
motion, was made out by Bonaventura Corti a 
century ago ; but the fact, important as it was, 
fell into oblivion, and had to be rediscovered by 
Treviranus in 1807. Robert Brown noted the 
more complex motions of the protoplasm in the 
cells of Tradesmntia in 1831 ; and now such move- 
ments of the living substance of plants are well 



166 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

known to be some of the most widely-prevalent 
phenomena of vegetable life. 

Agardh, and other of the botanists of Cuvier's 
generation, who occupied themselves with the 
lower plants, had observed that, under particular 
circumstances, the contents of the cells of certain 
water-weeds were set free, and moved about with 
considerable velocity, and with all the appearances 
of spontaneity, as locomotive bodies, which, from 
their similarity to animals of simple organisation, 
were called " zoospores." Even as late as 1845, 
however, a botanist of Schleiden's eminence dealt 
very sceptically with these statements ; and his 
scepticism was the more justified, since Ehren- 
berg, in his elaborate and comprehensive work on 
the Inftisoria, had declared the greater number of 
what are now recognised as locomotive plants to 
be animals. 

At the present day, innumerable plants and free 
plant cells are known to pass the whole or part of 
their lives in an actively locomotive condition, in 
no wise distinguishable from that of one of the 
simpler animals ; and, while in this condition, their 
movements are, to all appearance, as spontaneous 
— as much the product of volition — as those of 
such animals. 

Hence the teleological argument for Cuvier's 
first diagnostic character — the presence in animals 
of an alimentary cavity, or internal pocket, in 
which they can carry about their nutriment — has 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 167 

broken down, so far, at least, as his mode of stating 
it goes. And, with the advance of microscopic 
anatomy, the universality of the fact itself among 
animals has ceased to be predicable. Many 
animals of even complex structure, which live 
parasitically within others, are wholly devoid of an 
alimentary cavity. Their food is provided for 
them, not only ready cooked, but ready digested, 
and the alimentary canal, become superfluous, 
has disappeared. Again, the males of most 
Rotifers have no digestive apparatus ; as a German ■ 
naturalist has remarked, they devote themselves 
entirely to the " Minnedienst," and are to be 
reckoned among the few realisations of the 
Byronic ideal of a lover. Finally, amidst the 
lowest forms of animal life, the speck of gelatinous 
protoplasm, which constitutes the whole body, has 
no permanent digestive cavity or mouth, but takes 
in its food anywhere ; and digests, so to speak, all 
over its body. 

But although Cuvier's leading diagnosis of the 
animal from the plant wiU not stand a strict test, 
it remains one of the most constant of the dis- 
tinctive characters of animals. And, if we sub- 
stitute for the possession of an alimentary cavity, 
the power of taking solid nutriment into the body 
and there digesting it, the definition so changed 
will cover all animals, except certain parasites, 
and the few and exceptional cases of non-parasitic 
animals which do not feed at all. On the other 



168 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

hand, the definition thus amended will exclude all 
ordinary vegetable organisms. 

Cuvier himself practically gives up his second 
distinctive mark when he admits that it is want- 
ing in the simpler animals. 

The third distinction is based on a completely 
erroneous conception of the chemical differences 
and resemblances between the constituents of 
animal and vegetable organisms, for which Cuvier 
is not responsible, as it was current among con- 
temporary chemists. It is now established that 
nitrogen is as essential a constituent of vegetable 
as of animal living matter ; and that the latter is, 
chemically speaking, just as complicated as the 
former. Starchy substances, cellulose and sugar, 
once supposed to be exclusively confined to plants, 
are now known to be regular and normal products 
of animals. Amylaceous and saccharine substances 
are largely manufactured, even by the highest 
animals ; cellulose is widespread as a constituent 
of the skeletons of the lower animals; and it is 
probable that amyloid substances are universally 
present in the animal organism, though not in the 
precise form of starch. 

Moreover, although it remains true that there 
is an inverse relation between the green plant in 
sunshine and the animal, in so far as, under these 
circumstances, the green plant decomposes car- 
bonic acid and exhales oxygen, while the animal 
absorbs oxygen and exhales cai'bonic acid ; yet. 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 169 

the exact researches of the modern chemical in- 
vestigators of the physiological processes of plants 
have clearly demonstrated the fallacy of attempt- 
ing to draw any general distinction between 
animals and vegetables on this ground. In fact, 
the difference vanishes with the sunshine, even in 
the case of the green plant ; which, in the dark, 
absorbs oxygen and gives out carbonic acid like 
any animal.^ On the other hand, those plants, 
such as the fungi, which contain no chlorophyll 
and are not green, are always, so far as respiration 
is concerned, in the exact position of animals. 
They absorb oxygen and give out carbonic acid. 

Thus, by the progress of knowledge, Cuvier's 
fourth distinction between the animal and the 
plant has been as completely invalidated as the 
third and second ; and even the iirst can be re- 
tained only in a modified form and subject to 
exceptions. 

But has the advance of biology simply tended 
to break down old distinctions, without establish- 
ing new ones ? 

With a qualification, to be considered presently, 
the answer to this question is undovibtedly in the 
affirmative. The famous researches of Schwann 

' There is every reason to believe that living plants, like living 
animals, always respire, and, in respiring, absorb oxygen and 
give off carbonic acid ; but, that in green plants exposed 
to daylight or to the electric light, the quantity of oxygen 
evolved in consequence of the decomposition of carbonic acid 
by a special appajatus which gi'een plants possess exceeds that 
absorbed in the concurrent respiratory process. 



170 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

and Schleiden in 1837 and the following years, 
founded the modern science of histology, or that 
branch of anatomy which deals with the ultimate 
visible structure of organisms, as revealed by the 
microscope ; and, from that day to this, the rapid 
improvement of methods of investigation, and the 
energy of a host of accurate observers, have given 
greater and greater breadth and firmness to 
Schwann's great generalisation, that a fundamental 
unity of structure obtains in animals and plants ; 
and that, however diverse may be the fabrics, or 
tissues, of which their bodies are composed, all 
these varied structures result from the meta- 
morphosis of morphological units (termed cells, in 
a more general sense than that in which the word 
" cells " was at first employed), which are not only 
similar in animals and in plants respectively, but 
present a close resemblance, when those of animals 
and those of plants are compared together. 

The contractility which is the fundamental con- 
dition of locomotion, has not only been discovered 
to exist far more widely among plants than was 
formerly imagined ; but, in plants, the act of con- 
traction has been found to be accompanied, as Dr. 
Burdon Sanderson's interesting investigations have 
shown, by a disturbance of the electrical state of 
the contractile substance, comparable to that 
which was found by Du Bois Reymond to be a 
concomitant of the activity of ordinary muscle in 
animals. 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 171 

Again, I know of no test by which the reaction 
of the leaves of the Sundew and of other plants to 
stimuli, so fully and carefully studied by Mr. 
Darwin, can be distinguished from those acts of 
contraction following upon stimuli, which are 
called " reflex " in animals. 

On each lobe of the bilobed leaf of Venus's fly- 
trap (DioncBa muscipula) are three delicate filaments 
which stand out at right angle from the surface of 
the leaf. Touch one of them with the end of a 
fine human hair and the lobes of the leaf instantly 
close together ^ in virtue of an act of contraction 
of part of their substance, just as the body of 
a snail contracts into its shell when one of its 
" horns " is irritated. 

The reflex action of the snail is the result of the 
presence of a nervous system in the animal. A 
molecular change takes place in the nerve of the 
tentacle, is propagated to the muscles by which the 
body is retracted, and causing them to contract, 
the act of retraction is brought about. Of course 
the similarity of the acts does not necessarily in- 
volve the conclusion that the mechanism by 
which they are effected is the same; but it 
suggests a suspicion of their identity which needs 
careful testing. 

The results of recent inquiries into the structure 
of the nervous system of animals converge towards 
the conclusion that the nerve fibres, which we 
^ Danvin, Insectivorous Plants, p. 289. 



172 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

have hitherto regarded as ultimate elements of 
nervous tissue, are not such, but are simply the 
visible aggregations of vastly more attenuated 
filaments, the diameter of which dwindles down to 
the limits of our present microscopic vision, greatly 
as these have been extended by modem improve- 
ments of the microscope ; and that a nerve is, in 
its essence, nothing but a linear tract of specially 
modified protoplasm between two points of an 
organism — one of which is able to affect the other 
by means of the communication so established. 
Hence, it is conceivable that even the simplest 
living being may possess a nervous system. And 
the question whether plants are provided with a 
nervous system or not, thus acquires a new aspect, 
and presents the histologist and physiologist with 
a problem of extreme difiiculty, which must be 
attacked from a new point of view and by the aid 
of methods which have yet to be invented. 

Thus it must be atlmitted that plants may be 
contractile and locomotive ; that, while locomotive, 
their movements may have as much appearance of 
spontaneity as those of the lowest animals ; and 
that many exhibit actions, comparable to those 
which are brought about by the agency of a 
nervous system in animals. And it must be 
allowed to be possible that further research may 
reveal the existence of something comparable to a 
nervous system in plants. So that I know not 
where we can hope to find any absolute distinction 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 173 

between animals and plants, unless we return to 
their mode of nutrition, and inquire whether 
certain differences of a more occult character than 
those imagined to exist by Cuvier, and which cer- 
tainly hold good for the vast majority of animals 
and plants, are of universal application. 

A bean may be supplied with water in which 
salts of ammonia and certain other mineral salts 
are dissolved in due proportion ; with atmospheric 
air containing its ordinary minute dose of carbonic 
acid ; and with nothing else but sunlight and heat. 
Under these circumstances, unnatural as they are, 
with proper management, the bean will thrust 
forth its radicle and its plumule ; the former will 
grow down into roots, the latter grow up into 
the stem and leaves of a vigorous bean-plant ; and 
this plant will, in due time, flower and produce its 
crop of beans, just as if it were grown in the 
garden or in the field. 

The weight of the nitrogenous protein com- 
pounds, of the oily, starchy, saccharine and woody 
substances contained in the full-grown plant and its 
seeds, will be vastly greater than the weight of the 
same substances contained in the bean from which it 
sprang. But nothing has been supplied to the bean 
save water, carbonic acid, ammonia, potash, lime, 
iron, and the like, in combination with phosphoric, 
sulphuric, and other acids. Neither protein, nor 
fat, nor starch, nor sugar, nor any substance in the 
slightest degree resembling them, has formed part 



174 ANIMALS AND PLANTS 



VI 



of the food of the bean. But the weights of the 
carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, 
sulphur, and other elementary bodies contained in 
the bean-plant, and in the seeds which it produces, 
are exactly equivalent to the weights of the same 
elements which have disappeared from the 
materials supplied to the bean during its growth. 
Whence it follows that the bean has taken in only 
the raw materials of its fabric, and has manu- 
factured them into bean-stuffs. 

The bean has been able to perform this great 
chemical feat by the help of its green colouring 
matter, or chlorophyll; for it is only the green 
parts of the plant which, under the influence of 
sunlight, have the marvellous power of decom- 
posing carbonic acid, setting free the oxygen and 
lajdng hold of the carbon which it contains. In 
fact, the bean obtains two of the absolutely in- 
dispensable elements of its substance from two 
distinct sources ; the watery solution, in which its 
roots are plunged, contains nitrogen but no carbon ; 
the air, to which the leaves are exposed, contains 
carbon, but its nitrogen is in the state of a free 
gas, in which condition the bean can make no use 
of it ; ^ and the chlorophyll ^ is the apparatus by 

1 I purposely assume that the air irith which the bean is 
supplied in the case stated contains no ammoniacal salts. 

'■' The recent researches of Pringsheim have raised a host of 
questions as to the exact share taken by chlorophyll in the 
chemical operations which are effected by the gi-een parts of 
plants. It may be that the chlorophyll is only a constant con- 
comitant of the actual deoxidising apparatus. 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 175 

which the carbon is extracted from the atmo- 
spheric carbonic acid — the leaves being the chief 
laboratories in which this operation is effected. 

The great majority of conspicuous plants are, as 
everybody knows, green ; and this arises from the 
abundance of their chlorophyll. The few which 
contain no chlorophyll and are colourless, are un- 
able to extract the carbon which they require from 
atmospheric carbonic acid, and lead a parasitic 
existence upon other plants ; but it by no means 
follows, often as the statement has been repeated, 
that the manufacturing power of plants depends 
on their chlorophyll, and its interaction with the 
rays of the sun. On the contrary, it is easily 
demonstrated, as Pasteur first proved, that the 
lowest fungi, devoid of chlorophyll, or of any sub- 
stitute for it, as they are, nevertheless possess the 
characteristic manufacturing powers of plants in a 
very high degree. Only it is necessary that they 
should be supplied with a different kind of raw 
material ; as they cannot extract carbon from car- 
bonic acid, they must be furnished with something 
else that contains carbon. Tartaric acid is such a 
substance ; and if a single spore of the commonest 
and most troublesome of moulds — Penicillium — be 
sown in a saucerful of water, in which tartrate of 
ammonia, with a small percentage of phosphates 
and sulphates is contained, and kept warm, whether 
in the dark or exposed to light, it will, in a 
short time, give rise to a thick crust of mould, 



176 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

which contains many miUion times the weight of 
the original spore, in protein compounds and 
cellulose. Thus we have a very wide basis of fact 
for the generalisation that plants are essentially 
characterised by their manufacturing capacity — by 
their power of working up mere mineral matters 
into complex organic compounds. 

Contrariwise, there is a no less wide foundation 
for the generalisation that animals, as Cuvier puts 
it, depend directly or indirectly upon plants for 
the materials of their bodies ; that is, either they 
are herbivorous, or they eat other animals which 
are herbivorous. 

But for what constituents of their bodies are 
animals thus dependent upon plants ? Certainly 
not for their horny matter ; nor for chondrin, the 
proximate chemical element of cartilage ; nor for 
gelatine ; nor for syntonin, the constituent of 
muscle; nor for their nervous or biliary sub- 
stances ; nor for their amyloid matters ; nor, 
necessarily, for their fats. 

It can be experimentally demonstrated that 
animals can make these for themselves. But that 
which they cannot make, but must, in all known 
cases, obtain directly or indirectly from plants, is 
the peculiar nitrogenous matter, protein. Thus 
the plant is the ideal proUtaire of the living 
world, the worker who produces ; the animal, the 
ideal aristocrat, who mostly occupies himself in 
consuming, after the manner of that noble repre- 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 177 

sentative of the line of Zahdarm, whose epitaph is 
written in " Sartor Eesartus." 

Here is our last hope of finding a sharp line of 
demarcation between plants and animals; for, as 
I have already hinted, there is a border territory 
between the two kingdoms, a sort of no-man's- 
land, the inhabitants of which certainly cannot 
be discriminated and brought to their proper 
allegiance in any other way. 

Some months ago. Professor TjTidall asked me 
to examine a drop of infusion of hay, placed 
under an excellent and powerful microscope, and 
to tell him what I thought some organisms 
visible in it were. I looked and observed, in the 
first place, multitudes of Bacteria moving about 
with their ordinary intermittent spasmodic 
wriggles. As to the vegetable nature of these 
there is now no doubt. Not only does the close 
resemblance of the Bacteria to unquestionable 
plants, such as the Oscillatorice and the lower forms 
of Fungi, justify this conclusion, but the manu- 
facturing test settles the question at once. It 
is only needful to add a minute drop of fluid 
containing Bacteria, to water in which tartrate, 
phosphate, and sulphate of ammonia are dissolved ; 
and, in a very short space of time, the clear fluid 
becomes milky by reason of their prodigious 
multiplication, which, of course, implies the 
manufacture of living Bacterium-stuff out of 
these merely saline matters. 

VOL. VIII N 



178 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

But other active organisms, very much larger 
than the Bacteria, attaining in fact the com- 
paratively gigantic dimensions of -g^nnr of an 
inch or more, incessantly crossed the field of view. 
Each of these had a body shaped like a pear, the 
small end being slightly incurved and produced 
into a long curved filament, or cilium, of extreme 
tenuity. Behind this, from the concave side of 
the incurvation, proceeded another long cdium, 
so delicate as to be discernible only by the use of 
the highest powers and careful management of 
the light. In the centre of the pear-shaped 
body a clear round space could occasionally be 
discerned, but not always; and careful watching 
showed that this clear vacuity appeared gradually, 
and then shut up and disappeared suddenly, at 
regular intervals. Such a structure is of common 
occurrence among the lowest plants and animals, 
and is known as a contractile vacuole. 

The little creature thus described sometimes 
propelled itself with great activity, with a curious 
rolling motion, by the lashing of the front cilium, 
while the second cilium trailed behind; some- 
times it anchored itself by the hinder cilium and 
was spun round by the working of the other, its 
motions resembling those of an anchor buoy in a 
heavy sea. Sometimes, when two were in fiill 
career towards one another, each would appear 
dexterously to get out of the other's way ; some- 
times a crowd would assemble and jostle one 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 179 

another, with as much semblance of individual 
effort as a spectator on the Grands Mulcts might 
observe with a telescope among the specks repre- 
senting men in the valley of Chamounix. 

The spectacle, though always surprising, was 
not new to me. So my reply to the question put 
to me was, that these organisms were what 
biologists call Monads, and though they might be 
animals, it was also possible that they might, 
like the Bacteria, be plants. My friend received 
ray verdict with an expression which showed a 
sad want of respect for authority. He would as 
soon believe that a sheep was a plant. Naturally 
piqued by this want of faith, I have thought a 
good deal over the matter ; and, as I still rest in 
the lame conclusion I originally expressed, and 
must even now confess that I cannot certainly 
say whether this creature is an animal or a plant, 
I think it may be well to state the grounds of my 
hesitation at length. But, in the first place, in 
order that I may conveniently distinguish this 
" Monad " from the multitude of other things 
which go by the same designation, I must give it 
a name of its own. I think (though, for reasons 
which need not be stated at present, I am not 
quite sure) that it is identical with the species 
Monas lens, as defined by the eminent French 
microscopist Dujardin, though his magnifying 
power was probably insufficient to enable him 
to see that it is curiously like a much larger 

N 2 



180 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

form of monad whicli he has named Heteromita. 
I shall, therefore, call it not Monas, but Heteromita 
lens. 

I have been unable to devote to my Heteromita 
the prolonged study needful to work out its whole 
history, which would involve weeks, or it may be 
months, of unremitting attention. But I the less 
regret this circumstance, as some remarkable 
observations recently published by Messrs. Dal- 
linger and Drysdale ^ on certain Monads, relate, 
in part, to a form so similar to my Heteromita 
lens, that the history of the one may be used to 
illustrate that of the other. These most patient 
and painstaking observers, who employed the 
highest attainable powers of the microscope and, 
relieving one another, kept watch day and night 
over the same individual monads, have been 
enabled to trace out the whole history of their 
Heteromita ; which they found in infusions of the 
heads of fishes of the Cod tribe. 

Of the four monads described and figured by 
these investigators, one, as I have said, very 
closely resembles Heteromita lens in every 
particular, except that it has a separately dis- 
tinguishable central particle or " nucleus," which 
is not certainly to be made out in Heteromita 
lens ; and that nothing is said by Messrs. Dallinger 

1 " Researches in the Life-history of a Cercomonad : a Lesson 
in Biogenesis"; and "Further Researches in the Life-history 
of the Monads." — Monthly MicroscopicalJownal, 1873. 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 181 

and Diysdale of the existence of a contractile 
vacuole in this monad, though they describe it in 
another. 

Their Heteromita, how^ever, multiplied rapidly 
by fission. Sometimes a transverse constriction 
appeared ; the hinder half developed a new cilium, 
■ and the hinder cilium gradually split from its 
base to its free end, until it was divided into 
two ; a process which, considering the fact that 
this fine filament cannot be much more than 
To 0^0 of ^n inch, in diameter, is wonderful 
enough. The constriction of the body extended 
inwards until the two portions were united by a 
narrow isthmus ; finally, they separated and each 
swam away by itself, a complete Heteromita, 
provided with its two cilia. Sometimes the con- 
striction took a longitudinal direction, with the 
same ultimate result. In each case the process 
occupied not more than six or seven minutes. 
At this rate, a single Heteromita would give rise 
to a thousand like itself in the course of an hour, 
to about a million in two hours, and to a number 
greater than the generally assumed number of 
human beings now living in the world in three 
hours ; or, if we give each Heteromita an hour's 
enjoyment of individual existence, the same result 
will be obtained in about a day. The apparent 
suddenness of the appearance of multitudes of 
such organisms as these, in any nutritive fluid to 
which one obtains access, is thus easily explained. 



182 ANIMALS AND PLANTS 



VI 



During these processes of multiplication by 
fission, the Heteromita remains active; but some- 
times another mode of fission occurs. The body 
becomes rounded and quiescent, or nearly so ; and, 
while in this resting state, divides into two 
portions, each of which is rapidly converted into 
an active Heteromita. 

A still more remarkable phenomenon is that 
kind of multiplication which is preceded by the 
union of two monads, by a process which is termed 
conjugation. Two active Heteromitw become applied 
to one another, and then slowly and gradually coa- 
lesce into one body. The two nuclei run into one ; 
and the mass resulting from the conjugation of the 
two Heteromitm, thus fused together, has a tri- 
angular form. The two pairs of cilia are to be 
seen, for some time, at two of the angles, which 
answer to the smaU ends of the conjoined monads ; 
but they ultimately vanish, and the twin organ- 
ism, in which all visible traces of organisation 
have disappeared, falls into a state of rest. 
Sudden wave-like movements of its substance 
next occur; and, in a short time, the apices of 
the triangular mass burst, and give exit to a 
dense yellowish, glairy fluid, filled with minute 
granules. This process, which, it wiU be observed, 
involves the actual confluence and mixture of the 
substance of two distinct organisms, is efiected in 
the space of about two hours. 

The authors whom I quote say that they 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 183 

" cannot express " the excessive minuten'ess of the 
granules in question, and they estimate their 
diameter at less than awinrTr of ^^ inch. Under 
the highest powers of the microscope, at present 
apphcable, such specks are hardly- discernible. 
Nevertheless, particles of this size are massive 
when compared to physical molecules; whence 
there is no reason to doubt that each, small as it 
is, may have a molecular structure sufficiently 
complex to give rise to the phenomena of life. 
And, as a matter of fact, by patient watching of 
the place at which these infinitesimal living 
particles were discharged, our observers assured 
themselves of their growth and development into 
new monads. In about four hours from their 
being set free, they had attained a sixth of the 
length of the parent, with the characteristic cilia, 
though at first they were quite motionless ; and, 
in four hours more, they had attained the dimen- 
sions and exhibited all the activity of the adult. 
These inconceivably minute particles are therefore 
the germs of the Heteromita ; and fi-om the 
dimensions of these germs it is easily shown that 
the body formed by conjugation may, at a low 
estimate, have given exit to thirty thousand of 
them ; a result of a matrimonial process whereby 
the contracting parties, without a metaphor, " be- 
come one flesh," enough to make a Malthusian 
despair of the future of the Universe. 

I am not aware that the investigators from 



184 ANIMALS AND PLANTS 



VI 



wliom I "have borrowed this history have en- 
deavoured to ascertain whether their monads take 
soHd nutriment or not ; so that though they help 
us very much to fill up the blanks in the history 
of my Heteromita, their observations throw no 
light on the problem we are trying to solve — Is it 
an animal or is it a plant ? 

Undoubtedly it is possible to bring forward 
very strong arguments in favour of regarding 
Heteromita as a plant. 

For example, there is a Fungus, an obscure and 
almost microscopic mould, termed Perono^ora 
infestans. Like many other Fungi, the Perono- 
sporce are parasitic upon other plants; and this 
particular Peronospora happens to have attained 
much notoriety and political importance, in a way 
not without a parallel in the career of notorious 
pohticians, namely, by reason of the frightful 
mischief it has done to mankind. For it is this 
Fungus which is the cause of the potato disease ; 
and, therefore, Peronospora infestans (doubtless of 
exclusively Saxon origin, though not accurately 
known to be so) brought about the Irish famine. 
The plants afflicted with the malady are found to 
be infested by a mould, consisting of fine tubular 
filaments, termed hypJice, which burrow through 
the substance of the potato plant, and appropriate 
to themselves the substance of their host ; while, 
at the same time, directly or indirectly, they set 
up chemical changes by which even its woody 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 185 

framework becomes blackened, sodden, and 
withered. 

In structure, however, the Peronospora is as 
much a mould as the common Penicillium ; and 
just as the Penicillium multiplies by the breaking 
up of its hyphas into separate rounded bodies, the 
spores ; so, in the Peronospora, certain of the 
hyphse grow out into the air through the interstices 
of the superficial cells of the potato plant, and 
develop spores. Each of these hjrphje usually 
gives off several branches. The ends of the 
branches dilate and become closed sacs, which 
eventually drop off as spores. The spores falling 
on some part of the same potato plant, or carried 
by the wind to another, may at once germinate, 
throwing out tubular prolongations which become 
hyphse, and burrow into the substance of the 
plant attacked. But, more commonly, the con- 
tents of the spore divide into six or eight separate 
portions. The coat of the spore gives way, and 
each portion then emerges as an independent 
organism, which has the shape of a bean, rather 
narrower at one end than the other, convex on one 
side, and depressed or concave on the opposite. 
From the depression, two long and delicate cilia 
proceed, one shorter than the other, and directed 
forwards. Close to the origin of these cilia, in the 
substance of the body, is a regularly pulsating, 
contractile vacuole. The shorter cihum vibrates 
actively, and effects the locomotion of the organ- 



186 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

ism, while the other trails behind ; the whole 
body rolling on its axis with its pointed end 
forwards. 

The eminent botanist, De Bary, who was not 
thinking of our problem, tells us, in describing the 
movements of these "Zoospores," that, as they 
swim about, " Foreign bodies are carefully avoided, 
and the whole movement has a deceptive likeness 
to the voluntary changes of place which are 
observed in microscopic animals." 

After swarming about in this way in the 
moisture on the surface of a leaf or stem (which, 
film though it may be, is an ocean to such a fish) 
for half an hour, more or less, the movement of 
the zoospore becomes slower, and is limited to a 
slow turning upon its axis, without change of 
place. It then becomes quite quiet, the cilia dis- 
appear, it assumes a spherical form, and surrounds 
itself with a distinct, though delicate, membranous 
coat. A protuberance then grows out fi-om one 
side of the sphere, and rapidly increasing in length, 
assumes the character of a h3?pha. The latter 
penetrates into the substance of the potato plant, 
either by entering a stomate, or by boring through 
the wall of an epidermic cell, and ramifies, as a 
myceUum, in the substance of the plant, destroying 
the tissues with which it comes in contact. As 
these processes of multipHcation take place very 
rapidly, millions of spores are soon set fi-ee from a 
single infested plant ; and, from their minuteness, 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 187 

they are readily transported by the gentlest 
breeze. Since, again, the zoospores set free from 
each spore, in virtue of their powers of locomotion, 
swiftly disperse themselves over the surface, it is 
no wonder that the infection, once started, soon 
spreads from field to field, and extends its ravages 
over a whole country. 

However, it does not enter into my present 
plan to treat of the potato disease, instructively as 
its history bears upon that of other epidemics; 
and I have selected the case of the Peronospora 
simply because it affords an example of an organ- 
ism, which, in one stage of its existence, is truly a 
" Monad," indistinguishable by any important 
character from our Heteromita, and exti:0,ordinarily 
like it in some respects. And yet this " Monad " 
can be traced, step by step, through the series of 
metamorphoses which I have described, until it 
assumes the features of an organism, which is as 
much a plant as is an oak or an elm. 

Moreover, it would be possible to pursue the 
analogy farther. Under certain circumstances, a 
process of conjugation takes place in the Perono- 
spora. Two separate portions of its protoplasm 
become fused together, surround themselves with 
a thick coat, and give rise to a sort of vegetable 
egg called an oospore. After a period of rest, the 
contents of the oospore break up into a number of 
zoospores like those already described, each of 
which, after a period of activity, germinates in the 



188 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

ordinary way. This process obviously corresponds 
with the conjugation and subsequent setting free 
of germs in the Heteromita. 

But it may be said that the Peronospora is, 
after all, a questionable sort of plant ; that it seems 
to be wanting in the manufacturing power, selected 
as the main distinctive character of vegetable 
life; or, at any rate, that there is no proof that 
it does not get its protein matter ready made 
from the potato plant. 

Let \is, therefore, take a case which is not open 
to these objections. 

There are some small plants known to botanists 
as members of the genus Goleochmte, which, with- 
out being truly parasitic, grow upon certain 
water-weeds, as lichens grow upon trees. The 
little plant has the form of an elegant green star, 
the branching arms of which are divided into 
cells. Its greenness is due to its chlorophyll, and 
it undoubtedly has the manufacturing power in 
full degree, decomposing carbonic acid'and setting 
oxygen free, under the influence of sunlight. But 
the protoplasmic contents of some of the cells of 
which the plant is made up occasionally divide, by 
a method similar to that which effects the division 
of the contents of the Peronospora spore ; and the 
severed portions are then set free as active monad- 
like zoospores. Each is oval and is provided at 
one extremity with two long active ciha. Pro- 
pelled by these, it swims about for a longer or 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 189 

shorter time, but at length comes to a state of 
rest and gradually grows into a Coleochcete. 
Moreover, as in the Peronosjpora, conjugation may 
take place and result in an oospore ; the contents 
of which divide and are set free as monadiform 
germs. 

If the whole history of the zoospores of Perono- 
spora and of GokocluBte were unknown, they would 
undoubtedly be classed among " Monads '' with 
the same right as Heteromita ; why then may not 
Heteromita be a plant, even though the cycle of 
forms through which it passes shows no terms 
quite so complex as those which occur in Perono- 
spora and Coleochcete? And, in fact, there are 
some green organisms, in every respect charac- 
teristically plants, such as Chlamydomonas, 
and the common Volvox, or so-called " Globe 
animalcule,'' which run through a cycle of forms 
of just the same simple character as those of 
Heteromita. 

The name of Chlamydomonas is applied to certain 
microscopic green bodies, each of which consists of 
a protoplasmic central substance invested by a 
structureless sac. The latter contains cellulose, as 
in ordinary plants; and the chlorophyll which 
gives the green colour enables the Chlamydomonas 
to decompose carbonic acid and fix carbon as they 
do. Two long cilia protrude through the cell-wall, 
and effect the rapid locomotion of this " monad," 
which, in all respects except its mobihty, is 



190 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

characteristically a plant. Under ordinary cir- 
cumstances, the Chlamydomonas multiplies by 
simple fission, each splitting into two or into four 
parts, which separate and become independent 
organisms. Sometimes, however, the Chlamy- 
domonas divides into eight parts, each of which is 
provided with four instead of two cilia. These 
"zoospores" conjugate in pairs, and give rise to 
quiescent bodies, which multiply by division, and 
eventually pass into the active state. 

Thus, so far as outward form and the general 
character of the cycle of modifications, through 
which the organism passes in the course of its 
life, are concerned, the resemblance between 
Chlamydomonas and Heteromita is of the closest 
description. And on the face of the matter there 
is no ground for refusing to admit that Heteromita 
may be related to Chlamydomonas, as the colourless 
fungus is to the green alga. Volvox may be com- 
pared to a hollow sphere, the wall of which is 
made up of coherent Chlamydomonads ; and which 
progresses with a rotating motion effected by the 
paddling of the multitudinous pairs of cilia which 
project from its surface. Each Fofeoa;-monad, 
moreover, possesses a red pigment spot, like the 
simplest form of eye known among animals. The 
methods of fissive multiplication and of conjugation 
observed in the monads of this locomotive globe 
are essentially similar to those observed in Chlamy- 
domonas; and, though a hard battle has been 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 191 

fought over it, Volvox is now finally surrendered to 
the Botanists. 

Thus there is really no reason why Heteromita 
may not be a plant ; and this conclusion would be 
very satisfactory, if it were not equally easy to 
show that there is really no reason why it should 
not be an animal. For there are numerous 
organisms presenting the closest resemblance to 
Heteromita, and, like it, grouped under the general 
name of '' Monads," which, nevertheless, can be 
observed to take in solid nutriment, and which, 
therefore, have a virtual, if not an actual, mouth 
and digestive cavity, and thus come under Cuvier's 
definition of an animal. Numerous forms of such 
animals have been described by Ehrenberg, 
Dujardin, H. James Clark, and other writers on 
the Infusoria. Indeed, in another infusion 
of hay in which my Heteromita lens occurred, 
there were innumerable such infusorial animalcules 
belonging to the well-known species Colpoda 
cucullus} 

Full-sized specimens of this animalcule attain a 
length of between -^^ or ^^^ of an inch, so that it 
may have ten times the length and a thousand 
times the mass of a Heteromita. In shape, it is 
not altogether unlike Heteromita. The small end, 
however, is not produced into one long cilium, 
but the general surface of the body is covered with 

' Excellently described by Stein, almost all of whose state- 
ments I have verified. 



192 ANIMALS AND PLANTS vi 

small actively vibrating ciliary organs, which are 
only longest at the small end. At the point 
which answers to that from which the two cilia 
arise in Heteromita, there is a conical depression, 
the mouth ; and, in young specimens, a tapering 
filament, which reminds one of the posterior cilium 
of Heteromita, projects from this region. 

The body consists of a soft granular proto- 
plasmic substance, the middle of which is occupied 
by a large oval mass called the " nucleus " ; while, 
at its hinder end, is a " contractile vacuole," con- 
spicuous by its regular rhythmic appearances and 
disappearances. Obviously, although the Colpoda 
is not a monad, it differs from one only in subor- 
dinate details. Moreover, under certain conditions, 
it becomes quiescent, incloses itself in a delicate 
case or cyst, and then divides into two, four, or 
more portions, which are eventually set free and 
swim about as active Golpodm. 

But this creature is an unmistakable animal, 
and full-sized Golpodce may be fed as easily as one 
feeds chickens. It is only needful to diffuse very 
finely ground carmine through the water in which 
they hve, and, in a very short time, the bodies of 
the Golpodm are stuffed with the deeply-coloured 
granules of the pigment. 

And if this were not sufiicient evidence of the 
animality of Colpoda, there comes the fact that it 
is even more similar to another weU-knowm 
animalcule, Paramcecium, than it is to a monad. 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 193 

But Parammcium is so huge a creature compared 
with those hitherto discussed — it reaches yiu of 
an inch or more in length — ^that there is no dififi- 
culty in making out its organisation in detail; 
and in proving that it is not only an animal, but 
that it is an animal which possesses a somewhat 
compHcated organisation. For example, the sur- 
face layer of its body is different in structure from 
the deeper parts. There are two contractile 
vacuoles, from each of which radiates a system of 
vessel-hke canals ; and not only is there a conical 
depression continuous with a tube, which serve as 
mouth and gullet, but the food ingested takes a 
definite course, and refiise is rejected from a 
definite region. Nothing is easier than to feed 
these animals, and to watch the particles of indigo 
or carmine accumulate at the lower end of the 
gullet. From this they gradually project, sur- 
rounded by a ball of water, which at length passes 
with a jerk, oddly simulating a gulp, into the 
pulpy central substance of the body, there to cir- 
culate up one side and down the other, until its 
contents are digested and assimilated. Neverthe- 
less, this complex animal multiplies by division, as 
the monad does, and, Hke the monad, undergoes 
conjugation. It stands in the same relation to 
Heteromita on the animal side, as Coleochmte does 
on the plant side. Start from either, and such an 
insensible series of gradations leads to the monad 
that it is impossible to say at any stage of the 
VOL. VIII 



194 ANIMALS AND PLANTS VI 

progress where the Hne between the animal and 
the plant must be drawn. 

There is reason to think that certain organisms 
which pass through a monad stage of existence, 
such as the Myxomycetes, are, at one time of their 
lives, dependent upon external sources for their 
protein matter, or are animals ; and, at another 
period, manufacture it, or are plants. And seeing 
that the whole progress of modern investigation is 
in favour of the doctrine of continuity, it is a fair 
and probable speculation — ^though only a specu- 
lation — that, as there are some plants which can 
manufacture protein out of such apparently in- 
tractable mineral matters as carbonic acid, water, 
nitrate of ammonia, metalUc and earthy salts ; while 
others need to be suppHed with their carbon and 
nitrogen in the somewhat less raw form of tartrate 
of ammonia and allied compounds ; so there may be 
yet others, as is possibly the case with the true 
parasitic plants, which can only manage to put 
together materials still better prepared — still more 
nearly approximated to protein — until we arrive at 
such organisms as the Psorospermim and the Pan- 
histophyton, which are as much animal as vegetable 
in structure, but are animal in their dependence 
on other organisms for their food. 

The singular circumstance observed by Meyer, 
that the Torula of yeast, though an indubitable 
plant, still flourishes most vigorously when supplied 
with the complex nitrogenous substance, pepsin; 



VI ANIMALS AND PLANTS 195 

the probability that the Peronospora is nourished 
directly by the protoplasm of the potato-plant; 
and the wonderful facts which have recently been 
brought to light respecting insectivorous plants, all 
favour this view ; and tend to the conclusion that 
the difference between animal and plant is one of 
degree rather than of kind, and that the problem 
whether, in a given case, an organism is an 
animal or a plant, may be essentially insoluble. 



vn 

A LOBSTER; OR, THE STUDY OF 
ZOOLOGY 

[1861] 

Natural History is the name familiarly applied 
to the study of the properties of such natural 
bodies as minerals, plants, and animals; the 
sciences which embody the knowledge man has 
acquired upon these subjects are commonly termed 
Natural Sciences, in contradistinction to other so- 
called " physical " sciences ; and those who devote 
themselves especially to the pursuit of such 
sciences have been and are commonly termed 
" Naturalists." 

Linnaeus was a naturalist in this wide sense, 
and his " Systema Naturae " was a work upon 
natural history, in the broadest acceptation of the 
term ; in it, that great methodising spirit em- 
bodied all that was known in his time of the 
distinctive characters of minerals, animals, and 



Vli THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 197 

plants. But the enormous stimulus which 
Linnseus gave to the investigation of nature soon 
rendered it impossible that any one man should 
write another " Systema Naturae," and extremely 
difficult for any one to become even a naturalist 
such as Linnseus was. 

Great as have been the advances made by all 
the three branches of science, of old included 
under the title of natural history, there can be no 
doubt that zoology and botany have grown in an 
enormously greater ratio than mineralogy; and 
hence, as I suppose, the name of " natural history " 
has gradually become more and more definitely 
attached to these prominent divisions of the 
subject, and by " naturalist " people have meant 
more and more distinctly to imply a student of 
the structure and function of living beings. 

However this may be, it is certain that the 
advance of knowledge has gradually widened the 
distance between mineralogy and its old associates, 
while it has drawn zoology and botany closer to- 
gether; so that of late years it has been found 
convenient (and indeed necessary) to associate the 
sciences which deal with vitality and all its phe- 
nomena under the common head of " biology " ; 
and the biologists have come to repudiate any 
blood-relationship with their foster-brothers, the 
mineralogists. 

Certain broad laws have a general application 
throughout both the animal and the vegetable 



198 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 



Vll 



worlds, but the ground common to these kingdoms 
of nature is not of very wide extent, and the 
multipHcity of details is so great, that the student 
of living beings finds himself obliged to devote his 
attention exclusively either to the one or the 
other. If he elects to study plants, under any 
aspect, we know at once what to call him. He is 
a botanist, and his science is botany. But if the 
investigation of animal life be his choice, the name 
generally apphed to him will vary according to 
the kind of animals he studies, or the particular 
phenomena of animal life to which he confines his 
attention. If the study of man is his object, he is 
called an anatomist, or a physiologist, or an ethno- 
logist; but if he dissects animals, or examines 
into the mode in which their functions are per- 
formed, he is a comparative anatomist or com- 
parative physiologist. If he turns his attention to 
fossil animals, he is a palaeontologist. If his mind 
is more particularly directed to the specific de- 
scription, discrimination, classification, and distri- 
bution of animals, he is termed a zoologist. 

For the purpose of the present discourse, how- 
ever, I shall recognise none of these titles save the 
last, which I shall employ as the equivalent of 
botanist, and I shall use the term zoology as 
denoting the whole doctrine of animal life, in con- 
tradistinction to botany, which signifies the whole 
doctrine of vegetable life. 

Employed in this sense, zoology, like botany, is 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 199 

divisible into three great but subordinate sciences, 
morphology, physiology, and distribution, each of 
which may, to a very great extent, be studied in- 
dependently of the. other. 

Zoological morphology is the doctrine of animal 
form or structure. Anatomy is one of its branches ; 
development is another ; while classification is the 
expression of the relations which different animals 
bear to one another, in respect of their anatomy 
and their development. 

Zoological distribution is the study of animals in 
relation to the terrestrial conditions which obtain 
now, or have obtained at any previous epoch of 
the earth's history. 

Zoological physiology, lastly, is the doctrine of 
the functions or actions of animals. It regards 
animal bodies as machines impelled by certain 
forces, and performing an amount of work which 
can be expressed in terms of the ordinary forces of 
nature. The final object of physiology is to 
deduce the facts of morphology, on the one hand, 
and those of distribution on the other, from the 
laws of the molecular forces of matter. 

Such is the scope of zoology. But if I were to 
content myself with the enunciation of these dry 
definitions, I should ill exemplify that method of 
teaching this branch of physical science, which it is 
my chief business to-night to recommend. Let us 
turn away then from abstract definitions. Let us 
take some concrete living thing, some animal, the 



200 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vil 

cominoner the better, and let us see how the appli- 
cation of common sense and common logic to the 
obvious facts it presents, inevitably leads us into 
all these branches of zoological ecience. 

I have before me a lobster. When I examine 
it, what appears to be the most striking character it 
presents ? Why, I observe that this part which we 
call the tail of the lobster, is made up of six distinct 
hard rings and a seventh terminal piece. If I 
separate one of the middle rings, say the third, I 
find it carries upon its under surface a pair of 
limbs or appendages, each of which consists of a 
stalk and two terminal pieces. So that I can re- 
present a transverse section of the ring and its 
appendages upon the diagram board in this way. 

If I now take the fourth ring, I find it has the 
same structure, and so have the fifth and the second ; 
so that, in each of these divisions of the tail, I find 
parts which correspond with one another, a ring 
and two appendages; and in each appendage a 
stalk and two end pieces. These corresponding 
parts are called, in the technical language of 
anatomy, "homologous parts." The ring of the 
third division is the " homologue " of the ring of 
the fifth, the appendage of the former is the homo- 
logue of the appendage of the latter. And, as 
each division exhibits corresponding parts in 
corresponding places, we say that all the divisions 
are constructed upon the same plan. But now let 
us consider the sixth division. It is similar to. 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 201 

and yet different from, the others. The ring is 
essentially the same as in the other divisions ; but 
the appendages look at first as if they were very 
different ; and yet when we regard them closely, 
what do we find ? A stalk and two terminal 
divisions, exactly as in the others, but the stalk is 
very short and very thick, the terminal divisions 
are very broad and flat, and one of them is divided 
into two pieces. 

I may say, therefore, that the sixth segment is 
like the others in plan, but that it is modified in 
its details. 

The first segment is like the others, so far as its 
ring is concerned, and though its appendages differ 
from any of those yet examined in the simplicity 
of their structure, parts corresponding with the 
stem and one of the divisions of the appendages 
of the other segments can be readily discerned in 
them. 

Thus it appears that the lobster's tail is com- 
posed of a series of segments which are funda- 
mentally similar, though each presents peculiar 
modifications of the plan common to all. But 
when I turn to the forepart of the body I see, at 
first, nothing but a great shield-like shell, called 
technically the " carapace," ending in front in a 
sharp spine, on either side of which are the curious 
compound eyes, set upon the ends of stout movable 
stalks. Behind these, on the under side of the 
body, are two pairs of long feelers, or antennse, 



202 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vil 

followed by six pairs of jaws folded against one 
another over the mouth, and five pairs of legs, the 
foremost of these being the great pinchers, or 
claws, of the lobster. 

It looks, at first, a little hopeless to attempt to 
find in this complex mass a series of rings, each 
with its pair of appendages, such as I have shown 
you in the abdomen, and yet it is not difficult to 
demonstrate their existence. Strip off the legs, 
and you will find that each pair is attached to a 
very definite segment of the under wall of the 
body; but these segments, instead of being the 
lower parts of free rings, as in the tail, are such 
parts of rings which are all solidly united and 
bound together ; and the like is true of the jaws, 
the feelers, and the eye-stalks, every pair of which 
is borne upon its own special segment. Thus the 
conclusion is gradually forced upon us, that the 
body of the lobster is composed of as many rings 
as there are pairs of appendages, namely, twenty in 
all, but that the six hindmost rings remain free 
and movable, while the fourteen front rings be- 
come firmly soldered together, their backs forming 
one continuous shield — the carapace. 

Unity of plan, diversity in execution, is the 
lesson taught by the study of the rings of the body, 
and the same instruction is given still more em- 
phatically by the appendages. If I examine the 
outermost jaw I find it consists of three distinct 
portions, an inner, a, middle, and an outer, mounted 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 203 

upon a common stem ; and if I compare this jaw 
with the legs behind it, or the jaws in front of it, 
I find it quite easy to see, that, in the legs, it is 
the part of the appendage which corresponds with 
the inner division, which becomes modified into 
what we know familiarly as the " leg," while the 
middle division disappears, and the outer division 
is hidden under the carapace. Nor is it more 
difficult to discern that, in the appendages of the 
tail, the middle division appears again and the 
outer vanishes ; while, on the other hand, in the 
foremost jaw, the so-called mandible, the inner 
division only is left ; and, in the same way, the 
parts of the feelers and of the eye-stalks can be 
identified with those of the legs and jaws. 

But whither does all this tend ? To the very 
remarkable conclusion that a unity of plan, of the 
same kind as that discoverable in the tail or 
abdomen of the lobster, pervades the whole organ- 
isation of its skeleton, so that I can return to the 
diagram representing any one of the rings of the 
tail, which I drew upon the board, and by adding a 
third division to each appendage, I can use it as a 
sort of scheme or plan of any ring of the body. I 
can give names to all the parts of that figure, and 
then if I take any segment of the body of the 
lobster, I can point out to you exactly, what modi- 
fication the general plan has undergone in that 
particular segment ; what part has remained 
movable, and what has become fixed to another ; 



204 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vii 

what has been excessively developed and metamor- 
phosed and what has been suppressed. 

But I imagine I hear the question, How is all 
this to be tested ? No doubt it is a pretty and 
ingenious way of looking at the structure of any 
animal ; but is it anything more ? Does Nature 
acknowledge, in any deeper way, this unity of plan 
we seem to trace ? 

The objection suggested by these questions is a 
very valid and important one, and morphology was 
in an unsound state so long as it rested upon the 
mere perception of the analogies which obtain 
between fuUy formed parts. The unchecked in- 
genuity of speculative anatomists proved itself 
fully competent to spin any number of contradic- 
tory hypotheses out of the same facts, and endless 
morphological dreams threatened to supplant 
scientific theory. 

Happily, however, there is a criterion of mor- 
phological truth, and a sure test of all homologies. 
Our lobster has not always been what we see it ; 
it was once an egg, a semifluid mass of yolk, not so 
big as a pin's head, contained in a transparent 
membrane, and exhibiting not the least trace of 
any One of those organs, the multiplicity and 
complexity of which, in the adult, are so surprising. 
After a time, a delicate patch of cellular membrane 
appeared upon one face of this yolk, and that 
patch was the foundation of the whole creature, 
the clay out of which it would be moulded. 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 205 

Gradually investing the yolk, it became subdivided 
by transverse constrictions into segments, the 
forerunners of the rings of the body. Upon the 
ventral surface of each of the rings thus sketched 
out, a pair of bud-like prominences made their ap- 
pearance — the rudiments of the appendages of the 
ring. At first, all the appendages were alike, but, 
as they grew, most of them became distinguished 
into a stem and two terminal divisions, to which, 
in the middle part of the body, was added a third 
outer division ; and it was only at a later period, 
that by the modification, or absorption, of certain 
of these primitive constituents, the hmbs acquired 
their perfect form. 

Thus the study of development proves that the 
doctrine of unity of plan is not merely a fancy, 
that it is not merely one way of looking at the 
matter, but that it is the expression of deep-seated 
natural facts. The legs and jaws of the lobster 
may not merely be regarded as modifications of a 
common type, — in fact and in nature they are so, 
— the leg and the jaw of the young animal being, 
at first, indistinguishable. 

These are wonderful truths, the more so because 
the zoologist finds them to be of universal applica- 
tion. The investigation of a polype, of a snail, of 
a fish, of a horse, or of a man, would have led us, 
though by a less easy path, perhaps, to exactly the 
same point. Unity of plan everywhere Hes hidden 
under the mask of diversity of structure — the 



206 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vii 

coipplex is everywhere evolved out of the simple. 
Every animal has at first the form of an egg, and 
every animal and every organic part, in reaching 
its adult state, passes through conditions common 
to other animals and other adult parts ; and this 
leads me to another point. I have hitherto 
spoken as if the lobster were alone in the world, 
but, as I need hardly remind you, there are 
myriads of other animal organisms. Of these, 
some, such as men, horses, birds, fishes, snails, 
slugs, oysters, corals, and sponges, are not in the 
least like the lobster. But other animals, though 
they may differ a good deal from the lobster, are 
yet either very like it, or are like something that 
is like it. The cray fish, the rock lobster, and the 
prawn, and the shrimp, for example, however 
different, are yet so like lobsters, that a child 
would group them as of the lobster kind, in contra- 
distinction to snails and slugs ; and these last again 
would form a kind by themselves, in contradis- 
tinction to cows, horses, and sheep, the cattle kind. 

But this spontaneous grouping into " kinds " is 
the first essay of the human mind at classification, 
or the calling by a common name of those things 
that are alike, and the arranging them in such a 
manner as best to suggest the sum of their like- 
nesses and unlikenesses to other things. 

Those kinds which include no other subdivisions 
than the sexes, or various breeds, are called, in 
technical language, species. The English lobster 



Vii THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 207 

is a species, our cray fish is another, our prawn is 
another. In other countries, however, there are 
lobsters, cray fish, and prawns, very hke ours, and 
yet presenting sufficient differences to deserve dis- 
tinction. Naturalists, therefore, express this re- 
semblance and this diversity by grouping them as 
distinct species of the same " genus.'' But the 
lobster and the cray fish, though belonging to dis- 
tinct genera, have many features in common, and 
hence are grouped together in an assemblage which 
is called a family. More distant resemblances 
connect the lobster with the prawn and the crab, 
which are expressed by putting all these into the 
same order. Again, more remote, but still very 
definite, resemblances unite the lobster with the 
woodlouse, the king crab, the water flea, and the 
barnacle, and separate them fi:om all other animals ; 
whence they collectively constitute the larger 
group, or class, Crustacea. But the Cnistacea 
exhibit many peculiar features in common with 
insects, spiders, and centipedes, so that these are 
grouped into the still larger assemblage or " pro- 
vince" Articulata; and, finally, the relations 
which these have to worms and other lower 
animals, are expressed by combining the whole vast 
aggregate into the sub-kingdom of Anmdosa. 

If I had worked my way from a sponge instead 
of a lobster, I should have found it associated, by 
like ties, with a great number of other animals 
into the sub-kingdom Protozoa ; if I had selected 
a fresh-water polype or a coral, the members of 



208 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vil 

what naturalists term the sub-kingdom Ccelenterata, 
would have grouped themselves around my type ; 
had a snail been chosen, the inhabitants of all 
univalve and bivalve, land and water, shells, the 
lamp shells, the squids, and the sea-mat would 
have gradually linked themselves on to it as mem- 
bers of the same sub-kingdom of Mollusca; and 
finally, starting from man, I should have been com- 
pelled to admit first, the ape, the rat, the horse, 
the dog, into the same class ; and then the bird, 
the crocodile, the turtle, the frog, and the fish, 
into the same sub-kingdom of Vertebrata. 

And if I had followed out all these various Unes 
of classification fiiUy, I should discover in the end 
that there was no animal, either recent or fossil, 
which did not at once fall into one or other of 
these sub-kingdoms. In other words, every animal 
is organised upon one or other of the five, or more, 
plans, the existence of which renders our classifi- 
cation possible. And so definitely and precisely 
marked is the structure of each animal, that, in 
the present state of our knowledge, there is not 
the least evidence to prove that a form, in 
the sHghtest degree transitional between any of 
the two groups Vertebrata, Annulosa, Mollusca, 
and Co&lenterata, either exists, or has existed, 
during that period of the earth's history which is 
recorded by the geologist.^ Nevertheless, you 
must not for a moment suppose, because no such 

[' The different grouping necessitated by later knowledge 
does not affect the principle of the argument. — 1894.] 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 209 

transitional forms are known, that the members of 
the sub-kingdoms are disconnected from, or inde- 
pendent of, one another. On the contrary, in 
their earliest condition they are all similar, and the 
primordial germs of a man, a dog, a bird, a fish, a 
beetle, a snail, and a polype are, in no essential 
structural respects, distinguishable. 

In this broad sense, it may with truth be said, 
that all living animals, and all those dead faunae 
which geology reveals, are bound together by an 
all-pervading unity of organisation, of the same 
character, though not equal in degree, to that 
which enables us to discern one and the same plan 
amidst the twenty different segments of a lobster's 
body. Truly it has been said, that to a clear eye 
the smallest fact is a window through which the 
Infinite may be seen. 

Turning from these purely morphological con- 
siderations, let us now examine into the manner in 
which the attentive study of the lobster impels us 
into other lines of research. 

Lobsters are found in all the European seas ; 
but on the opposite shores of the Atlantic and in 
the seas of the southern hemisphere they do not 
exist. They are, however, represented in these 
regions by very closely alHed, but distinct forms — 
the Homanis Americanus and the Homarus 
Oapcnsis : so that we may say that the European 
has one species of Homarus ; the American, 
another ; the African, another ; and thus the 

VOL. VIII p 



210 



THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 



remarkable facts of geographical distribution begin 
to dawn upon us. 

Again, if we examine the contents of the earth's 
crust, we shall find in the latter of those deposits, 
which have served as the great burying grounds of 
past ages, numberless lobster-like animals, but 
none so similar to our Hving lobster as to make 
zoologists sure that they belonged even to the 
same genus. If we go still further back in time, 
we discover, in the oldest rocks of all, the remains 
of animals, constructed on the same general plan 
as the lobster, and belonging to the same great 
group of Crustacea; but for the most part 
totally different from the lobster, and indeed from 
any other living form of crustacean ; and thus we 
gain a notion of that successive change of the 
animal population of the globe, in past ages, 
which is the most striking fact revealed by 
geology. 

Consider, now, where our inquiries have led us. 
We studied our type morphologically, when we 
determined its anatomy and its development, and 
when comparing it, in these respects, with other 
animals, we made out its place in a system of 
classification. If we were to examine every 
animal in a similar manner, we should estabhsh a 
complete body of zoological morphology. 

Again, we investigated the distribution of our 
type in space and in time, and, if the hke had 
been done with every animal, the sciences of geo- 



Vll THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 211 

graphical and geological distribution would have 
attained their Kmit. 

But you will observe one remarkable circum- 
stance, that, up to this point, the question of the 
life of these organisms has not come under con- 
sideration. Morphology and distribution might be 
studied almost as well, if animals and plants were 
a peculiar kind of crystals, and possessed none of 
those functions which distinguish living beings so 
remarkably. But the facts of morphology and 
distribution have to be accounted for, and the 
science, the aim of which it is to account for 
them, is Physiology. 

Let us return to our lobster once more. If we 
watched the creature in its native element, we 
should see it chmbing actively the submerged 
rocks, among which it delights to live, by means 
of its strong legs ; or swimming by powerful strokes 
of its great tail, the appendages of the sixth 
joint of which are spread out into a broad fan-hke 
propeller : seize it, and it will show you that its 
great claws are no mean weapons of offence ; sus- 
pend a piece of carrion among its haunts, and it 
will greedily devour it, tearing and crushing the 
flesh by means of its multitudinous jaws. 

Suppose that we had known nothing of the 
lobster but as an inert mass, an organic crystal, if 
I may use the phrase, and that we could suddenly 
see it exerting all these powers, what wonderful 
new ideas and new questions would arise in our 

p -2 



212 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY VII 

minds ! The great new question would be, " How 
does all this take place ? " the chief new idea would 
be, the idea of adaptation to purpose, — -the notion, 
that the constituents of animal bodies are not 
mere unconnected parts, but organs working 
together to an end. Let us consider the tail of 
the lobster again from this point of view. 
Morphology has taught us that it is a series 
of segments composed of homologous parts, 
which undergo various modifications — beneath 
and through which a common plan of formation 
is discernible.. But if I look at the same part 
physiologically, I see that it is a most beautifully 
constructed organ of locomotion, by means of 
which the animal can swiftly propel itself either 
backwards or forwards. 

But how is this remarkable propulsive machine 
made to perform its functions ? If I were sud- 
denly to kill one of these animals and to take out 
all the soft parts, I should find the shell to be per- 
fectly inert, to have no more power of moving 
itself than is possessed by the machinery of a mill 
when disconnected from its steam-engine or water- 
wheel. But if I were to open it, and take out the 
viscera only, leaving the white flesh, I should per- 
ceive that the lobster could bend and extend its 
tail as well as before. If I were to cut off the 
tan, I should cease to find any spontaneous motion 
in it ; but on pinching any portion of the flesh, 
I should observe that it underwent a very curious 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 213 

change — each fibre becoming shorter and thicker. 
By this act of contraction, as it is termed, the 
parts to which the ends of the fibre are attached 
are, of course, approximated ; and according to the 
relations of their points of attachment to the 
centres of motions of the different rings, the 
bending or the extension of the tail results. Close 
observation of the newly-opened lobster would 
soon show that all its movements are due to the 
same cause — the shortening and thickening of 
these fleshy fibres, which are technicallj^ called 
muscles. 

Here, then, is a capital fact. The movements 
of the lobster are due to muscular contractiUty. 
But why does a muscle contract at one time and 
not at another ? Why does one whole group of 
muscles contract when the lobster wishes to ex- 
tend his tail, and another group when he desires 
to bend it ? What is it originates, directs, and 
controls the motive power ? 

Experiment, the great instrument for the ascer- 
tainment of truth in physical science, answers this 
question for us. In the head of the lobster 
there lies a small mass of that peculiar tissue 
which is known as nervous substance. Cords of 
similar matter connect this brain of the lobster, 
directly or indirectly, with the muscles. Now, it 
these communicating cords are cut, the brain 
remaining entire, the power of exerting what we 
call voluntary motion in the parts below the sec- 



214 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vil 

tion is destroyed ; and, on the other hand, if, the 
cords remaining entire, the brain mass be destroyed, 
the same voluntary mobihty is equally lost. 
Whence the inevitable conclusion is, that the 
power of originating these motions resides in 
the brain and is propagated along the nervous 
cords. 

In the higher animals the phenomena which 
attend this transmission have been investigated, 
and the exertion of the pecuhar energy which 
resides in the nerves has been found to be accom- 
panied by a disturbance of the electrical state of 
their molecules. 

If we could exactly estimate the signification 
of this disturbance ; if we could obtain the value 
of a given exertion of nerve force by determining 
the quantity of electricity, or of heat, of which it 
is the equivalent; if we could ascertain upon 
what arrangement, or other condition of the 
molecules of matter, the manifestation of the 
nervous and muscular energies depends (and 
doubtless science wiU some day or other ascertain 
these points), physiologists would have attained 
their ultimate goal in this direction ; they would 
have determined the relation of the motive force 
of animals to the other forms of force found in 
nature ; and if the same process had been success- 
fully performed for all the operations which are 
carried on in, and by, the animal frame, physiology 
would be perfect, and the facts of morphology 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 215 

and distribution would be deducible from the 
laws which physiologists had estabhshed, com- 
bined with those determining the condition of the 
surrounding universe. 

There is not a fragment of the organism of this 
humble animal whose study would not lead us 
into regions of thought as large as those which I 
have briefly opened up to you ; but what I have 
been saying, I trust, has not only enabled you to 
form a conception of the scope and purport of 
zoology, but has given you an imperfect example 
of the manner in which, in my opinion, that 
science, or indeed any physical science, may be 
best taught. The great matter is, to make 
teaching real and practical, by fixing the atten- 
tion of the student on particular facts; but at 
the same time it should be rendered broad and 
comprehensive, by constant reference to the 
generalisations of which all particular facts are 
illustrations. The lobster has served as a type 
of the whole animal kingdom, and its anatomy 
and physiology have illustrated for us some of 
the greatest truths of biology. The student who 
has once seen for himself the facts which I have 
described, has had their relations explained to 
him, and has clearly comprehended them, has, 
so far, a knowledge of zoology, which is real and 
genuine, however limited it may be, and which is 
worth more than all the mere reading knowledge 
of the science he could ever acquire. His zoologi- 



216 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vil 

cal infonnation is, so far, knowledge and not mere 
hearsay. 

And if it were my business to fit you for the 
certificate in zoological science granted by this 
department, I should pursue a course precisely 
similar in principle to that which I have taken 
to-night. I should select a fresh-water sponge, 
a fresh-water polype or a Cyancea, a fresh-water 
mussel, a lobster, a fowl, as types of the five 
primary divisions of the animal kingdom. I 
should explain their structure very fully, and 
show how each illustrated the great principles of 
zoology. Having gone very carefully and fully 
over this ground, I should feel that you had a 
safe foundation, and I should then take you in 
the same way, but less minutely, over similarly 
selected illustrative types of the classes ; and then 
I should direct your attention to the special 
forms enumerated under the head of types, in 
this syllabus, and to the other facts there men- 
tioned. 

That would, speaking generally, be my plan. 
But I have undertaken to explain to you the best 
mode of acquiring and communicating a know- 
ledge of zoology, and you may therefore fairly ask 
me for a more detailed and precise account of the 
manner in which I should propose to furnish you 
with the information I refer to. 

My own impression is, that the best model for 
all kinds of training in physical science is that 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOI.OOY 217 

afforded by the method of teaching anatomy, in 
use in the medical schools. This method con- 
sists of three elements — lectures, demonstrations, 
and examinations. 

The object of lectures is, in the first place, to 
awaken the attention and excite the enthusiasm 
of the student ; and this, I ara sure, may be 
effected to a far greater extent by the oral dis- 
course and by the personal influence of a respected 
teacher than in any other way. Secondly, lectures 
have the double use of guiding the student to 
the salient points of a subject, and at the same 
time forcing him to attend to the whole of it, and 
not merely to that part which takes his fancy. 
And lastly, lectures afford the student the oppor- 
tunity of seeking explanations of those difficulties 
which will, and indeed ought to, arise in the 
course of his studies. 

What books shall I read ? is a question con- 
stantly put by the student to the teacher. My 
reply usually is, " None : write your notes out 
carefully and fully ; strive to understand them 
thoroughly; come to me for the explanation of 
anything you cannot understand : and I would 
rather you did not distract your mind by reading." 
A properly composed course of lectures ought to 
contain fully as much matter as a student can 
assimilate in the time occupied by its delivery; 
and the teacher should always recollect that his 
business is to feed, and not to cram the intellect. 



218 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOPxY vn 

Indeed, I believe that a student who gains 
from a course of lectures the simple habit of 
concentrating his attention upon a definitely 
limited series of facts, until they are thoroughly 
mastered, has made a step of immeasurable 
importance. 

But, however good lectures may be, and how- 
ever -extensive the course of reading by which 
they are followed up, they are but accessories to 
the great instrument of scientific teaching — 
demonstration. If I insist unweariedly, nay 
fanatically, upon the importance of physical 
science as an educational agent, it is because 
the study of any branch of science, if properly 
conducted, appears to me to fill up a void left 
by all other means of education. I have the 
greatest respect and love for literature; nothing 
would grieve me more than to see literary train- 
ing other than a very prominent branch of 
education : indeed, I wish that real literary dis- 
cipline were far more attended to than it is ; 
but I cannot shut my eyes to the fact, that there 
is a vast difference between men who have had a 
purely literary, and those who have had a sound 
scientific, training. 

Seeking for the cause of this difference, I 
imagine I can find it in the fact that, in the 
world of letters, learning and knowledge are one, 
and books are the source of both; whereas in 
science, as in life, learning and knowledge are 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOOY 219 

distinct, and the study of things, and not of 
books, is the source of the latter. 

All that literature has to bestow may be obtained 
by reading and by practical exercise in writing 
and in speaking ; but I do not exaggerate when 
I say, that none of the best gifts of science are to 
be won by these means. On the contrary, the 
great benefit which a scientific education bestows, 
whether as training or as knowledge, is dependent 
ujjon the extent to which the mind of the student 
is brought into immediate contact with facts — 
upon the degree to which he learns the habit of 
appealing directly to Nature, and of acquiring 
through his senses concrete images of those pro- 
perties of things, which are, and always will be, 
but approximatively expressed in human language. 
Our wajr of looking at Nature, and of speaking 
about her, varies from year to j'ear; but a fact 
once seen, a relation of cause and effect, once 
demonstrativel}' apprehended, are possessions 
which neither change nor pass away, but, on the 
contrary, form fixed centres, about which other 
truths aggregate by natural afiinity. 

Therefore, the great business of the scientific 
teacher is, to imprint the fundamental, irrefragable 
facts of his science, not only by words upon the 
mind, but by sensible impressions upon the eye, 
and ear, and touch of the student, in so complete 
a manner, that every term used, or law enunciated, 
should afterwards call up vivid images of the 



220 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vn 

particular structural, or other, facts which furnished 
the demonstration of the law, or the illustration 
of the term. 

Now this important operation can only be 
achieved by constant demonstration, which may 
take place to a certain imperfect extent during a 
lecture, but which ought also to be carried on 
independently, and which should be addressed to 
each individual student, the teacher endeavouring, 
not so much to show a thing to the learner, as to 
make him see it for himself 

I am well aware that there are great practical 
difficulties in the way of effectual zoological 
demonstrations. The dissection of animals is not 
altogether pleasant, and requires much time ; nor 
is it easy to secure an adequate supply of the 
needful specimens. The botanist has here a 
great advantage ; his specimens are easily ob- 
tained, are clean and wholesome, and can be 
dissected in a private house as well as anywhere 
else ; and hence, I believe, the fact, that botany 
is so much more readily and better taught than 
its sister science. But, be it difficult or be it 
easy, if zoological scieilce is to be properly studied, 
demonstration, and, consequently, dissection, must 
be had. Without it, no man can have a really 
sound knowledge of animal organisation. 

A good deal may be done, however, without 
actual dissection on the student's part, by demon- 
stration upon specimens and preparations ; and in 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 221 

all probability it would not be very difficult, were 
the demand sufficient, to organise collections of 
such objects, sufficient for all the purposes of 
elementary teaching, at a comparatively cheap 
rate. Even without these, much might be 
effected, if the zoological collections, which are 
open to the public, were arranged according to 
what has been termed the " typical principle " ; 
that is to say, if the specimens exposed to public 
view were so selected that the public could learn 
something from them, instead of being, as at 
present, merely confused by their multiplicity. 
For example, the grand ornithological gallery at 
the British Museum contains between two and 
three thousand species of birds, and sometimes 
five or six specimens of a species. They are 
very pretty to look at, and some of the cases are, 
indeed, splendid; but I will undertake to say, 
that no man but a professed ornithologist has 
ever gathered much information from the col- 
lection. Certainly, no one of the tens of thousands 
of the general public who have walked through 
that gallery ever knew more about the essential 
pecuharities of birds when he left the gallery 
than when he entered it. But if, somewhere in 
that vast hall, there were a few preparations, 
exempUfying the leading structural pecuharities 
and the mode of development of a common fowl ; 
if the types of the genera, the leading modifica- 
tions in the skeleton, in the plumage at various 



222 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vn 

ages, in the mode of nidification, and the like, 
among birds, were displayed ; and if the other 
specimens were put away in a place where the 
men of science, to whom they are alone useful, 
could have free access to them, I can conceive 
that this collection might become a great instru- 
ment of scientific education. 

The last implement of the teacher to which I 
have adverted is examination — a means of educa- 
tion now so thoroughly understood that I need 
hardly enlarge upon it. I hold that both written 
and oral examinations are indispensable, and, by 
requiring the description of specimens, they may 
be made to supplement demonstration. 

Such is the fullest reply the time at my dis- 
posal will allow me to give to the question — how 
may a knowledge of zoology be best acquired and 
communicated ? 

But there is a previous question which may 
be moved, and which, in fact, I know many 
are inclined to move. It is the question, why 
should teachers be encouraged to acquire a know- 
ledge of this, or any other branch of physical 
science ? What is the use, it is said, of attempt- 
ing to make physical science a branch of primary 
education ? Is it not probable that teachers, in 
pursuing such studies, will be led astray from the 
acquirement of more important but less attractive 
knowledge ? And, even if they can learn some- 
thing of science without prejudice to their useful- 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 223 

ness, what is the good of their attempting to 
instil that knowledge into boys whose real busi- 
ness is the acquisition of reading, writing, and 
arithmetic ? 

These questions are, and will be, very commonly 
asked, for they arise from that profound ignorance 
of the value and true position of physical science, 
which infests the minds of the most highly edu- 
cated and intelligent classes of the community. 
But if I did not feel well assured that they are 
capable of being easily and satisfactorily answered ; 
that they have been answered over and over again ; 
and that the time will come when men of liberal 
education wiU blush to raise such questions — I 
should be ashamed of my position here to-night. 
Without doubt, it is your great and very important 
function to carry out elementary education ; with- 
out question, anything that should interfere with 
the faithful fulfilment of that duty on your part 
would be a great evil ; and if I thought that your 
acquirement of the elements of physical science, 
and your communication of those elements to your 
pupils, involved any sort of interference with your 
proper duties, I should be the first person to pro- 
test against your being encouraged to do anything 
of the kind. 

But is it true that the acquisition of such a 
knowledge of science as is proposed, and the com- 
munication of that knowledge, are calculated to 
weaken your usefulness ? Or may I not rather 



224 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vii 

ask, is it possible for you to discharge your 
functions properly without these aids ? 

What is the purpose of primary intellectual 
education ? I apprehend that its first object is to 
train the young in the use of those tools where- 
with men extract knowledge from the ever-shift- 
ing succession of phenomena which pass before 
their eyes ; and that its second object is to inform 
them of the fundamental laws which have been 
found by experience to govern the course of things, 
so that they may not be turned out into the world 
naked, defenceless, and a prey to the events they 
might control. 

A boy is taught to read his own and other 
languages, in order that he may have access to 
infinitely wider stores of knowledge than could 
ever be opened to him by oral intercourse with his 
fellow men ; he learns to write, that his means of 
communication with the rest of mankind may be 
indefinitely enlarged, and that he may record and 
store up the knowledge he acquires. He is taught 
elementary mathematics, that he may understand 
all those relations of number and form, upon which 
the transactions of men, associated in complicated 
societies, are built, and that he may have some 
practice in deductive reasoning. 

All these operations of reading, writing, and 
ciphering, are intellectual tools, whose use should, 
before all things, be learned, and learned thor- 
oughly; so that the youth may be enabled to 



Til THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 225 

make his life that which it ought to be, a con- 
tinual progress in learning and in wisdom. 

But, in addition, primary education endeavours 
to fit a boy out with a certain equipment of 
positive knowledge. He is taxight the great laws 
of morality; the religion of his sect; so much 
history and geography as will tell him where the 
great countries of the world are, what they are, 
and how they have become what they are. 

Without doubt all these are most fitting and 
excellent things to teach a boy ; I should be very 
sorry to omit any of them from any scheme of 
primary intellectual education. The system is 
excellent, so far as it goes. 

But if I regard it closely, a curious reflection 
arises. I suppose that, fifteen hundred years ago, 
the child of any well-to-do Eoman citizen was 
taught just these same things ; reading and writing 
in his own, and, perhaps, the Greek tongue ; the 
elements of mathematics ; and the religion, moral- 
ity, history, and geography current in his time. 
Furthermore, I do not think I err in affirming, 
that, if such a Christian Roman boy, who had 
finished his education, could be transplanted into 
one of our public schools, and pass through its 
course of instruction, he would not meet with a 
single unfamiliar line of thought ; amidst all the 
new facts he would have to learn, not one would 
suggest a different mode of regarding the universe 
from that current in his own time. 

VOL, VIII Q 



226 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vil 

And yet surely there is some great difference 
between the civilisation of the fourth century and 
that of the nineteenth, and still more between the 
intellectual habits and tone of thought of that 
day and this ? 

And what has made this difference ? I answer 
fearlessly — The prodigious development of physi- 
cal science within the last two centuries. 

Modern civilisation rests upon physical science ; 
take away her gifts to our own country, and our 
position among the leading nations of the world 
is gone to-morrow ; for it is physical science only 
that makes intelligence and moral energy stronger 
than brute force. 

The whole of modern thought is steeped in 
science; it has made its way into the works of 
our best poets, and even the mere man of letters, 
who affects to ignore and despise science, is un- 
consciously impregnated with her spirit, and in- 
debted for his best products to her methods. I 
believe that the greatest intellectual revolution 
mankind has yet seen is now slowly taking place 
by her agency. She is teaching the world that 
the ultimate court of appeal is observation and 
experiment, and not authority ; she is teaching it 
to estimate the value of evidence ; she is creating 
a firm and living faith in the existence of immut^ 
able moral and physical laws, perfect obedience to 
which is the highest possible aim of an intelligent 
being. 



VII THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY 227 

But of all this your old stereotyped system of 
education takes no note. Physical science, its 
methods, its problems, and its difficulties, will 
meet the poorest boy at every turn, and yet we 
educate him in such a manner that he shall enter 
the world as ignorant of the existence of the 
methods and facts of science as the day he was 
bom. The modem world is full of artillery ; and 
we turn out our children to do battle in it, 
equipped with the shield and sword of an ancient 
gladiator. 

Posterity will cry shame on us if we do not 
remedy this deplorable state of things. Nay, if 
we live twenty years longer, our own consciences 
will cry shame on us. 

It is my firm conviction that the only way to 
remedy it is to make the elements of physical 
science an integral part of primary education. I 
have endeavoured to show you how that may be 
done for that branch of science which it is my 
business to pursue ; and I can but add, that I 
should look upon the day when every schoolmaster 
throughout this land was a centre of genuine, 
however rudimentary, scientific knowledge, as an 
epoch in the history of the country. 

But let me entreat you to remember my last 
words. Addressing myself to you, as teachers, I 
would say, mere book learning in physical science 
is a sham and a delusion — what you teach, unless 
you wish to be impostors, that you miist first 

Q 2 



228 THE STUDY OF ZOOLOGY vil 

know; and real knowledge in science means 
personal acquaintance with, the facts, be they 
few or many.^ 

1 It has been suggested to me that these words may be taken 
to imply a discouragement on my part of any sort of scientific 
instruction which does not give an acquaintance with the facts 
at first hand. But this is not my meaning. The ideal of 
scientific teaching is, no doubt, a system by which the scholar 
sees every fact for himself, and the teacher supplies only the 
explanations. Circumstances, however, do not often allow of 
the attainment of that ideal, and we must put up with the 
next best system — one in which the scholar takes a good deal on 
trust from a teacher, who, knowing the facts by his own know- 
ledge, can describe them with so much vividness as to enable 
his audience to form competent ideas concerning them. The 
system which I repudiate is that which allows teachers who 
have not come into direct contact with the leading facts of a 
science to pass their -second-hand information on. The scientific 
virus, like vaccine lymph, if passed through too long a succes- 
sion of organisms, will lose all its effect in protecting the young 
against the intellectual epidemics to which they are exposed. 

[The remarks on p. 222 applied to the Natural History Collec- 
tion of the British Museum in 1861. The visitor to the Natural 
History Museum in 1894 need go no further than the Great Hall 
to see the realisation of my hopes by the present Director.] 



VIII 
BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 

(the presidential address to the BRITISH 

ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE 

FOE 1870) 

It has long been the custom for the newly 
installed President of the British Association for 
the Advancement of Science to take advantage of 
the elevation of the position in which the suffrages 
of his colleagues had, for the time, placed him, and, 
casting his eyes around the horizon of the scientific 
world, to report to them what could be seen from 
his watch-tower ; in what directions the multitu- 
dinous divisions of the noble army of the improvers 
of natural knowledge were marching; what 
important strongholds of the great enemy of us 
all, ignorance, had been recently captured; and, 
also, with due impartiality, to mark where the 
advanced posts of science had been driven in, or a 
long-continued siege had n^ade no progress. 



230 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

1 propose to endeavour to follow this ancient 
precedent, in a manner suited, to the limitations of 
my knowledge and of my capacity. I shall not 
presume to attempt a panoramic survey of the 
world of science, nor even to give a sketch of what 
is doing in the one great province of biology, with 
some portions of which my ordinary occupations 
render me familiar. But I shall endeavour to put 
before you the history of the rise and progress of 
a single biological doctrine; and I shall try to 
give some notion of the fruits, both intellectual 
and practical, which we owe, directly or indirectly, 
to the working out, by seven generations of 
patient and laborious investigators, of the 
thought which arose, more than two centuries 
ago, in the mind of a sagacious and observant 
Italian naturahst. 

It is a matter of everyday experience that it is 
difficult to prevent many articles of food from 
becoming covered with mould ; that fruit, sound 
enough to all appearance, often contains grubs at 
the core; that meat, left to itself in the air, is 
apt to putrefy and swarm with maggots. Even 
ordinary water, if allowed to stand in an open 
vessel, sooner or later becomes turbid and fuU of 
living matter. 

The philosophers of antiquity, interrogated as to 
the cause of these phenomena, were provided with 
a ready and a plausible answer. It did not enter 
their minds even to doubt that these low forms of 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 231 

life were generated in the matters in which they 
made their appearance. Lucretius, who had drunk 
deeper of the scientific spirit than any poet of 
ancient or modern times except Goethe, intends to 
speak as a philosopher, rather than as a poet, when 
he writes that " with good reason the earth has 
gotten the name of mother, since all things are 
produced out of the earth. And many living 
creatures, even now, spring out of the earth, taking 
form by the rains and the heat of the sun." ^ The 
axiom of ancient science, " that the corruption of 
one thing is the birth of another," had its popular 
embodiment in the notion that a seed dies before 
the young plant springs from it ; a belief so wide- 
spread and so fixed, that Saint Paul appeals to 
it in one of the most splendid outbursts of his 
fervid eloquence : — 

" Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not 
quickened, except it die."^ 

The proposition that life may, and does, proceed 
from that which has no life, then, was held alike 
by the philosophers, the poets, and the people, of 

' It is thus that Mr. Munro renders 

"Linquitur, ut merito maternum nomen adepta 
Terra sit, ■) terra quoniam sunt cuncta areata. 
Multaque nunc etiam exsistant animalia terris 
Imbribus et calido solis concreta vapore." 

De Merum Natura, lib. v. 793—796. 

But would not the meaning of the last line be better 
rendered ' ' Developed in rain-water and in the warm vapours 
raised by the sun " ? - \ Corinthians xv. 36, 



232 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS viii 

the most enlightened nations, eighteen hundred 
years ago ; and it remained the accepted doctrine 
of learned and unlearned Europe, through the 
Middle Ages-, down even to the seventeenth 
century. 

It is commonly counted among the many merits 
of our great countryman, Harvey, that he was the 
first to declare the opposition of fact to venerable 
authority in this, as in other matters ; but I can 
discover no justification for this widespread 
notion. After careful search through the " Exer- 
citationes de Generatione," the most that appears 
clear to me is, that Harvey believed all animals 
and plants to spring from what he terms a " prim- 
ordium vegetale" a phrase which may nowadays be 
rendered " a vegetative germ " ; and this, he says, 
is " oviforme" or " egg-like " ; not, he is careful to 
add, that it necessarily has the shape of an Qgg, but 
because it has the constitution and nature of one. 
That this " immordium oviforme " must needs, in 
all cases, proceed from a living parent is nowhere 
expressly maintained by Harvey, though such an 
opinion may be thought to be implied in one or two 
passages ; while, on the other hand, he does, more 
than once, use language which is consistent only 
with a full belief in spontaneous or equivocal 
generation.^ In fact, the main concern of Harvey's 

' See the following passage in Exereitatio I. : — "Item sponU 
nascentia dicuntur ; non quod ex putredine oriunda sint, sed 
quod easu, natures sponte, et sequivood (ut aiunt) generatione, a 



Tin BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 233 

wonderfial little treatise is not with generation, in 
the physiological sense, at all, but with develop- 
ment ; and his great object is the establishment of 
the doctrine of epigenesis. 

The first distinct enunciation of the hypothesis 
that all living matter has sprung from pre-existing 
living matter, came from a contemporary, though a 
junior, of Harvey, a native of that country, fertile 
in men great in all departments of human activity, 
which was to intellectual Europe, in the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries, what Germany is in the 
nineteenth. It was in Italy, and from Italian 
teachers, that Harvey received the most import- 
ant part of his scientific education. And it was 
a student trained in the same schools, Francesco 
Redi — a man of the widest knowledge and most 
versatile abilities, distinguished alike as scholar, 
poet, physician, and naturalist — who, just two 
hundred and two years ago, published his " Esper- 
ienze intorno alia Generazione degl' Insetti," and 
gave to the world the idea, the growth of which it 
is my purpose to trace. Redi's book went through 
five editions in twenty years; and the extreme 

parentibus sui dissimilitus proveniant." Again, in Do Uteri 
Memhranis : — "In cunctorum viventium generatione (sicnt 
diximus) hoc .solenne est, ut ortum ducunt a primordio aliquo, 
quod turn materiam turn efficiendi potestatem in se habet : 
sitque adeo id, ex qno et a quo quicquid nascitur, ortum suum 
ducat. Tale primordium in animalibus (sive ab aliis gcnerantibus 
proveniant, sive sponte, aut ex putredine nasocntur) est humor 
in tnnicS aliqua aut putami ne conclusus." Compare also 
■what Redi has to say respecting Harvey's opinions, Esperienze, 
p. 11. 



234 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

simplicity of his experiments, and the clearness 
of his arguments, gained for his views, and 
for their consequences, almost universal accept- 
ance. 

Eedi did not trouble himself much with specu- 
lative considerations, but attacked particular cases 
of what was supposed to be " spontaneous genera- 
tion " experimentally. Here are dead animals, or 
pieces of meat, says he ; I expose them to the air 
in hot weather, and in a few days they swarm with 
maggots. You tell me that these are generated 
in the dead flesh ; but if I put similar bodies, 
while quite fresh, into a jar, and tie some fine 
gauze over the top of the jar, not a maggot makes 
its appearance, while the dead substances, never- 
theless, putrefy just in the same way as before. 
It is obvious, therefore, that the maggots are not 
generated by the corruption of the meat ; and that 
the cause of their formation must be a some- 
thing which is kept away by gauze. But gauze 
will not keep away aeriform bodies, or fluids. 
This something must, therefore, exist in the 
form of solid particles too big to get through 
the gauze. Nor is one long left in doubt 
what these solid particles are ; for the blow- 
flies, attracted by the odour of the meat, swarm 
round the vessel, and, urged by a powerful 
but in this case misleading instinct, lay eggs out 
of which maggots are immediately hatched, upon 
the gauze. The conclusion, therefore, is un- 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 235 

avoidable ; the maggots are not generated by the 
meat, but the eggs which give rise to them are 
brought through the air by the flies. 

These experiments seem almost childishly 
simple, and one wonders how it was that no one 
ever thought of them before. Simple as they are, 
however, they are worthy of the most careful study, 
for every piece of experimental work since done, 
in regard to this subject, has been shaped upon 
the model furnished by the Italian philosopher. 
As the results of his experiments were the same, 
however varied the nature of the materials he 
used, it is not wonderful that there arose in Redi's 
mind a presumption, that, in aU such cases of the 
seeming production of life from dead matter, 
the real explanation was the introduction of 
living germs from without into that dead matter.^ 

^ ' ' Pure contentandomi sempre in questa ed in ciascuna altro 
cosa, da oiascuno piu savio, Ih, dove io difettuosamente parlassi, 
esser corretto ; non tacero, che per molte osservazioni molti volti 
da me fatte, mi sento inclinato a credere che la ten'a, da quelle 
prime piante, e da quei primi animali in poi, che ella nei primi 
giorni del mondo produsse per comandemento del sovrano ed 
omnipotente Fattore, non abbia mai piii prodotto da se medesima 
lie erba nk albero, ne animale alcuno pcrfetto o imperfetto che 
ei se fosse ; e che tutto quello, che ne' tempi trapassati e nato 
e che ora nascere in lei, o da lei veggiamo, venga tutto dalla 
semenza reale e vera delle piante, e degli animali stessi, i quali 
col mezzo del proprio seme la loro spezie conservano. E se bene 
tutto giorno scorghiamo da' cadaveri degli animali, e da tutte 
quante le maniere dell' erbe, e dc' fiori, e dei fratti imputriditi, 
e corrotti nascere vermi infiniti — 

' Nonne vides qucecnnque moi-a, fluidoque calore 

Corpora tabescunt in parva animalia verti ' — 

Io mi sento, dico, inclinato, a credere che tutti quei vermi si 



236 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vm 

And thus the hypothesis that living matter always 
arises by the agency of pre-existing living matter, 
took definite shape ; and had, henceforward, a 
right to be considered and a claim to be refuted, in 
each particular case, before the production of Hving 
matter in any other way could be admitted by 
careful reasoners. It will be necessary for me to 
refer to this hypothesis so frequently, that, to save 
circumlocution, I shall call it the hypothesis of 
Biogenesis ; and I shall term the contrary doctrine 
— that living matter may be produced by not 
living matter — the hypothesis of Ahiogenesis. 

In the seventeenth century, as I have said, the 
latter was the dominant view, sanctioned alike by 
antiquity and by authority; and it is interesting 
to observe that Redi did not escape the customary 
tax upon a discoverer of having to defend himself 
against the charge of impugning the authority of 
the Scriptures ; ^ for his adversaries declared that 

generino dal seme paterno ; e che le carni, e 1' eibe, e 1' altre 
cose tutte putrefatte, o putrefattibili non facciano altra parte, 
nk abbiano altro ufizio nella generazione degl' insetti, se non 
d'apprestare un luogo o un nido proporzionato, in cui dagli 
animali nel tempo della figliatura sieno portati, c partoriti i 
vermi, o 1' nova o 1' altre semenze dei vermi, i quali tosto chc 
nati sono, trovano in esso nido un sufficiente alimento abilissimo 
per nutricarsi : e se in quelle non son portate dalle madri queste 
suddette semenze, niente mai, e replicatamente niente, vis'in- 
gegneri e nasca." — Kedi, Esperieme, pp. 14-16. 

^ " Molti, e molti altri ancora vi potrei annoverare, se non 
fossi chiamato a rispondere alle rampogne di alcnni, che brusca- 
mente mi rammentano ci6, che si legge nel capitolo quattor- 
dicesimo del sacrosanto Libre de' giudici. . . . " — Redi, loc. cit. 
p. 45. 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 237 

the generation of bees from the carcase of a dead 
lion is afifirmed, in the Book of Judges, to have 
been the origin of the famous riddle with which 
Samson perplexed the Philistines : — 

" Out of the eater came forth meat, 
And out of the strong came forth sweetness. 

Against all odds, however, Redi, strong with 
the strength of demonstrable fact, did splendid 
battle for Biogenesis; but it is remarkable that 
he held the doctrine in a sense which, if he had 
lived in these times, would have infallibly caused 
him to be classed among the defenders of " spon- 
taneous generation." " Omne vivum ex vivo," 
" no life without antecedent life," aphoristically 
sums up Redi's doctrine ; but he went no further. 
It is most remarkable evidence of the philosophic 
caution and impartiality of his mind, that although 
he had speculatively anticipated the manner in 
which grubs really are deposited in fruits and in 
the galls of plants, he deliberately admits that the 
evidence is insufficient to bear him out ; and he 
therefore prefers the supposition that they are 
generated by a modification of the living substance 
of the plants themselves. Indeed, he regards 
these vegetable growths as organs, by means of 
which the plant gives rise to an animal, and looks 
upon this production of specific animals as the 
final cause of the galls and of, at any rate, some 
fruits, And he proposes to explain the occurrence 



238 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

of parasites within the animal body in the same 

way.i 

1 The passage (Sspericnze, p. 129) is worth quoting in full :— 
" Se dovessi palesarvi il mio sentimento crederei che i frutti, 
i leguml, gli alberi e le foglie, in due nianiere inverminassero. 
Una, perchfe venendo i bachi per di fuora, e cercando 1' alimento, 
col rodere ci aprono la strada, ed arrivano alia piii interna 
midoUa de' frutti e de' legni. L'altra maniera si t, che io per 
me stimerei, che non fosse gran fatto disdicevole il credere, che 
quell' anima o quella virtu, la quale genera i fieri ed i frutti 
nelle piante viventi, sia quella stessa che generi ancora i bachi 
di esse piante. E chi sk forse, che molti frutti degli alberi non 
sieno prodotti, non per un fine primario e principale, ma bensi 
per un ufBzio secondario e servile, destinato alia generazione^ di 
que' vermi, servendo a loro in vece di matrice, in cui dimorino 
un prefisso e determinato tempo ; il quale arrivato escan fuora a 
godere il sole. 

" Io m' immagino, che questo mio pensiero non vipan-a total- 
mente un paradosso ; mentre farete riflessione a quelle tante 
sorte di galle, di gallozzole, di coccole, di ricci, di calici, di 
cornettiedi lappole, che son produtte daUe quercel, dalle farnie, 
da' cerri, da' suyheri, da' lecci e da altri simili alberi da ghianda ; 
imperciocche in quelle gallozzole, e particolarmente nelle pii 
grosse, che si chiamano coronati, ne' rioci capelluti, che ciuffoli 
da' nostri contadini son detti ; nei ricci legnosi del cerro,_ ne' 
ricci stellati della querela, nelle galluzze della foglia del leccio si 
vede cvidentissimamente, che la prima e principale intenzione 
della natura e fonnare dentro di quelle un animale volante ; 
vedendosi nel centre della gallozzola un novo, che col crescere e col 
maturarsi di essa gallozzola va crescendo e maturando anch' 
egli, e cresce altresi a suo tempo quel verme, che nell' novo si 
racchiude ; il qual verme, quando la gallozzola e finita di matu- 
rare e che e venuto il termine destinato al suo nascimento, 
diventa, di verme che era, una mosca. . . . Io vi confesso in- 
genuamente, che prima d'aver fatte queste mie esperienze intorno 
alia generazione degl' insetti mi dava a credere, opor dir meglio 
sospettava, che forse la gallozzola nascesse, perche arrivando la 
mosca nel tempo della primavera, e facendo una piccolissima 
fessura ne' rami piu teneri della querela, in quella fessura nas- 
condesse uno de suoi semi, il quale fosse cagione che sbocoiasse 
fuora la gallozzola ; e die mai non si vedessero gaUe o gallozzole 
o rioci cornetti o calici o coccole, se non in que' rami, ne' quali 
le mosche avessero depositate le loro semenze ; e mi dava ad 
intendcre, che le gallozzole fossero una malattia cagionata nelle 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 239 

It is of great importance to apprehend Eedi's 
position rightly ; for the lines of thought he laid 
down for us are those upon which naturalists have 
been working ever since. Clearly, he held Bio- 
genesis as against Ahiogenesis ; and I shall imme- 
diately proceed, in the first place, to inquire how 
far subsequent investigation has borne him out in 
so doing. 

But Redi also thought that there were two 
modes of Biogenesis. By the one method, which 
is that of common and ordinary occurrence, the 
living parent gives rise to offspring which passes 
through the same cycle of changes as itself — Hke 
gives rise to like; and this has been termed 
Homogenesis. By the other mode, the living 
parent was supposed to give rise to offspring 
which passed through a totally dilferent series of 
states from those exhibited by the parent, and 
did not return into the cycle of the parent ; this 
is what ought to be called Heterogenesis, the off- 
spring being altogether, and permanently, unlike 
the parent. The term Heterogenesis, however, 
has unfortunately been used in a different sense, 
and M. Milne-Edwards has therefore substituted 
for it Xenogenesis, which means the generation of 
something foreign. After discussing Redi's hypo- 
thesis of universal Biogenesis, then, I shall go 

querce dalle punture delle mosche, in quella giusa stessa che 
dalle pmituie d' altri animaletti simiglievoli veggiamo crescere 
de' tumori ne' coi'pi degli animali." 



240 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

on to ask how far the growth of science justifies 
his other hypothesis of Xenogenesis. 

The progress of the hypothesis of Biogenesis 
was triumphant and unchecked for nearly a 
century. The appKcation of the microscope to 
anatomy in the hands of Grew, Leeuwenhoek, 
Swammerdam, Lyonnet, ValHsnieri, Rdaumur, and 
other illustrious investigators of nature of that 
day, displayed such a complexity of organisation 
in the lowest and minutest forms, and everywhere 
revealed such a prodigality of provision for their 
multiplication by germs of one sort or another, 
that the hypothesis of Abiogenesis began to 
appear not only untrue, but absurd ; and, in the 
middle of the eighteenth century, when Needham 
and Buffon took up the question, it was almost 
universally discredited.^ 

But the skill of the microscope makers of the 
eighteenth century soon reached its limit. A 
microscope magnifying 400 diameters was a chef 
d'ostivre of the opticians of that day; and, at the 
same time, by no means trustworthy. But a 
magnifying power of 400 diameters, even when 

' Needham, writing in 1750, says : — 

' ' Les naturalistes modernes s'acoordent unaninement h, etablir, 
comme une verite certaine, que toute plante vient de sa semence 
specifique, tout animal d'un oeuf ou de quelque chose d'analogue 
preexistant dans la plante, ou dans I'animal de meme espece qui 
I'a ^mAmV—Nouvellas Observations, p. 169. 

"Les naturalistes ont generalemente cru que les animaux 
microscopic^ues ^^taient engendres par des oeufs transportes dans 
I'air, ou deposes dans des eaux dormantes par des insectes 
volans." — Ibid. p. 176, 



VIII BIOaENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 241 

definition reaches the exquisite perfection of our 
modem achromatic lenses, hardly sufiices for the 
mere discernment of the smallest forms of life. 
A speck, only -^th of an inch in diameter, has, at 
ten inches from the eye, the same apparent size 
as an object loo oo ^^ of ^ii 1^"^^ iii diameter, 
when magnified 400 times; but forms of living 
matter abound, the diameter of which is not more 
than ijji-^Tjih. of an inch. A filtered infusion of 
hay, allowed to stand for two days, will swarm 
with living things among which, any which 
reaches the diameter of a human red blood- 
corpuscle, or about ^^Vs-th of an inch, is a giant. 
It is only by bearing these facts in mind, that we 
can deal fairly with the remarkable statements 
and speculations put forward by Buffon and 
Needham in the middle of the eighteenth 
century. 

When a portion of any animal or vegetable 
body is infused in water, it gradually softens and 
disintegrates ; and, as it does so, the water is 
found to swarm with minute active creatures, the 
so-called Infusorial Animalcules, none of which 
can be seen, except by the aid of the microscope ; 
while a large proportion belong to the category of 
smallest things of which I have spoken, and 
which must have looked like mere dots and lines 
under the ordinary microscopes of the eighteenth 
century. 

Led by various theoretical considerations which 

VOL. VIII R 



242 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

I cannot now discuss, but which looked promising 
enough in the lights of their time, Buffon and 
Needham doubted the applicability of Redi's 
hypothesis to the infusorial animalcules, and 
Needham very properly endeavoured to put the 
question to an experimental test. He said to 
himself. If these infusorial animalcules come from 
germs, their germs must exist either in the sub- 
stance infused, or in the water with which the 
infusion is made, or in the superjacent air. Now 
the vitality of all germs is destroyed by heat. 
Therefore, if I boil the infusion, cork it up care- 
fully, cementing the cork over with mastic, and 
then heat the whole vessel by heaping hot ashes 
over it, I must needs kill whatever germs are 
present. Consequently, if Redi's hypothesis hold 
good, when the infusion is taken away and allowed 
to cool, no animalcules ought to be developed in 
it ; whereas, if the animalcules are not dependent 
on pre-existing germs, but are generated from the 
infused substance, they ought, by and by, to make 
their appearance. Needham found that, under 
the circumstances in which he made his experi- 
ments, animalcules always did arise in the 
infusions, when a sufficient time had elapsed to 
allow for their development. 

In much of his work Needham was associated 
with Buffon, and the results of their experiments 
fitted in admirably with the great French natural- 
ist's hypothesis of "organic molecules," according 



■nil BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 243 

to which, life is the indefeasible property of certain 
indestructible molecules of matter, which exist in 
all living things, and have inherent activities 
by which they are distinguished from not living 
matter. Each individual living organism is 
formed by their temporary combination. They 
stand to it in the relation of the particles of 
water to a cascade, or a whirlpool ; or to a mould, 
into which the water is poured. The form of the 
organism is thus determined by the reaction 
between external conditions and the inherent 
activities of the organic molecules of which it is 
composed ; and, as the stoppage of a whirlpool 
destroys nothing but a form, and leaves the 
molecules of the water, with all their inherent 
activities intact, so what we call the death and 
putrefaction of an animal, or of a plant, is merely 
the breaking up of the form, or manner of asso- 
ciation, of its constituent organic molecules, which 
are then set free as infusorial animalcules. 

It will be perceived that this doctrine is by no 
means identical with Aiiogcncsis, with which it is 
often confounded. On this hypothesis, a piece of 
beef, or a handful of hay, is dead only in a Hmited 
sense. The beef is dead ox, and the hay is dead 
grass ; but the " organic molecules " of the beef or 
the hay are not dead, but are ready to manifest 
their vitality as soon as the bovine or herbaceous 
shrouds in which they are imprisoned are rent by 
the macerating action of water. The hypothesis 

E 2 



244 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS viil 

therefore must be classified under Xenogenesis, 
rather than under Abiogenesis. Such as it was, I 
think it will appear, to those who will be just 
enough to remember that it was propounded 
before the birth of modern chemistry, and of the 
modern optical arts, to be a most ingenious and 
suggestive speculation. 

But the great tragedy of Science — the slaying of 
a beautiful hypothesis by an ugly fact — which is so 
constantly being enacted under the eyes of philo- 
sophers, was played, almost immediately, for the 
benefit of Buffon and Needham. 

Once more, an Italian, the Abb^ Spallanzani, a 
worthy successor and representative of Redi in his 
acuteness, his ingenuity, and his learning, sub- 
jected the experiments and the conclusions of 
Needham to a searching criticism. It might be 
true that Needham's experiments yielded results 
such as he had described, but did they bear out 
his arguments ? Was it not possible, in the first 
place, he had not completely excluded the air by his 
corks and mastic ? And was it not possible, in the 
second place, that he had not sufiiciently heated 
his infusions and the superjacent air ? Spallan- 
zani joined issue with the English naturalist on 
both these pleas, and he showed that if, in the first 
place, the glass vessels in which the infusions were 
contained were hermetically sealed by fusing their 
necks, and if, in the second place, they were ex- 
posed to the temperature of boiling water for 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 245 

three-quarters of an hour,^ no animalcules ever 
made their appearance within them. It must be 
admitted that the experiments and arguments of 
Spallanzani furnish a complete and a crushing 
reply to those of Needham. But we all too often 
forget that it is one thing to refute a proposition, 
and another to prove the truth of a doctrine which, 
imphcitly or explicitly, contradicts that propo- 
sition ; and the advance of science soon showed 
that though Needham might be quite wrong, it 
did not follow that Spallanzani was quite right. 

Modern Chemistry, the birth of the latter half 
of the eighteenth century, grew apace, and soon 
found herself face to face with the great problems 
which biology had vainly tried to attack without 
her help. The discovery of oxygen led to the lay- 
ing of the foundations of a scientific theory of 
respiration, and to an examination of the marvel- 
lous interactions of organic substances with 
oxygen. The presence of free oxygen appeared to 
be one of the conditions of the existence of life, 
and of those singular changes in organic matters 
which are known as fermentation and putrefaction. 
The question of the generation of the infusory 
animalcules thus passed into a new phase. For 
what might not have happened to the organic 
matter of the infusions, or to the oxygen of the 
air, in Spallanzani's experiments ? What security 
was there that the development of life which ought 
^ See Spallanzani, Opere, vi. pp. 42 and 51. 



246 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS viii 

to have taken place had not been checked or pre- 
vented by these changes ? 

The battle had to be fought again. It was need- 
ful to repeat the experiments under conditions 
which would make sure that neither the oxygen of 
the air, nor the composition of the organic matter, 
was altered in such a manner as to interfere with 
the existence of life. 

Schulze and Schwann took up the question from 
this point of view in 1836 and 1837. The passage 
of air through red-hot glass tubes, or through 
strong sulphuric acid, does not alter the propor- 
tion of its oxygen, while it must needs arrest, or 
destroy, any organic matter which may be con- 
tained in the air. These experimenters, therefore, 
contrived arrangements by which the only air 
which should come into contact with a boiled in- 
fusion should be such as had either passed through 
red-hot tubes or through strong sulphuric acid. 
The result which they obtained was that an in- 
fusion so treated developed no living things, while, 
if the same infusion was afterwards exposed to the 
air, such things appeared rapidly and abundantly. 
The accuracy of these experiments has been 
alternately denied and aflSrmed. Supposing them 
to be accepted, however, all that they really proved 
was that the treatment to which the air was 
subjected destroyed something that was essential 
to the development of life in the infusion. This 
" something '' might be gaseous, fluid, or solid ; 



vm BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 247 

that it consisted of germs remained only an hypo- 
thesis of greater or less probability. 

Contemporaneously with these investigations a 
remarkable discovery was made by Cagniard de la 
Tour. He found that common yeast is com- 
posed of a vast accumulation of minute plants. 
The fermentation of must, or of wort, in the 
fabrication of wine and of beer, is always accom- 
panied by the rapid growth and multiplication of 
these Torulce. Thus, fermentation, in so far as it 
was accompanied by the development of micro- 
scopical organisms in enormous numbers, became 
assimilated to the decomposition of an infusion of 
ordinary animal or vegetable matter ; and it was 
an obvious suggestion that the organisms were, in 
some way or other, the causes both of fermentation 
and of putrefaction. The chemists, with Berzelius 
and Liebig at their head, at first laughed this idea 
to scorn ; but in 1843, a man then very young, 
who has since performed the unexampled feat of 
attaining to high eminence alike in Mathematics, 
Physics, and Physiology — I speak of the illustrious 
Helmholtz — reduced the matter to the test of 
experiment by a method alike elegant and con- 
clusive. Helmholtz separated a putrefying or a 
fermenting liquid from one which was simply 
putrescible or fermentable by a membrane which 
allowed the fluids to pass through and become 
intermixed, but stopped the passage of solids. 
The result was, that while the putrescible or the 



248 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

fermentable liquids became impregnated with the 
results of the putrescence or fermentation which 
was going on on the other side of the membrane, 
they neither putrefied (in the ordinary way) nor 
fermented ; nor were any of the organisms which 
abounded in the fermenting or putrefying liquid 
generated in them. Therefore the cause of the 
development of these organisms must lie in some- 
thing which cannot pass through membranes ; and 
as Helmholtz's investigations were long antecedent 
to Graham's researches upon colloids, his natural 
conclusion was that the agent thus intercepted 
must be a solid material. In point of fact, 
Helmholtz's experiments narrowed the issue to 
this : that which excites fermentation and putre- 
faction, and at the same time gives rise to living 
forms in a fermentable or putrescible fluid, is not 
a gas and is not a diffusible fluid ; therefore it is 
either a colloid, or it is matter divided into very 
minute solid particles. 

The researches of Schroeder and Duschin 1854, 
and of Schroeder alone, in 1859, cleared up this 
point by experiments which are simply refine- 
ments upon those of Redi. A lump of cotton-wool 
is, physically speaking, a pile of many thicknesses 
of a very fine gauze, the fineness of the meshes of 
which depends upon the closeness of the compres- 
sion of the wool. Now, Schroeder and Dusch 
found, that, in the case of all the putrefiable 
materials which they used (except milk and yolk 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 249 

of egg), an infusion boiled, and then allowed to 
come into contact with no air but such as had 
been filtered through cotton-wool, neither putre- 
fied, nor fermented, nor developed living forms. 
It is hard to imagine what the fine sieve formed 
by the cotton-wool could have stopped except 
minute solid particles. Still the evidence was 
incomplete until it had been positively shown, 
first, that ordinary air does contain such particles ; 
and, secondly, that filtration through cotton-wool 
arrests these particles and allows only physically 
pure air to pass. This demonstration has been 
furnished within the last year by the remarkable 
experiments of Professor Tyndall. It has been a 
common objection of Abiogenists that, if the 
doctrine of Biogeny is true, the air must be thick 
with germs ; and they regard this as the height of 
absurdity. But nature occasionally is exceedingly 
unreasonable, and Professor Tyndall has proved 
that this particular absurdity may nevertheless be 
a reality. He has demonstrated that ordinary air 
is no better than a sort of stirabout of excessively 
minute solid particles ; that these particles are 
almost wholly destructible by heat ; and that they 
are strained off, and the air rendered optically 
pure, by its being passed through cotton-wool. 

It remains yet in the order of logic, though 
not of history, to show that among these solid 
destructible particles, there really do exist germs 
capable of giving rise to the development of living 



250 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS viii 

forms in suitable menstrua. This piece of work was 
done by M. Pasteur in those beautiful researches 
which will ever render his name famous; and 
which, in spite of all attacks upon them, appear 
to me now, as they did seven years ago,^ to he 
models of accurate experimentation and logical 
reasoning. He strained air through cotton-wool, 
and found, as Schroeder and Dusch had done, that 
it contained nothing competent to give rise to the 
development of life in fluids highly fitted for that 
purpose. But the important further links in the 
chain of evidence added by Pasteur are three. In 
the first place he subjected to microscopic exam- 
ination the cotton-wool which had served as 
strainer, and found that sundry bodies clearly 
recognisable as germs, were among the solid 
particles strained off. Secondly, he proved that 
these gernos were competent to give rise to living 
forms by simply sowing them in a solution fitted 
for their development. And, thirdly, he showed 
that the incapacity of air strained through cotton- 
wool to give rise to life, was not due to any occult 
change eflfected in the constituents of the air by 
the wool, by proving that the cotton-wool might 
be dispensed with altogether, and perfectly free 
access left between the exterior air and that in the 
experimental flask. If the neck of the flask is 
dra\\"n out into a tube and bent downwards ; and 

• Lectures to Working Men on the Causes of the Phenomena of 
Organic Nature, 1863. (See Vol. II. of these Essays.) 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 251 

if, after the contained fluid has been carefully 
boiled, the tube is heated sufficiently to destroy 
any germs which may be present in the air which 
enters as the fluid cools, the apparatus may be 
left to itself for any time and no life will appear 
in the fluid. The reason is plain. Although there 
is free communication between the atmosphere 
laden with germs and the germless air in the flask, 
contact between the two takes place only in the 
tube ; and as the germs cannot fall upwards, and 
there are no currents, they never reach the interior 
of the flask. But if the tube be broken short ofl 
where it proceeds from the flask, and free access 
be thus given to germs falling vertically out of 
the air, the fluid, which has remained clear and 
desert for months, becomes, in a few days, turbid 
and full of life. 

These experiments have been repeated over and 
over again by independent observers with entire 
success ; and there is one very simple mode of 
seeing the facts for one's self, which I may as well 
describe. 

Prepare a solution (much used by M. Pasteur, 
and often called " Pasteur's solution " ) composed 
of water with tartrate of ammonia, sugar, and 
yeast-ash dissolved therein.^ Divide it into three 
portions in as many flasks; boil all three for a 

' Infusion of hay treated in the same way yields similar 
results ; but as it contains organic matter, the argument which 
follows cannot be based upon it. 



252 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

quarter of an hour ; and, while the steam is passing 
out, stop the neck of one with a large plug of 
cotton-wool, so that this also may be thoroughly- 
steamed. Now set the flasks aside to cool, and, 
when their contents are cold, add to one of the open 
ones a drop of filtered infusion of hay which has 
stood for twenty-four hours, and is consequently 
full of the active and excessively minute organisms 
known as Bacteria. In a couple of days of ordinary 
warm weather the contents of this flask will be 
milky from the enormous multiplication of Bacteria. 
The other flask, open and exposed to the air, will, 
sooner or later, become milky with Bacteria, and 
patches of mould may appear in it ; while the liquid 
in the flask, the neck of which is plugged with 
cotton-wool, will remain clear for an indefinite 
time. I have sought in vain for any explanation 
of these facts, except the obvious one, that the air 
contains germs competent to give rise to Bacteria, 
such as those with which the first solution has 
been knowingly and purposely inoculated, and to 
the moviH-Fungi. And I have not yet been able 
to meet with any advocate of Abiogenesis who 
seriously maintains that the atoms of sugar, tar- 
trate of ammonia, yeast-ash, and water, under no in- 
fluence but that of free access of air and the ordinary 
temperature, re-arrange themselves and give rise 
to the protoplasm of Bacterium. But the alterna- 
tive is to admit that these Bacteria arise from 
germs in the air ; and if they are thus propagated, 



vm BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 253 

the burden of proof that other like forms arc 
generated in a different manner, must rest with 
the assertor of that proposition. 

To sum up the effect of this long chain of 
evidence : — 

It is demonstrable that a fluid eminently fit for 
the development of the lowest forms of life, but 
which contains neither germs, nor any protein 
compound, gives rise to Hving things in great 
abundance if it is exposed to ordinary air ; while 
no such development takes place, if the air with 
which it is in contact is mechanically freed from 
the solid particles which ordinarily float in it, and 
which may be made visible by appropriate means 

It is demonstrable that the great majority of 
these particles are destructible by heat, and that 
some of them are germs, or living particles, capable 
of giving rise to the same forms of life as those 
which appear when the fluid is exposed to un- 
purified air. 

It is demonstrable that inoculation of the ex- 
perimental fluid with a drop of liquid known to 
contain living particles gives rise to the same 
phenomena as exposure to unpurified air. 

And it is further certain that these living 
particles are so minute that the assumption of 
their suspension in ordinary air presents not the 
slightest difficulty. On the contrary, considering 
their hghtness and the wide diffusion of the 
organisms which produce them, it is impossible to 



254 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

conceive that they should not be suspended in the 
atmosphere in myriads. 

Thus the evidence, direct and indirect, in favour 
of Biogenesis for all known forms of life must, I 
think, be admitted to be of great weight. 

On the other side, the sole assertions worthy 
of attention are that hermetically sealed fluids, 
which have been exposed to great and long-con- 
tinued heat, have sometimes exhibited living 
forms of low organisation when they have been 
opened. 

The first reply that suggests itself is the prob- 
ability that there must be some error about these 
experiments, because they are performed on an 
enormous scale every day with quite contrary 
results. Meat, fruits, vegetables, the very ma- 
terials of the most fermentable and putrescible 
infusions, are preserved to the extent, I suppose I 
may say, of thousands of tons every year, by a 
method which is a mere application of Spallan- 
zani's experiment. The matters to be preserved 
are well boiled in a tin case provided with a small 
hole, and this hole is soldered up when all the air 
in the case has been replaced by steam. By this 
method they may be kept for years without 
putrefying, fermenting, or getting mouldy. Now 
this is not because oxygen is excluded, inasmuch 
as it is now proved that free oxygen is not neces- 
sary, for either fermentation or putrefaction. It 
is not because the tins are exhausted of air, for 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 255 

Vihriones and Bacteria live, as Pasteur has shown, 
without air or free oxygen. It is not because the 
boiled meats or vegetables are not putrescible or 
fermentable, as those who have had the misfortune 
to be in a ship supplied with unskilfully closed 
tins well know. What is it, therefore, but the 
exclusion of germs ? I think that Abiogenists are 
bound to answer this question before they ask us 
to consider new experiments of precisely the same 
order. 

And in the next place, if the results of the 
experiments I refer to are really trustworthy, it 
by no means follows that Abiogenesis has taken 
place. The resistance of living matter to heat is 
known to vary within considerable limits, and to 
depend, to some extent, upon the chemical and 
physical qualities of the surrounding medium. 
But if, in the present state of science, the alter- 
native is offered us, — either germs can stand a 
greater heat than has been supposed, or the mole- 
cules of dead matter, for no valid or intelligible 
reason that is assigned, are able to re-arrange 
themselves into living bodies, exactly such as can 
be demonstrated to be frequently produced in 
another way,- — I cannot understand how choice 
can be, even for a moment, doubtful. 

But though I cannot express this conviction of 
mine too strongly, I must carefully guard mji-self 
against the supposition that I intend to suggest 
that no such thing as Abiogenesis ever has taken 



256 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

place in the past, or ever will take place in 
the future. With organic chemistry, molecular 
physics, and physiology yet in their infancy, and 
every day making prodigious strides, I think it 
would be the height of presumption for any man 
to say that the conditions under which matter 
assumes the properties we call " vital " may not, 
some day, be artificially brought together. All I 
feel justified in affirming is, that I see no reason 
for believing that the feat has been performed 

yet. 

And looking back through the prodigious vista 
of the past, I find no record of the commencement 
of life, and therefore I am devoid of any means of 
forming a definite conclusion as to the conditions 
of its appearance. Belief, in the scientific sense 
of the word, is a serious matter, and needs strong 
foundations. To say, therefore, in the admitted 
absence of evidence, that I have any belief as to 
the mode in which the existing forms of life have 
originated, would be using words in a wrong sense. 
But expectation is permissible where behef is 
not ; and if it were given me to look beyond the 
abyss of geologically recorded time to the still 
more remote period when the earth was passing 
through physical and chemical conditions, which 
it can no more see again than a man can recall 
his infancy, I should expect to be a witness of the 
evolution of living protoplasm from not hving 
matter. I should expect to see it appear under 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 257 

forms of great simplicity, endowed, like existing 
fungi, with the power of determining the formation 
of new protoplasm from such matters as ammonium 
carbonates, oxalates and tartrates, alkaline and 
earthy phosphates, and water, without the aid of 
light. That is the expectation to which analogi- 
cal reasoning leads me ; but I beg you once more 
to recollect that I have no right to call my 
opinion anything but an act of philosophical 
faith. 

So much for the history of the progress of 
Redi's great doctrine of Biogenesis, which appears 
to me, with the limitations I have expressed, to 
be victorious along the whole line at the present 
day. 

As regards the second problem offered to us by 
Redi, whether Xenogenesis obtains, side by side 
with Homogenesis, — whether, that is, there exist 
not only the ordinary living things, giving rise to 
offspring which run through the same cycle as 
themselves, but also others, producing offspring 
which are of a totally different character from 
themselves, — the researches of two centuries have 
led to a different result. That the grubs found 
in galls are no product of the plants on 
which the galls grow, but are the result of the 
introduction of the eggs of insects into the sub- 
stance of these plants, was made out by Vallisnieri, 
Reaumur, and others, before the end of the first 
half of the eighteenth century. The tapeworms, 

VOL. VIII s 



258 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vm 

bladderworms, and flukes continued to be a 
strongbold of the advocates of Xenogenesis for a 
much longer period. Indeed, it is only within the 
last thirty years that the splendid patience of Von 
Siebold, Van Beneden, Leuckart, Kiichenmeister, 
and other helminthologists, has succeeded in 
tracing every such parasite, often through the 
strangest wanderings and metamorphoses, to an 
egg derived from a parent, actually or potentially 
like itself; and the tendency of inquiries else- 
where has all been in the same direction. A 
plant may throw off bulbs, but these, sooner or 
later, give rise to seeds or spores, which develop 
into the original form. A polype may give rise 
to Medusae, or a pluteus to an Echinoderm, but 
the Medusa and the Echinoderm give rise to eggs 
which produce polypes or plutei, and they are 
therefore only stages in the cycle of life of the 
species. 

But if we turn to pathology, it offers us some 
remarkable approximations to true Xenogenesis. 

As I have already mentioned, it has been 
known since the time of VaUisnieri and of 
Eeaumur, that galls in plants, and tumours in 
cattle, are caused by insects, which lay their eggs 
in those parts of the animal or vegetable frame of 
which these morbid structures are outgrowths. 
Again, it is a matter of familiar experience to 
everybody that mere pressure on the skin will 
give rise to a corn. Now the gall, the tumour, 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 259 

and the com are parts of the living body, which 
have become, to a certain degree, independent and 
distinct organisms. Under the influence of cer- 
tain external conditions, elements of the body, 
which should have developed in due subordination 
to its general plan, set up for themselves and 
apply the nourishment which they receive to their 
own purposes. 

From such innocent productions as corns and 
warts, there are all gradations to the serious 
tumours which, by their mere size and the 
mechanical obstruction they cause, destroy the 
organism out of which they are developed ; while, 
finally, in those terrible structures known as 
cancers, the abnonnal growth has acquired powers 
of reproduction and multiplication, and is only 
morphologically distinguishable from the parasitic 
worm, the life of which is neither more nor less 
closely bound up with that of the infested 
organism. 

If there were a kind of diseased structure, the 
histological elements of which were capable of 
maintaining a separate and independent existence 
out of the body, it seems to me that the shadowy 
boundary between morbid growth and Xeno- 
genesis would be effaced. And I am inclined to 
think that the progress of discovery has almost 
brought us to this point already. I have been 
favoured by Mr. Simon with an early copy of the 
last published of the valuable "Eeports on the 

s 2 



260 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

Public Health," which, in his capacity of their 
medical ofl&cer, he annually presents to the Lords 
of the Privy Council. The appendix to this 
report contains an introductory essay " On the 
Intimate Pathology of Contagion," by Dr. Burdon- 
Sanderson, which is one of the clearest, most 
comprehensive, and well-reasoned discussions of a 
great question which has come under my notice 
for a long time. I refer you to it for details and 
for the authorities for the statements I am about 
to make. 

You are familiar with what happens in vaccina- 
tion. A minute cut is made in the skin, and an 
infinitesimal quantity of vaccine matter is inserted 
into the wound. Within a certain time a vesicle 
appears in the place of the wound, and the fluid 
which distends this vesicle is vaccine matter, in 
quantity a hundred or a thousandfold that which 
was originally inserted. Now what has taken 
place in the course of this operation ? Has the 
vaccine matter, by its irritative property, produced 
a mere blister, the fluid of which has the same 
irritative property ? Or does the vaccine matter 
contain living particles, which have grown and 
multiplied where they have been planted ? The 
observations of M. Chauveau, extended and con- 
firmed by Dr. Sanderson himself, appear to leave 
no doubt upon this head. Experiments, similar 
in principle to those of Helmholtz on fermentation 
and putrefaction, have proved that the active 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 261 

element in the vaccine lymph is non-diffusible, 
and consists of minute particles not exceeding 
2 6 0()oth of an inch in diameter, which are made 
visible in the lymph by the microscope. Similar 
experiments have proved that two of the most 
destructive of epizootic diseases, sheep-pox and 
glanders, are also dependent for their existence 
and their propagation upon extremely small living- 
solid particles, to which the title of microeymes is 
applied. An animal suffering under either of 
these terrible diseases is a source of infection and 
contagion to others, for precisely the same reason 
as a tub of fermenting beer is capable of pro- 
pagating its fermentation by "infection," or 
" contagion,'' to fresh wort. In both cases it is 
the solid living particles which are efficient ; the 
liquid in which they float, and at the expense of 
which they live, being altogether passive. 

Now arises the question, are these microzymes 
the results of Hbmogcnesis, or of Xenogcnesis ? are 
they capable, hke the Torulm of yeast, of arising 
only by the development of pre-existing germs? 
or may they be, like the constituents of a nut-gall, 
the results of a modification and individuaHsation 
of the tissues of the body in which they are 
found, resulting from the operation of certain 
conditions ? Are they parasites in the zoological 
sense, or are they merely what Virchow has called 
" heterologous growths " ? It is obvious that this 
question has the most profound importance, 



262 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

whether we look at it from a practical or from a 
theoretical point of view. A parasite may be 
stamped out by destroying its germs, but a patho- 
logical product can only be annihilated by 
removing the conditions which give rise to it. 

It appears to me that this great problem will 
have to be solved for each zymotic disease 
separately, for analogy cuts two ways. I have 
dwelt upon the analogy of pathological modifi- 
cation, which is in favour of the xenogenetic 
origin of microzymes ; but I must now speak 
of the equally strong analogies in favour of the 
origin of such pestiferous particles by the ordinary 
process of the generation of like from like. 

It is, at present, a well-established fact that 
certain diseases, both of plants and of animals, 
which have all the characters of contagious and 
infectious epidemics, are caused by minute organ- 
isms. The smut of wheat is a well-known instance 
of svich a disease, and it cannot be doubted that 
the grape-disease and the potato-disease fall 
under the same category. Among animals, 
insects are wonderfully liable to the ravages of 
contagious and infectious diseases caused by 
microscopic Fungi. 

In autumn, it is not uncommon to see flies 
motionless upon a window-pane, with a sort of 
magic circle, in white, drawn round them. On 
microscopic examination, the magic circle is found 
to consist of innumerable spores, which have been 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 263 

thrown off in all directions by a minute fungus 
called JEmpusa muscce, the spore-forming filaments 
of which stand out like a pile of velvet from the 
body of the fly. These spore-forming filaments 
are connected with others which fill the interior 
of the fly's body like so much fine wool, having 
eaten away and destroyed the creature's viscera. 
This is the full-grown condition of the Empusa. 
If traced back to its earliest stages, in flies which 
are still active, and to all appearance healthy, it 
is found to exist in the form of minute corpuscles 
which float in the blood of the fly. These multiply 
and lengthen into filaments, at the expense of 
the fly's substance ; and when they have at last 
killed the patient, they grow out of its body and 
give off spores. Healthy flies shut up with 
diseased ones catch this mortal disease, and 
perish like the others. A most competent 
observer, M. Cohn, who studied the development 
of the Umpusa very carefully, was utterly unable 
to discover in what manner the smallest germs 
of the Empusa got into the fly. The spores 
could not be made to give rise to such germs by 
cultivation ; nor were such germs discoverable in 
the air, or in the food of the fly. It looked 
exceedingly like a case of Abiogenesis, or, at any 
rate, of Xenogenesis ; and it is only quite recently 
that the real course of events has been made out. 
It has been ascertained, that when one of the 
spores falls upon the body of a fly, it begins to 



264 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

germinate, and sends out a process which bores 
its way through the fly's skin ; this, having 
reached the interior cavities of its body, gives 
off the minute floating corpuscles which are the 
earhest stage of the Empusa. The disease is 
" contagious," because a healthy fly coming in 
contact with a diseased one, from which the 
spore-bearing filaments protrude, is pretty sure 
to carry off a spore or two. It is "infectious" 
because the spores become scattered about all 
sorts of matter in the neighbourhood of the slain 
flies. 

The silkworm has long been known to be 
subject to a very fatal and infectious disease 
called the Muscardine. Audouin transmitted it 
by inoculation. This disease is entirely due to 
the development of a fungus, Botrytis Bassiana, 
in the body of the caterpillar ; and its contagious- 
ness and infectiousness are accounted for in the 
same way as those of the fly-disease. But, of 
late years, a still more serious epizootic has 
appeared among the silkworms ; and I may 
mention a few facts which will give you some 
conception of the gravity of the injury which it 
has inflicted on France alone. 

The production of silk has been for centuries 
an important branch of industry in Southern 
France, and in the year 1853 it had attained 
such a magnitude that the annual produce of the 
French sericulture was estimated to amount to a 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 265 

tenth of that of the whole world, and represented a 
money-value of 117,000,000 francs, or nearly five 
millions sterling. What may be the sum which 
would represent the money-value of all the in- 
dustries connected with the working up of the 
raw silk thus produced, is more than I can 
pretend to estimate. Suffice it to say, that the 
city of Lyons is built upon French silk as much 
as Manchester was upon American cotton before 
the civil war. 

Silkworms are liable to many diseases; and, 
even before 1853, a peculiar epizootic, frequently 
accompanied by the appearance of dark spots 
upon the skin (whence the name of " P^brine " 
which it has received),- had been noted for its 
mortality. But in the years following 1853 this 
malady broke out with such extreme violence, 
that, in 1858, the silk-crop was reduced to a third 
of the amount which it had reached in 1853 ; 
and, up till within the last year or two, it has 
never attained half the yield of 1853. This 
means not only that the great number of people 
engaged in silk growing are some thirty millions 
sterling poorer than they might have been; it 
means not only that high prices have had to be 
paid for imported silkworm eggs, and that, after 
investing his money in them, in paying for mul- 
berry-leaves and for attendance, the cultivator has 
constantly seen his silkworms perish and himself 
plunged in ruin; but it means that the looms of 



266 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vm 

Lyons have lacked employment, and that, for 
years, enforced idleness and misery have been 
the portion of a vast population which, in former 
days, was industrious and well-to-do. 

In 1858 the gravity of the situation caused the 
French Academy of Sciences to appoint Com- 
missioners, of whom a distinguished naturalist, 
M. de Quatrefages, was one, to inquire into the 
nature of this disease, and, if possible, to devise 
some means of staying the plague. In reading 
the Report ^ made by M. de Quatrefages in 1859, 
it is exceedingly interesting to observe that his 
elaborate study of the P^brine forced the convic- 
tion upon his mind that, in its mode of occurrence 
and propagation, the disease of the silkworm is, in 
every respect, comparable to the cholera among 
mankind. But it differs from the cholera, and so 
far is a more formidable malady, in being here- 
ditary, and in being, under some circumstances, 
contagious as weU as infectious. 

The Italian naturahst, Filippi, discovered in the 
blood of the silkworms affected by this strange 
disorder a multitude of cylindrical corpuscles, each 
about ^irWth of an inch long. These have been 
carefully studied by Lebert, and named by him 
Panhistophyton ; for the reason that in subjects in 
which the disease is strongly developed, the cor- 
puscles swarm in every tissue and organ of the 
body, and even pass into the undeveloped eggs of 
1 Mudes sitr hs Maladies actuelles dcs Vers A Soie, p. 53. 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 267 

the female moth. But are these corpuscles 
causes, or mere concomitants, of the disease ? 
Some naturahsts took one view and some another ; 
and it was not until the French Government, 
alarmed by the continued ravages of the malady, 
and the inefficiency of the remedies which had 
been suggested, despatched M. Pasteur to study it, 
that the question received its final settlement ; at 
a great sacrifice, not only of the time and peace of 
mind of that eminent philosopher, but, I regret to 
have to add, of his health. 

But the sacrifice has not been in vain. It is 
now certain that this devastating, cholera-like, 
Pebrine, is the effect of the growth and multiplica- 
tion of the Panhistophyton in the silkworm. It is 
contagious and infectious, because the corpuscles 
of the PanMsto'phytmi pass away from the bodies 
of the diseased caterpillars, directly or indirectly, 
to the alimentary canal of healthy silkworms in 
their neighbourhood ; it is hereditary because the 
corpuscles enter into the eggs while they are being 
formed, and consequently are carried within them 
when they are laid ; and for this reason, also, it 
presents the very singular peculiarity of being 
inherited only on the mother's side. There is 
not a single one of all the apparently capricious 
and unaccountable phenomena presented by the 
Pebrine, but has received its explanation from the 
fact that the disease is the result of the presence 
of the microscopic organism, Panliistophyton. 



268 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vill 

Such being the facts with rpspect to the P^brine, 
what are the indications as to the method of pre- 
venting it ? It is obvious that this depends upon 
the way in which the Panhistophyton is generated. 
If it may be generated by Abiogenesis, or by 
Xenogenesis, within the silkworm or its moth, the 
extirpation of the disease must depend upon the 
prevention of the occurrence of the conditions 
under which this generation tq,kes place. But if, 
on the other hand, the Panhistophyton is an inde- 
pendent organism, which is no more generated by 
the silkworm than the mistletoe is generated by 
the apple-tree or the oak on which it grows, 
though it may need the silkworm for its develop- 
ment in the same way as the mistletoe needs the 
tree, then the indications are totally different. 
The sole thing to be done is to get rid of and keep 
away the germs of the Panhistophyton. As might 
be imagined, from the course of his previous inves- 
tigations, M. Pasteur was led to believe that the 
latter was the right theory ; and, guided by that 
theory, he has devised a method of extirpating the 
disease, which has proved to be completely success- 
ful wherever it has been properly carried out. 

There can be no reason, then, for doubting that, 
among insects, contagious and infectious diseases, 
of great malignity, are caused by minute organisms 
which are produced from pre-existing germs, or by 
homogenesis ; and there is no reason, that I know 
of, for believing that what happens in insects may 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 269 

not take place in the highest animals. Indeed, 
there is already strong evidence that some diseases 
of an extremely malignant and fatal character to 
which man is subject, are as much the work of 
minute organisms as is the P^brine. I refer for 
this evidence to the very striking facts adduced 
by Professor Lister in his various well-known 
publications on the antiseptic method of treat- 
ment. It appears to me impossible to rise from 
the perusal of those publications without a strong 
conviction that the lamentable mortality which so 
frequently dogs the footsteps of the most skilful 
operator, and those deadly consequences of wounds 
and injuries which seem to haunt the very walls 
of great hospitals, and are, even now, destroying 
more men than die of bullet or bayonet, are due 
to the importation of minute organisms into 
wounds, and their increase and multiplication ; and 
that the surgeon who saves most lives will be he 
who best works out the practical consequences of 
the hypothesis of Redi. 

I commenced this Address by asking you to 
follow me in an attempt to trace the path which 
has been followed by a scientific idea, in its long 
and slow progress from the position of a probable 
hypothesis to that of an established law of nature. 
Our survey has not taken us into very attractive 
regions ; it has lain, chiefly, in a land flowing with 
the abominable, and peopled with mere grubs and 
mouldiness. And it may be imagined with what 



270 BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS vin 

smiles and shrugs, practical and serious contempo- 
raries of Redi and of Spallanzani may have com- 
mented on the waste of their high abilities in 
toiling at the solution of problems which, though 
curious enough in themselves, could be of no con- 
ceivable utility to mankind. 

Nevertheless, you will have observed that before 
we had travelled very far upon our road, there 
appeared, on the right hand and on the left, 
fields laden with a harvest of golden grain, 
immediately convertible into those things which 
the most solidly practical men will admit to have 
value — viz., money and hfe. 

The direct loss to France caused by the Pebrine 
in seventeen years cannot be estimated at less 
than fifty millions sterling; and if we add to 
this what Redi's idea, in Pasteur's hands, has 
done for the wine-grower and for the vinegar- 
maker, and try to capitalise its value, we shall 
find that it will go a long way towards repairing 
the money losses caused by the frightful and 
calamitous war of this autumn. And as to the 
equivalent of Redi's thought in hfe, how can we 
over-estimate the value of that knowledge of the 
nature of epidemic and epizootic diseases, and 
consequently of the means of checking, or eradi- 
cating them, the dawn of which has assuredly 
commenced ? 

Looking back no further than ten years, it is 
possible to select three (1863, 1864, and 1869) in 



VIII BIOGENESIS AND ABIOGENESIS 271 

which the total number of deaths from scarlet- 
fever alone amounted to ninety thousand. That 
is the return of killed, the maimed and disabled 
being left out of sight. Why, it is to be hoped 
that the list of killed in the present bloodiest 
of all wars will not amount to more than this ! 
But the facts which I have placed before you 
must leave the least sanguine without a doubt 
that the nature and the causes of this scourge 
will, one day, be as well understood as those 
of the Pebrine are now ; and that the long- 
suffered massacre of our innocents will come to 
an end. 

And thus mankind will have one more admoni- 
tion that " the people perish for lack of know- 
ledge " ; and that the alleviation of the miseries, 
and the promotion of the welfare, of men must 
be sought, by those who will not lose their pains, 
in that dihgent, patient, loving study of all the 
multitudinous aspects of Nature, the results of 
which constitute exact knowledge, or Science. 
It is the justification and the glory of this great 
meeting that it is gathered together for no other 
object than the advancement of the moiety of 
science which deals with those phenomena of 
nature which we call physical. May its en- 
deavours be crowned with a full measure of 
success ! 



IX 



GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY AND 
PERSISTENT TYPES OF LIFE 

[1862] 

Merchants occasionally go through a wholesome, 
though troublesome and not always satisfactory, 
process which they term " taking stock." After 
all the excitement of speculation, the pleasure of 
gain, and the pain of loss, the trader makes up his 
mind to face facts and to learn the exact quantity 
and quality of his solid and reliable possessions. 

The man of science does well sometimes to 
imitate this procedure ; and, forgetting for the 
time the importance of his own small winnings, 
to re-examine the common stock in trade, so that 
he may make sure how far the stock of bullion in 
the cellar — on the faith of whose existence so 
much paper has been circulating — is really the 
solid gold of truth. 

The Anniversary Meeting of the Geological 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 27S 

Society seems to be an occasion well suited for an 
undertaking of this kind — for an inquiry, in fact, 
into the nature and value of the present results 
of palaeontological investigation ; and the more 
so, as all those who have paid close attention to 
the late multitudinous discussions in which 
palseontology is implicated, must have felt the 
urgent necessity of some such scrutiny. 

First in order, as the most definite and unques- 
tionable of all the results of palaeontology, must 
be mentioned the immense extension and impulse 
given to botany, zoology, and comparative an- 
atomy, by the investigation of fossil remains. 
Indeed, the mass of biological facts has been so 
greatly increased, and the range of biological 
speculation has been so vastly widened, by the 
researches of the geologist and palaeontologist, 
that it is to be feared there are naturalists in 
existence who look upon geology as Brindley 
regarded rivers. " Rivers," said the great engineer, 
" were made to feed canals ; " and geology, some 
seem to "think, was solely created to advance com- 
parative anatomy. 

Were such a thought justifiable, it could 
hardly expect to be received with favour by this 
assembly. But it is not justifiable. Your favourite 
science has her own great aims independent of all 
others ; and if, notwithstanding her steady devotion 
to her own progress, she can scatter such rich 
alms among her sisters, it should be remembered 

VOL. VIII T 



274 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

that her charity is of the sort that does not 
impoverish, but " blesseth him that gives and him 
that takes." 

Regard the matter as we will, however, the 
facts remain. Nearly 40,000 species of animals 
and plants have been added to the Systema 
Naturae by palseontological research. This is a 
living population equivalent to that of a new 
continent in mere number ;. equivalent to that of 
a new hemisphere, if we take into account the 
small population of insects as yet found fossil, and 
the large proportion and peculiar organisation of 
many of the Vertebrata. 

But, beyond this, it is perhaps not too much 
to say that, except for the necessity of interpreting 
palaeontological facts, the laws of distribution 
would have received less careful study ; while 
few comparative anatomists (and those not of the 
first order) would have been induced by mere 
love of detail, as such, to study the minutiae of 
osteology, were it not that in such minutiae he the 
only keys to the most interesting riddles offered 
by the extinct animal world. 

These assuredly are great and solid gains. Surely 
it is matter for no small congratulation that in 
half a century (for palaeontology, though it dawned 
earlier, came into full day only with Cuvier) a 
subordinate branch of biology should have doubled 
the value and the interest of the whole group 
of sciences to which it belongs. 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPOEANEITY 275 

But this is not all. Allied with geology, 
paleeontology has established two laws of inestim- 
able importance : the first, that one and the same 
area of the earth's surface has been successively 
occupied by very different kinds of living beings ; 
the second, that the order of succession established 
in one locality holds good, approximately, in all. 

The first of these laws is universal and irre- 
versible ; the second is an induction from a vast 
number of observations, though it may possibly, 
and even probably, have to admit of exceptions. 
As a consequence of the second law, it follows 
that a peculiar relation frequently subsists between 
series of strata containing organic remains, in dif- 
ferent localities. The series resemble one another 
not only in virtue of a general resemblance of the 
organic remains in the two, but also in virtue of a 
resemblance in the order and character of the 
serial succession in each. There is a resemblance 
of arrangement ; so that the separate terms of 
each series, as well as the whole series, exhibit a 
correspondence. 

Succession implies time ; the lower members 
of an undisturbed series of sedimentary rocks are 
certainly older than the upper; and when the 
notion of age was once introduced as the equiva- 
lent of succession, it was no wonder that corres- 
pondence in succession came to be looked upon as 
a correspondence in age, or " contemporaneity." 
And, indeed, so long as relative age only is spoken 

T 2 



276 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

of, correspondence in succession is correspondence 
in age ; it is relative contemporaneity. 

But it would have been very much better for 
geology if so loose and ambiguous a word as 
" contemporaneous " had been excluded from her 
terminology, and if, in its stead, some term 
expressing similarity of serial relation, and ex- 
cluding the notion of time altogether, had been 
employed to denote correspondence in position 
in two or more series of strata. 

In anatomy, where such correspondence of posi- 
tion has constantly to be spoken of, it is denoted 
by the word " homology " and its derivatives ; and 
for Geology (which after all is only the anatomy 
and physiology of the earth) it might be well to 
invent some single word, such as "homotaxis" 
(similarity of order), in order to express an essen- 
tially similar idea. This, however, has not been 
done, and most probably the inquiry will at once 
be made — To what end burden science with a new 
and strange term in place of one old, familiar, and 
part of our common language ? 

The reply to this question will become obvious 
as the inquiry into the results of palaeontology is 
pushed further. 

Those whose business it is to acquaint themselves 
specially with the works of palaeontologists, in fact, 
will be fully aware that very few, if any, would rest 
satisfied with such a statement of the conclusions 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 277 

of their branch of biology as that which has just 
been given. 

Our standard repertories of palaeontology profess 
to teach us far higher things — ^to disclose the 
entire succession of living forms upon the surface 
of the globe ; to tell us of a wholly different dis- 
tribution of climatic conditions in ancient times ; 
to reveal the character of the first of all living 
existences ; and to trace out the law of progress 
from them to us. 

It may not be unprofitable to bestow on these 
professions a somewhat more critical examination 
than they have hitherto received, in order to 
ascertain how far they rest on an irrefragable 
basis ; or whether, after all, it might not be well 
for palseontologists to learn a little more carefully 
that scientific " ars artium," the art of saying " I 
don't know." And to this end let us define some- 
what more exactly the extent of these pretensions 
of palajontology. 

Every one is aware that Professor Bronn's " Un- 
tersuchungen " and Professor Pictet's " Traite de 
Pal^ontologie " are works of standard authority, 
familiarly consulted by every working palaeontolo- 
gist. It is desirable to speak of these excellent 
books, and of their distiaguished authors, with the 
utmost respect, and in a tone as far as possible re- 
moved from carping criticism ; indeed, if they are 
specially cited in this place, it is merely in justifi- 
cation of the assertion that the following proposi- 



278 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPOEANEITY ix 

tions, which may be found implicitly, or explicitly, 
in the works in question, are regarded by the mass 
of palaeontologists and geologists, not only on the 
Continent but in this country, as expressing some 
of the best-established results of palaeontology. 
Thus :— 

Animals and plants began their existence to- 
gether, not long after the commencement of the 
deposition of the sedimentary rocks; and then 
succeeded one another, in such a manner, that 
totally distinct faunae and florae occupied the whole 
surface of the earth, one after the other, and dur- 
ing distinct epochs of time. 

A geological formation is the sum of all the 
strata deposited over the whole surface of the 
earth during one of these epochs: a geolo- 
gical fauna or flora is the sum of all the 
species of animals or plants which occupied the 
whole surface of the globe, during one of these 
epochs. 

The population of the earth's surface was at fu-st 
very similar in all parts, and only from the middle 
of the Tertiary epoch onwards, began to show a 
distinct distribution in zones. 

The constitution of the original population, as 
well as the numerical proportions of its members, 
indicates a wanner and, on the whole, somewhat 
tropical climate, which remained tolerably equable 
throughout the year. The subsequent distribution 
of living beings in zones is the result of a gradual 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 279 

lowering of the general temperature, which first 
began to be felt at the poles. 

It is not now proposed to inquire whether these 
doctrines are true or false ; but to direct your 
attention to a much simpler though very essential 
preliminary question — What is their logical basis ? 
what are the fundamental assumptions upon which 
they all logically depend ? and what is the evidence 
on which those fundamental propositions demand 
our assent ? 

These assumptions are two : the first, that the 
commencement of the geological record is coeval 
with the commencement of life on the globe ; the 
second, that geological contemporaneity is the 
same thing as chronological synchrony. Without 
the first of these assumptions there would of 
course be no ground for any statement respecting 
the commencement of life ; without the second, all 
the other statements cited, every one of which 
implies a knowledge of the state of different parts 
of the earth at one and the same time, will be no 
less devoid of demonstration. 

The first assumption obviously rests entirely on 
negative evidence. This is, of course, the only 
evidence that ever can be available to prove the 
commencement of any series of phenomena ; but, 
at the same time, it must be recollected that the 
value of negative evidence depends entirely on the 
amount of positive corroboration it receives. If A.B. 



280 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMI'ORANEITY ix 

wishes to prove an alibi, it is of no use for him to 
get a thousand witnesses simply to swear that 
they did not see him in such and such a place, 
unless the witnesses are prepared to prove that 
they must have seen him had he been there. But 
the evidence that animal life commenced with the 
Lingula-flags, e.g., would seem to be exactly of this 
unsatisfactory uncorroborated sort. The Cambrian 
witnesses simply swear they " haven't seen any- 
body their way " ; upon which the counsel for the 
other side immediately puts in ten or twelve 
thousand feet of Devonian sandstones to make 
oath they never saw a fish or a moUusk, though 
all the world knows there were plenty in their 
time. 

But then it is urged that, though the Devonian 
rocks in one part of the world exhibit no fossils, 
in another they do, while the lower Cambrian 
rocks nowhere exhibit fossils, and hence no living 
being could have existed in their epoch. 

To this there are two repUes : the first that the 
observational basis of the assertion that the lowest 
rocks are nowhere fossihferous is an amazingly 
small one, seeing how very small an area, in com- 
parison to that of the whole world, has yet been 
fully searched ; the second, that the argument is 
good for nothing unless the unfossihferous rocks 
in question were not only contemjMraneotis in the 
geological sense, but synchronous in the chronolo- 
gical sense. To use the alibi illustration again. 



tX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 281 

If a man wishes to prove he was in neither of 
two places, A and B, on a given day, his witnesses 
for each place must be prepared to answer for the 
whole day. If they can only prove that he was 
not at A in the morning, and not at B in the 
afternoon, the evidence of his absence from both 
is nil, because he might have been at B in the 
morning and at A in the afternoon. 

Thus everything depends upon the validity of 
the second assumption. And we must proceed to 
inquire what is the real meaning of the word 
" contemporaneous " as employed by geologists. 
To this end a concrete example may be taken. 

The Lias of England and the Lias of Germany, 
the Cretaceous rocks of Britain and the Cretaceous 
rocks of Southern India, are termed by geologists 
" contemporaneous " formations ; but whenever 
any thoughtful geologist is asked whether he 
means to say that they were deposited synchron- 
ously, he says, " No, — only within the same great 
epoch." And if, in pursuing the inquiry, he is 
asked what may be the approximate value in time 
of a " great epoch " — whether it means a hundred 
years, or a thousand, or a million, or ten million 
years — his reply is, '' I cannot tell." 

If the further question be put, whether physical 
geology is in possession of any method by which 
the actual synchrony (or the reverse) of any two 
distant deposits can be ascertained, no such 
method can be heard of; it being admitted by all 



282 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

the best authorities that neither similarity of 
mineral composition, nor of physical character, 
nor even direct continuity of stratum, are absolute 
proofs of the synchronism of even approximated 
sedimentary strata : while, for distant deposits, 
there seems to be no kind of physical evidence 
attainable of a nature competent to decide 
whether such deposits were formed simultan- 
eously, or whether they possess any given differ- 
ence of antiquity. To return to an example 
already given : All competent authorities will 
probably assent to the proposition that physical 
geology does not enable us in any way to reply to 
this question — Were the British Cretaceous rocks 
deposited at the same time as those of India, or 
are they a million of years younger or a million of 
years older ? 

Is palaeontology able to succeed where physical 
geology fails ? Standard writers on palaeontology, 
as has been seen, assume that she can. They 
take it for granted, that deposits containing 
similar organic remains are synchronous — at any 
rate in a broad sense ; and yet, those who will 
study the eleventh and twelfth chapters of Sir 
Henry De La Beche's remarkable "Eesearches 
in Theoretical Geology," published now nearly 
thirty years ago, and will carry out the arguments 
there most luminously stated, to their logical 
consequences, may very easily convince them- 
selves that even absolute identity of organic 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 283 

contents is no proof of the synchrony of deposits, 
while absolute diversity is no proof of difference 
of date. Sir Henry De La Beche goes even 
further, and adduces conclusive evidence to show 
that the different parts of one and the same 
stratum, having a similar composition throughout, 
containing the same organic remains, and having 
similar beds above and below it, may yet differ 
to any conceivable extent in age. 

Edward Forbes was in the habit of asserting 
that the similarity of the organic contents of 
distant formations was 2Jriin& facie evidence, not 
of their similarity, but of their difference of age ; 
and holding as he did the doctrine of single 
specific centres, the conclusion was as legitimate 
as any other ; for the two districts must 
have been occupied by migration from one of 
the two, or from an intermediate spot, and the 
chances against exact coincidence of migration 
and of imbedding are infinite. 

In point of fact, however, whether the hypo- 
thesis of single or of multiple specific centres 
be adopted, similarity of organic contents cannot 
possibly afford any proof of the synchrony of 
the deposits which contain them ; on the con- 
trary, it is demonstrably compatible with the 
lapse of the most prodigious intervals of time, 
and with the interposition of vast changes in the 
organic and inorganic worlds, between the epochs 
in which such deposits were formed. 



284 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY IX 

On what amount of similarity of their faunae 
is the doctrine of the contemporaneity of the 
European and of the North American Silurians 
based ? In the last edition of Sir Charles Lyell's 
"Elementary Geology" it is stated, on the 
authority of a former President of this 
Society, the late Daniel Sharpe, that between 
30 and 40 per cent, of the species of Silurian 
Mollusca are common to both sides of the 
Atlantic. By way of due allowance for further 
discovery, let us double the lesser number and 
suppose that 60 per cent, of the species are 
common to the North American and the British 
Silurians. Sixty per cent, of species in common 
is, then, proof of contemporaneity. 

Now suppose that, a million or two of years 
hence, when Britain has made ajiother dip 
beneath the sea and has come up again, some 
geologist apphes this doctrine, in comparing the 
strata laid bare by the upheaval of" the bottom, 
say, of St. George's Channel with what may then 
remain of the Suffolk Crag. Keasoning in the 
same way, he will at once decide the Suffolk 
Crag and the St. George's Channel beds to be 
contemporaneous; although we happen to know 
that a vast period (even in the geological sense) 
of time, and physical changes of almost unpre- 
cedented extent, separate the two. 

But if it be a demonstrable fact that strata 
containing more than 60 or 70 per cent, of species 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 285 

of MoUusca in common, and comparatively close 
together, may yet be separated by an amount 
of geological time sufficient to allow of some 
of the greatest physical changes the world has 
seen, what becomes of that sort of contem- 
poraneity the sole evidence of which is a simi- 
larity of facies, or the identity of half a dozen 
species, or of a good many genera ? 

And yet there is no better evidence for the 
contemporaneity assumed by all who adopt the 
hypothesis of universal faunae and florae, of a 
universally uniform climate, and of a sensible 
cooling of the globe during geological time. 

There seems, then, no escape from the admis- 
sion that neither physical geology, nor palaeonto- 
logy, possesses any method by which the absolute 
synchronism of two strata can be demonstrated. 
All that geology can prove is local order of succes- 
sion. It is mathematically certain that, in any 
given vertical linear section of an undisturbed 
series of sedimentary deposits, the bed which lies 
lowest is the oldest. In many other vertical 
linear sections of the same series, of course, cor- 
responding beds will occur in a similar order; 
but, however great may be the probability, no 
man can say with absolute certainty that the 
beds in the two sections were synchronously 
deposited. For areas of moderate extent, it is 
doubtless true that no practical evil is likely to 
result from assuming the corresponding beds to 



286 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

be synchronous or strictly contemporaneous ; and 
there are multitudes of accessory circumstances 
which may fully justify the assumption of such 
syBchrony. But the moment the geologist has 
to' deal with large areas, or with completely 
separated deposits, the mischief of confounding 
that " homotaxis " or " similarity of arrangementj" 
which can be demonstrated, with " s3mchrony " or 
"identity of date," for which there is not a 
shadow of proof, under the one common term 
of " contemporaneity " becomes incalculable, and 
proves the constant source of gratuitous specu- 
lations. 

For an3rthing that geology or paleontology are 
able to show to the contrary, a Devonian fauna 
and flora in the British Islands may have been 
contemporaneous with Silurian life in North 
America, and with a Carboniferous fauna and flora 
in Africa. Geographical provinces and zones may 
have been as distinctly marked in the Palaeozoic 
epoch as at present, and those seemingly sudden 
appearances of new genera and species, which we 
ascribe to new creation, may be simple results of 
migration. 

It may be so; it may be otherwise. In the 
present condition of our knowledge and of our 
methods, one verdict — "not proven, and not 
provable" — must be recorded against all the 
grand hypotheses of the palaeontologist respecting 
the general succession of life on the globe. The 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 287 

order and nature of terrestrial life, as a whole, 
are open questions. Geology at present provides 
us with most valuable topographical records, but 
she has not the means of working them into a 
universal history. Is such a universal history, 
then, to be regarded as unattainable ? Are all 
the grandest and most interesting problems which 
offer themselves to the geological student, essenti- 
ally insoluble ? Is he in the position of a scientific 
Tantalus — doomed always to thirst for a knowledge 
which he cannot obtain ? The reverse is to be 
hoped ; nay, it may not be impossible to indicate 
the source whence help will come. 

In commencing these remarks, mention was 
made of the great obligations under which the 
naturalist lies to the geologist and palaeontologist. 
Assuredly the time will come when these obliga- 
tions will be repaid tenfold, and when the maze of 
the world's past history, through which the pure 
geologist and the pure palaeontologist find no 
guidance, will be securely threaded by the clue 
furnished by the naturalist. 

All who are competent to express an opinion on 
the subject are, at present, agreed that the mani- 
fold varieties of animal and vegetable form have 
not either come into existence by chance, nor 
result from capricious exertions of creative power ; 
but that they have taken place in a definite order, 
the statement of which order is what men of 
science term a natural law. Whether such a law 



288 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

is to be regarded as an expression of the mode of 
operation of natural forces, or whether it is simply 
a statement of the manner in which a super- 
natural power has thought fit to act, is a secondary 
question, so long as the existence of the law and 
the possibility of its discovery by the human 
intellect are granted. But he must be a half- 
hearted philosopher who, believing in that possi- 
bility, and having watched the gigantic strides 
of the biological sciences during the last twenty 
years, doubts that science will sooner or later 
make this further step, so as to become possessed 
of the law of evolution of organic forms — of the 
unvarjdng order of that great chain of causes and 
effects of which all organic forms, ancient and 
modern, are the links. And then, if ever, we 
shall be able to begin to discuss, with profit, the 
questions respecting the commencement of life, 
and the nature of the successive populations of 
the globe, which so many seem to think are 
already answered. 

The preceding arguments make no particular 
claim to novelty ; indeed they have been floating 
more or less distinctly before the minds of geo- 
logists for the last thirty years.; and if, at the 
present time, it has seemed desirable to give them 
more definite and systematic expression, it is be- 
cause palaeontology is every day assuming a greater 
importance, and now requires to rest on a basis 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 289 

the firmness of which is thoroughly well assured. 
Among its fundamental conceptions, there must 
be no confusion between what is certain and what 
is more or less probable.^ But, pending the con- 
struction of a surer foundation than palaeontology 
now possesses, it may be instructive, assuming 
for the nonce the general correctness of the 
ordinary hypothesis of geological contemporaneity, 
to consider whether the deductions which are 
ordinarily drawn from the whole body of palse- 
ontological facts are justifiable. 

The evidence on which such conclusions are 
based is of two kinds, negative and positive. The 
value of negative evidence, in connection with this 
inquiry, has been so fully and clearly discussed in 
an address from the chair of this Society,^ which 
none of us have forgotten, that nothing need at 
present be said about it ; the more, as the con- 
siderations which have been laid before you have 
certainly not tended to increase your estimation 
of such evidence. It will be preferable to turn to 
the positive facts of palaeontology, and to inquire 
what they tell us. 

We are all accustomed to speak of the number 
and the extent of the changes in the living popu- 
lation of the globe during geological time as 

^ " Le plus grand service qii'on pnisse rendre a la science est 
d'y faire place.nette avant d'y rien constmire. " — Cuvibk. 

•^ Anniversary Address for 1851, Quart. Journ. Gcol. Soe. 
vol. vii. 

VOL. VIII U 



290 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

something enormous : and indeed they are so, if 
we regard only the negative differences which 
separate the older rocks from the more modern, 
and if we look upon specific and generic changes 
as great changes, which from one point of view, 
they truly are. But leaving the negative differ- 
ences out of consideration, and looking only at the 
positive data furnished by the fossil world from a 
broader point of view — from that of the compara- 
tive anatomist who has made the study of the 
greater modifications of animal form his chief 
business — a surprise of another kind dawns upon 
the mind ; and under this aspect the smallness of 
the total change becomes as astonishing as was its 
greatness under the other. 

There are two hundred known orders of plants ; 
of these not one is certainly known to exist ex- 
clusively in the fossil state. The whole lapse of 
geological time has as yet yielded not a single new 
ordinal type of vegetable structure.^ 

The positive change in passing from the recent 
to the ancient animal world is greater, but still 
singularly small. No fossil animal is so distinct 
fi-om those now living as to require to be arranged 
even in a sepairate class from those which contain 
existing forms. It is only when we come to the 
orders, which may be roughly estimated at about 
a hundred and thirty, that we meet with fossil 

^ See Hooter's Introductory Essay to the Flora of Tasmania, 
p. xxiii. 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 291 

animals so distinct from those now living as to 
require orders for themselves; and these do not 
amount, on the most liberal estimate, to more than 
about 10 per cent, of the whole. 

There is no certainly known extinct order of 
Protozoa ; there is but one among the Coelenterata 
—that of the rugose corals ; there is none among 
the MoUusca; there are three, the Cystidea, 
Blastoidea, and Edrioasterida, among the Echino- 
derms; and two, the Trilobita and Eurypterida, 
among the Crustacea ; making altogether five for 
the great sub-kingdom of Annulosa. Among 
Vertebrates there is no ordinally distinct fossil 
fish : there is only one extinct order of Amphibia 
— the Labyrinthodonts ; but there are at least four 
distinct orders of Reptilia, viz. the Ichthyosauria, 
Plesiosauria, Pterosauria, Dinosauria, and perhaps 
another or two. There is no known extinct order 
of Birds, and no certainly known extinct order of 
Mammals, the ordinal distinctness of the " Toxo- 
dontia " being doubtful. 

The objection that broad statements of this 
kind, after all, rest largely on negative evidence is 
obvious, but it has less force than may at first be 
supposed ; for, as might be expected from the cir- 
cumstances of the case, we possess more abundant 
positive evidence regarding Fishes and marine 
MoUusks than respecting any other forms of 
animal life ; and yet these offer us, through the 
whole range of geological time, no species ordinally 

U 2 



292 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

distinct from those now living ; while the far less 
numerous class of Echinoderms presents three, and 
the Crustacea two, such orders, though none of these 
come down later than the Palaeozoic age. Lastly, 
the Reptilia present the extraordinary and excep- 
tional phenomenon of as many extinct as existing 
orders, if not more ; the four mentioned maintain- 
ing their existence from the Lias to the Chalk 
inclusive. 

Some years ago one of your Secretaries pointed 
out another kind of positive palseontological 
evidence tending towards the same conclusion — 
afforded by the existence of what he termed 
" persistent types " of vegetable and of animal 
life.^ He stated, on the authority of Dr. Hooker, 
that there are Carboniferous plants which appear 
to be generically identical with some now living ; 
that the cone of the Oolitic Araucaria is hardly 
distinguishable from that of an existing species ; 
that a true Pinus appears in the Purbecks and a 
Juglans in the Chalk ; while, from the Bagshot 
Sands, a Banhsia, the wood of which , is not 
distinguishable from that of species now living 
in Australia, had been obtained. 

Turning to the animal kingdom, he affirmed 
the tabulate corals of the Silurian rocks to be 
wonderfully like those which now exist; while 

^ See the abstract of a Lecture ' ' On the Persistent Types of 
Animal Life," in the Notices of tlie Meetings of the Boyal 
Institution of Great Britain. — June 3, 1859, vol. iii. p. 151. 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 293 

even the families of the Aporosa were all repre- 
sented in the older Mesozoic rocks. 

Among the Mollusca similar facts were adduced. 
Let it be borne in mind that Avicula, Mytilus, 
Chiton, Natica, Patella, Trochus, Discina, Orhicula, 
Lingula, Rhynchonella, and Nautilus, all of which 
are existing genera, are given without a doubt as 
Silurian in the last edition of " Siluria " ; while 
the highest forms of the highest Cephalopods 
are represented in the Lias by a genus Belemno- 
teuthis, which presents the closest relation to the 
existing Loligo. 

The two highest groups of the Annulosa, the 
Insecta and the Arachnida, are represented in the 
Coal, either by existing genera, or by forms 
differing from existing genera in quite minor 
peculiarities. 

Turning to the Vertebrata, the only palaeozoic 
Elasmobranch Fish of which we have any complete 
knowledge is the Devonian and Carboniferous 
PleuracantMis, which differs no more from existing 
Sharks than these do from one another. 

Again, vast as is the number of undoubtedly 
Ganoid fossil Fishes, and great as is their range 
in time, a large mass of evidence has recently 
been adduced to show that almost all those 
respecting which we possess sufficient information, 
are referable to the same sub-ordinal groups as 
the existing Lejoidosteus, Polypterus, and Sturgeon ; 
and that a singular relation obtains between the 



294 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

older and the younger Fishes ; the former, the 
Devonian Ganoids, being almost all members of 
the same sub-order as Polypterus, while the 
Mesozoic Ganoids are almost all similarly allied 
to Zepidosteus} 

Again, what can be more remarkable than the 
singular constancy of structure preserved through- 
out a vast period of time by the family of the 
Pycnodonts and by that of the true Ccelacanths : 
the former persisting, with but insignificant 
modifications, from the Carboniferous to the 
Tertiary rocks, inclusive ; the latter existing, 
with still less change, from the Carboniferous 
rocks to the Chalk, inclusive ? 

Among Eeptiles, the highest living group, that 
of the Crocodilia, is represented, at the early part 
of the Mesozoic epoch, by species identical in the 
essential characters of their organisation with 
those now living, and differing from the latter 
only in such matters as the form of the articular 
fecets of the vertebral centra, in the extent to 
which the nasal passages are separated from the 
cavity of the mouth by bone, and in the pro- 
portions of the limbs. 

And even as regards the Mammalia, the scanty 
remains of Triassic and Oolitic species afford no 
foundation for the supposition that the organisa- 

1 ' ' Memoirs of the Geological Survey of the United Kingdom. 
— Decade x. Preliminary Essay upon the Systematic Arrange- 
ment of the Fishes of the Devonian Epoch." 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 295 

tion of the oldest forms differed nearly so much 
from some of those which now live as these differ 
from one another. 

It is needless to multiply these instances; 
enough has been said to justify the statement 
that, in view of the immense diversity of known 
animal and vegetable forms, and the enormous 
lapse of time indicated by the accumulation of 
fossiliferous strata, the only circumstance to be 
wondered at is, not that the changes of life, as 
exhibited by positive evidence, have been so great, 
but that they have been so small. 

Be they great or small, however, it is desirable 
to attempt to estimate them. Let us, therefore, 
take each great division of the animal world in 
succession, and, whenever an order or a family can 
be shown to have had a prolonged existence, let us 
endeavour to ascertain how far the later members 
of the group differ from the earlier ones. If these 
later members, in all or in many cases, exhibit a 
certain amount of modification, the fact is, so far, 
evidence in favour of a general law of change ; 
and, in a rough way, the rapidity of that change 
will be measured by the demonstrable amount ,of 
modification. On the other hand, it must be 
recollected that the absence of any modification, 
while it may leave the doctrine of the existence of 
a law of change without positive support, cannot 
possibly disprove all forms of that doctrine, though 



296 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

it may afford a sufficient refutation of many of 
them. 

The Protozoa. — The Protozoa are represented 
throughout the whole range of geological series, 
from the Lower Silurian formation to the present 
day. The most ancient forms recently made 
known by Ehrenberg are exceedingly like those 
which now exist : no one has ever pretended that 
the difference between any ancient and any modern 
Foraminifera is of more than generic value, nor 
are the oldest Foraminifera either simpler, more 
embryonic, or less differentiated, than the existing 
forms. 

The Ccelenterata. — The Tabulate Corals have 
existed from the Silurian epoch to the present 
day, but I am not aware that the ancient Hdiolites 
possesses a single mark of a more embryonic or 
less differentiated character, or less high organisa- 
tion, than the existing ffeliopora. As for the 
Aporose Corals, in what respect is the Silurian 
Palceoeyclus less highly organised or more embry- 
onic than the modern Fungia, or the Liassic 
Aporosa than the existing members of the same 
families ? 

The Mollusca. — In what sense is the living 
Waldheimia less embryonic, or more specialised, 
than the palaeozoic Spirifer ; or the existing 
Bhynchonellm, Cranim, Siscince, Lingulm, than the 
Silurian species of the same genera? In what 
sense can LoUgo or Spirula be said to be more 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 297 

specialised, or less embryonic, than Belemnites; 
or the modern species of Lamelhbranch and 
Gasteropod genera, than the Silurian species of 
the same genera ? 

The Annulosa. — The Carboniferous Insecta 
and Arachnida are neither less specialised, nor 
more embryonic, than these that now live, nor are 
the Liassic Cirripedia and Macrura ; while several 
of the Brachyura, which appear in the Chalk, 
belong to existing genera; and none exhibit 
either an intermediate, or an embryonic, 
character. 

The VertebeATA. — Among fishes I have 
referred to the CcElacanthini (comprising the 
genera Ccelacanthus, Holophagus, Undina, and 
Macropoma) as affording an example of a persistent 
type; and it is most remarkable to note the 
smalhiess of the differences between any of these 
fishes (affecting at most the proportions of the 
body and fins, and the character and sculpture 
of the scales), notwithstanding their enormous 
range in time. In all the essentials of its 
very pecuUar structure, the Macropoma of the 
Chalk is identical with the Gwlacantlius of the 
Coal. Look at the genus Lepidotus, again, per- 
sisting without a modification of importance 
from the Liassic to the Eocene formations in- 
clusivly. 

Or among the Teleostei — in what respect is 
the Beryx of the Chalk more embryonic, or 



298 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

less differentiated, than Beryx lineattis of King 
George's Sound? 

Or to turn to the higher Vertebrata — in what 
sense are the Liassic Chelonia inferior to those 
which now exist ? How are the Cretaceous 
Ichthyosauria, Plesiosauria, or Pterosauria less 
embryonic, or more differentiated, species than 
those of the Lias? 

Or lastly, in what circumstance is the Phasco- 
lotherium more embryonic, or of a more genera- 
lised type, than the modern Opossum; or a 
Zophiodoii, or a Palceothermm, than a modern 
Tapirus or ITyrax? 

These examples might be almost indefinitely 
multiplied, but surely they are sufficient to prove 
that the only safe and unquestionable testimony 
we can procure — positive evidence — fails to dem- 
onstrate any sort of progressive modification 
towards a less embryonic, or less generalised, type 
in a great many groups of animals of long- 
continued geological existence. In these groups 
there is abundant evidence of variation — ^none of 
what is ordinarily understood as progression ; and, 
if the known geological record is to be regarded 
as even any considerable fragment of the whole, 
it is inconceivable that any theory of a necessarily 
progressive development can stand, for the numer- 
ous orders and families cited afford no trace of 
such a process. 

But it is a most remarkable fact, that, while the 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 299 

groups which have been mentioned, and many 
besides, exhibit no sign of progressive modification, 
there are others, co-existing with them, under the 
same conditions, in which more or less distinct 
indications of such a process seems to be traceable. 
Among such indications I may remind you of the 
predominance of Holostome Gasteropoda in the 
older rocks as compared with that of Siphonostone 
Gasteropoda in the later. A case less open to the 
objection of negative evidence, however, is that 
afforded by the Tetrabranchiate Cephalopoda, the 
forms of the shells and of the septal sutures 
exhibiting a certain increase of complexity in the 
newer genera. Here, however, one is met at once 
with the occurrence of Orthoceras and Baculites at 
the two ends of the series, and of the fact that 
one of the simplest genera. Nautilus, is that 
which now exists. 

The Crinoidea, in the abundance of stalked 
forms in the ancient formations as compared with 
their present rarity, seem to present us with a 
fair case of modification from a more embryonic 
towards a less embryonic condition. But then, on 
careful consideration of the facts, the objection 
arises that the stalk, calyx, and arms of the palae- 
ozoic Crinoid are exceedingly different from the 
corresponding organs of a larval Comatula ; and it 
might with perfect justice be argued that Actino- 
criiius and Eucalyptocrinus, for example, depart to 
the full as widely, in one direction, from the stalked 



300 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

embryo of Oomatula, as Comatula itself does in 
the other. 

The Echinidea, again, are frequently quoted as 
exhibiting a gradual passage from a more genera- 
lised to a more specialised type, seeing that the 
elongated, or oval, Spatangoids appear after the 
spheroidal Echinoids. But here it might be 
argued, on the other hand, that the spheroidal 
Echinoids, in reality, depart further from the 
general plan and from the embryonic form than 
the elongated Spatangoids do ; and that the 
pecuHar dental apparatus and the pedicellarise of 
the former are marks of at least as great differ- 
entiation as the petaloid ambulacra and semitse of 
the latter. 

Once more, the prevalence of Macrurous before 
Brachyurous Podophthalmia is, apparently, a fair 
piece of evidence in favour of progressive modifi- 
cation in the same order of Crustacea; and yet 
the case will not stand much sifting, seeing that 
the Macrurous Podophthalmia depart as far in one 
direction from the common type of Podophthalmia, 
or from any embryonic condition of the Brachyura, 
as the Brachyura do in the other ; and that the 
middle terms between Macrura and Brachyura — 
the Anomura — are little better represented in the 
older Mesozoic rocks than the Brachyura are. 

None of the cases of progressive modification 
which are cited from among the Invertebrata 
appear to me to have a foundation less open to 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY 301 

criticism than these ; and if this be so, no careful 
reasoner would, I think, be inclined to lay very 
great stress upon them. Among the Vertebrata, 
however, there are a few examples which appear to 
be far less open to objection. 

It is, in fact, true of several groups of Verte- 
brata which have lived through a considerable 
range of time, that the endoskeleton (more par- 
ticularly the spinal column) of the older genera 
presents a less ossified, and, so far, less differ- 
entiated, condition than that of the younger 
genera. Thus the Devonian Ganoids, though 
almost all members of the same sub-order as 
Polypterus, and presenting numerous important re- 
semblances to the existing genus, which possesses 
biconclave vertebrae, are, for the most part, wholly 
devoid of ossified vertebral centra. The Mesozoic 
Lepidosteidse, again, have, at most, biconcave 
vertebrae, while the existing Lepidostms has 
Salamandroid, opisthoccElous, vertebrse. So, none 
of the Palaeozoic Sharks have shown themselves 
to be possessed of ossified vertebra, while the 
majority of modern Sharks possess such vertebrae. 
Again, the more ancient Crocodilia and Lacertilia 
have vertebrae with the articular facets of their 
centra flattened or biconcave, while the modern 
members of the same group have them procoelous. 
But the most remarkable examples of progressive 
modification of the vertebral column, in corre- 
spondence with geological age, are those afforded 



302 GKOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITT ix 

by the Pycnodonts among fish, and the Labyrin- 
thodonts among Amphibia. 

The late able ichthyologist Heckel pointed out 
the fact, that, while the Pycnodonts never possess 
brue vertebral centra, they differ in the degree of 
expansion and extension of the ends of the bony 
arches of the vertebrae upon the sheath of the 
notochord ; the Carboniferous forms exhibiting 
hardly any such expansion, while the Mesozoic 
genera present a greater and greater development, 
until, in the Tertiary forms, the expanded ends 
become suturally united so as to form a sort of 
false vertebra. Hermann von Meyer, again, to 
whose luminous researches we are indebted for 
our present large knowledge of the organisation of 
the older Labyrinthodonts, has proved that the 
Carboniferous Archegosaurus had very imperfectly 
developed vertebral centra, while the Triassic 
Mastodonsaurus had the same parts completely 
ossified.^ 

The regularity and evenness of the dentition of 
the Anoplotherium, as contrasted with that of exist- 
ing Artiodactyles, and the assumed nearer approach 
of the dentition of certain ancient Carnivores to 
the typical arrangement, have also been cited as 
exemplifications of a law of progressive develop- 
ment, but I know of no other cases based on 

' As this Address is passing through the press (March 7, 
1862), evidence lies before me of the existence of a new Laby- 
rinthodont {Pholidogaster), from the Edinburgh coal-field with 
well-ossified vertebral centra. 



IX GEOLOGICAL CONTEMl'OKANErrY 303 

positive evidence which are worthy of particular 
notice. 

What then does an impartial survey of the 
positively ascertained truths of palaeontology testify 
in relation to the common doctrines of progressive 
modification, which suppose that modification to 
have taken place by a necessary progress from 
more to less embryonic forms, or from more to 
less generalised types, within the limits of the 
period represented by the fossiliferous rocks ? 

It negatives those doctrines ; for it either 
shows us no evidence of any such modification, or 
demonstrates it to have been very slight ; and as 
to the nature of that modification, it yields no 
evidence whatsoever that the earlier members of 
any long-continued group were more generalised 
in structure than the later ones. To a certain 
extent, indeed, it may be said that imperfect 
ossification of the vertebral column is an em- 
bryonic character; but, on the other hand, it 
would be extremely incorrect to suppose that the 
vertebral columns of the older Vertebrata are in 
any sense embryonic in their whole structure. 

Obviously, if the earliest fossiliferous rocks now 
known are coeval with the commencement of life, 
and if their contents give us any just conception 
of the nature and the extent of the earliest fauna 
and flora, the insignificant amount of modification 
which can be demonstrated to have taken place in 
any one group of animals, or plants, is quite in- 



304 GEOLOGICAL CONTEMPORANEITY ix 

compatible with the hypothesis that all living 
forms are the results of a necessary process of 
progressive development, entirely comprised within 
the time represented by the fossiliferous rocks. 

Contrariwise, any admissible h3rpothesis of pro- 
gressive modification must be compatible with 
persistence without progression, through indefi- 
nite periods. And should such an hypothesis 
eventually be proved to be true, in the only 
way in which it can be demonstrated, viz. 
by observation and experiment upon the 
existing forms of life, the conclusion will 
inevitably present itself, that the Paleeozoic 
Mesozoic, and Cainozoic faunae and florae, taken 
together, bear somewhat the same proportion to 
the whole series of living beings which have 
occupied this globe, as the existing fauna and 
flora do to them. 

Such are the results of palaeontology as they 
appear, and have for some years appeared, to the 
mind of an inquirer who regards that study simply 
as one of the applications of the great biological 
sciences, and who desires to see it placed upon the 
same sound basis as other branches of physical 
inquiry. If the arguments which have been 
brought forward are valid, probably no one, in view 
of the present state of opinion, will be inclined to 
think the time wasted which has been spent upon 
their elaboration. 



X 

GEOLOGICAL REFOEM 
[1869] 

' ' A great reform in geological speculation seems now to have 
become necessary. " 

" It is c^uite certain that a great mistake has been made — that 
British popular geology at the present time is in direct opposi- 
tion to the principles of Natural Philosophy. " ^ 

In reviewing the course of geological thought 
during the past year, for the purpose of discovering 
those matters to which I might most fitly direct 
your attention in the Address which it now 
becomes my duty to deliver from the Presidential 
Chair, the two somewhat alarming sentences 
which I have just read, and which occur in an 
able and interesting essay by an eminent natural 
philosopher, rose into such prominence before my 
mind that they eclipsed everything else. 

It surely is a matter of paramount importance 

' On Geological Time. By Sir W. Thomson, LL. D. Trans- 
actioTis of the Geological Society of Glasgow, vol. iii. 

VOL. VIII X 



306 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

for the British geologists (some of them very- 
popular geologists too) here in solemn annual 
session assembled, to inquire whether the severe 
judgment thus passed upon them by so high an 
authority as Sir William Thomson is one to which 
they must plead guilty sans phrase, or whether 
they are prepared to say " not guilty," and appeal 
for a reversal of the sentence to that higher 
court of educated scientific opinion to which we 
are all amenable. 

As your attorney-general for the time being, 
I thought I could not do better than get up the 
case with a view of advising you. It is true that 
the charges brought forward by the other side 
involve the consideration of matters quite foreign 
to the pursuits with which I am ordinarily occu- 
pied ; but, in that respect, I am only in the 
position which is, nine times out of ten, occupied 
by counsel, who nevertheless contrive to gain 
their causes, mainly by force of mother- wit and 
common-sense, aided by some training in other 
intellectual exercises. 

Nerved by such precedents, I proceed to put 
my pleading before you. 

And the first question with which I propose to 
deal is. What is it to which Sir W. Thomson 
refers when he speaks of " geological speculation " 
and " British popular geology " ? 

I find three, more or less contradictory, systems 
of geological thought, each of which might fairly 



X GEOLOGICAL EEFOEM 307 

enough claim these appellations, standing side by 
side in Britaia. I shall call one of them Cata- 
STROPHISM, another UNiFOEMiTARiANiSM,the third 
Evolutionism ; and I shall try briefly to sketch 
the characters of each, that you may say whether 
the classification is, or is not, exhaustive. 

By Catasteophism, I mean any form of geo- 
logical speculation which, in order to account for 
the phenomena of geology, supposes the operation 
of forces different in their nature, or immeasur- 
ably different in power, from those which we at 
present see in action in the universe. 

The Mosaic cosmogony is, in this sense, cata- 
strophic, because it assumes the operation of 
extra-natural power. The doctrine of violent 
upheavals, debacles, and cataclysms in general, is 
catastrophic, so far as it assumes that these were 
brought about by causes which have now no 
parallel. There was a time when catastrophism 
might, pre-eminently, have claimed the title of 
" British popular geology " ; and assuredly it has 
yet many adherents, and reckons among its sup- 
porters some of the most honoured members of 
this Society. 

By Uniformitarianism, I mean especially, the 
teaching of Hutton and of Lyell. 

That great though incomplete work, " The 
Theory of the Earth," seems to me to be one of 
the most remarkable contributions to geology 
which is recorded in the annals of the science. 

X 2 



308 GEOLOGICAL EEFOEM x 

So far as the not-living world is concerned, uni- 
formitarianism lies there, not only in germ, but in 
blossom and fruit. 

If one asks how it is that Hutton was led 
to entertain views so far in advance of those 
prevalent in his time, in some respects ; while, in 
others, they seem almost curiously limited, the 
answer appears to me to be plain. 

Hutton was in advance of the geological specu- 
lation of his time, because, in the first place, he 
had amassed a vast store of knowledge of the 
facts of geology, gathered by personal observation 
in travels of considerable extent ; and because, ia 
the second place, he was thoroughly trained in 
the physical and chemical science of his day, and 
thus possessed, as much as any one in his time 
could possess it, the knowledge which is requisite 
for the just interpretation of geological pheno- 
mena, and the habit of thought which fits a man 
for scientific inquiry. 

It is to this thorough scientific training that I 
ascribe Button's steady and persistent refusal to 
look to other causes than those now in operation, 
for the explanation of geological phenomena. 

Thus he writes :— " I do not pretend, as he 
[M. de Luc] does in his theory, to describe the 
beginniag of things. I take things such as I find 
them at present ; and from these I reason with 
regard to that which must have been." ^ 

1 The Theory of the Earth, vol. i. p. 178, note. 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 309 

And again:— "A theory of the earth, which 
has for object truth, can have no retrospect to 
that which had preceded the present order of the 
world; for this order alone is what we have to 
reason upon; and to reason without data is 
nothing but delusion. A theory, therefore, which 
is limited to the actual constitution of this earth 
cannot be allowed to proceed one step beyond the 
present order of things." ^ 

And so clear is he, that no causes beside such 
as are now in operation are needed to account for 
the character and disposition of the components 
of the crust of the earth, that he says, broadly 
and boldly: — " . . . There is no part of the 
earth which has not had the same origin, so 
far as this consists in that earth being collected 
at the bottom of the sea, and afterwards pro- 
duced, as land, along with masses of melted 
substances, by the operation of mineral causes." ^ 

But other influences were at work upon Hutton 
beside those of a mind logical by nature, and 
scientific by sound training; and the pecuhar 
turn which his speculations took seems to me 
to be unintelligible, unless these be taken into 
account. The arguments of the French astro- 
nomers and mathematicians, which, at the end 
of the last century, were held to demonstrate 
the existence of a compensating arrangement 
among the celestial bodies, whereby all pertiirba- 
1 The Theory of the Earth, vol. i. p. 281. = Ibid. p. 371. 



310 GEOLOGICAL REFORM j 

tions eventually reduced themselves to oscilla- 
tions on each side of a mean position, and the 
stability of the solar system was secured, had 
evidently taken strong hold of Button's mind. 

In those oddly constructed periods which seem 
to have prejudiced many persons against reading 
his works, but which are full of that peculiar, if 
unattractive, eloquence which flows from mastery 
of the subject, Hutton says : — 

" We have now got to the end of our reasoning ; 
we have no data further to conclude immediately 
from that which actually is. But we have got 
enough; we have the satisfaction to find, that 
in Nature there is wisdom, system, and consist- 
ency. For having, in the natural history of this 
earth, seen a succession of worlds, we may from 
this conclude that there is a system in Nature; 
in like manner as, from seeing revolutions of the 
planets, it is concluded, that there is a system by 
which they are intended to continue those revolu- 
tions. But if the succession of worlds is estab- 
lished in the system of nature, it is in vain to 
look for anything higher in the origin of the 
earth. The result, therefore, of this physical 
inquiry is, that we find no vestige of a begiiming, 
— no prospect of an end." ^ 

Yet another influence worked strongly upon 
Hutton. Like most philosophers of his age, he 
coquetted with those final causes which have 
1 The Theory of the Earth, vol. i. p. 200. 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 311 

been named ban-en virgins, but which might 
be more fitly termed the hetairce of philosophy, 
so constantly have they led men astray. The 
final cause of the existence of the world is, for 
Hutton, the production of life and intelligence. 

"We have now considered the globe of this 
earth as a machine, constructed upon chemical 
as well as mechanical principles, by which its 
difierent parts are all adapted, in form, in quality, 
and in quantity, to a certain end; an end at- 
tained with certainty or success; and an end 
from which we may perceive wisdom, in contem- 
plating the means employed. 

" But is this world to be considered thus 
merely as a machine, to last no longer than its 
parts retain their present position, their proper 
forms and qualities? Or may it not be also 
considered as an organised body? such as has 
a constitution in which the necessary decay of 
the machine is naturally repaired, in the exertion 
of those productive powers by which it had 
been formed. 

" This is the view in which we are now to 
examine the globe ; to see if there be, in the 
constitution of this world, a reproductive opera- 
tion, by which a ruined constitution may be 
again repaired, and a duration or stabiHty thus 
procured to the machine, considered as a world 
sustaining plants and animals."^ 

' TJie Theory of the Earth, vol. i. pp. 16, 17, 



Sl2 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

Kirwan, and the other Philistines of the day, 
accused Hutton of declaring that his theory 
implied that the world never had a beginning, 
and never differed in condition from its present 
state. Nothing could be more grossly unjust, as 
he expressly guards himself against any such 
conclusion in the following terms : — 

" But in thus tracing back the natural opera- 
tions which have succeeded each other, and mark 
to us the course of time past, we come to a period 
in which we cannot see any farther. This, how- 
ever, is not the beginning of the operations which 
proceed in time and according to the wise 
economy of this world ; nor is it the estabhshing 
of that which, in the course of time, had no 
beginning; it is only the Hmit of our retrospec- 
tive view of those operations which have come 
to pass in time, and have been conducted by 
supreme intelligence." ^ 

I have spoken of Uniformitarianism as the doc- 
trine of Hutton and of Lyell. If I have quoted 
the older writer rather than the newer, it is be- 
cause his works are little known, and his claims 
on our veneration too frequently forgotten, not 
because I desire to dim the fame of his eminent 
successor. Few of the present generation of 
geologists have read Playfair's " Illustrations," 
fewer still the original " Theory of the Earth " ; the 
more is the pity ; but which of us has not thumbed 
' The Theory of the Earth, vol. i. p. 223. 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 313 

every page of the " Principles of Geology " ? I 
think that he who writes fairly the history of his 
own progress in geological thought, will not be 
able to separate his debt to Hutton from his 
obUgations to Lyell ; and the history of the pro- 
gress of individual geologists is the history of 
geology. 

No one can doubt that the influence of uniform- 
itarian views has been enormous, and, in the 
main, most beneficial and favourable to the 
progress of sound geology. 

Nor can it be questioned that Uniformitarianism 
has even a stronger title than Catastrophism to 
call itself the geological speculation of Britain, or, 
if you will, British popular geology. For it is 
eminently a British doctrine, and has even now 
made comparatively Uttle progress on the con- 
tinent of Europe. Nevertheless, it seems to me 
to be open to serious criticism upon one of its 
aspects. 

I have shown how unjust was the insinuation 
that Hutton denied a beginning to the world. 
But it would not be unjust to say that he persist- 
ently in practice, shut his eyes to the existence 
of that prior and different state of things which, 
in theory, he admitted ; and, in this aversion to 
look beyond the veil of stratified rocks, Lyell 
follows him. 

Hutton and Lyell alike agree in their indis- 
position to carry their speculations a step beyond 



314 GEOLOGICAL REFOEM x 

the period recorded in the raost ancient strata 
now open to observation in the crust of the earth. 
This is, for Hutton, " the point in which we can- 
not see any farther " ; while Lyell tells us, — 

"The astronomer may find good reasons for 
ascribing the earth's form to the original fluidity 
of the mass, in times long antecedent to the first 
iatroduction of living beings into the planet ; but 
the geologist must be content to regard the earliest 
monuments which it is his task to interpret, as 
belonging to a period when the crust had aheady 
acquired great solidity and thickness, probably as 
great as it now possesses, and when volcanic rocks, 
not essentially differing from those now produced, 
were formed from time to time, the intensity of 
volcanic heat being neither greater nor less than 
it is now." ^ 

And again, " As geologists, we learn that it is 
not only the present condition of the globe which 
has been suited to the accommodation of myriads 
of living creatures, but that many former states 
also have been adapted to the organisation and 
habits of prior races of beings. The disposition of 
the seas, continents and islands, and the climates, 
have varied ; the species likewise have been 
changed ; and yet they have all been so modelled, 
on types analogous to those of existing plants and 
animals, as to indicate, throughout, a perfect 
harmony of design and unity of purpose. To 
1 Principles of Geology, vol. ii. p. 211. 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 315 

assume that the evidence of the beginning, or end, 
of so vast a scheme lies within the reach of our 
philosophical inquiries, or even of our speculations, 
appears to be inconsistent with a just estimate of 
the relations which subsist between the finite 
powers of man and the attributes of an infinite 
and eternal Being." ^ 

The limitations implied in these passages appear 
to me to constitute the weakness and the logical 
defect of Uniformitarianism. No one wiU impute 
blame to Hutton that, in face of the imperfect 
condition, in his day, of those physical sciences 
which furnish the keys to the riddles of geology, 
he should have thought it practical wisdom to 
limit his theory to an attempt to account for " the 
present order of things " ; but I am at a loss to 
comprehend why, for all time, the geologist must 
be content to regard the oldest fossiliferous rocks 
as the ultima Thule of his science ; or what there 
is inconsistent with the relations between the 
finite and the infinite mind, in the assumption, 
that we may discern somewhat of the beginning, 
or of the end, of this speck in space we call our 
earth. The finite mind is certainly competent to 
trace out the development of the fowl within the 
Qgg ; and I know not on what ground it should 
find more difficulty in unravelling the complexities 
of the development of the earth. In fact, as Kant 

' Principles of Geology, vol. ii. p. 613. 



316 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

has well remarked,^ the cosmical process is really 
simpler than the biological. 

This attempt to limit, at a particular point, the 
progress of inductive and deductive reasoning 
from the things which are, to those which were — 
this faithlessness to its own logic, seems to me to 
have cost Uniformitarianism the place, as the 
permanent form of geological speculation, which 
it might otherwise have held. 

It remains that I should put before you what 
I understand to be the third phase of geological 
speculation — namely. Evolutionism. 

I shall not make what I have to say on this 
head clear, unless I diverge, or seem to diverge, for a 
while, from the direct path of my discourse, so far 
as to explain what I take to be the scope of geology 
itself I conceive geology to be the history of the 
earth, in precisely the same- sense as biology is 
the history of living beings ; and I trust you will 
not think that I am overpowered by the influence 
of a dominant pursuit if I say that I trace a close 
analogy between thise two histories. 

If I study a Uving being, under what heads 
does the knowledge I obtain fall ? I can learn its 
structure, or what we call its Anatomy ; and its 

^ "Man darf es sich also nicht befremden lassen, wenn icli 
mich unterstehe zu sagen, dass eher die Bildung aller Himmels- 
kbrper, die Ursaclie ihrer Bewegungen, kurz der Ursprung der 
ganzen gegenwartigen Verfassung des Weltbaues werden konnen 
eingesehen werden, ehe die Erzeugung eiues einzigen Krautes oder 
einer Raupe aus meehanischen Griinden, deutlich und vollstandig 
kund werden wird." — Kakt's SiimmiUche Werke, Bd. i. p. 220. 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 317 

Development, or the series of changes which it 
passes through to acquire its complete structure. 
Then I find that the living being has certain 
powers resulting from its own activities, and the 
interaction of these with the activities of other 
things — the knowledge of which is Physiology. 
Beyond this the Hving being has a position in 
space and time, which is its Distribution. All 
these form the body of ascertainable facts which 
constitute the status qioo of the Hving creature. 
But these facts have ■ their causes ; and the 
ascertainment of these causes is the doctrine of 
.(Etiology. 

If we consider what is knowable about the 
earth, we shall find that such earth-knowledge — 
if I may so translate the word geology — falls into 
the same categories. 

What is termed stratigraphical geology is neither 
more nor less than the anatomy of the earth ; and 
the history of the succession of the formations is 
the history of a succession of such anatomies, or 
corresponds with development, as distinct from 
generation. 

The internal heat of the earth, the elevation 
and depression of its crust, its belchings forth 
of vapours, ashes, and lava, are its activities, in as 
strict a sense as are warmth and the movements 
and products of respiration the activities of an 
animal. The phenomena of the seasons, of the 
trade winds, of the Gulf-stream, are as much the 



318 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

results of the reaction between these inner 
activities and outward forces, as are the budding 
of the leaves in spring and their falhng in autumn 
the effects of the interaction between the organ- 
isation of a plant and the solar light and heat. 
And, as the study of the activities of the living being 
is called its physiology, so are these phenomena 
the subject-matter of an analogous telluric physio- 
logy, to which we sometimes give the name of 
meteorology, sometimes that of physical geography, 
sometimes that of geology. Again, the earth has 
a place in space and in time, and relations to 
other bodies in both these respects, which con- 
stitute its distribution. This subject is usually 
left to the astronomer; but a knowledge of its 
broad outlines seems to me to be an essential 
constituent of the stock of geological ideas. 

All that can be ascertained concerning the 
structure, succession of conditions, actions, and posi- 
tion in space of the earth, is the matter of fact of its 
natural history. But, as in biology, there remains 
the matter of reasoning from these facts to their 
causes, which is just as much science as the other, 
and indeed more ; and this constitutes geological 
aetiology. 

Having regard to this general scheme of geo- 
logical knowledge and thought, it is obvious that 
geological speculation may be, so to speak, ana- 
tomical and developmental speculation, so far as it 
relates to points of stratigraphical arrangement 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 319 

which are out of reach of direct observation; or, 
it may be physiological speculation so fax as it 
relates to undetermined problems relative to the 
activities of the earth ; or, it may be distributional 
speculation, if it deals with modifications of the 
earth's place in space ; or, finally, it will be a?tio- 
logical speculation if it attempts to deduce the 
history of the world, as a whole, fi-om the known 
properties of the matter of the earth, in the con- 
ditions in which the earth has been placed. 

For the purposes of the present discourse I may 
take this last to be what is meant by "geological 
speculation." 

Now Uniformitarianism, as we have seen, tends 
to ignore geological speculation in this sense 
altogether. 

The one point the catastrophists and the uni- 
formitarians agreed upon, when this Society was 
founded, was to ignore it. And you wiU find, if 
you look back into our records, that our revered 
fathers in geology plumed themselves a good de^ 
upon the practical sense and wisdom of this 
proceeding. As a temporary measure, I do not 
presume to challenge its wisdom; but in all 
organised bodies temporary changes are apt to 
produce permanent effects ; and as time has 
shpped by, altering aU the conditions which may 
have made such mortification of the scientific flesh 
desirable, I think the effect of the stream of cold 
water which has steadily flowed over geological 



320 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

speculation within these walls has been of doubtful 
beneficence. 

The sort of geological speculation to which I am 
now referring (geological aetiology, in short) was 
created, as a science, by that famous philosopher 
Immanuel Kant, when, in 1775, he wrote bis 
" General Natural History and Theory of the 
Celestial Bodies ; or an Attempt to account for 
the Constitutional and the Mechanical Origin of 
the Universe upon Newtonian principles." ^ 

In this very remarkable but seemingly little- 
known treatise,^ Kant expounds a complete cosmo- 
gony, in the shape of a theory of the causes which 
have led to the development of the universe 
from diffused atoms of matter endowed with simple 
attractive and repulsive forces. 

" Give me matter," says Kant, " and I will build 
the world ; " and he proceeds to deduce from the 
simple data from which he starts, a doctrine in all 
essential respects similar to the well-known 
" Nebular Hypothesis " of Laplace.^ He accounts 
for the relation of the masses and the densities of 
the planets to their distances from the sun, for the 
eccentricities of their orbits, for their rotations, for 



^ Grant {Sistory of Physical Astronomy, p. 574) makes but 
the briefest reference to Kant. 

2 " Allgemeine Natuvgesohichfe und Theorje des Himmels ; 
Oder Versuch von der Verfassung und dem mechanisohen 
Ursprunge des ganzen Weltgebaudes nach Newton'seben Grand- 
satzen abgehandelt. " — Kant's Sammtliche Werke, Bd. i. p. 
207. ' Systime du Monde, tome ii. chap. 6, 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 321 

their satellites, for the general agreement in the 
direction of rotation among the celestial bodies, for 
Saturn's ring, and for the zodiacal light. He finds 
in each system of worlds, indications that the 
attractive force of the central mass will eventually 
destroy its organisation, by concentrating upon 
itself the matter of the whole system ; but, as the 
result of this concentration, he argues for the 
development of an amount of heat which will 
dissipate the mass once more into a molecular 
chaos such as that in which it began. 

Kant pictures to himself the universe as once 
an infinite expansion of formless and diffused 
matter. At one point of this he supposes a single 
centre of attraction set up ; and, by strict deduc- 
tions from admitted dynamical principles, shows 
how this must result in the development of a 
prodigious central body, surrounded by systems 
of solar and planetary worlds in all stages of 
development. In vivid language, he depicts the 
great world-maelstrom, widening the margins of its 
prodigious eddy in the slow progress of millions of 
ages, gradually reclaiming more and more of the 
molecular waste, and converting chaos into cosmos. 
But what is gained at the margin is lost in the 
centre; the attractions of the central systems 
bring their constituents together, which then, by 
the heat evolved, are converted once more into 
molecular chaos. Thus the worlds that are, lie 
between the ruins of the worlds that have been, 

VOL. vin y 



322 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

and the chaotic materials of the worlds that shall 
be; and in spite of all waste and destruction, 
Cosmos is extending his borders at the expense of 
Chaos. 

Kant's further application of his views to the 
earth itself is to be found in his " Treatise on 
Physical Geography "^ (a term under which the 
then unknown science of geology was included), a 
subject which he had studied with very great 
care and on which he lectured for many years. 
The fourth section of the first part of this Treatise 
is called '' History of the great Changes which 
the Earth has formerly undergone and is still 
undergoing," and is, in fact, a brief and pregnant 
essay upon the principles of geology. Kant gives 
an account first " of the gi'adual changes which 
are now taking place " under the heads of such as 
are caused by earthquakes, such as are brought 
about by rain and rivers, such as are effected by 
the sea, such as are produced by winds and frost ; 
and, finally, such as result from the operations of 
man. 

The second part is devoted to the " Memorials 
of the Changes which the Earth has undergone in 
remote Antiquity." These are enumerated as : — 
A. Proofs that the sea formerly covered the whole 
earth. B. Proofs that the sea has often been 
changed into dry land and then again into sea. 
C. A discussion of the various theories of the 
' Kant's Sdmmtliche Werke, Bd. viii. p. 145. 



X GEOLOGICAL' REFORM 323 

earth put forward by Scheuchzer, Moro, Bonnet, 
Woodward, White, Leibnitz, Linnaeus, and Buffon. 

The third part contains an " Attempt to give a 
sound explanation of the ancient history of the 
earth." 

I suppose that it would be very easy to pick 
holes in the details of Kant's speculations, whether 
cosmological, or specially telluric, in their appli- 
cation. But for all that, he seems to me to have 
been the first person to frame a complete system 
of geological speculation by founding the doctrine 
of evolution. 

With as much truth as Hutton, Kant could say, 
" I take things just as I find them at present, and, 
from these, I reason with regard to that which 
must have been." Like Hutton, he is never tired 
of pointing out that " in Nature there is wisdom, 
system, and consistency." And, as in these great 
principles, so in believing that the cosmos has a 
reproductive operation " by which a ruined consti- 
tution may be repaired," he forestalls Hutton; 
while, on the other hand, Kant is true to science. 
He knows- no bounds to geological speculation 
but those of the intellect. He reasons back to a 
beginning of the present state of things; he 
admits the possibility of an end. 

I have said that the three schools of geological 
speculation which I have termed Cata^trophism, 
Uniformitarianism, and Evolutionism, are com- 
monly supposed to be antagonistic to one another ; 

T 2 



324 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

and I presume it will have become obvious that 
in my belief, the last is destined to swallow up 
the other two. But it is proper to remark that 
each of the latter has kept alive the tradition of 
precious truths. 

Catastrophism has insisted upon the existence 
of a practically unlimited bank of force, on which 
the theorist might draw; and it has cherished the 
idea of the development of the earth from a state 
in which its form, and the forces which it exerted, 
were very different from those we now know. 
That such difference of form and power once 
existed is a necessary part of the doctrine of 
evolution. 

UNiFORMiTARiANiSM:,on the other hand, has with 
equal justice insisted upon a practically unlimited 
bank of time, ready to discount any quantity of 
hypothetical paper. It has kept before our eyes 
the power of the infinitely little, time being 
granted, and has compelled us to exhaust known 
causes, before flying to the unknown. 

To my mind there appears to be no sort of 
necessary theoretical antagonism between Cata- 
strophism and Uniformitarianism. On the contrary, 
it is very conceivable that catastrophes may be 
part and parcel of uniformity. Let me illustrate 
my case by analogy. The working of a clock is a 
model of uniform action ; good time-keeping 
means uniformity of action. But the striking 
of the clock is essentially a catastrophe; the 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 325 

hammer might be made to blow up a barrel of 
gunpowder, or turn on a deluge of water ; and, by 
proper arrangement, the clock, instead of marking 
the hours, might strike at all sorts of irregular 
periods, never twice alike, in the intervals, force, 
or number of its blows. Nevertheless, all these 
irregular, and apparently lawless, catastrophes 
would be the result of an absolutely uniformitarian 
action ; and we might have two schools of clock- 
theorists, one studying the hammer and the other 
the pendulum. 

Still less is there any necessary antagonism 
between either of these doctrines and that of 
Evolution, which embraces all that is sound in 
both Catastrophism and Uniformitarianism, while 
it rejects the arbitrary assumptions of the one and 
the, as arbitrary, limitations of the other. Nor is 
the value of the doctrine of Evolution to the philo- 
sophic thinker diminished by the fact that it applies 
the same method to the living and the not-living 
world ; and embraces, in one stupendous analogy, 
the growth of a solar system from molecular chaos, 
the shaping of the earth from the nebulous cub- 
hood of its youth, through innumerable changes 
and immeasurable ages, to its present form ; and 
the development of a living being from the shape- 
less mass of protoplasm we term a germ. 

I do not know whether Evolutionism can claim 
that amount of cuiTency which would entitle it 
to be called British popular geology ; but, more 



326 GEOLOGICAL REFORM X 

or less vaguely, it is assuredly present in the 
minds of most geologists. 

Such being the three phases of geological 
speculation, we are now in position to inquire 
which of these it is that Sir William Thomson 
calls upon us to reform in the passages which I 
have cited. 

,It is obviously Uniformitarianism which the 
distinguished physicist takes to be the representa- 
tive of geological speculation in general. And 
thus a first issue is raised, inasmuch as many 
persons (and those not the least thoughtful among 
tlie younger geologists) do not accept strict Uni- 
formitarianism as the final form of geological 
speculation. We should say, if Hutton and 
Playfair declare the course of the world to have 
been always the same, point out the fallacy by all 
means ; but, in so doing, do not imagine that 
you are proving modern geology to be in opposi- 
tion to natural philosophy. I do not suppose 
that, at the present day, any geologist would be 
found to maintain absolute Uniformitarianism, 
to deny that the rapidity of the rotation of the 
earth may be diminishing, that the sun may be 
waxing dim, or that the earth itself 7nay be 
cooling. Most of us, I suspect, are Gallios, " who 
care for none of these things," being of opinion 
that, true or fictitious, they have made no prac- 
tical difference to the earth, during the period 



X GEOLOGICAL EEFOEM 327 

of which a record is preserved in stratified 
deposits. 

The accusation that we have been running 
counter to the principles of natural philosophy, 
therefore, is devoid of foundation. The only 
question which can arise is whether we have, or 
have not, been tacitly making assumptions which 
are in opposition to certain conclusions which 
may be drawn from those principles. And this 
question subdivides itself into two : — the first, 
are we really contravening such conclusions ? the 
second, if we are, are those conclusions so firmly 
based that we may not contravene them ? I reply 
in the negative to both these questions, and I 
wiU give you my reasons for so doing. Sir 
William Thomson believes that he is able to 
prove, by physical reasonings, " that the existing 
state of things on the earth, Ufe on the earth — all 
geological history showing continuity of life 
— must be limited within some such period 
of time as one hundred million years " {loc. 
cit. p. 25). 

The first inquiry which arises plainly is, has it 
ever been denied that this period may be enough 
for the purposes of geology ? 

The discussion of this question is greatly 
embarrassed by the vagueness with which the 
assumed limit is, I will not say defined, but 
indicated, — " some such period of past time as 
one hundred million years." Now does this mean 



328 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

that it may have been two, or three, or four 
hundred million years ? Because this really 
makes all the difference. ^ 

I presume that 100,000 feet may be taken as a 
full allowance for the total thickness of stratified 
rocks containing traces of life ; 100,000 divided 
by 100,000,000 = O'OOl. Consequently, the deposit 
of 100,000 feet of stratified rock in 100,000,000 
years means that the deposit has taken place 
at the rate of xoW of a foot, or, say, gJ^ of an 
inch, per annum. 

Well, I do not know that any one is prepared 
to maintain that, even making all needful allow- 
ances, the stratified rocks may not have been 
formed, on the average, at the rate of -^ of an 
inch per annum. I suppose that if such could be 
shown to be the limit of world-growth, we could 
put up with the allowance without feeling that 
our speculations had undergone any revolution. 
And perhaps, after aU, the qualifying phrase 
" some such period " may not necessitate the 
assumption of more than y^^ or -^^ or -^-^ of 
an inch of deposit per year, which, of course, 
would give us still more ease and comfort. 

But, it may be said, that it is biology, and not 

geology, which asks for so much time — that the 

succession of life demands vast intervals; but 

' Sir William Thomson implies (loe. cit. p. 16) that the pre- 
cise time is of no consequence : "the piinciple is the same"; 
but, as the principle is admitted, the whole discussion turns on 
its practical results. 



X GEOLOGICAL BEFOEM 329 

this appears to me to be reasoning in a circle. 
Biology takes her time from geology. The only 
reason we have for believing in the slow rate of 
the change in living forms is the fact that they 
persist through a series of deposits which, geology 
informs us, have taken a long while to make. 
If the geological clock is wrong, all the naturalist 
will have to do is to modify his notions of the 
rapidity of change accordingly. And I venture 
to point out that, when we are told that the 
limitation of the period during which living 
beings have inhabited this planet to one, two, or 
three hundred million years requires a complete 
revolution in geological speculation, the onus 
prohandi rests on the maker of the assertion, 
who brings forward not a shadow of evidence 
in its support. 

Thus, if we accept the limitation of time placed 
before us by Sir W. Thomson, it is not obvious, 
on the face of the matter, that we shall have to 
alter, or reform, our ways in any appreciable 
degree ; and we may therefore proceed with much 
calmness, and indeed much indifference, as to the 
result, to inquire whether that limitation is 
justified by the arguments employed in its 
support. 

These arguments are three in number: — 
I. The first is based upon the undoubted fact 
that the tides tend to retard the rate of the 
earth's rotation upon its axis. That this must 



330 GEOLOGICAL EEFOEM x 

be so is obvious, if one considers, roughly, that 
the tides result from the pull which the sun 
and the moon exert upon the sea, causing it 
to act as a sort of break upon the rotating solid 
earth. 

Kant, who was by no means a mere " abstract 
philosopher," but a good mathematician and well 
versed in the physical science of his time, not 
only proved this in an essay of exquisite clear- 
ness and intelligibility, now more than a century 
old, ^ but deduced from it some of its more im- 
portant consequences, such as the constant turn- 
ing of one face of the moon towards the earth. 

But there is a long step from the demonstration 
of a tendency to the estimation of the practical 
value of that tendency, which is all with which 
we are at present concerned. The facts bearing 
on this point appear to stand as follows : — 

It is a matter of observation that the moon's 
mean motion is (and has for the last 3,000 years 
been) undergoing an acceleration, relatively to 
the rotation of the earth. Of course this may 
result from one of two causes: the moon may 
really have been moving more swiftly in its orbit ; 
or the earth may have been rotating more slowly 
on its axis. 

' " Untersuchung der Frage ol) die Erde in ihrer Unidrehung 
um die Achse, wodurch sie die Abwecliselung des Tages und der 
Nacht hervorbringt, einige Veriindening seit don ersten Zeitoii 
ihres Ursprunges erlitten habe, &c." — Kant's Sdmmtliche 
IFcrke, Bd. i. p. 178. 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 331 

Laplace believed he had accounted for this phe- 
nomenon by the fact that the eccentricity of the 
earth's orbit has been diminishing throughout 
these 3,000 years. This would produce a diminu- 
tion of the mean attraction of the sun on the 
moon; or, in other words, an increase in the 
attraction of the earth on the moon; and, con- 
sequently, an increase in the rapidity of the orbital 
motion of the latter body. Laplace, therefore, 
laid the responsibility of the acceleration upon 
the moon, and if his views were correct, the tidal 
retardation must either be insignificant in amount, 
or be counteracted by some other agency. 

Our great astronomer, Adams, however, appears 
to have found a flaw in Laplace's calculation, and 
to have shown that only half the observed re- 
tardation could be accounted for in the way he 
had suggested. There remains, therefore, the 
other half to be accounted for ; and here, in the 
absence of all positive knowledge, three sets of 
hypotheses have been suggested. 

(a.) M. Delaunay suggests that the earth is at 
fault, in consequence of the tidal retardation. 
Messrs. Adams, Thomson, and Tait work out this 
suggestion, and, "on a certain assumption as to 
the proportion of retardations due to the sun and 
moon," find the earth may lose twenty-two seconds 
of time in a century from this cause.^ 

(6.) But M. Dufour suggests that the retardation 

' Sir W. Thomson, loc. cit. p. 14. 



332 GEOLOGICAL EEFORM x 

of the earth (which is hypothetically assumed to 
exist) may be due in part, or wholly, to the increase 
of the moment of inertia of the earth by meteors 
falling upon its surface. This suggestion also 
meets with the entire approval of Sir W. Thomson, 
who shows that meteor-dust, accumulating at the 
rate of one foot in 4,000 years, would account for 
the remainder of retardation.^ 

(c.) Thirdly, Sir W. Thomson brings forward an 
hypothesis of his own with respect to the cause 
of the hypothetical retardation of the earth's 
rotation : — 

"Let us suppose ice to melt from the polar 
regions (20° round each pole, we may say) to the 
extent of something more than a foot thick, 
enough to give I'l foot of water over those areas, 
or 0'006 of a foot of water if spread over the whole 
globe, which would, in reality, raise the sea-level 
by only some such undiscoverable difference as 
three-fourths of an inch or an inch. This, or the 
reverse, which we believe might happen any year, 
and could certainly not be detected without far 
more accurate observations and calculations for 
the mean sea-level than any hitherto made, would 
slacken or quicken the earth's rate as a timekeeper 
by one-tenth of a second per year." ^ 

I do not presume to throw the slightest doubt 
upon the accuracy of any of the calculations made 
by such distinguished mathematicians as those 
1 Sir W. Thomson, loc. cit. p. 27. Ibid. 



X GEOLOGICAL EEFOEM 333 

who have made the suggestions I have cited. On 
the contrary, it is necessary to my argument to 
assume that they are all correct. But I desire to 
point out that this seems to be one of the many 
cases in which the admitted accuracy of mathe- 
matical process is allowed to throw a wholly 
inadmissible appearance of authority over the 
results obtained by them. Mathematics may be 
compared to a mill of exquisite workmanship, 
which grinds you stuff of any degree of fineness ; 
but, nevertheless, what you get out depends upon 
what you put in ; and as the grandest mill in the 
world will not extract wheat-flour from peascods, 
so pages of formulae will not get a definite result 
out of loose data. 

In the present instance it appears to be 
admitted : — 

1. That it is not absolutely certain, after all, 
whether the moon's mean motion is undergoing 
acceleration, or the earth's rotation retardation. '^ 
And yet this is the key of the whole position. 

2. If the rapidity of the earth's rotation is 
diminishing, it is not certain how much of that 
retardation is due to tidal friction, how much to 
meteors, — how much to possible excess of melting 
over accumulation of polar ice, during the period 
covered by observation, which amounts, at the 
outside, to not more than 2,600 years. 

' It will be understood tliat I do not wish to deny that the 
earth's rotation may be undergoing retardation. 



334 GEOLOGICAL REFORM x 

3. The effect of a different distribution of land 
and water in modifying the retardation caused by- 
tidal friction, and of reducing it, under some cir- 
cumstances, to a minimum, does not appear to be 
taken into account. 

4. During the Miocene epoch the polar ice was 
certainly many feet thinner than it has been dur- 
ing, or since, the Glacial epoch. Sir W. Thomson 
tells us that the accumulation of something more 
than a foot of ice around the poles (which implies 
the withdrawal of, say, an inch of water from the 
general surface of the sea) will cause the earth 
to rotate quicker by one-tenth of a second per 
annum. It would appear, therefore, that the earth 
may have been rotating, throughout the whole 
period which has elapsed from the commencement 
of the Glacial epoch down to the present time, one, 
or more, seconds per annum quicker than it 
rotated during the Miocene epoch. 

But, according to Sir W. Thomson's calculation, 
tidal retardation will only account for a retardation 
of 22" in a century, or -j^%- (say -J) of a second per 
annum. 

Thus, assuming that the accumulation of polar 
ice since the Miocene epoch has only been suffi- 
cient to produce ten times the effect of a coat of 
ice one foot thick, we shall have an accelerating 
cause which covers all the loss from tidal action, 
and leaves a balance of f of a second per annum 
in the way of acceleration. 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 335 

If tidal retardation can be thus checked and 
overthrown by other temporary conditions, what 
becomes of the confident assertion, based upon the 
assumed uniformity of tidal retardation, that ten 
thousand million years ago the earth must have 
been rotating more than twice as fast as at 
present, and, therefore, that we geologists are 
" in direct opposition to the principles of Natural 
Philosophy " if we spread geological history over 
that time ? 

II. The second argument is thus stated by Sir 
W. Thomson : — " An article, by myself, published 
in ' Macmillan's Magazine ' for March 1862, on the 
age of the sun's heat, explains results of investiga- 
tion into various questions as to possibilities 
regarding the amount of heat that the sun could 
have, dealing with it as you would with a stone, or a 
piece of matter, only taking into account the sun's 
dimensions, which showed it to be possible that 
the sun may have already illuminated the earth 
for as many as one hundred million years, but at 
the same time rendered it almost certain that he 
had not illuminated the earth for five hundred 
millions of years. The estimates here are neces- 
sarily very vague ; but yet, vague as they are, I do 
not know that it is possible, upon any reasonable 
estimate founded on known properties of matter, 
to say that we can believe the sun has really illum- 
inated the earth for five hundred million years." ^ 

' ioc. cit. p. 20. 



336 GEOLOGICAL REFORM X 

I do not wish to "Hansardise" Sir William 
Thomson by laying much stress on the fact that, 
only fifteen years ago he entertained a totally differ- 
ent view of the origin of the sun's heat, and 
believed that the energy radiated from year to 
year was supplied from year to year — a doctrine 
which would have suited Hutton perfectly. But 
the fact that so eminent a physical philosopher 
has, thus recently, held views opposite to those 
which he now entertains, and that he confesses his 
own estimates to be '' very vague," justly entitles 
us to disregard those estimates, if any distinct 
facts on our side go against them. However, I am 
not aware that such facts exist. As I have already 
said, for anything I know, one, two, or three hun- 
dred millions of years may serve the needs of 
geologists perfectly well. 

III. The third line of argument is based upon 
the temperature of the interior of the earth. Sir 
W. Thomson refers to certain investigations which 
prove that the present thermal condition of the 
interior of the earth implies either a heating of 
the earth within the last 20,000 years of as much 
as 100° F., or a greater heating all over the surface 
at some time further back than 20,000 years, and 
then proceeds thus : — 

" Now, are geologists prepared to admit that, at 
some time within the last 20,000 years, there has 
been all over the earth so high a temperature as 
that ? I presume not ; no geologist — no modern 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 337 

geologist — would for a moment admit the hypo- 
thesis that the present state of underground heat 
is due to a heating of the surface at so late a 
period as 20,000 years ago. If that is not admitted 
we are driven to a greater heat at some time more 
than 20,000 years ago. A greater heating all 
over the surface than 100° Fahrenheit would kill 
nearly all existing plants and animals, I may 
safely say. Are modern geologists prepared to 
say that all life was killed off the earth 50,000, 
100,000, or 200,000 years ago ? For the uniformity 
theory, the further back the time of high surface- 
temperature is put the better; but the further 
back the time of heating, the hotter it must have 
been. The best for those who draw most largely 
on time is that which puts it furthest back ; and 
that is the theory that the heating was enough to 
melt the whole. But even if it was enough to 
melt the whole, we must still admit some limit, 
such as fifty milKon years, one hundred million 
years, or two or three hundred million years ago. 
Beyond that we cannot go." ^ 

It will be observed that the " limit " is once 
again of the vaguest, ranging from 60,000,000 
years to 300,000,000. And the reply is, once 
more, that, for anything that can be proved to the 
contrary, one or two hundred million years might 
serve the purpose, even of a thoroughgoing Hut- 
tonian uniformitarian, very well. 

' Loo. cU. p. 24. 

VOL. VIII 5; 



338 GEOLOGICAL REFORM X 

But if, on the other hand, the 100,000,000 or 
200,000,000 years appear to be insufficient for 
geological purposes, we must closely criticise the 
method by which the limit is reached. The 
argument is simple enough. Assuming the earth 
to be nothing but a coohng mass, the quantity of 
heat lost per year, supposing the rate of cooling to 
have been uniform, multiplied by any given 
number of years, will be given the minimum 
temperature that number of years ago. 

But is the earth nothing but a cooling mass, 
" hke a hot-water jar such as is used in carriages," 
or " a globe of sandstone," and has its cooling 
been uniform ? An affirmative answer to both 
these questions seems to be necessary to the 
validity of the calculations on which Sir W. 
Thomson lays so much stress. 

Nevertheless it surely may be urged that such 
affirmative answers are purely hypothetical, and 
that other suppositions have an equal right to 
consideration. 

For example, is it not possible that, at the 
prodigious temperature which would seem to 
exist at 100 miles below the surface, all the 
metallic bases may behave as mercury does at a 
red heat, when it refuses to combine with oxygen ; 
while, nearer the surface, and therefore at a lower 
temperature, they may enter into combination (as 
mercury does with oxygen a few degrees below its 
boiling-point), and so give rise to a heat totally 



X GEOLOGICAL REFORM 339 

distinct from that which they possess as cooUng 
bodies? And has it not also been proved by 
recent researches that the quahty of the atmo- 
sphere may immensely affect its permeability to 
heat ; and, consequently, profoundly modify the 
rate of cooling the globe as a whole ? 

I do not think it can be denied that such con- 
ditions may exist, and may so greatly affect the 
supply, and the loss, of terrestrial heat as to 
destroy the value of any calculations which leave 
them out of sight. 

My functions as your advocate are at an end. I 
speak with more than the sincerity of a mere 
advocate when I express the belief that the case 
against us has entirely broken down. The cry for 
reform which has been raised without, is super- 
fluous, inasmuch as we have long been reforming 
from within, with all needful speed. And the 
critical examination of the grounds upon which 
the very grave charge of opposition to the principles 
of Natural Philosophy has been brought against 
us, rather shows that we have exercised a wise 
discrimination in declining, for the present, to 
meddle with our foundations. 



XI 



PALEONTOLOGY AND THE DOCTEINE 
OF EVOLUTION 

[1870] 

It is now eight years since, in the absence of 
the late Mr. Leonard Horner, who then presided 
over us, it fell to my lot, as one of the Secretaries 
of this Society, to draw up the customary Annual 
Address. I availed myself of the opportunity to 
endeavour to " take stock " of that portion of the 
science of biology which is commonly called 
" palaeontology," as it then existed ; and, dis- 
cussing one after another the doctrines held by 
palaeontologists, I put before you the results of 
my attempts to sift the well-established from 
the hypothetical or the doubtful. Permit me 
briefly to recall to your minds what those results 
were : — 

1. The living population of all parts of the 
earth's surface which have yet been examined 



XT PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 341 

has undergone a succession of changes which, 
upon the whole, have been of a slow and gradual 
character. 

2. When the fossil remains which are the 
evidences of these successive changes, as they 
have occurred in any two more or less distant 
parts of the surface of the earth, are com- 
pared, they exhibit a certain broad and general 
parallelism. In other words, certain forms of 
life in one locality occur in the same general 
order of succession as, or are homotaxial with, 
similar forms in the other locality. 

3. Homotaxis is not to be held identical with 
synchronism without independent evidence. It 
is possible that similar, or even identical, faunae 
and florae in two different localities may be of 
extremely different ages, if the term " age '' is 
used in its proper chronological sense. I stated 
that " geographical provinces, or zones, may have 
been as distinctly marked in the Palaeozoic epoch 
as at present ; and those seemingly sudden ap- 
pearances of new genera and species which we 
ascribe to new creation, may be simple results 
of migration." 

4. The opinion that the oldest known fossils 
are the earliest forms of life has no solid founda- 
tion. 

5. If we confine ourselves to positively ascer- 
tained facts, the total amount of change in the 
forms of animal and vegetable life, since the 



342 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION xi 

existence of such forms is recorded, is small. 
When compared with the lapse of time since 
the first appearance of these forms, the amount 
of change is wonderfully small. Moreover, in 
each great group of the animal and vegetable 
kingdoms, there are certain forms which I termed 
Persistent Types, which have remained, with 
but very little apparent change, from their first 
appearance to the present time. 

6. In answer to the question " What, then, does 
an impartial survey of the positively ascertained 
truths of palaeontology testify in relation to the 
common doctrines of progressive modification, 
which suppose that modification to have 
taken place by a necessary progress from more 
to less embryonic forms, from more to less general- 
ised types, within the limits of the period 
represented by the fossiliferous rocks ? " I reply, 
" It negatives these doctrines ; for it either 
show us no evidence of siich modification, oi 
demonstrates such modification as has occurred 
to have been very slight ; and, as to the nature 
of that modification, it yields no evidence what- 
soever that the earlier members of any long-con- 
tinued group were more generalised in structure 
than the later ones." 

I think that I cannot employ my last opportu- 
nity of addressing you, officially, more properly — 
I may say more dutifully — than in revising these 
old judgments with such help as further know- 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 343 

ledge and reflection, and an extreme desire to get 
at the truth, may afford me. 

1. With respect to the first proposition, I may- 
remark that whatever may be the case among the 
physical geologists, catastrophic palaeontologists 
are practically extinct. It is now no part of 
recognised geological doctrine that the species of 
one formation all died out and were replaced by a 
brand-new set in the next formation. On the 
contrary, it is generally, if not universally, agreed 
that the succession of life has been the result of a 
slow and gradual replacement of species by species ; 
and that all appearances of abruptness of change 
are due to breaks in the series of deposits, or other 
changes in physical conditions. The continuity of 
living forms has been unbroken from the earliest 
times to the present day. 

2, 3. The use of the word " homotaxis " instead 
of " synchronism " has not, so far as I know, found 
much favour in the eyes of geologists. I hope, 
therefore, that it is a love for scientific caution, 
and not mere personal affection for a bantling of 
my own, which leads me still to think that the 
change of phrase is of importance, and that 
the sooner it is made, the sooner shall we get rid 
of a number of pitfalls which beset the reasoner 
upon the facts and theories of geology. 

One of the latest pieces of foreign intelligence 
which has reached us is the information that the 
Austrian geologists have, at last, succumbed to 



844 PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLTfTION xi 

the weighty evidence which M. Barrande has 
accumulated, and have admitted the doctrine of 
colonies. But the admission of the doctrine of 
colonies implies the further admission that even 
identity of organic remains is no proof of the 
sjTichronism of the deposits which contain 
them. 

4. The discussions touching the Eozoon, which 
commenced in 1864, have abundantly justified the 
fourth proposition. In 1862, the oldest record of 
life was in the Cambrian rocks ; but if the Eozoon 
be, as Principal Dawson and Dr. Carpenter have 
shown so much reason for believing, the remains 
of a living being, the discovery of its true nature 
carried life back to a period which, as Sir William 
Logan has observed, is as remote from that during 
which the Cambrian rocks were deposited, as the 
Cambrian epoch itself is from the tertiaries. In 
other words, the ascertained duration of life upon 
the globe was nearly doubled at a stroke. 

5. The significance of persistent types, and of 
the small amount of change which has taken place 
even in those forms which can be shown to have 
been modified, becomes greater and greater in my 
eyes, the longer I occupy myself with the biology 
of the past. 

Consider how long a time has elapsed since the 
Miocene epoch. Yet, at that time there is reason 
to believe that every important group in every 
order of the Mammalia was represented. Even the 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 345 

comparatively scanty Eocene fauna yields examples 
of the orders Oheirojptera, Insectivora, Bodentia, and 
Perissodactyla ; of Artiodactyla under both the 
Ruminant and the Porcine modifications ; of Garni- 
vora, Cetacea, and Marsupialia. 

Or, if we go back to the older half of the Meso- 
zoic epoch, how truly surprising it is to find 
every order of the Beptilia, except the Ophidia, 
represented ; while some groups, such as the 
Ornithoscelida and the Pterosauria, more specialised 
than any which now exist, abounded. 

There is one division of the Amphibia which 
offers especially important evidence upon this 
point, inasmuch as it bridges over the gap between 
the Mesozoic and the Palaeozoic formations (often 
supposed to be of such prodigious magnitude), ex- 
tending, as it does, from the bottom of the Car- 
boniferous series to the top of the Trias, if not 
into the Lias. I refer to the Labyrinthodonts. 
As the Address of 1862 was passing through the 
press, I was able to mention, in a note, the 
discovery of a large Labyrinthodont, with well- 
ossified vertebrae, in the Edinburgh coal-field. 
Since that time eight or ten distinct genera of 
Labyrinthodonts have been discovered in the 
Carboniferous rocks of England, Scotland, and 
Ireland, not to mention the American forms 
described by Principal Dawson and Professor 
Cope. So that, at the present time, the Labyrin- 
thodont Fauna of the Carboniferous rocks is more 



346 PALvKONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION xi 

extensive and diversified than that of the Trias, 
while its chief types, so far as osteology enables 
us to judge, are quite as highly organised. Thus 
it is certain that a comparatively highly organised 
vertebrate type, such as that of the Labjrrintho- 
donts, is capable of persisting, with no considerable 
change, through the period represented by the 
vast deposits which constitute the Carboniferous, 
the Permian, and the Triassic formations. 

The very remarkable results which have been 
brought to light by the sounding and dredging 
operations, which have been carried on with such 
remarkable success by the expeditions sent out by 
our own, the American, and the Swedish Govern- 
ments, under the supervision of able naturalists, 
have a bearing in the same direction. These in- 
vestigations have demonstrated the existence, at 
great depths in the ocean, of living animals in 
some cases identical with, in others very similar 
to, those which are found fossilised in the white 
chalk. The Globigerinm, Cyatholiths, Cocco- 
spheres, Discoliths in the one are absolutely 
identical with those in the other ; there are 
identical, or closely analogous, species of Sponges, 
Echinoderms, and Brachiopods. Off the coast of 
Portugal, there now lives a species of Beryx, which, 
doubtless, leaves its bones and scales here and 
there in the Atlantic ooze, as its predecessor left 
its spoils in the mud of the sea of the Cretaceous 
epoch. 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AXD ETOLUTIOX "47 

Many jears ago^ I ventured to speak of the 
Atlantic mud as " modem chalk," and I know of 
no fact inconsistent with the view which Professor 
Wyville Thomson has advocated, that the modem 
chalk is not only the lineal descendant of the 
ancient chalk, hut that it remains, so to speak, in 
the possession of the ancestral estate : and that 
from the Cretaceous period (if not much earUer) 
to the present day, the deep sea has covered a 
large part of what is now the area of the Atlantic. 
But if Glohigerina, and Tercbraiuh caput-strpentis 
and Beryx, not to mention other forms of animal* 
and of plants, thus bridge over the interval 
between the present and the Mesozoic periods, is 
it possible that the majority of other hving things 
underwent a " sea-change into something new and 
strange " all at once ? 

6. Thus far I have endeavoured to expand and 
to enforce by fresh arguments, but not to modify 
in any important respect, the ideas submitted to 
you on a former occasion. But when I come to 
the propositions touching progressive modifica- 
tion, it appears to me, with the help of the new 
light which has broken from various quarters, that 
there is much ground for softening the somewhat 
Brutus-like severity with which, in 1862, I dealt 
with a doctrine, for the truth of which I should 
have been glad enough to be able to find a good 

' Soe an article in the Saturday Review, for 1858, on " Chalk, 
Ancient and Modern." 



348 PALiEONTOLOGT AND EVOLUTION xi 

foundation. So far, indeed, as the Invertehrata and 
the lower Vertehrata are concerned, the facts and 
the conclusions which are to be drawn from them 
appear to me to remain what they were. For 
anything that, as yet, appears to the contrary, the 
earliest known Marsupials may have been as 
highly organised as their living congeners; the 
Permian lizards show no signs of inferiority to 
those of the present day; the Labyrinthodonts 
cannot be placed below the living Salamander and 
Triton ; the Devonian Ganoids are closely related 
to Polypterus and to Lepidosiren. 

But when we turn to the higher Vertehrata, 
the results of recent investigations, however we 
may sift and criticise them, seem to me to leave a 
clear balance in favour of the doctrine of the 
evolution of living forms one from another. 
Nevertheless, in discussing this question, it is 
very necessary to discriminate carefully between 
the different kinds of evidence from fossil re- 
mains which are brought forward in favour of 
evolution. 

Every fossil which takes an intermediate place 
between forms of life already known, may be said, 
so far as it is intermediate, to be evidence in 
favour of evolution, inasmuch as it shows a possible 
road by which evolution may have taken place. 
But the mere discovery of such a form does not, 
in itself, prove that evolution took place by and 
through it, nor does it constitute more than pre- 



XI PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 849 

sumptive evidence in favour of evolution in 
general. Suppose A, B, C to be three forms, 
while B is intermediate in structure between A 
and C. Then the doctrine of evolution offers four 
possible alternatives. A may have become C by 
way of B ; or C may have become A by way of B ; 
or A and C may be independent modifications of 
B ; or A, B, and C may be independent modifica- 
. tions of some unknown D. Take the case of the 
Pigs, the Anoplotheridm, and the Ruminants. 
The AnoplotJieridw are intermediate between the 
first and the last ; but this does not tell us whether 
the Ruminants have come from the Pigs, or the 
Pigs from Ruminants, or both from Anoplotheridm, 
or whether Pigs, Ruminants, and Anoplotheridce 
alike may not have diverged from some common 
stock. 

But if it can be shown that A, B, and C exhibit 
successive stages in the degree of modification, or 
specialisation, of the same type ; and if, fiirther, it 
can be proved that they occur in successively 
newer deposits, A being in the oldest and C in 
the newest, then the intermediate character of B 
has quite another importance, and I should accept 
it, without hesitation, as a link in the genealogy 
of C. I should consider the burden of proof to be 
thrown upon any one who denied C to have been 
derived from A by way of B, or in some closely 
analogous fashion ; for it is always probable that 
one may not hit upon the exact line of filiation, 



350 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION xi 

and, in dealing with fossils, may mistake uncles 
and nephews for fathers and sons. 

I think it necessary to distinguish between the 
former and the latter classes of intermediate forms, 
as intercalary types and linear types. When I 
apply the former term, I merely mean to say that 
as a matter of fact, the form B, so named, is inter- 
mediate between the others, in the sense in which 
the Anoplotherium is intermediate between the 
Pigs and the Ruminants — without either affirming, 
or denying, any direct genetic relation between 
the three forms involved. When I apply the 
latter term, on the other hand, I mean to express 
the opinion that the forms A, B, and C constitute 
a line of descent, and that B is thus part of the 
lineage of C. 

From the time when Cuvier's wonderful re- 
searches upon the extinct Mammals of the Paris 
gypsum first made intercalary types known, and 
caused them to be recognised as such, the number 
of such forms has steadily increased among the 
higher Mammalia. Not only do we now know 
numerous intercalary forms of TJngnlata, but M. 
Gaudry's great monograph upon the fossils of 
Pikermi (which strikes me as one of the most 
perfect pieces of palgeontological work I have seen 
for a long time) shows us, among the Primates, 
Mesopitheeus as an intercalary form between the 
Semnopitheei and the Macaci ; and among the 
Carnivwa, Hymnictis and Ictitherium as intercalary. 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 351 

or, perhaps, linear types between the Viverridm 
and the Hymnidm. 

Hardly any order of the higher Mammalia 
stands so apparently separate and isolated from 
the rest as that of the Getacea ; though a cai-efiil 
consideration of the structure of the pionipede 
Garnivom, or Seals, shows, in them, many an 
approximation towards the still more completely 
marine mammals. The extinct Zctiglodon, how- 
ever, presents us with an intercalary form between 
the t3rpe of the Seals and that of the Whales. 
The skull of this great Eocene sea-monster, in 
fact, shows by the narrow and prolonged inter- 
orbital region ; the extensive union of the parietal 
bones in a sagittal suture; the well-developed 
nasal bones ; the distinct and large incisors 
implanted in premaxiUary bones, which take a 
full share in bounding the fore part of the gape ; 
the two-fanged molar teeth with triangular and 
serrated crowns, not exceeding five on each side 
in each jaw ; and the existence of a deciduous 
dentition — its close relation with the Seals. 
While, on the other hand, the produced rostral 
form of the snout, the long symphysis, and the 
low coronary process of the mandible are approxi- 
mations to the cetacean form of those parts. 

The scapula resembles that of the cetacean 
Byperoodon, but the supra-spinous fossa is larger 
and more seal-like; as is the humerus, which 
differs from that of the Getacea in presenting true 



352 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION xi 

articular surfaces for the free jointing of the 
bones of the fore-arm. In the apparently com- 
plete absence of hinder limbs, and in the characters 
of the vertebral column, the Zeuglodon lies on the 
cetacean side of the boundary line ; so that upon 
the whole, the Zeuglodonts, transitional as they 
are, are conveniently retained in the cetacean 
order. And the publication, in 1864, of M. Van 
Beneden's memoir on the Miocene and Pliocene 
Squahdon, furnished much better means than 
anatomists previously possessed of fitting in 
another link of the chain which connects the 
existing Getacea with Zeaiglodon. The teeth are 
much more numerous, although the molars exhibit 
the zeuglodont double fang ; the nasal bones are 
very short, and the upper surface of the rostrum 
presents the groove, filled up during life by the 
prolongation of the ethmoidal cartilage, which is 
so characteristic of the majority of the CctcLcea. 

It appears to me that, just as among the 
existing Oarnivora, the walruses and the eared 
seals are intercalary forms between the fissipede 
Carnivora and the ordinary seals, so the Zeuglo- 
donts are intercalary between the Carnivora, as a 
whole, and the Getacea. Whether the Zeuglodonts 
are also linear types in their relation to these two 
groups cannot be ascertained, until we have more 
definite knowledge than we possess at present, 
respecting the relations in time of the Garnivora 
and Getacea. 



XI PALiEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 353 

Thus far we have been concerned with the 
intercalary types which occupy the intervals 
between Families or Orders of the same class; 
but the investigations which have been carried 
on by Professor Gegenbaur, Professor Cope, and 
myself into the structure and relations of the 
extinct reptilian forms of the OmithosctUda (or 
Binosauria and Compsognatha) have brought to 
light the existence of intercalary forms between 
what have hitherto been always regarded as very 
distinct classes of the vertebrate sub-kingdom, 
namely Beptilia and Aves. Whatever inferences 
may, or may not, be drawn from the fact, it is 
now an established truth that, in many of these 
Ornithoscelida, the hind hmbs and the pelvis are 
much more similar to those of Birds than they 
are to those of EeptUes, and that these Bird- 
reptiles, or Eeptile-birds, were more or less com- 
pletely bipedal, 

When I addressed you in 1862, I should have 
been bold indeed had I suggested that palaeon- 
tology would before long show us the possibility 
of a direct transition from the type of the lizard 
to that of the ostrich. At the present moment, 
we have, in the Ornithoscelida, the intercalary type, 
which proves that transition to be something 
more than a possibility; but it is very doubtful 
whether any of the genera of Ornithoscelida with 
which we are at present acquainted are the actual 
linear types by which the transition from the 

VOL. VIII A A 



354 PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

lizard to the bird was effected. These, very prob- 
ably, are still hidden from us in the older for- 
mations. 

Let us now endeavour to find some cases of 
true linear tjrpes, or forms which are intermediate 
between others because they stand in a direct 
genetic relation to them. It is no easy matter to 
find clear and unmistakable evidence of filiation 
among fossil animals; for, in order that such 
evidence should be quite satisfactory, it is necessary 
that we should be acquainted with aU the most 
important features of the organisation of the 
animals which are supposed to be thus related, and 
not merely with the fragments upon which the 
genera and species of the palseontologist are so 
often based. M. Gaudry has arranged the species 
of Hymnidce, Prohoscidea, Bhinocerotidce, and Equidce 
in their order of filiation firom their earliest appear- 
ance in the Miocene epoch to the present time, and 
Professor Kutimeyer has drawn up similar schemes 
for the Oxen and other Ungulata — ^with what, I 
am disposed to think, is a fair and probable approxi- 
mation to the order of nature. But, as no one is 
better aware than these two learned, acute, and 
philosophical biologists, all such arrangements 
must be regarded as provisional, except in those 
cases in which, by a fortunate accident, large 
series of remains are obtainable from a thick and 
widespread series of deposits. It is easy to 
accumulate probabilities — hard to make out some 



XI PAt^ONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 355 

particular case in such a way that it will stand 
rigorous criticism. 

After much search, however, I think that such 
a case is to be made out in favour of the pedigree 
of the Horses. 

The genus JEguus is represented as far back as 
the latter part of the Miocene epoch; but in 
deposits belonging to the middle of that epoch its 
place is taken by two other genera, Hipparion and 
AncMtherium ; ^ and, in the lowest Miocene and 
upper Eocene, only the last genus occurs. A 
species of AncMtherium was referred by Cuvier to 
the Palceotheria under the name of F. aurelianense. 
The grinding-teeth are in fact very similar in 
shape and in pattern, and in the absence of any 
thick layer of cement, to those of some species of 
Paloeotherium, especially Cuvier's PalmotTierium 
minus, which has been formed into a separate 
genus, Plagiolophus, by Pomel. But in the fact 
that there are only six fuU-sized grinders in the 
lower jaw, the first premolar being very small; 
that the anterior grinders are as large as, or 
rather larger than, the posterior ones ; that the 

' Hennann von Meyer gave the name of ATichiiherium to A. 
Ezqimrrce ; and in his paper on the subject he takes great pains 
to distinguish the latter as the type of a new genus, from 
Cuvier's Palmotherium d'Orleavs. But it is precisely the 
Palcmtherium d'Orlians which is the type of Christol's genus 
HipparitJierium ; and thus, though Hipparillicrmm is of later 
date than AnchitTierium, it seemed- to me to have a sort of 
eijuitable right to recognition when this Address was written. 
On the whole, however, it seems most convenient to adopt 
Anchitherium. 

A A 2 



856 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION xi 

second premolar has an anterior prolongatita ; and 
that the posterior molar of the lower jaw has, as 
Cuvier pointed out, a posterior lobe of much 
smaller size and diiferent form, the dentition of 
ATichitherium departs from the type of the 
Palceotherium, and approaches that of the Horse. 

Again, the skeleton of Anchithei'ium is ex- 
tremely equine. M. Ghristol goes so far as to 
say that the description of the bones of the horse, 
or the ass, current in veterinary works, would fit 
those of Anohitherium. And, in a general way, 
this may be true enough ; but there are some most 
important differences, which, indeed, are justly 
indicated by the same careful observer. Thus the 
ulna is complete throughout, and its shaft is not a 
mere rudiment, fused into one bone with the 
radius. There are three toes, one large in the 
middle and one small on each side. The femur is 
quite like that of a horse, and has the character- 
istic fossa above the external condyle. In the 
British Museum there is a most instructive 
specimen of the leg-bones, showing that the fibula 
was represented by the external malleolus and by 
a flat tongue of bone, which extends up from it 
on the outer side of the tibia, and is closely 
ankylosed with the latter bone.^ The hind toes 

^ I am indebted to M. Gervais for a specimen which indicates 
that the fibula was complete, at any rate, in some cases ; and 
for a very interesting ramus of a mandible, which shows that, 
as in the Falceolheria, the hindermost milk-molar of the lower 



XI paljEOntoi,ogy and evolution 357 

are three, like those of the fore leg; and the 
middle metatarsal bone is much less compressed 
from side to side than that of the horse. 

In the Hipparion, the teeth nearly resemble 
those of the Horses, though the crowns of the 
grinders are not so long ; like those of the Horses, 
they are abundantly coated with cement. The 
shaft of the ulna is reduced to a mere style, anky- 
losed throughout nearly its whole length mth the 
radius, and appearing to be little more than a 
ridge on the surface of the latter bone until it is 
carefully examined. The front toes are still three, 
but the outer ones are more slender than in 
Anchitherium, and their hoofs smaller in proportion 
to that of the middle toe ; they are, in fact, re- 
duced to mere dew-claws, and do not touch the 
ground. In the leg, the distal end of the fibula is 
so completely united with the tibia that it appears 
to be a mere process of the latter bone, as in the 
Horses. 

In Eqiius, finally, the crowns of the grinding- 
teeth become longer, and their patterns are slightly 
modified ; the middle of the shaft of the ulna 
usually vanishes, and its proximal and distal ends 
ankylose with the radius. The phalanges of the 
two outei- toes in each foot disappear, their meta- 
carpal and metatarsal bones being left as the 
" splints." 

jaw was devoid of the posterior lobe which exists in the hinder- 
most true molar. 



358 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

The Hipparion has large depressions on the 
face in front of the orbits, like those for the 
" larmiers " of many ruminants ; but traces of these 
are to be seen in some of the fossil horses from 
the Sewalik Hills; and, as Leidy's recent re- 
searches show, they are preserved in Anchi- 
therium. 

When we consider these facts, and the further 
circumstance that the Hipparions, the remains of 
which have been collected in immense numbers, 
were subject, as M. Gaudry and others have 
pointed out, to a great range of variation, it 
appears to me impossible to resist the conclusion 
that the types of the AricMthermm, of the 
Hipparion, and of the ancient Horses consti- 
tute the lineage of the modern Horses, the Jlip- 
parion being the intermediate stage between the 
other two, and answering to B in my former 
illustration. 

The process by which the Anchitherium has 
been converted into Equus is one of specialisation, 
or of more and more complete deviation from what 
might be called the average form of an ungulate 
mammal. In the Horses, the reduction of some 
parts of the limbs, together with the special modi- 
fication of those which are left, is carried to a 
greater extent than in any other hoofed mammals. 
The reduction is less and the specialisation is less 
in the Hipparion, and still less in the AticM- 
therium ; but yet, as compared with other mam- 



XI PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 359 

mals, the reduction and specialisation of parts in 
the Anchitherimn remain great. 

Is it not probable then, that, just as in the 
Miocene epoch, we find an ancestral equine form 
less modified than Uquus, so, if we go back 
to the Eocene epoch, we shall find some quadruped 
related to the Anchithcrium, as Hipparion is re- 
lated to Uquus, and consequently departing less 
from the average form ? 

I think that this desideratum is very nearly, if 
not quite, supplied by Plagiolophus, remains of 
which occur abundantly in some parts of the 
Upper and Middle Eocene formations. The 
patterns of the grinding-teeth of Plagiolophus are 
similar to those of ATichithermm, and their crowns 
are as thinly covered with cement; but the 
grinders diminish in size forwards, and the last 
lower molar has a large hind lobe, convex outwards 
and concave inwards, as in Palceotherium. The 
ulna is complete and much larger than in any of 
the Uquidce, while it is more slender than in most 
of the true Palceotheria ; it is fixedly united, but 
not ankylosed, with the radius. There are three 
toes in the fore limb, the outer ones being slender, 
but less attenuated than in the Uquidce. The 
femur is more like that of the Palceotheria than 
that of the horse, and has only a small depression 
above its outer condyle in the place of the great 
fossa which is so obvious in the Uquidce. The fibula 
is distinct, but very slender, and its distal end is 



360 PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

ankylosed with the tibia. There are three toes 
on the hind foot having similar proportions to 
those on the fore foot. The principal metacarpal 
and metatarsal bones are flatter than they are in 
any of the UquidcB ; and the metacarpal bones are 
longer than the metatarsals, as in the Palmotheria. 

In its general form, Flagiolophus resembles a 
very small and slender horse,^ and is totally unlike 
the reluctant, pig-like creature depicted in Cuvier's 
restoration of his Palceothermm mimes in the 
" Ossemens Fossiles." 

It would be hazardous to say that Flagiolophus 
is the exact radical form of the Equine quadru- 
peds; but I do not think there can be any 
reasonable doubt that the latter animals have 
resulted from the modification of some quadruped 
similar to Flagiolophus. 

We have thus arrived at the Middle Eocene 
formation, and yet have traced back the Horses 
only to a three-toed stock ; but these three-toed 
forms, no less than the Equine quadrupeds them- 
selves, present rudiments of the two other toes 
which appertain to what I have termed the 
" average " quadruped. If the expectation raised 
by the splints of the Horses that, in some ancestor 
of the Horses, these splints would be found to 
be complete digits, has been verified, we are fur- 

' Such, at least, is the conclusion suggested by the proportions 
of the skeleton figured by Cuvier and De Blainville ; but per- 
haps something between a Horse and an Agouti would be nearest 
the mark. 



XI PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 361 

nislied with very strong reasons for looking for a 
no less complete verification of the expectation 
that the three-toed Plagiolophus-Yike " avus " of the 
horse must have had a five-toed " atavus " at some 
earlier period. 

No such five-toed "atavus," however, has yet 
made its appearance among the few middle and 
older Eocene Mammalia which are known. 

Another series of closely affiliated forms, though 
the evidence they afford is perhaps less complete 
than that of the Equine series, is presented to 
us by the Dichohune of the Eocene epoch, the 
Cainotherium of the Miocene, and the Tragulidw, 
or so-called " Musk-deer,'' of the present day. 

The TragulidcB have no incisors in the upper 
jaw, and only six grinding-teeth on each side of 
each jaw ; while the canine is moved up to the 
outer incisor, and there is a diastema in the lower 
jaw. There are four complete toes on the hind 
foot, but the middle metatarsals usually become, 
sooner or later, ankylosed into a cannon bone. 
The navicular and the cuboid unite, and the 
distal end of the fibula is ankylosed with the 
tibia. 

In Oainothermm and Bichohimc the upper 
incisors are fully developed. There are seven 
grinders ; the teeth form a continuous series with- 
out a diastema. The metatarsals, the navicular 
and cuboid, and the distal end of the fibula, 
remain free. In the Cainotherium, also, the second 



362 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

metacarpal is developed, but is much shorter than 
the third, while the fifth is absent or rudimentary. 
In this respect it resembles Anoplotherium secunda- 
rium. This circumstance, and the peculiar pattern 
of the upper molars in Cainotherium, lead me to 
hesitate in considering it as the actual ancestor 
of the modern Tragulidm. If Dichdbune has a 
fore-toed fore foot (though I am incHned to 
suspect that it resembles Cainotherium), it will 
be a better representative of the oldest forms of 
the Traguline series ; but Bichdbune occurs in the 
Middle Eocene, and is, in fact, the oldest known 
artiodactyle mammal. Where, then, must we 
look for its five-toed ancestor ? 

If we follow down other lines of recent and 
tertiary Ung%lata, the same question presents 
itself. The Pigs are traceable back through the 
Miocene epoch to the Upper Eocene, where they 
appear in the two well-marked forms of Hyopopo- 
tamus and Chosropotamus ; but Hyopotamus appears 
to have had only two toes. 

Again, all the great groups of the Euminants, 
the Bovidce, Antilopidce, Camelopardalidce, and 
Cervidce, are represented in the Miocene epoch, and 
so are the Camels. The Upper Eocene Anoplo- 
therium, which is intercalary between the Pigs 
and the Tragulidw, has only two, or, at most, 
three toes. Among the scanty mammals of the 
Lower Eocene formation we have the perisso- 
dactyle Ungulata represented by Goryphodon, 



XI PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 363 

Hyracotherium, and Pliolophus. Suppose for a 
moment, for the sake of following out the 
argument, that Pliolophus represents the primary 
stock of the Perissodactyles, and Dichohune that 
of the Artiodactyles (though I am far from saying 
that such is the case), then we find, in the earliest 
fauna of the Eocene epoch to which our investiga- 
tions carry us, the two divisions of the Ungulata 
completely differentiated, and no trace of any 
common stock of both, or of five-toed predecessors 
to either. With the case of the Horses before us, 
justifying a belief in the production of new 
animal forms by modification of old ones, I see no 
escape from the necessity of seeking for these 
ancestors of the Ungulata beyond the limits of 
the Tertiary formations. 

I could as soon admit special creation, at 
once, as suppose that the Perissodactyles and 
Artiodactyles had no five-toed ancestors. And 
when we consider how large a portion of the 
Tertiary period elapsed before Anchitheriuin was 
converted into Equus, it is difiicult to escape the 
conclusion that a large proportion of time anterior 
to the Tertiary period must have been expended 
in converting the common stock of the Ungulata 
into Perissodactyles and Artiodactyles. 

The same moral is inculcated by the study 
of every other order of Tertiary monodelphous 
Mammalia. Each of these orders is represented 
in the Miocene epoch : the Eocene formation, as 



364 PALJiONTOLOGT AND EVOLUTION XI 

I have already said, contains Cheiroptera, Insecti- 
vora, Bodentia, Ungulata, Garnivora, and Getacca. 
But the Gheiroptera are extreme modifications 
of the Insectivora, just as the Getacea are extreme 
modifications of the Carnivorous type ; and there- 
fore it is to my mind incredible that monodelphous 
Insectivora and Garnivora should not have been 
abundantly developed, along with Ungulata, in 
the Mesozoic epoch. But if this be the case, 
how much further back must we go to find the 
common stock of the monodelphous Mammalia? 
As to the Bidelphia, if we may trust the evidence 
which seems to be afforded by their very scanty 
remains, a Hypsiprymnoid form existed at the 
epoch of the Trias, contemporaneously with a 
Carnivorous form. At the epoch of the Trias, 
therefore, the Marsupialia must have already 
existed long enough to have become differentiated 
into carnivorous and herbivorous forms. But the 
Monotremata are lower forms than the Bidelphia 
which last are intercalary between the Ornitho- 
delphia and the Monodelphia. To what point of 
the Palaeozoic epoch, then, must we, upon any 
rational estimate, relegate the origin of the 
Monotremata ? 

The investigation of the occurrence of the 
classes and of the orders of the Sauropsida in time 
points in exactly the same direction. If, as there 
is great reason to believe, true Birds existed in 
the Triassic epoch, the ornithoscelidous forms by 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 365 

which Reptiles passed into Birds must have pre- 
ceded them. In fact there is, even at present, 
considerable ground for suspecting the existence 
of Dinosauria in the Permian formations ; but, in 
that case, lizards must be of still earlier date. 
And if the very small diiferences which are 
observable between the Crocodilia of the older 
Mesozoic formations and those of the present day 
furnish any sort of approximation towards an 
estimate of the average rate of change among the 
Sauropsida, it is almost appalling to reflect how far 
back in Palaeozoic times we must go, before we 
can hope to arrive at that common stock from 
which the Crocodilia, Lacertilia, Ornithoscelida, 
and Plesiosauria, which had attained so great a 
development in the Triassic epoch, must have 
been derived. 

The Amphibia and Pisces tell the same story. 
There is not a single class of vertebrated animals 
which, when it first appears, is represented by 
analogues of the lowest known members of the 
same class. Therefore, if there is any truth in 
the doctrine of evolution, every class must be vastly 
older than the first record of its appearance upon 
the surface of the globe. But if considerations of 
this kind compel us to place the origin of ver- 
tebrated animals at a period sufiiciently distant 
from the Upper Silurian, in which the first Elas- 
mobranchs and Ganoids occur, to allow of the 
evolution of such fishes as these from a Vertebrate 



366 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

as simple as the Amphioxus, I can only repeat 
that it is appalling to Speculate upon the extent 
to which that origin must have preceded the 
epoch of the first recorded appearance of verte- 
brate life. 

Such is the further commentary which I have 
to ofifer upon the statement of the chief results of 
palaeontology which I formerly ventured to lay 
before you. 

But the growth of knowledge in the interval 
makes me conscious of an omission of considerable 
moment in that statement, inasmuch as it contains 
no reference to the bearings of palaeontology upon 
the theory of the distribution of life; nor takes 
note of the remarkable manner in which the facts 
of distribution, in present and past times, accord 
with the doctrine of evolution, especially in regard 
to land animals. 

That connection between palaeontology and 
geology and the present distribution of terrestrial 
animals, which so strikingly impressed Mr. Darwin, 
thirty years ago, as to lead him to speak of a " law 
of succession of types," and of the wonderful re- 
lationship on the same continent between the 
dead and the living, has recently received much 
elucidation from the researches of Gaudry, of 
Riitimeyer, of Leidy, and of Alphonse Milne- 
Edwards, taken in connection with the earlier 
labours of our lamented colleague Falconer; and 



XI PALiEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 367 

it has been instructively discussed in the thought- 
ful and ingenious work of Mr. Andrew Murray 
" On the Geographical Distribution of Mammals." ^ 

I propose to lay before you, as briefly as I can, 
the ideas to which a long consideration of the 
subject has given rise in my mind. 

If the doctrine of evolution is sound, one of its 
immediate consequences clearly is, that the present 
distribution of life upon the globe is the product 
of two factors, the one being the distribution 
which obtained in the immediately preceding 
epoch, and the other the character and the extent 
of the changes which have taken place in physical 
geography between the one epoch and the other ; 
or, to put the matter in another way, the Fauna 
and Flora of any given area, in any given epoch, 
can consist only of such forms of life as are directly 
descended from those which constituted the Fauna 
and Flora of the same area in the immediately 
preceding epoch, unless the physical geography 
(under which I include climatal conditions) of 
the area has been so altered as to give rise to 
immigration of living forms from some other 
area. 

The evolutionist, therefore, is bound to gTapple 

' The paper "On the Form and Distribution of the Land- 
tracts during the Secondary and Tertiary Periods respectively ; 
and on the Effect upon Animal Life which great Changes in 
Geographical Configuration have probably produced," by Mr. 
Searles V. Wood, jun. , which was published in the Philosophical 
Magazine, in 1862, was unknown to me when this Address 
was written. It is well worthy of the most careful study. 



368 PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

with the following problem whenever it is clearly 
put before him : — Here are the Faunae of the same 
area during successive epochs. Show good cause 
for believing either that these Faunae have been 
derived from one another by gradual modification, 
or that the Faunse have reached the area in ques- 
tion by migration from some area in which they 
have undergone their development. 

I propose to attempt to deal with this problem, 
so far as it is exemplified by the distributijon of 
the terrestrial Vertebrata, and I shall endeavour 
to show you that it is capable of solution in a 
sense entirely favourable to the doctrine of evo- 
lution. 

I have elsewhere ^ stated at length the reasons 
which lead me to recognise four primary distribu- 
tional provinces for the terrestrial Vertebrata in 
the present world, namely, — first, the NMozelamia%, 
or New-Zealand province; secondly, the Austra- 
lian province, including Australia, Tasmania, and 
the Negrito Islands ; thirdly, Austro-Cohtnibia, or 
South America plus North America as far as 
Mexico; and fourthly, the rest of the world, or 
Arctogma, in which province America north of 
Mexico constitutes one sub-province, Africa south 
of the Sahara a second, Hindostan a third, and the 
remainder of the Old World a fourth. 

Now the truth which Mr. Darwin perceived and 

' " On the Classification and Distribution of the Alectoro- 
morphae ; " Proceedings of the Zoological Society, 1868. 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 369 

promulgated as "the law of the succession of 
types '' is, that, in all these provinces, the animals 
found in Pliocene or later deposits are closely 
affined to those which now inhabit the same pro- 
vinces ; and that, conversely, the forms character- 
istic of other provinces are absent. North and 
South America, perhaps, present one or two 
exceptions to the last rule, but they are readily 
susceptible of explanation. Thus, in Australia, the 
later Tertiary mammals are marsupials (possibly 
with the exception of the Dog and a Eodent or two, 
as at present). In Austro-Columbia, the later 
Tertiary fauna exhibits numerous and varied forms 
of Platyrrhine Apes, Rodents, Cats, Dogs, Stags, 
Edentata, and Opossums ; but, as at present, no 
Catarrhine Apes, no Lemurs, no Insedivora, Oxen, 
Antelopes, Rhinoceroses, nor Didel^hia other than 
Opossums. And in the widespread Arctogseal 
province, the Pliocene and later mammals belong 
to the same groups as those which now exist in 
the province. The law of succession of types, 
therefore, holds good for the present epoch as 
compared with its predecessor. Does it equally 
well apply to the Pliocene fauna when we com- 
pare it with that of the Miocene epoch ? By 
great good fortune, an extensive mammalian fauna 
of the latter epoch has now become known, in 
four very distant portions of the Arctogseal pro- 
vince which do not differ greatly in latitude. 
Thus Falconer and Cautley have made known the 

VOL. VIII B B 



370 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

fauna of the sub-Himalayas and the Perim Islands ; 
Gaudry that of Attica ; many observers that of 
Central Europe and France; and Leidy that of 
Nebraska, on the eastern flank of the Rocky 
Mountains. The results are very striking. The 
total Miocene fauna comprises many genera and 
species of Catarrhine Apes, of Bats, of Insectivora ; 
of Arctogseal types of Rodentia ; oiProhoscidea ; of 
equine, rhinocerotic, and tapirine quadrupeds ; of 
cameline, bovine, antilopine, cervine, and traguline 
Ruminants; of Pigs and Hippopotamuses; of 
ViverridcB and Hymnido} among other Oarnivora ; 
with Edentata allied to the Arctogseal Orycteropus 
and Manis, and not to the Austro-Columbian 
Edentates. The only type present in the Miocene, 
but absent in the existing, fauna of Eastern Arc- 
togsea, is that of the Bidelphidm, which, however, 
remains in North America. 

But it is very remarkable that while the 
Miocene fauna of the Arctogseal province, as 
a whole, is of the same character as the existing 
fauna of the same province, as a whole, the com- 
ponent elements of the fauna were differently as- 
sociated. In the Miocene epoch, North America 
possessed Elephants, Horses, Rhinoceroses, and a 
great number and variety of Ruminants and Pigs, 
which are absent in the present indigenous fauna ; 
Europe had its Apes, Elephants, Rhinoceroses, 
Tapirs, Musk-deer, Giraffes, Hyaenas, great Cats, 
Edentates, and Opossum-Hke Marsupials, which 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 371 

have equally vanished from its present fauna; 
and in Northern India, the African types of Hippo- 
potamuses, Giraffes, and Elephants were mixed 
up with what are now the Asiatic types of the 
latter, and with Camels, and Semnopithecine and 
Pithecine Apes of no less distinctly Asiatic forms. 
In fact the Miocene mammalian fauna of 
Europe and the Himalayan regions contains, asso- 
ciated together, the types which are at present 
separately located in the South-African and 
Indian sub-provinces of Arctogaga. Now there 
is every reason to believe, on other grounds, that 
both Hindostan, south of the Ganges, and Africa, 
south of the Sahara, were separated by a wide 
sea from Europe and North Asia during the 
Middle and Upper Eocene epochs. Hence it 
becomes highly probable that the well-known 
similarities, and no less remarkable differences 
between the present Faunae of India and South 
Africa have arisen in some such fashion as the 
following. Some time during the Miocene epoch, 
possibly when the Himalayan chain was ele- 
vated, the bottom of the nummulitic sea was 
upheaved and converted into dry land, in the 
direction of a line extending from Abyssinia to 
the mouth of the Ganges. By this means, the 
Dekhan on the one hand, and South Africa on 
the other, became connected with the Miocene 
dry land and with one another. The Miocene 
mammals spread gradually over this intermediate 

B B 2 



372 PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

dry land ; and if the condition of its eastern and 
western ends offered as wide contrasts as the 
valleys of the Ganges and Arabia do now, many 
forms which made their way into Africa must 
have been different from those which reached 
the Dekhan, while others might pass into both 
these sub-provinces. 

1 That there was a continuity of dry land between 
Europe and North America during the Miocene 
epoch, appears to me to be a necessary consequence 
of the fact that many genera of terrestrial 
mammals, such as Castor, Hystrix, Mephas, 
Mastodon, Eguus, Hipparion, Anchithermm, Rhino- 
ceros, Cervus, Amphicyon, Hymnarctos, and Machair- 
odus, are common to the Miocene formations of 
the two areas, and have as yet been found (except 
perhaps Anchithermm) in no deposit of earlier age. 
"Whether this connection took place by the east, 
or by the west, or by both sides of the Old 
World, there is at present no certain evidence, and 
the question is immaterial to the present argu- 
ment ; but, as there are good grounds for the 
belief that the Australian province and the Indian 
and South- African sub-provinces were separated 
by sea from the rest of Arctogeea before the 
Miocene epoch, so it has been rendered no less 
probable, by the investigations of Mr. Carrick 
Moore and Professor Duncan, that Austro-Columbia 
was separated by sea from North America during 
a large part of the Miocene epoch. 



Si tALiEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 373 

It IS unfortunate that we have no knowledge of 
the Miocene mammalian fauna of the Australian 
and Austro-Columbian provinces ; but, seeing that 
not a trace of a Platyrrhine Ape, of a Procyonine 
Carnivore, of a characteristically South-American 
Eodent, of a Sloth, an Armadillo, or an Ant-eater 
has yet been found in Miocene deposits of Arc- 
togsea, I cannot doubt that they already existed in 
the Miocene Austro-Columbian province. 

Nor is it less probable that the characteristic 
types of Australian Mammalia were already de- 
veloped in that region in Miocene times. 

But Austro-Columbia presents difficulties from 
which Australia is free ; Camelidce and Tapiridce 
are now indigenous in South America as they are 
in Arctogsea; and, among the Pliocene Austro- 
Columbian mammals, the Arctogeeal genera 
Equus, Mastodon, and Machairodus are numbered. 
Are these Postmiocene immigrants, or Prsemio- 
cene natives ? 

Still more perplexing are the strange and in- 
teresting forms Toxodon, Macrauchenia, Typo- 
thermm, and a new Anoplotherioid mammal 
{Homalodotheriuni) which Dr. Cunningham sent 
over to me some time ago from Patagonia. I con- 
fess I am strongly inclined to surmise that these 
last, at any rate, are remnants of the popula- 
tion of Austro-Columbia before the Miocene 
epoch, and were not derived from Arctogsea by 
. way of the north and east. 



374 PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION xi 

The fact that this immense fauna of Miocene 
Arctogsea is now fully and richly represented only 
in India and in South Africa, while it is shrunk 
and depauperised in North Asia, Europe, and 
North America, becomes at once intelligible, if we 
suppose that India and South Africa had but a 
scanty mammalian population before the Miocene 
immigration, while the conditions were highly 
favourable to the new comers. It is to be supposed 
that these new regions ofifered themselves to the 
Miocene Ungulates, as South America and Australia 
ofifered themselves to the cattle, sheep, and horses 
of modern colonists. But, after these great areas 
were thus peopled, came the Glacial epoch, during 
which the excessive cold, to say nothing of depres- 
sion and ice-covering, must have almost depopu- 
lated all the northern parts of Arctogsea, destroying 
all the higher mammalian forms, except those 
which, like the Elephant and Ehinoceros, could 
adjust their coats to the altered conditions. Even 
these must have been driven away from the 
greater part of the area; only those Miocene 
mammals which had passed into Hindostan and 
into South Africa would escape decimation by such 
changes in the physical geography of Arctogsea. 
And when the northern hemisphere passed into its 
present condition, these lost tribes of the Miocene 
Fauna were hemmed by the Himalayas, the 
Sahara, the Eed Sea, and the Arabian deserts, 
mthin their present boundaries. 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 375 

Now, on the hypothesis of evolution, there is no 
sort of difficulty in admitting that the differences 
between the Miocene forms of the mammalian 
Fauna and those which exist at present are the 
results of gradual modification; and, since such 
differences in distribution as obtain are readily 
explained by the changes which have taken place 
in the physical geography of the world since the 
Miocene epoch, it is clear that the result of the 
comparison of the Miocene and present Faunae is 
distinctly in favour of evolution. Indeed I may 
go further. I may say that the hypothesis of 
evolution explains the facts of Miocene, Pliocene, 
and Kecent distribution, and that no other sup- 
position even pretends to account for them. It is, 
indeed, a conceivable supposition that every species 
of Rhinoceros and every species of Hyaena, in the 
long succession of forms between the Miocene and 
the present species, was separately constructed out 
of dust, or out of nothing, by supernatural power ; 
but until I receive distinct evidence of the fact, I 
refuse to run the risk of insulting any sane man 
by supposing that he seriously holds such a 
notion. 

Let us now take a step further back in time, 
and inquire into the relations between the Miocene 
Fauna and its predecessor of the Upper Eocene 
formation. 

Here it is to be regretted that our materials for 
forming a judgment are nothing to be compared 



876 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

in point of extent or variety with those which are 
jdelded by the Miocene strata. However, what we 
do know of this Upper Eocene Fauna of Europe 
gives sufficient positive information to enable us 
to draw some tolerably safe inferences. It has 
yielded representatives of Insectivora, of Cheir- 
optera, of Rodentia, of Garnivm^a, of artiodactyle 
and perissodactyle Ungulata, and of opossum-like 
Marsupials. No Australian type of Marsupial has 
been discovered in the Upper Eocene strata, nor 
any Edentate mammal. The genera (except per- 
haps in the case of some of the Insectivora, Cheir- 
optera, and Rodentia) are different from those of 
the Miocene epoch, but present a remarkable 
general similarity to the Miocene and recent 
genera. In several cases, as I have already shown, 
it has now been clearly made out that the relation 
between the Eocene and Miocene forms is such 
that the Eocene form is the less specialised ; while 
its Miocene ally is more so, and the specialisation 
reaches its maximum in the recent forms of the 
same type. 

So far as the Upper Eocene and the Miocene 
Mammalian Faunae are comparable, their relations 
are such as in no way to oppose the hypothesis 
that the older are the progenitors of the more 
recent forms, while, in some cases, they distinctly 
favour that hypothesis. The period in time and 
the changes in physical geography represented by 
the numtnulitic deposits are undoubtedly very 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 377 

great, while the remains of Middle Eocene and 
Older Eocene Mammals are comparatively few. 
The general facies of the Middle Eocene Fauna, 
however, is quite that of the Upper. The Older 
Eocene pre-nummulitic mammalian Fauna con- 
tains Bats, two genera of Carnivora, three genera 
of Ungulata (probably all perissodactyle), and a 
didelphid Marsupial; all these forms, except 
perhaps the Bat and the Opossum, belong to 
genera which are not known to occur out of the 
Lower Eocene formation. The Goryphodon appears 
to have been allied to the Miocene and later 
Tapirs, while Pliolophus, in its skull and dentition, 
curiously partakes of both artiodactyle and perisso- 
dactyle characters ; the third trochanter upon 
its femur, and its three-toed hind foot, however, 
appear definitely to fix its position in the latter 
division. 

There is nothing, then, in what is known of the 
older Eocene mammals of the Arctogseal province 
to forbid the supposition that they stood in an 
ancestral relation to those of the Calcaire Grossier 
and the Gypsum of the Paris basin, and that our 
present fauna, therefore, is directly derived from 
that which already existed in Arctogsea at the 
commencement jDf the Tertiary period. But if 
we now cross the frontier between the Cainozoic 
and the Mesozoic faunae, as they are preserved 
within the Arctogaeal area, we meet with an 
astounding change, and what appears to be a 



378 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

complete and uumistakable break in the line of 
biological continuity. 

Among the twelve or fourteen species of Mam- 
malia which are said to have been found in the 
Purbecks, not one is a member of the orders 
Cheiroptera, Bodentia, Ungiilata, or Garnivora, 
which are so well represented in the Tertiaries. 
No Insectivora are certainly known, nor any 
opossum-like Marsupials. Thus there is a vast 
negative difference between the Cainozoic and 
the Mesozoic mammalian faunse of Europe. But 
there is a still more important positive difference, 
inasmuch as all these Mammalia appear to be 
Marsupials belonging to Australian groups, and 
thus appertaining to a different distributional 
province from the Eocene and Miocene marsupials, 
which are Austro-Columbian. So far as the im- 
perfect materials which exist enable a judgment 
to be formed, the same law appears to have held 
good for all the earlier Mesozoic Mammalia. Of 
the Stonesfield slate mammals, one, Amphither'- 
ium, has a definitely Australian character; one, 
Phascolotherium, may be either Dasyurid or 
Didelphine ; of a third, Stereognathus, nothing 
can at present be said. The two mammals 
of the Trias, also, appear to belong to Australian 
groups. 

Every one is aware of the many curious points 
of resemblance between the marine fauna of the 
European Mesozoic rocks and that which now 



XI iPALvEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 379 

exists in Australia. But if there was this 
Australian facies about both the terrestrial and 
the marine faunse of Mesozoic Europe, and if 
there is this unaccountable and immense break 
between the fauna of Mesozoic and that of 
Tertiary Europe, is it not a very obvious sugges- 
tion that, in the Mesozoic epoch, the Australian 
province included Europe, and that the Arctogseal 
province was contained within other hmits ? The 
Arctogseal province is at present enormous, while 
the Australian is relatively small. Why should 
not these proportions have been different during 
the Mesozoic epoch ? 

Thus I am led to think that by far the simplest 
and most rational mode of accounting for the 
great change which took place in the living 
inhabitants of the European area at the end of 
the Mesozoic epoch, is the supposition that it 
arose from a vast alteration of the physical 
geography of the globe ; whereby an area long 
tenanted by Cainozoic forms was brought into 
such relations with the European area that 
migration from the one to the other became 
possible, and took place on a great scale. 

This supposition relieves us, at once, from the 
difficulty in which we were left, some time ago, 
by the arguments which I used to demonstrate 
the necessity of the existence of all the great 
types of the Eocene epoch in some antecedent 
period. 



880 PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION ti 

It is this Mesozoic continent (wtich may well 
have lain in the neighbourhood of what are now 
the shores of the North Pacific Ocean) which I 
suppose to have been occupied by the Mesozoic 
Monodelphia ; and it is in this region that I con- 
ceive they must have gone through the long 
series of changes by which they were specialised 
into the forms which we refer to different orders. 
I think it very probable that what is now South 
America may have received the characteristic 
elements of its mammalian fauna during the 
Mesozoic epoch ; and there can be little doubt 
that the general nature of the change which took 
place at the end of the Mesozoic epoch in Europe 
was the upheaval of the eastern and northern 
regions of the Mesozoic sea-bottom into a west- 
ward extension of the Mesozoic continent, over 
which the mammalian fauna, by which it was 
already peopled, gradually spread. This invasion 
of the land was prefaced by a previous invasion of 
the Cretaceous sea by modern forms of mollusca 
and fish. 

It is easy to imagine how an analogous change 
might come about in the existing world. There 
is, at present, a great difference between the fauna 
of the Polynesian Islands and that of the west 
coast of America. The animals which are leaving 
their spoils in the deposits now forming in these 
localities are widely different. Hence, if a gradual 
shifting of the deep sea, which at present bars 



XI PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 381 

migration between the easternmost of these islands 
and America, took place to the westward, while 
the American side of the sea-bottom was gradually 
upheaved, the paleontologist of the future would 
find, over the Pacific area, exactly such a change 
as I am supposing to have occurred in the North- 
Atlantic area at the close of the Mesozoic period. 
An Australian fauna would be found underlying 
an American fauna, and the transition from the 
one to the other would be as abrupt as that 
between the Chalk and lower Tertiaries; and as 
the drainage-area of the newly formed extension 
of the American continent gave rise to rivers and 
lakes, the mammals mired in their mud would 
differ from those of like deposits on the Australian 
side, just as the Eocene mammals differ from those 
of the Purbecks. 

How do similar reasonings apply to the other 
great change of life — that which took place at the 
end of the Palaeozoic period ? 

In the Triassic epoch, the distribution of the 
dry land and of terrestrial vertebrate life appears 
to have been, generally, similar to that which 
existed in the Mesozoic epoch ; so that the Triassic 
continents and their faunae seem to be related to the 
Mesozoic lands and their faunae, just as those of the 
Miocene epoch are related to those of the present 
day. In fact, as I have recently endeavoured to 
prove to the Society, there was an Arctogaeal con- 
tinent and an Arctogaeal province of distribution 
in Triassic times as there is now ; and the Saurop- 



382 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

sida and Marsupialia which constituted that fauna 
were, I doubt not, the progenitors of the Sauropsida 
and Marsupialia of the whole Mesozoic epoch. 

Looking at the present terrestrial fauna of 
Australia, it appears to me to be very probable 
that it is essentially a remnant of the fauna of the 
Triassic, or even of an earlier, age ; ^ in which case 
Australia must at that time have been in continuity 
with the Arctogseal continent. 

But now comes the further inquiry, Where was 
the highly differentiated Sauropsidan fauna of the 
Trias in Palaeozoic times ? The supposition that 
the Dinosaurian, Crocodilian, Dicynodontian, and 
Plesiosaurian types were suddenly created at the 
end of the Permian epoch may be dismissed, with- 
out further consideration, as a monstrous and un- 
warranted assumption. The supposition that all 
these types were rapidly dififerentiated out of 
Lacertilia in the time represented by the passage 
from the Palaeozoic to the Mesozoic formation, 
appears to me to be hardly more credible, to say 
nothing of the indications of the existence of 
Dinosaurian forms in the Permian rocks which 
have already been obtained. 

For my part, I entertain no sort of doubt that 

the Keptiles, Birds, and Mammals of the Trias are 

the direct descendants of Reptiles, Birds, and 

Mammals which existed in the latter part of the 

' Since this Address was read, Mr. Krefft has sent us news of 
the discovery in Australia of a freshwater fish of strangely 
Palaeozoic aspect, and apparently a Ganoid intei-raediate between 
Dipterus and Lepidosiren. [The now well-known Ceratodus, 1894.] 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 383 

Palaeozoic epoch, but not in any area of the present 
dry land which has yet been explored by the 
geologist. 

This may seem a bold assumption, but it will 
not appear unwarrantable to those who reflect 
upon the very small extent of the earth's surface 
which has hitherto exhibited the remains of the 
great Mammalian fauna of the Eocene times. In this 
respect, the Permian land Vertebrate fauna appears 
to me to be related to the Triassic much as the 
Eocene is to the Miocene. Terrestrial reptiles 
have been found in Permian rocks only in three 
localities ; in some spots of France, and' recently 
of England, and over a more extensive area in 
Germany. Who can suppose that the few fossils 
yet found in these regions give any sufficient re- 
presentation of the Permian fauna ? 

It may be said that the Carboniferous forma- 
tions demonstrate the existence of a vast extent 
of dry land in the present dry-land area, and that 
the supposed terrestrial Palaeozoic Vertebrate 
Fauna ought to have left its remains in the Coal- 
measures, especially as there is now reason to 
believe that much of the coal was formed by the 
accumulation of spores and sporangia on dry land. 
But if we consider the matter more closely, I 
think that this apparent objection loses its force. 
It is clear that, during the Carboniferous epoch, 
the vast area of land which is now covered by 
Coal-measures must have been undergoing a 
gradual depression. The dry land thus depressed 



384 PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

must, therefore, have existed, as such, before the 
Carboniferous epoch — in other words, in Devonian 
times — and its terrestrial population may never 
have been other than such as existed during the 
Devonian, or some previous epoch, although much 
higher forms may have been developed else- 
where. 

Again, let me say that I am making no 
gratuitous assumption of inconceivable changes. 
It is clear that the enormous area of Polynesia is, 
on the whole, an area over which depression has 
taken place to an immense extent ; consequently 
a great continent, or assemblage of subcontinental 
masses of land must have existed at some former 
time, and that at a recent period, geologically 
speaking, in the area of the Pacific. But if that 
continent had contained Mammals, some of them 
must have remained to tell the tale ; and as it is 
well known that these islands have no indigenous 
Mammalia, it is safe to assume that none existed. 
Thus, midway between Australia and South 
America, each of which possesses an abundant 
and diversified mammalian fauna, a mass of land, 
which may have been as large as both put together, 
must have existed without a mammalian in- 
habitant. Suppose that the shores of this great 
land were fi:inged, as those of tropical Australia are 
now, with belts of mangroves, which would extend 
landwards on the one side, and be buried beneath 
littoral deposits on the other side, as depression 
went on; and great beds of mangrove lignite 



XI PALAEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 385 

might accumulate over the sinking land. Let 
upheaval of the whole now take place, in such a 
manner as to bring the emerging land into con- 
tinuity with the South-American or Australian 
continent, and, in course of time, it would be 
peopled by an extension of the fauna of one of 
these two regions — ^just as I imagine the European 
Permian dry land to have been peopled. 

I see nothing whatever against the supposition 
that distributional provinces of terrestrial life 
existed in the Devonian epoch, inasmuch as M. 
Barrande has proved that they existed much 
earlier. I am aware of no reason for doubting 
that, as regards the grades of terrestrial life 
contained in them, one of these may have been 
related to another as New Zealand is to Australia, 
or as Australia is to India, at the present day. 
Analogy seems to me to be rather in favour of, 
than against, the supposition that while only 
Ganoid fishes inhabited the fresh waters of our 
Devonian land. Amphibia and Beptilia, or even 
higher forms, may have existed, though we have 
not yet found them. The earliest Carboniferous 
Amphibia now known, such as Anthracosaurus, 
are so highly specialised that I can by no means 
conceive that they have been developed out of 
piscine forms in the interval between the Devonian 
and the Carboniferous periods, considerable as that 
is. And I take refuge in one of two alternatives : 
either they existed in our own area during the 
Devonian epoch and we have simply not yet found 

VOL. VIII c 



386 PALJiONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

them; or they formed part of the population of 
some other distributional province of that day, 
and only entered our area by migration at the end 
of the Devonian epoch. Whether Bcptilia and 
Mammalia existed along with them is to me, at 
present, a perfectly open question, which is just 
as likely to receive an affirmative as a negative 
answer from future inquirers. 

Let me now gather together the threads of my 
argumentation into the form of a connected hypo- 
thetical view of the manner in which the dis- 
tribution of living and extinct animals has been 
brought about. 

I conceive that distinct provinces of the distribu- 
tion of terrestrial life have existed since the earliest 
period at which that life is recorded, and possibly 
much earlier; and I suppose, with Mr. Darwin, 
that the progress of modification of terrestrial 
forms is more rapid in areas of elevation than in 
areas of depression. I take it to be certain that 
Labyrinthodont Amphibia existed in the distribu- 
tional province which included the dry land 
depressed during the Carboniferous epoch ; and 
I conceive that, in some other distributional 
provinces of that day, which remained in the 
condition of stationary or of increasing dry land, 
the various types of the terrestrial Sauropsida 
and of the Mammalia were gradually developing. 

The Permian epoch marks the commencement 
of a new movement of upheaval in our area, which 
attained its maximum in the Triassic epoch, when 



XI PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION 387 

dry land existed in North America, Europe, Asia, 
and Africa, as it does now. Into this great new 
continental area the Mammals, Birds, and Eeptiles 
developed during the Palaeozoic epoch spread, and 
formed the great Triassic Arctogseal province. 
But, at the end of the Triassic period, the move- 
ment of depression recommenced in our area, 
though it was doubtless balanced by elevation 
elsewhere ; modification and development, checked 
in the one province, went on in that " elsewhere " ; 
and the chief forms of Mammals, Birds and Rep- 
tiles, as we know them, were evolved and peopled 
the Mesozoic continent. I conceive Australia to 
have become separated from the continent as early 
as the end of the Triassic epoch, or not much 
later. The Mesozoic continent must, I conceive, 
have lain to the east, about the shores of the 
North Pacific and Indian Oceans; and I am 
inclined to believe that it continued along the 
eastern side of the Pacific area to what is now the 
province of Austro-Columbia, the characteristic 
fauna of which is probably a remnant of the popu- 
lation of the latter part of this period. 

Towards the latter part of the Mesozoic 
period the movement of upheaval around the 
shores of the Atlantic once more recommenced, 
and was very probably accompanied by a de- 
pression around those of the Pacific. The Verte- 
brate fauna elaborated in the Mesozoic continent 
moved westward and took possession of the new 



388 PALEONTOLOGY AND EVOLUTION XI 

lands, which gradually increased in extent up to, 
and in some directions after, the Miocene epoch. 

It is in favour of this hypothesis, I think, 
that it is consistent with the persistence of a 
general uniformity in the positions of the great 
masses of land and water. From the Devonian 
period, or earlier, to the present day, the four 
great oceans, Atlantic, Pacific, Arctic, and Antarc- 
tic, may have occupied their present positions, 
and only their coasts and channels of communi- 
cation have undergone an incessant alteration. 
And, finally, the hypothesis I have put before you 
requires no supposition that the rate of change in 
organic life has been either greater or less in 
ancient times than it is now ; nor any assumption, 
either physical or biological, which has not its 
justification in analogous phenomena of existing 
nature. 

I have now only to discharge the last duty 
of my office, which is to thank you, not only 
for the patient attention with which you have 
listened to me so long to-day, but also for the 
uniform kindness with which, for the past two 
years, you have rendered my endeavours to per- 
form the important, and often laborious, functions 
of your President a pleasure instead of a burden. 

END OF VOLUME VIII. 



^be J£vev8le^ Series. 

Gloie 8vo. Jj. per volume. 

Essays by George Brimley. Third Edition. 

Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. Edited by A. W. Pollard. 2 Vols. 

Dean Church's Miscellaneous Writings. Collected Edition. 6 Vols. 

MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS. 

DANTE : and other Essays. 

ST. ANSELM. 

SPENSER. 

BACON. 

THE OXFORD MOVEMENT.— Twelve Years, 1333-1845. 
Life of Swift. By Henry Craik, C.B. 2 Vols. New Edition. 
Emerson's Collected Works. 6 Vols. With Introduction by John 

MORLEY. 

MISCELLANIES.— ESSAYS.-POEMS. 

ENGLISH TRAITS AND REPRESENTATIVE MEN. 

THE CONDUCT OF LIFE, AND SOCIETY AND SOLITUDE. 

LETTERS AND SOCIAL AIMS. 
The Letters of Edward FitzGerald. Edited by W. Alois Wright. 

z Vols. New Edition. 
Goethe's Prose Maxims. Translated, with Introductions, by T. Bailey 

' Saunders. 
Thomas Gray's Collected Works in Prose and Verse. Edited by 

Edmund Gosse. 4 Vols. Poems, Journals, and Essays.— Letters, 2 Vols. 

— Notes on Aristophanes and Plato. 
Stray Studies from England and Italy. By John Richard Green. 
The Choice of Books, and other Literary Pieces. By Frederic 

Harrison. 
B, H. Button's Collected Essays. 

LITERARY ESSAYS. 

THEOLOGICAL ESSAYS. 

ESSAYS ON SOME- OF THE MODERN GUIDES OF ENGLISH 

THOUGHT IN MATTERS OF FAITH. 
CRITICISMS ON CONTEMPORARY THOUGHT AND THINKERS. 

2 Vols. 

Thomas Henry Huxley's Collected Works. 

I. METHOD AND RESULTS. 
II. DARWINIANA. 

III. SCIENCE AND EDUCATION. 

IV. SCIENCE AND HEBREW TRADITION. 
V. SCIENCE AND CHRISTIAN TRADITION. 

VI. HUME. With helps to the Study of Berkeley. 
VII. MAN'S PLACE IN NATURE : and other Anthropological Essays. 
VIII. DISCOURSES, BIOLOGICAL AND GEOLOGICAL. 
IX. EVOLUTION AND ETHICS, AND OTHER ESSAYS. 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. 



Works by Henry James. 
PARTIAL PORTRAITS. 
FRENCH POKTS AND NOVELISTS. 

Letters of John Keats to his Family and Friends. Edited by 
Sydney Colvin. 

Charles Eingsley's Novels and Poems. 

WESTWARD HO ! 2 Vols. I ALTON LOCKE. 2 Vols. 

HYP AT [A. 2 Vols. TWO YEARS AGO. 2 Vols. 

YEAST. I Vol. I HEREWARD THE WAKE. 2 Vols. 

POEMS. 2 Vols. 

Charles Lamb's Collected Works. Edited, with Introduction and Notes, 
by the Rev. Canon Ainger, M.A. 6 Vols. 
THE ESSAYS OF ELIA. 

POEMS, PLAYS, AND MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS. 
MRS. LEICESTER'S SCHOOL, and other Writings. 
TALES FROM SHAKESPEARE. By Charles and Mary Lamb. 
THE LETTERS OF CHARLES LAMB. 2 Vols. 

Life of Charles Lamb. By Canon Ainger. 

The Poetical Works of John Milton. Edited, with Memoir, Introduc- 
tion, Notes, by David Masson, M.A., LL.D. In 3 Vols. 
I. THE MINOR POEMS. 
II. PARADISE LOST. 
III. PARADISE REGAINED, AND SAMSON AGONISTES. 

John Morley's Collected Works. In 11 Vols. 
VOLTAIRE. I Vol. 
ROUSSEAU. 2 Vols. 

DIDEROT AND THE ENCYCLOPAEDISTS, z Vols. 
ON COMPROMISE, i Vol. 
MISCELLANIES. 2 Vols. 
BURKE. I Vol. 
STUDIES IN LITERATURE, i Vol. 

Science and a Future Life, and other Essays. By F. W. H. 

Myers, M.A. 

Records of Tennyson, Buskin, and Browning. By Anne Thackeray 
Ritchie. 

Works by Sir J. E. Seeley. 

THE EXPANSION OF ENGLAND. [/« thi Press. 

LECTURES AND ESSAYS. 
ECCE HOMO. 
NATURAL RELIGION. 

Works by James Smetham. 

LETTERS. With an Introductory Memoir. Edited by Sarah Smetham and 

William Davies. With a Portrait. 
LITERARY WORKS. Edited by William Davies. 

Life of Swift. By Henry Craik, C.B. 2 Vols. New Edition. 

Selections from Thoreau. By H. S. Salt. 

Essays in the History of Religious Thought in the West. By 

Brooke Foss Westcott, D.D., D.C.L., Lord Bishop of Durham. 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. 



