2. Magnolia Family. Order Magnoliaceæ

Trees or shrubs, with aromatic or strong-scented and bitter bark, and alternate simple leaves, which are never toothed; large, thin stipules form the covering of the buds, but fall off early. Flowers large, single at the ends of the branches; their leaves in threes, viz. 3 sepals colored like the petals, and 6 petals in two ranks or 9 in three ranks, their margins overlapping in the bud. Stamens very many, on the receptacle, with long anthers occupying, as it were, the side of the filament. Pistils many, packed and partly grown together one above the other, so as to make a sort of cone in fruit. — We have only two genera.

[Figure in: 256. Small Laurel-Magnolia. — A half-opened Small Laurel-Magnolia flower on its stalk, the thick rounded petals cupped round the stamens, between two pointed leaves.]

[Figure io: 257. A stamen magnified. — A single long, narrow Magnolia stamen, the anther cells running down the sides of the short filament.]

[Figure ip: 258. Its cone of fruit, the seeds hanging as they drop. — The Magnolia's cone of fruit with its pistils split open on the back, and three seeds dangling below on long, slender threads.]

1. Stipules flat, not adhering to the leafstalk. Petals 6, greenish-orange. Filaments slender. Pistils overlying each other and grown together to make a spindle-shaped cone, dry when ripe, and separating into a sort of key-fruit. Leaves somewhat 3-lobed, and as if cut off at the end. One species only is known, the (*Liriodéndron Tulipífera*) Tulip-tree.

2. Stipules making a round and pointed bud, adhering to the lower part of the leaf-stalk. Petals 6 to 9. Filaments below the anther very short. Cone of fruit rose-red and fleshy when ripe, the pistils opening on the back, the scarlet fleshy-coated seeds hanging by delicate and very elastic threads, Magnolia.

Magnolia. *Magnòlia.*

Our wild species divide into Laurel-Magnolias, Cucumber-trees, and Umbrella-trees.

§ 1. LAUREL-MAGNOLIAS. Leaves thick, evergreen at the South; leaf-buds silky; flowers rather globe-shaped, appearing through the summer, white, very fragrant

1. Great Laurel-Magnolia. Tree with leaves deep-green and shining above, rusty beneath when young; flower very large. S. It has stood the winter as far north as Philadelphia.  *M. grandiflòra.*

2. Small Laurel-M. (or White Bay). Shrub or small tree; leaves oblong, whitish beneath; flower about 2′ broad. Swamps. E. & S.  *M. glauca.*

§ 2. CUCUMBER-TREES. Leaves thin, scattered along the branches, a little downy beneath, buds silky; flowers not sweet-scented, nor showy, nor very large, appearing in spring.

3. Common Cucumber-M. A tall tree; leaves oval or oblong, pointed; flowers greenish; young fruit resembling a very small cucumber. Common W.  *M. acuminàta.*

4. Yellow Cucumber-M. A low tree; leaves ovate or a little heart-shaped; flowers cream-yellow S.; sometimes cultivated at the North.  *M. cordàta.*

§ 3. UMBRELLA-TREES. Leaves thin, large, those on the flowering shoots forming an umbrella-like circle underneath the blossom; leaf-buds smooth; flower large and white, not sweet-scented, appearing in early spring; petals about 4′ long, tapering below.

5. Ear-leaved Umbrella-M. Leaves nearly 1° long, auricled at the base (Fig. 102). S.  *M. Fràseri.*

6. Common Umbrella-M. Leaves 1° to 2° long, tapering into a short footstalk.  *M. Umbrélla.*

7. There is, besides, the Great-leaved M., with much the largest flowers and leaves of all, the latter 2° or 3° long, scattered, heart-shaped at the base, and white-downy beneath; flower 8′ or 10′ broad. S. and cult. rarely. It does not belong exactly to either the above divisions.  *M. macrophýlla.*

8. The Purple Magnolia, from Japan, is a shrub in some gardens and grounds, flowering before the leaves are out.  *M. purpùrea.*
