5. Barberry Family. Order Berberidaceæ

Readily distinguished (with a single exception) by having the sepals and petals in fours, sixes, or eights (not in fives), and with just the same number of stamens as petals, *one before each petal* (on the receptacle), the anthers opening by an uplifted valve or door on each side. Pistil only one. Harmless, except the May-Apple (also called Mandrake), which has rather poisonous roots, although the fruit is innocent and eatable. Having only one species of each genus, we may ascertain them by the following key: —

[Figure iu: 265. Shoot; — A slender Barberry shoot beset with branching thorns, each an altered leaf, with small buds in their angles and toothed leaves at the base.]

[Figure iv: 266. cluster of leaves and raceme; — A cluster of bristly-toothed Barberry leaves on a short twig, with a drooping raceme of buds and open flowers hanging from among them.]

[Figure iw: 267. enlarged flower spread open; — A Barberry flower spread open and enlarged: six rounded petals, a stamen standing before each, round the single pistil in the centre.]

[Figure ix: 268. a petal more magnified; — A single Barberry petal, oval and veined, with two small oblong glands near its base.]

[Figure iy: 269. a stamen, with the anther opening, of the common Barberry. — A Barberry stamen: a thick filament whose anther opens by two little valves lifted up like doors at the top.]

	Shrubs with yellow bark and wood, and yellow flowers. Stamens and petals 6.
	  Leaves appearing simple, in a cluster above a branching thorn, which is an altered leaf of the year before. Berries red, · · · (*Bérberis*) Barberry
	  Leaves scattered, pinnate, evergreen: no thorns. Berries blue, · · · (*Mahónia*) ⁎ Mahonia.
	Herbs, with perennial roots, all with compound or deeply lobed leaves.
	  Flowers yellowish-green, small. Stamens and petals 6. Leaves decompound, from the root and also at the top of the stem, · · · (*Caulophýllum*) Cohosh.
	  Flowers white, rather large: petals larger than the fugacious calyx.
	    Stamens and narrow petals 8. The one-flowered scape and the 2-parted leaves rising separately from the ground. Fruit a many-seeded pod opening by a lid, · · · (*Jeffersònia*) Twinleaf
	    Stamens 12 to 18: petals rounded, 6 to 9. Flowering stems 2-leaved at the top: leaves shield-shaped and several-cleft, large, with a nodding flower in the fork, · · · (*Podophýllum*) May-Apple.
