6. Water-Lily Family. Order Nymphæaceæ

Water-plants with flowers and leaves on long footstalks, rising out of the water or resting on its surface; the leaves either shield-shaped or deeply heart-shaped. Petals and stamens generally very many. — To the proper Water-Lily family may here well enough be added the Water-shield and the Nelumbo, each of a single species. This gives us four genera, which are distinguished as follows: —

[Figure iz: 270. Flower, bud, and leaf of White Water-Lily. 271. Flower with the parts cut away, all but two petal-like stamens, one ordinary stamen, and the compound pistil. 272. Slice across the 11-celled pistil. — A full-blown White Water-Lily with many pointed petals, a closed bud at right and a broad round leaf behind (270); below left, the flower cut back to its pistil and a few stamens (271); beside it, a round slice of the pistil showing its cells (272).]

[Figure ja: Fruit of Nelumbo. — The top-shaped fruit of the Nelumbo, its broad flat top pitted with holes, each holding a seed, above a ribbed body narrowing to the stalk.]

1. Leaves and flowers from very thick and long creeping rootstocks. Sepals and the many petals and stamens gradually blending into each other, and growing to the surface of the many-celled and many-seeded compound pistil. Flower white, sweet-scented, (*Nymphæ̀a*) White Water-Lily.

2. Leaves and flowers from rootstocks like the last. Sepals 5 or 6, rounded, partly petal-like and yellow. Within these a mass of small, square-topped bodies looking like and not much larger than the stamens, but really answering to petals; and above them the real stamens in great numbers, all under the many-celled and flat-topped pistil, (*Nuphar*) Yellow Pond-Lily.

3. Leaves and small dull-purple flowers from a slender stem rising in the water; the oval leaves attached by the middle of the under side (centrally peltate). Sepals and petals narrow, each 4, and 12 to 18 stamens, all under the 4 to 16 separate and few-seeded pistils, (*Brasènia*) Watershield.

4. Sepals and petals (alike in many ranks) and stamens many, all falling off early, all under the pistils, which are 12 or more in number and separately embedded in the flat upper face of an enlarged top-shaped receptacle. In fruit they are round and eatable nuts (Fig. 273). Leaves very large (1° or 2° broad), round, attached by the middle underneath, cupped, rising out of the water, as do the great greenish-yellow flowers also, on long stalks. Common W. & S. (*Nelúmbium*) Nelumbo.
