12. Violet Family. Order Violaceæ

Herbs with 5 sepals, 5 petals, and 5 stamens borne on the receptacle, the lower petal rather different from the rest and enlarged at the bottom into a projecting sac or spur. Stamens very short and broad, the anthers a little united by their edges around the pistil. Pistil one, with one style. Pod one-celled, with three rows of seeds on its walls. — Leaves with stipules. Roots and juice rather acrid. The common plants of the family belong to the genus,

1. Violet. *Viola.*

Flower nodding on the summit of the flower-stalk. Style club-shaped; stigma bent over to one side. — Flowering in spring, and some species continuing to blossom all summer.

⁎ Stemless species, i. e. leaves and naked flower-stalks all from rootstocks on or under ground.

† Garden species from Europe spreading by runners or rootstocks above ground.

1. Sweet or English Violet. Leaves rounded heart-shaped; flowers blue-purple, also a white variety, very fragrant. Cultivated, generally double-flowered.  *V. odoràta.*

† † Wild species, with tufted and fleshy uneven rootstocks. Flowers short-spurred.

‡ Flowers purple or blue, nearly scentless.

2. Common Blue V. Flowers pretty large; side-petals bearded; leaves on long upright stalks, heart-shaped or kidney-shaped, the sides at the bottom rolled in when young, slightly toothed, or in the lobed or *Hand-leaf* variety cleft or parted in various degrees. Low grounds.  *V. cucullàta.*

3. Hairy V. Leaves short-stalked and flat on the ground; flowers smaller; otherwise like the last. Dry soil, S. & W.  *V. villòsa.*

4. Arrow-leaved V. Early leaves on short and margined footstalks, oblong-heart-shaped, halberd-shaped, arrow-shaped, lance-oblong or ovate. Varying greatly, hairy or smoothish; side petals or all of them bearded; flowers large for the size of the plant. Dry or moist ground.  *V. sagittàta.*

5. Bird's-foot V. Leaves cut into fine linear lobes; petals lilac-purple, large, beardless. Moist sandy soil.  *V. pedàta.*

‡ ‡ Flowers small, white, faintly sweet-scented, the lower petal streaked. Small, in damp soil.

6. Bland V. Leaves rounded heart-shaped or kidney-shaped; petals without any beard.  *V. blanda.*

7. Primrose-leaved V. Leaves oblong or ovate; side-petals generally bearded.  *V. primulæfòlia.*

8. Lance-leaved Violet. Leaves lance-shaped, erect, smooth; petals not bearded.  *V. lanceolàta.*

‡ ‡ ‡ Flowers light yellow, small.

9. Round-leaved V. Leaves round ovate and heart-shaped, spreading flat on the ground; side-petals bearded and brown-streaked inside. Cold woods, N.  *V. rotundifòlia.*

⁎ ⁎ Leafy-stemmed species.

† Wild species, perennial, with heart-shaped leaves, blossoming nearly all summer.

10. Long-spurred V. Spur ½′ long, considerably longer than the pale bluish corolla.  *V. rostràta.*

11. Muhlenberg's V. Low, spreading by runners; spur stout, not more than half the length of the pale violet corolla. Wet woods.  *V. Muhlenbérgii.*

12. Pale V. Spur much shorter than the cream-colored corolla; lower petal streaked.  *V. striàta.*

13. Canada V. Tall; petals white above, violet-tinged beneath; spur very short.  *V. Canadénsis.*

14. Downy V. Tall, leafless below, downy; corolla yellow, spur very short.  *V. pubéscens.*

† † Cultivated or run wild; root annual or biennial.

15. Heart's-ease or Pansy V. Low; upper leaves oval, the lower heart-shaped; stipules large and leaf-like, pinnatifid; corolla yellow-whitish, violet-blue, and purple, varying or mixed, large and showy in the cultivated Pansy, becoming small when run wild.  *V. tricolor.*
