69. Gentian Family. Order Gentianaceæ

Smooth herbs with a colorless bitter juice; the leaves, with two exceptions, opposite, sessile, and entire; the regular flowers having as many stamens as there are lobes to the corolla, and alternate with them; stigmas or branches of the style 2; pod one-celled, with many and usually very small seeds on the walls, usually in two lines. — Tonic, generally very bitter plants: none of them poisonous. Flowers commonly large and handsome.

	Leaves simple, opposite and sessile. Corolla with the lobes *convolute*, i. e. each with one edge in and one out, in the bud.
	  Corolla wheel-shaped, 5- to 12-parted, white or pink, in cymes. Style 2-parted. (Two or three handsome-flowered species in salt marshes, and one or two on river-banks, &c., especially South), · · · (*Sabbátia*) Sabbatia.
	  Corolla funnel-form or bell-shaped, commonly blue. Style very short or none: stigmas 2, broad, · · · (*Gentiàna*) Gentian.
	Leaves simple, alternate or all from the root, round-heart-shaped, floating on the water, with very long footstalks, which bear near their summit a cluster of small white flowers, along with some spur-shaped bodies. Corolla 5-parted, the lobes folded inwards in the bud, · · · (*Limnánthemum*) Floating-Heart.
	Leaves with 3 oblong leaflets; footstalks long, alternate, their base sheathing the thickish rootstock or the lower part of a scape, which bears a raceme of white flowers. Corolla 5-parted, the lobes white-bearded inside, their edges turned inwards in the bud. One species, in bogs, · · · (*Menyánthes*) Buckbean.

Gentian. *Gentiàna.*

⁎ Stamens separate: no plaits or fringes between the lobes of the corolla.

1. Five-flowered Gentian. Slender, branching; leaves lance-ovate; branches about 5-flowered; corolla light blue, hardly 1′ long, with 5 pointed naked lobes. Fl. late summer and autumn; as do all the species.  *G. quinqueflòra.*

2. Fringed G. Leaves lance-shaped or lance-ovate; flowers single on a long naked stalk; corolla 2′ long, sky-blue, with 4 obovate beautifully fringed lobes. Low grounds.  *G. crinìta.*

⁎ ⁎ Anthers cohering with each other more or less: corolla with 5 plaited folds.

3. Closed G. Stout, leafy to the top, the flowers in sessile clusters, terminal and in the axils of the upper lance-oblong leaves; corolla pale blue or purplish, rather club-shaped, with the mouth contracted, and with 5 fringe-toothed plaits, the lobes hardly any.  *G. Andréwsii.*

4. Soapwort G. The light blue corolla more open and bell-shaped, its lobes short and broad, but longer than the intervening plaits; otherwise much as No. 3. S. and W.  *G. Saponària.*

5. Whitish G. Leaves lance-ovate with a heart-shaped clasping base; corolla dull white or yellowish, with lobes longer than the plaits. S. and W.  *G. alba.*
