74. Birthwort Family. Order Aristolochiaceæ

Herbs or twining vines, with perfect and large flowers, the tube of the 3-lobed calyx coherent with the 6-celled and many-seeded ovary. Leaves mostly heart-shaped or kidney-shaped, and entire, on long footstalks, alternate, or else from the rootstock at the surface of the ground. Lobes of the calyx edge to edge in the bud, usually dull-colored.

[Figure qe: 471. Plant of Canada Asarum or Wild-Ginger, in flower. — A creeping rootstock with fibrous roots, sending up two long-stalked kidney-shaped leaves and, between them near the ground, a single short bell-shaped flower.]

[Figure qf: 472 Magnified flower divided lengthwise, and the calyx spread out flat. — The flower cut down the middle, its three pointed calyx lobes spread flat, the stamens and thick style in the centre and the ovary below full of seeds.]

[Figure qg: 473. Flower, with the lobes of the calyx cut away, and the ovary cut across. — Above, the ring of stamens with pointed filaments round the thick style; below, the ovary cut across to show its six cells of seeds.]

[Figure qh: 474. A separate stamen, more magnified; outside view. — A single stamen seen from outside: a long flat filament with the anther cells along its middle and a slender point above.]

[Figure qi: 475. Magnified seed divided lengthwise. — An egg-shaped seed cut in half lengthwise, showing its thick coat and the finely lined interior.]

	Stemless herbs, with a pair of leaves and a flower between them from the spicy-tasted and creeping rootstock: calyx short, 3-cleft or 3-lobed; stamens 12, with filaments, which are united only with the base of the thick 6-lobed style, and are pointed above the anthers, · · · (*Ásarum*) Wild-Ginger.
	Twining shrubs or else low herbs: calyx a crooked tube, with a narrow throat and a slightly 3-lobed spreading border: stamens 6, sessile on the outside of the 3 lobes of the sessile stigma, i. e. two anthers or 4 cells to each lobe, attached to the stigma by their whole length: fruit a 6-valved pod, filled with numerous flat seeds, · · · (*Aristolòchia*) Birthwort.

Birthwort. *Aristolòchia.*

1. Snakeroot B. or Virginia Snakeroot. Herb 8′ to 15′ high; several stems from a tufted root, downy; flowers borne next the ground, in general shape much like the letter S; leaves oblong-heart-shaped or halberd-shaped. Rich woods; becoming scarce.  *A. serpentària.*

2. Pipe-vine B. A tall woody climber, with rounded kidney-shaped leaves, 8′ or 12′ broad when full grown; flower 1½′ long, curved like a Dutch pipe; greenish outside, and with the short 3-lobed border brown-purple within. Alleghany Mountains, or near them; and cultivated for arbors.  *A. Sipho.*
