82. Nettle Family. Order Urticaceæ

Monœcious, diœcious, or barely polygamous herbs, shrubs, or trees, with stipules, and a regular calyx, free from the ovary, which forms a one-seeded fruit. Divides into four distinct subfamilies which might be reckoned as families, viz.: —

I. ELM Subfamily. Trees, with alternate simple leaves, and polygamous or often nearly perfect flowers: styles or long stigmas 2.

	Ovary 2-celled, a hanging ovule in each cell: stamens 4 to 9. Flowers earlier than the leaves. Fruit a thin key, winged all round, one-seeded (Fig. 207), · · · (*Ulmus*) Elm.
	Ovary one-celled, with one hanging ovule: stamens 5 or 6. Fruit a small drupe. Leaves ovate or heart-shaped, · · · (*Celtis*) Hackberry.

II. BREADFRUIT Subfamily. Trees, with a milky or colored juice, and alternate leaves; the flowers in heads or catkin-like spikes, the fertile ones fleshy in fruit, or both kinds in a fleshy receptacle. Styles 1 or 2: ovary becoming an akene in fruit. Inner bark often tough and fibrous.

	Flowers, of both kinds mixed, enclosed in a pear-shaped fleshy receptacle like a rose-hip which is pulpy when ripe, · · · (*Ficus*) ⁎Fig.
	Flowers monœcious, both kinds in separate catkin-like spikes; the calyx, &c. in the fertile sort becoming fleshy and eatable, making a berried multiple fruit (248, Fig. 223). Stamens 4. Styles 2, · · · (*Morus*) Mulberry.
	Flowers diœcious: the fertile ones collected in a close and round head which is fleshy in fruit. Stamens 4. Style 1.
	  Sterile flowers in spikes. Leaves round-ovate or heart-shaped, rough above, soft-downy beneath, some of them palmately lobed, · · · (*Broussonètia*) ⁎Paper-Mulberry.
	  Sterile flowers in racemes. Leaves oblong, smooth above, entire; branchlets spiny, · · · (*Maclùra*) ⁎Osage-Orange.

III. NETTLE Subfamily. Herbs (in this country), with opposite or alternate leaves, a tough fibrous bark, and a colorless juice. Flowers monœcious or diœcious, in spikes, racemes, &c., not in catkins. Stamens of the same number as the sepals. Ovary one-celled, and style or stigma only one; fruit an akene.

	Plants beset with stinging bristles.
	  Leaves opposite: sepals 4 in both kinds of flowers: stigma a little tuft, · · · (*Urtìca*) Nettle.
	  Leaves alternate: sepals 5 in the sterile, 4 unequal or 2 in the fertile, flowers: stigma awl-shaped, · · · (*Lapórtea*) Wood-Nettle.
	Plants destitute of stinging hairs, and
	  Very smooth: leaves opposite: sepals 3 or 4, separate: stigma a tuft, · · · (*Pìlea*) Clearweed.
	  Smooth or hairy: leaves often alternate: calyx in the fertile flowers a cup with a narrow mouth enclosing the ovary.
	    Stigma long and thread-shaped: flower-clusters naked, in spikes, · · · (*Bœhmèria*) False-Nettle.
	    Stigma a little tuft: flowers in axillary cymes or clusters, accompanied by leafy bracts, · · · (*Parietària*) Pellitory.

IV. HEMP Subfamily. Herbs, with diœcious flowers, a colorless juice, fibrous tough bark, and opposite, or sometimes alternate, palmately-lobed or compound roughish leaves. Sterile flowers in compound racemes or panicles, with 5 sepals and 5 stamens. Fertile flowers crowded, and with only one sepal, which embraces the ovary and akene: stigmas 2, long.

	Herb erect, annual: leaves of 5 to 7 lance-shaped toothed leaflets. Stamens drooping. Fertile flowers in spiked clusters, each with a narrow bract, · · · (*Cánnabis*) Hemp.
	Herb twining: root perennial: leaves heart-shaped and lobed. Fertile flowers in short and scaly catkins, with broad and thin bracts, in fruit making a sort of membranaceous cone, · · · (*Hùmulus*) Hop.
