97. Greenbrier Family. Order Smilaceæ

Of this family, as here arranged, we have only a single genus, viz.: —

Greenbrier. *Smilax.*

Known at once by being climbing plants (or disposed to climb) and having a tendril on each side of the footstalk of the leaf; and by the leaves being veiny between the ribs, almost as in Exogens, alternate, sometimes evergreen, simple, and entire. Flowers diœcious, in axillary umbels. Perianth generally of 6 equal and spreading greenish or yellowish separate pieces. The sterile flowers have as many stamens, with oblong or linear one-celled anthers fixed by their base to the filament, and turned inwards. The fertile flowers have a round ovary, with 3 short spreading styles or stigmas. Fruit a berry, with 2 or few large seeds. Fl. summer.

⁎ Stems woody and often prickly, yellowish-green: ovary and berry 2-celled and 2-seeded, black when ripe, generally with a bluish bloom.

1. Common G. or Catbrier. Leaves thickish, round-ovate or slightly heart-shaped, and with 5 to 9 ribs, green both sides; branchlets often square; prickles short; peduncles of the umbel not longer than the petiole. Moist thickets.  *S. rotundifòlia.*

2. Glaucous G. Leaves ovate, glaucous beneath; peduncles longer than the petiole: otherwise nearly as No. 1.  *S. glauca.*

3. Bristly G. Leaves ovate and heart-shaped, large and thin, green both sides; stem below covered with long and weak blackish bristly prickles; peduncles much longer than the petioles. Thickets, N. and W.  *S. hispida.*

4. Laurel-leaved G. Not prickly; leaves lance-oblong or lance-linear, thick and evergreen, with 3 to 5 ribs; peduncles of the umbel very short. Sandy soil, S.  *S. laurifòlia.*

⁎ ⁎ Stem herbaceous, climbing, not prickly: ovary and blue-black berry 3-celled, 6-seeded.

5. Carrion-flower G. Leaves thin, pale, mostly heart-shaped, with 7 to 9 ribs, sometimes rather downy beneath, long-petioled; peduncles 3′ to 8′ long, longer than the leaves; flowers of the odor of carrion. Meadows and river-banks.  *S. herbàcea.*
