101. Iris Family. Order Iridaceæ

Herbs with perennial roots, commonly with rootstocks, bulbs, or corms, and with equitant leaves (151, Fig. 64); the flowers perfect, regular or irregular; tube of the corolla-like perianth below coherent with the surface of the ovary, and so appearing to grow from its summit; stamens only 3, one before each of the outer divisions of the perianth; their anthers turned outwards, i. e. looking towards the perianth and opening on that side. Ovary 3-celled, making a many-seeded pod: style one: stigmas 3, often flat or petal-like. Herbage, rootstocks, &c. generally acrid or sharp-tasted. Flowers generally showy, and from a spathe of one or more leaf-like bracts, or from the axils of the uppermost leaves, each one generally opening but once.

[Figure rt: 514. Plant of Crested Dwarf Iris. — The whole plant: narrow sword-shaped leaves from a short creeping rootstock with fibrous roots, and a stem bearing one iris flower with spreading, crested outer divisions.]

[Figure ru: 515. Top of the style and the 3 petal-like stigmas, also 2 of the stamens. — The style dividing at its top into three broad, arching petal-like stigmas, with a slender stamen lying under two of them.]

[Figure rv: 516. Magnified pistil and lower part of the tube of the perianth, divided lengthwise: the foliage cut away. — A long slender tube of the perianth rising from an oval ovary cut lengthwise to show its rows of ovules, set between the cut-off bases of two leaves.]

[Figure rw: 517. Lower part of a pod, divided crosswise. — A rounded pod on a short stalk, cut across to show three cells with their seeds.]

[Figure rx: 518. Seed. — A single rounded, somewhat three-sided seed with a finely lined coat.]

[Figure ry: 519. Magnified section of the same, showing the embryo. — The seed cut through, showing the thick coat, the albumen within, and the small embryo lying near the narrow end.]

	Filaments monadelphous in a tube which encloses the style as in a sheath: stigmas thread-shaped: perianth 6-parted nearly to the ovary, widely spreading, opening in sunshine and for only one day.
	  Flowers small, blue or purple, with 6 equal obovate divisions: stigmas simple: stems or scapes flat or 2-winged, from fibrous roots; leaves narrow and grass-like, · · · (*Sisyrìnchium*) Blue-eyed-Grass.
	  Flowers very large, orange and spotted with crimson and purple; the 3 inner divisions much smaller and narrowed in the middle: stigmas each 2-cleft: scape terete, from a coated bulb; leaves plaited, · · · (*Tigrìdia*) ⁎Tiger-flower.
	Filaments separate: stigmas flattened, or petal-like.
	  Perianth 6-parted down to the ovary, regular and wheel-shaped, the divisions obovate-oblong, all alike, yellow, with darker spots: seeds remaining after the valves of the pod fall, berry-like and black, the whole looking like a blackberry (whence the common name). Stems leafy below, from a rootstock: leaves sword-shaped, · · · (*Pardánthus*) ⁎Blackberry-Lily.
	  Perianth irregularly 6-cleft; 3 of the lobes arched and making an upper lip, the 3 lower more spreading, yellow, orange, or reddish. Stem rising from a corm, and bearing many flowers in a one-sided spike, · · · (*Gladìolus*) ⁎Corn-Flag.
	  Perianth 6-cleft; the divisions of two kinds, the 3 outer recurved or spreading, the 3 inner alternate with the others, smaller, erect, and differently shaped: stigmas 3, petal-like, one before each erect stamen. Generally with thick creeping rootstocks, · · · (*Iris*) Iris.
	  Perianth with a slender tube, rising (with the linear flat leaves) from a corm or solid bulb (Fig. 76); the summit divided into 6 roundish, equal, erect, or barely spreading divisions: stigmas 3, thick and wedge-shaped, somewhat fringe-toothed. Fl. in early spring, · · · (*Crocus*) ⁎Crocus.

Iris or Flower-de-Luce. *Iris.*

⁎ Common cultivated species in gardens: outer divisions of the perianth with a bearded crest.

1. Common Iris. Flowers several on a stem, 1° to 3° high, and much longer than the sword-shaped leaves, light blue or purple.  *I. sambucìna.*

2. Dwarf Garden Iris. Flowers close to the ground, hardly exceeding the sword-shaped leaves, violet-purple, the divisions obovate, the 3 outer recurved. Fl. in early spring.  *I. pùmila.*

⁎ ⁎ Wild species.

3. Crested Dwarf Iris. Low and almost stemless, from rootstocks spreading on the ground; leaves short; flower pale blue, the tube thread-shaped (2′ long) and longer than the spatulate divisions, the three outer divisions with a beardless crest. Fl. spring. S. and W., and in some gardens.  *I. cristàta.*

4. Larger I. or Blue-Flag. Stem stout, 1° to 3° high, bearing several crestless and beardless purple-blue and variegated flowers, their inner divisions much smaller than the outer; leaves sword-shaped, ¾′ wide. Wet places; flowering in late spring.  *I. versicolor.*

5. Slender I. or Blue-Flag. Stem slender; leaves narrowly linear (¼′ wide), and flower smaller than in No. 4: otherwise much like it. Wet places, E.  *I. Virginica.*
