TEXT ANALYSIS — J. A. Fleming, Waves and Ripples in Water, Air, and Aether (1902)
Source: Project Gutenberg #71757. Christmas 1901 course, Royal Institution.

READ candle/text_analysis.txt AND forces/ FIRST. Same institution, same
tradition, same live-demonstration register. What follows is only the
differences.

WHO AND WHAT

John Ambrose Fleming, professor of electrical engineering at University
College London, forty years after Faraday's courses and forty years
younger as a lecturer. He would go on to invent the thermionic valve.
This course was given in the winter of 1901, weeks after Marconi first
signalled across the Atlantic, and the last chapter is a report from the
front line of that work by a man who was consulting for Marconi at the
time.

Six chapters, ~81k words: water waves; the waves ships make (including
the design of America's Cup yachts); waves in air; sound and music;
electric oscillations; and waves in the aether.

VOICE — HOW HE DIFFERS FROM FARADAY

  - MORE FORMAL and more expository. Faraday performs; Fleming explains,
    then demonstrates. Longer paragraphs, more sustained argument, more
    numbers. Do NOT try to make him sound like Faraday.
  - He still addresses the room directly and still runs experiments in
    the continuous present. Keep every "you will see", "I have here",
    and every bracketed stage direction.
  - He is proud of the "juvenile audience" custom and defends it in his
    preface as including "those who are young in spirit as well as those
    who are young in years". That sets his level: he never talks down,
    and he assumes an audience that can follow a formula if it is
    explained.
  - He quotes and credits generously — Kelvin, Rayleigh, Scott Russell,
    Worthington, Hertz, Marconi — and often at length. Keep the credits.

THE AETHER — THE CENTRAL EDITORIAL POINT

A third of this book is a confident, detailed exposition of the
luminiferous aether: a real elastic medium filling space, in which light
and radio waves are strains and vibrations. This is the book's organising
idea and it is wrong. Michelson and Morley had already failed to detect
it; Einstein was three years away.

FOLLOW THE VERNE RULE ABSOLUTELY. The aether stays exactly as Fleming
has it: asserted, argued for, and never hedged. No footnotes saying "we
now know", no softening to "what physicists then believed", no scare
quotes. The reader is reading 1902, and the interest of the book is
partly that it is a first-rate mind being completely confident about
something that was about to evaporate. Say nothing.

The same applies to everything else dated: his figures for the velocity
of electric waves, his account of the coherer, his claims about what
wireless telegraphy would become. All as written.

TERMINOLOGY — LOCKED

  aether               keep this spelling throughout (it is in the title)
  wave-motion          keep as one hyphenated idea, his term of art
  ripple / wave        he distinguishes them technically (ripples are
                       ruled by surface tension, waves by gravity) — keep
                       the distinction sharp everywhere
  wave-length, wave-front, wave-train, node, anti-node, damping
  stationary waves, forced and free vibrations, resonance
  electric oscillation, oscillator, resonator, coherer, syntony
  Hertzian waves, electric radiation
  gamut, temperament, concord, discord — the music chapter's terms
  indiarubber          -> rubber
  telegraphy without wires / wireless telegraphy -> keep both as he uses
                       them; do not modernise to "radio"
  micron (μ)           keep, with his own gloss (a thousandth of a mm)

Units and every numerical value exactly as printed.

FIGURES — 87 plates

Markers as in the earlier books. Notes specific to this one:

  - [Figure front] is the Graphic's drawing of a Christmas Lecture in
    progress at the Royal Institution, by F. C. Dickinson — an audience
    of children watching a demonstration. Caption it as what it is.
  - FIGURES 8, 9 AND 10 are Worthington's stroboscopic photographs of a
    drop falling into milk, and their captions in the original are the
    ELAPSED TIMES: 0.0262 sec, 0.0391 sec, 0.101 sec after contact. Put
    those times in the modern captions; they are the whole point of the
    sequence.
  - [Figure 42a] and [Figure 42b] are the two halves of one figure
    printed across facing pages: American yachts entered for the
    America's Cup 1851–1899, and British yachts 1885–1901. Name the
    yachts in the captions; the prose compares their hull lines.
  - [Figure music] is a musical staff and has no number: its caption
    stands alone with no "Figure N" prefix.
  - The Morse alphabet, the Morse numerals and a specimen line of Morse
    are TEXT, not plates, and prep.py has kept them as indented blocks.
    Reproduce the dots and dashes exactly.

FLEMING'S NOTES

27 of them, his own, inlined by prep.py as "Note: ..." paragraphs after
the paragraph that cites them. They are in HIS voice — first person,
often a reading recommendation or a source — so unlike Crookes's notes in
the Faraday volumes they should NOT be made third-person.

FAMOUS PASSAGES (also in must_contain.txt)

  1. The preface on the "juvenile audience" being an elastic term taking
     in those young in spirit as well as young in years.
  2. The opening of Chapter One, standing by the seashore.
  3. Chapter Six on signalling without wires across the sea.

RATIO

  python3 verify.py fleming --min-ratio 0.85 --max-ratio 1.3
