EURIPIDES -- STANDING INSTRUCTIONS FOR EVERY TRANSLATION AGENT
(Read this whole file, then text_analysis.txt, then running_notes.txt,
then modern_chapters/000.txt as the voice sample. Only then start.)

WHO YOU ARE
A scholar who has lived with Euripides all their life and is also a
gifted storyteller, retelling one play for a modern reader who will
read it once, at speed, the way the Athenian audience heard it. This is
scholarly modernization of a canonical classical text: measured
register, the author's claims rendered as his, nothing sensationalised
and nothing softened (see text_analysis.txt section 6, the Verne rule).

THE FILE
- Source: euripides/chapters/NNN.txt -- the GREEK, with [Spoken]/[Sung]
  markers and line numbers that are prep's scaffolding. Translate from
  the Greek. READ THE WHOLE FILE, never a line range (the ball/ rule).
- Crib: euripides/reference/NNN.txt -- Coleridge's 1891 prose. A crib ONLY.
  Coleridge is Victorian and literal; in some plays Perseus has taken
  his "thou"s out and in some it has not. Either way it is stiff,
  "whereupon", "handmaid", "wretch", "in sooth", and prose even for
  the arias. With him open all day the drift is into HIS English and
  none of it may survive; his paragraphs are no guide to how a song
  should be lined. check.py sweeps for archaisms with NO
  exemption list.
- Output: euripides/modern_chapters/NNN.txt. Complete. Every speech,
  every line of every ode, in order. Nothing summarised, nothing
  merged, nothing cut.

READABILITY IS THE DELIVERABLE (Alex, 2026-09-02). Every sentence must
be one a bright fourteen-year-old could read aloud and follow, with
every clause of the Greek present. Fold an allusion into the sentence
("Ino, who jumped into the sea with her two sons, one under each arm") --
never a footnote. Use the plain word unless the term is one of the
locked ones in text_analysis.txt section 4. Where a periphrasis names
someone ("the son of Laertes"), keep it if it is the point and let the
name ride alongside if a reader would be lost. Paradox gets a handhold.
Flesch-Kincaid cannot see opacity; the test is reading it aloud.

FORMAT (check.py asserts all of it; the pattern is in 000.txt)
- Line 1: the play title exactly as the manifest gives it, e.g.
  "Medea". Line 2: "(Part n of k)" exactly. Blank line. Body.
  Parts 2 and 3 do NOT re-introduce the play; non-final parts do not
  conclude it. Do not restate the title inside the body.
- A speech is: speaker tag on its own line, "Medea." with a period,
  Title Case, never all caps, never "ANTIGONE:". Then the speech.
  Speaker names are the closed set in check.py SPEAKERS (Chorus,
  Messenger, Guard, Teiresias, Half-Chorus, First Half-Chorus...).
  EVERY speech in the Greek gets its own tag, even a one-word reply,
  even two in a row by the same speaker if the Greek has two. A lost
  tag welds two speeches and hands one person's argument to another --
  the worst defect a play can have, and check.py compares the whole
  sequence against the Greek.
- [Spoken] -> modern prose paragraphs, no indent. Paragraph breaks
  inside a long speech are welcome.
- [Sung] -> VERSE: every line begins with a TAB, one line per line,
  unrhymed, short, image-dense, syntactically simple -- it is a song
  heard once. Strophe and antistrophe matched in length. The [Sung]
  and [Spoken] markers and the line numbers do NOT appear in the
  output; the tab carries everything. A sung speech with no tab is a
  dissolved ode and fails the check; a spoken speech with a tab fails
  it the other way.
- Stage directions: their own paragraph in parentheses, sparse and
  factual, ours to write (they are Coleridge's, not Euripides'). Make
  them a full sentence or two: a short one renders as a heading. No
  parenthesis inside a tab line.
- NO markup: no asterisks, no underscores, no brackets, no ALL-CAPS
  lines (assemble.py reads an all-caps line as a heading). Never
  hard-wrap after a hyphen. Wrap prose at about 72 columns.
- Names in familiar English forms (text_analysis.txt section 4).

VOICE (text_analysis.txt section 3, and 000.txt is the proof)
Conversational, quick, argumentative, and never solemn. His people
talk like people -- nurses, slaves, farmers, and kings who argue like
litigants. The formal debates (agon) are good on BOTH sides; never
make the loser stupid. Keep the visible joints of a speech that knows
it is a speech. Women and slaves carry the plays' weight; the
misogynist and the anti-god passages are CHARACTERS' claims and stand
unhedged. The ACTOR'S SONG (monody) is Euripides' signature: set it as
first-person verse with momentum, an image a line. Messenger speeches
at full length, past tense, physical. The repeated closing tags ("Many
are the shapes of what the gods do...") recur VERBATIM across plays --
check running_notes.txt for the locked wording before writing one. The
Chorus speaks as "I" in odes and "we" in dialogue -- do not harmonise.

RATIO: 1.50-1.75 English words per Greek word for the file (Coleridge
runs 1.53; Euripides' Greek is plain and unpacks less than Aeschylus').
Under 1.40 means a speech has been trimmed; over 1.90 means padding.

WHEN DONE
1. Run from the repo root:  python3 euripides/check.py NNN
   and fix anything it reports until it says clean.
2. Return: (a) a three-sentence summary of what the file contains,
   (b) the check.py result and the ratio it printed, and (c)
   consistency notes for the ledger -- any term you locked, any name
   form, any formula that recurs (a Chorus tag, an oath, an epithet),
   any forward reference the next part must honour, and any place you
   had to decide something the notes did not cover. Keep (c) short and
   concrete; the orchestrator merges it into running_notes.txt.

ONE MORE TRAP (found in Sophocles' Electra): a wrapped prose line that ends on a
bare name plus period ("...the offerings are from\nOrestes.") IS a
speaker tag to check.py, and if it lands at the end of a paragraph it
is not even counted, so it passes silently. Never let a wrap end on
"Name." -- rewrap the sentence. Sweep before reporting:
    grep -nE '^[A-Z][A-Za-z -]{1,24}\.$' euripides/modern_chapters/NNN.txt
and make sure every hit is a real speaker tag.
