Appendix XVIII: Just Intonation in Singing

(See p. {@326b|326b}.)

{¶422c}Since the publication of the first edition of this book, I have had an opportunity of seeing the *Enharmonic Organ*, constructed by General Perronet Thompson,‡ which allows of performance in 21 major and minor scales with different tonics harmonically connected. This instrument is much more complicated than my harmonium. It contains 40 pipes to the octave, and has three distinct manuals, with, on the whole, 65 digitals to the octave, as the same note has to be sometimes struck on two or all of the manuals. This instrument allows of the performance of much more extensive modulations than my harmonium, without requiring any enharmonic interchanges. It is even possible to execute tolerably quick passages and ornamentations upon it, notwithstanding its apparently involved fingering. {¶423}The organ was erected in the Sunday School Chapel, 10 Jewin Street, Aldersgate, London,⁎ and was built by Messrs. Robson, 101 St. Martin's Lane, London. It contains only one stop of the usual *principal* work, has Venetian shutters forming a swell throughout, and is provided with a peculiar mechanism for correcting the influence of temperature on the intonation.

Footnote: ⁎ [Shortly before his death General Perronet Thompson presented this organ to Mr. John Curwen, mentioned in note ††, below. The General's executors had it reconstructed in a schoolroom at Plaistow, Essex. It was afterwards exhibited at the Scientific Loan Exhibition at South Kensington Museum in 1876, and has remained there ever since, at the top of the staircase leading to room Q of the Science Collections.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ‡ [The text is in error. There are 100 not 78 pipes to the octave, and *E₁* is not identified with *F*♭.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ‡ ['On the principles and Practice of *Just Intonation*, with a view to the Abolition of Temperament, and embodying the results of the Tonic *Sol-fa* Associations, as illustrated on the *Enharmonic Organ* . . . presenting the power of performing correctly in 21 keys (with the minors to the extent of involving not more than five flats), and a correction for changes of temperature. . . . Calculated for taking the place of the choir organ in a cathedral, and learned by the blind in six lessons. With an Appendix tracing the identity of design with the Enharmonic of the Ancients.' By T. Perronet Thompson, F.R.S. Ninth edition, 1866. The exact compass of this organ will be explained in App. XX. sect. F. No. 6. General Thompson was born at Hull, in 1783. and died at Blackheath, 6 September, 1869. He had been four years in the navy before joining the army, and was prominent during the Corn Law Abolition agitation. He was many years editor of the *Westminster Review*, and was first returned to Parliament for Hull in 1835.—*Translator.*]

Mr. H. W. Poole has lately transformed his organ † so as to get rid of stops for changing the intonation, and has constructed a peculiar arrangement of the digitals, which enables him to play in all keys with the same fingering. His scale contains not merely the just Fifths and Thirds in the series of major chords, but also the natural or subminor Sevenths for the tones of both series. There are 78 pipes to the octave, and *F*♭ has been identified with *E₁*, &c., as upon my harmonium.‡

Footnote: † *Silliman's American Journal of Science and Arts*, vol. xliv., July 1867. [In its original form the instrument, with an ordinary keyboard and pedals, was termed the *Enharmonic Organ*, and is described in *Silliman's Journal*, vol. ix. p. 209, for May 1850. The new fingerboard is figured and described hereafter, App. XX. sect. F. No. 7.—*Translator.*]

Successions of chords on General Thompson's instrument are extraordinarily harmonious, and, perhaps, on account of their softer quality of tone, even more surprising in their agreeable character than on my harmonium.§ I had an {¶423b}opportunity, at the same time, of hearing a female singer, who had often sung to it, perform a piece to the accompaniment of the enharmonic organ, and her singing gave me a peculiarly satisfactory feeling of perfect certainty in intonation, which is usually absent when a pianoforte accompanies. There was also a violinist ⁎⁎ present who had not been much accustomed to play with the organ, and accompanied well-known airs by ear. He hit off the intonation exactly as long as the key remained unchanged, and it was only in some rapid modulations that he was not able to follow it perfectly.

Footnote: § ['On organs of many stops, one or more ought certainly to be tuned with mathematically correct intonation, on account of their wonderful effect, to be employed (of course without using any others at the same time) as the music of the spheres (*als Gesang der Sphären*). It is impossible to form any notion of the effect of a chord in mathematically just intonation, without having heard it. I have such a one to compare with the others. Every one who hears it expresses his delight and surprise at a correctness of intonation that it does one good to hear (*Jeder, der ihn hört, spricht sein frohes Erstaunen über diese wohlthuende Reinheit aus*).'—Scheibler, *Ueber mathematische Stimmung, Temperaturen und Orgelstimmung nach Vibrations-Differenzen oder Stössen*, 1838. I have given the original words of the last German sentence, as it was impossible to do justice to its homely force in any translation. Every one who has heard just intonation will understand it.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: ⁎⁎ [A blind man, who had therefore no {¶423c}notes to guide him. I had the pleasure of taking Professor Helmholtz to hear the organ on this occasion (20 April 1864), and can corroborate his statements. Unfortunately the proper blind organist was not present. It is to this lady that General Thompson dedicates his little book, already recited, in these words: 'To Miss E. S. Northcote, Organist of St. Anne and St. Agnes, St. Martin's-le-Grand. In commemoration of the talent by which, after six lessons, she was able to perform in public on the enharmonic organ with 40 sounds to the octave; thereby settling the question of the practicability of just intonation on keyed instruments, and realising the visions of Guido and Mersenne, and the harmonists of classical antiquity.'—*Translator.*]

In London I had also an opportunity of comparing the intonation of this instrument with the natural intonation of singers who had learned to sing without any instrumental accompaniment at all, and are accustomed to follow their ear alone. This was the Society of Tonic Sol-faists, who are spread in great numbers (there were 150,000 in 1862††) over the large cities of England, and whose great

Footnote: †† [The 20 years which have elapsed since Prof. Helmholtz's first acquaintance with the {¶423d}Tonic Sol-fa movement have made a struggling system, slowly elaborated by a Congregationalist minister in connection with his ministry, into a great national system of teaching singing. And as the system had the cordial approval of Prof. Helmholtz (see note p. {@427d|427d}), I feel justified in adding a short account of its origin, progress, and present condition. In 1812 the two Miss Glovers, daughters of a clergyman of Norwich, then young women, now both dead at a very advanced age, invented and introduced into the schools under their superintendence a new sol-fa system, based upon the 'movable *doh*,' that is, the use of *doh* as the name of the keynote, whatever that might be. This was little known beyond the town where it was used, but was published about 1827 as a *Scheme for* *rendering Psalmody Congregational*, and passed through three editions. About 1841 John Curwen, then an unmarried Congregationalist minister (born 14 November 1816 at Heckmondwike, Yorks), visited the school, and at once saw that Miss Glover's scheme gave him the instrument he desired for his own work. In 1845 he married, and he and his wife struggled—it was a real and severe struggle, against small means—to make this system known and active. In the course of working it out various improvements suggested themselves, and the *Tonic Sol-fa* system, as he termed it, is not precisely the same as Miss {¶424b}Glover's; it is essentially John Curwen's. Thus Miss Glover's scheme (as she says in a MS. preface in 1862 to the 2nd edition of the description of her Harmonicon, in the Science Collections, South Kensington Museum) was founded on temperament; Curwen's on just intonation; and the alterations that this change involved were many and laborious. Here Curwen was, I believe, much assisted by the personal friendship of General Perronet Thompson, whose works he constantly quoted in the first book he issued, *Singing for Schools and Congregations*, 1843-8. A remarkable power of methodising, systematising, and teaching, of making friends and co-workers, and of utilising suggestions carried everything before it—at last. But the work was long, and the opposition strong. There was only an 'Association' when Prof. Helmholtz made the {¶424c}acquaintance of the Tonic Sol-fa system. But the Association grew to be a 'College,' which held its first 'summer term' on 10 July 1876, having been 'incorporated' on 26 June 1875, and there were in 1884, 1420 'Shareholders' in this College, which opened its 'Buildings' (at Forest Gate, London, E.) on 5 July 1879. John Curwen lived long enough to see the opening and to preside at the unveiling of Miss Glover's portrait in it, never having neglected to own his obligations to her initiative. On a stone at the entrance of the present College building he placed this inscription: 'This stone was laid by John Curwen, May 14, 1879, in memory of Miss Sarah Glover, on whose "Scheme for rendering Psalmody Congregational" the Tonic Sol-fa method was founded'. John Curwen died 26 May 1880, of weakness {¶424d}of the heart. His eldest son, John Spencer Curwen, Associate of the Royal Academy of Music, has been since that date annually elected as President of the College. The work of the College is chiefly examinational, carrying on classes by post in the various branches of music, and granting certificates shewing various degrees of attainment, on the authority of duly appointed examiners. From 1858 to 1884 the numbers of these certificates granted have been: Junior, 52,000; Elementary, 167,000; Intermediate, 44,000; Matriculation, 3350; Advanced, 520; Musical Theory (including Harmony, Composition, Form, Expression, Acoustics, &c.), 8200; total 275,070, as the Secretary informs me. During the summer there is always a term for the special *vivâ voce* instruction of teachers. Of course large classes are constantly going on everywhere. I quote the following from a letter dated 15 October 1884, written by John Spencer Curwen to the Editor of the *Times*:—

At the most modest estimate, during the 30 years our system has been at work, we have taught at least the elements of music to four million persons. There are now, in the elementary schools of the United Kingdom, about one million children learning to sing at sight upon our system. The Tonic Sol-fa College has 28 different kinds and grades of musical examinations, and these were passed last year by 18,716 persons. Every examination includes individual tests in singing at sight. We have between 4000 and 5000 teachers at work, and at the present time they have under instruction some 200,000 adults, in addition to the children already mentioned. I lately inquired of 16 of our most active professional teachers how many pupils, adults and children, they were instructing per week in their classes. The number proved to be 61,051. We have a well-organised movement. During the last four years I have attended 166 meetings in the length and breadth of the kingdom, my travels extending over 13,000 miles, and ranging from Plymouth to Londonderry from Inverness to Norwich. These meetings, at which demonstrations of musical education are invariably given, have been attended by at least 100,000 people. I have further travelled in France, Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, studying the condition of popular musical instruction in schools, singing clubs, &c., so that we may bring our practice up to the best continental models. The quantity of music printed in the Tonic Sol-fa notation is enormous, and is increasing very rapidly. Two-thirds of our pupils, having been grounded in our notation, go on to learn the ordinary staff notation, and prove themselves excellent readers of that notation.

With regard to teaching music in schools, the following is compiled from the papers issued by the Educational Department in 1884, England and Wales C. 3941, and Scotland C. 3942. They refer to 27,330 subordinate educational departments for England and Wales. Of these, 21,743 teach music by ear only; 1429 by the staff or ordinary notation; 3871 by Tonic Sol-fa; 32 by both systems; and 2161 in some other way. For Scotland there are 3403 subordinate departments, of which 1238 teach by ear only; 8 by the late Dr. Hullah's modification of Wilhelm's method, 1746 by Tonic Sol-fa; 117 by old notation with movable *doh* (for which many teachers have a strong predilection), and 7 by more than one system. There are 94 departments in England, and 277 in Scotland making no returns. These returns shew that Tonic Sol-fa is the national system of teaching music *by note* in the primary schools of England and Scotland at the present day.

John Curwen having started his system from purely philanthropic motives, gladly placed his notation at the disposal of all who liked to use it. A strong proof of the success of his system is furnished by the fact that all the principal London publishers have availed themselves of this permission. Gounod's *Redemption* and Mackenzie's *Rose of Sharon*, are among the latest additions to the Tonic Sol-fa répertoire. It is estimated that at the present time there are 40,000 pages of music printed and published in this latter notation. But the educational works on music and the system are the private property of the firm of John Curwen & Sons, and are of such a remarkable character that a gold medal was awarded for them at the International Health and Education Exhibition at South Kensington in 1884. It would indeed be difficult to find so much information on music and the method of teaching it (in both notations), so succinctly and plainly given, and at so cheap a rate, as in the late John Curwen's *Teacher's Manual*, *Standard Course*, *Musical Theory*, *How to Observe Harmony*, *How to read Music*, not to mention the very large number of books and music intended for immediate class use. John Curwen's especial desire was to teach 'the *thing* Music,' as he words it, and the peculiar means which he elaborated for this purpose, he valued only because it proved effectual for that purpose.

As one who was personally acquainted with John Curwen and his work for a quarter of a century, I may be permitted to give this testimony, and to refer all those who would learn the history of this successful musical educationalist to the *Memorials of John Curwen*, compiled by his son, J. Spencer Curwen, 1882.—*Translator.*]

{¶424}progress is of much importance for the theory of music. The Tonic Sol-faists represent the tones of the major scale by the syllables *Do*, *Re*, *Mi*, *Fa*, *So*, *La*, *Ti*, {¶425}*Do*, where *Do* is always the tonic [vowels as in Italian]. Their vocal music is not written in ordinary musical notation, but is printed with common types, the initial letters of the above words representing the pitch.⁎

When the tonic is changed in modulations, the notation is also changed. The *new* tonic is now called *Do*, and the change is pointed out in the notation by giving two different marks to the note on which it occurs, one belonging to the old, and one to the new key. This notation, therefore, gives the very first place to representing the relation of every note to the tonic, while the absolute pitch in which the piece has to be performed is marked at the commencement only. Since the intervals of the natural major scale are transferred to each new tonic as it arises in the course of modulation, all keys are performed without tempering the intervals. That in the modulation from *C* major to *G* major, the *Mi* (or *b₁*) of the second scale answers precisely to the *Ti* of the first is not indicated in the notation, and is only taught in the further course of instruction. Hence the pupil has {¶425b}no inducement to confuse *a* with *a₁*.†

Footnote: ⁎ [Great care has also been bestowed on the representation of rhythm, and exercises in rhythm form an important part of the *Standard Course* and the practice of Tonic Sol-fa teachers.—*Translator.*]

Footnote: † [In a footnote to this passage Prof. Helmholtz gives a list of the Tonic Sol-fa works, which is superseded by the note I have inserted above, and at the end of it he says:] In France singing is taught by the *Galin-Paris-Chevé* system, on similar principles and with the help of a similar notation. [This statement is misleading. Neither principles nor notation are alike. In 1818 P. Galin, 'Instituteur à l'Ecole des Sourds-Muets de Bordeaux,' published his *Exposition d′une Nouvelle Méthode pour l'Enseignement de la Musique*. It follows from p. 162 of his book (3rd ed. 1862, reprinted by Émile Chevé) that Galin adopted as his normal intonation Huyghens's cycle of 31 divisions of the octave, which closely represents the meantone temperament (see App. XX. sect. A. art. 22, ii.), although Galin did not seem to be acquainted with it under that name, and seems to announce, as his own discovery (*ibid.* p. 80, and especially p. 107) what was in fact Huyghens's more than 120 years previously: viz. that 1/5 of a whole Tone = 1/3 major Semitone = 1/2 of a minor Semitone, but the curious thing is that he considers the resulting flat Fifth of 696·773 cents to be *correct*, and the Fifth with 701·955 cents from the ratio of 2 : 3 to be *wrong*. This is enough to shew how widely Galin's *principles* differed from Curwen's. The notation of intervals which Galin used was Rousseau's numerical expression of the major scale as 1 2 3 4 5 6 7, indicating a rising Octave by overdotting and a falling by underdotting, but calling the figures *ut ré mi fa sol la si*. Here the only resemblance is the movable *ut* (= *doh*), as distinguished from the usual French custom of making *ut* = *C*. In marking sharps and flats and time the difference is greater, but need not be pursued. We should observe, however, that on this system, as Galin {¶425c}expressly states (p. 81), *g*♯ is flatter than *a*♭. Galin was born 16 Dec. 1786, and died 30 Aug. 1822. His pupils and especially Aimé and Nanine Paris (the latter of whom married Émile Chevé, a surgeon), continued to teach his system, and supplied it with text-books. The principal one is *Méthode élémentaire par Mme. Chevé* (Nanine Paris). *La partie théorique de cet ouvrage est rédigée par Émile Chevé*. In this theoretical part, p. 292, I find that Chevé imagined Galin to have called his single division half of a minor Second, whereas he says, as above, that it was half of a minor Semitone, which is totally different. The consequence is that Chevé makes Galin's scale a division of the octave into 29 divisions, instead of 31, and hence he obtained a sharp Fifth of 703·46 cents, a very sharp major Third of 413·8 cents, much sharper than the {¶425d}Pythagorean (App. XX. sect. A. art. 23, vi.). If he could have tuned an harmonium to this major scale and played the major chords, he would have been scared at the result. He makes *g*♯ much sharper than *a*♭; his *a*♭ was indeed flatter and *g*♯ sharper than on the Pythagorean system. It is evident that his pupils when they sang in chorus *could* not have used his theoretical scale. Hence his principles were entirely different from Curwen's. The notation remained the same as with Galin, sharps and flats being denoted by acute and grave accents drawn through the stems of the figures, but their meaning was altogether different. Also he retained the movable *ut* of Galin, and on p. 327 he made out a general table of the relation of modulations, which resembles my Duodenarium, App. XX. sect. E. art.18. M. Aimé Paris also introduced a plan for marking modulations which has a great resemblance to John Curwen's 'bridge tone,' but both plans were absolutely independent. The 'langue des durées' of Aimé Paris was, however, avowedly adapted to the Tonic Sol-fa system by John Curwen. Both M. and Mme. É Chevé are dead, and after some time their son Amand Chevé revived the system, which has had great success in France, and gained many prizes in choral competitions, shewing that Émile Chevé's theoretical scale could not have been adopted. From a correspondence I {¶426c}had with M. Amand Chevé I found he did not hold with his father's 29 division of the octave, but adopted the 53 division (not however as representing just intonation with a major Third of 17 degrees or 384·9 cents, but) as representing the Pythagorean intonation with a major Third of 18 degrees or 407·5 cents (App. XX. Sect. A. art. 22, iii.). As this would be frightful in part singing, it is probable that his pupils, although strictly taught to make *g*♯ sharper than *a*♭ (indeed to make the intervals *g* to *a*♭ and *g*♯ to *a* identical, each containing 4 degrees or 90·6 cents, with an interval of 1 degree or 22·6 cents between them), in choral singing insensibly use the equal temperament which Galin and Émile Chevé for different reasons inveighed against. At any rate the Galin-Paris Chevé system, {¶426d}clever and successful as it is, is after all and was from the first a *tempered* system, and in its Chevé form a (theoretically) very badly tempered system, and hence not in the slightest degree similar in principle to the Tonic Sol-fa, which as taught by John Curwen was always a system of just intonation. Another immense difference must be noted. Curwen founds everything upon the major chord *do mi so* at all pitches, then proceeds to its dominant *so ti re*, and finally to its subdominant *fa la do*, in every case drawing attention to the *character* of the notes in the scale. The Chevé system began by teaching the *melody*, *ut ri mi fa sol*, and not advancing till this melody was thoroughly impressed on the mind of the pupil for any *ut*, taken backwards or forwards, or stopping at any note and beginning again at that note. Afterwards the system took the melody *ut¹ si la sol*, and treated it in the same way. Finally the two were united as *ut re mi fa sol la si ut¹*. On these melodies all is founded, and the pupil is told to take any other intervals *by imagining the intermediate notes, without uttering them*, thus (the notes in roman letters being merely imagined), *ut* re *mi* fa *sol* la *si ut*. This is developed in Mme. Chevé's *Science et Art de l'intonation, théorie et pratique, système des points d′appui*, 1868. On the title-page she says: 'Les grands ressorts de notre méthode, pour l'étude de l'intonation, consistent en ceci: 1° Chercher les sons *un à un* et les émettre aussi *un à un*, en les détachant les uns des autres. Hors de là point de succès possible. 2° Se servir de deux rapports que l'on connaît, pour trouver un troisième rapport qu'on ignore; c'est-à-dire, aller du connu à l'inconnu; ce qui conduit à penser par degrés conjoints, en chantant par degrés disjoints,' May 1868. The two systems of Chevé and Curwen are therefore distinct in principle, value of the signs, form of the signs, notation of rhythm, and mode of teaching. They are alike in being taught without an instrument, but for very different reasons; in the Tonic Sol-fa to allow just intonation to become the pupil's guide; in the Chevé to allow of taking *g*♯ sharper than *a*♭, and to make *e* to *f* the same as *g*♯ to *a*, but different from *a*♭ to *a*. They are also alike in having a movable *do* or *ut*, a very ancient device. And also alike in their nomenclature of lengths, 'langue des durées,' which was an original invention of Aimé Paris. As to priority of invention, Miss Glover taught her system in 1812, Galin published his in 1818. Both used tempered systems.—*Translator*.]

{¶426}It is impossible not to acknowledge that this method of notation has the great advantage to the singer of giving prominence to what is of the greatest importance to him, namely, the relation of each tone to the tonic. It is only a few persons, unusually gifted, who are able to fix in their mind, and re-discover absolute pitches, when other tones are sounded at the same time. But the ordinary notation ⁎ gives directly nothing but absolute pitch, and that too only for tempered intonation. Any one who has frequently sung at sight is aware how much easier it is to do so from a pianoforte vocal score, in which the harmony is shewn, than from the separate voice part. In the first case it is easy to see whether the note to be sung is the root, Third, Fifth, or dissonance of the chord which occurs, and it is then comparatively easy to find one's way; † in the second case the only resource of the singer is to go up and down by intervals as well as he can, and trust to the accompanying instruments and the other voices to force his own to the right pitch.

Footnote: ⁎ [Usually called 'the Staff Notation' or 'the Old Notation' by the tonic Sol-faists by way of distinction.—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † [After a pupil has thoroughly acquired music on the Sol-fa notation, it becomes part of his duty to learn the other, and a course of instruction has been prepared for this purpose by Mr. Curwen, which when properly mastered (a comparatively easy task) puts the pupil in a condition to sing at sight from the old notation as readily as from the new.—*Translator*.]

Now the instruction conveyed to a singer who is familiar with musical theory {¶426b}by an examination of the pianoforte vocal score, is conveyed by the notation itself of the Tonic Sol-faist even to the uninstructed. I have convinced myself that by using this notation, it is much easier to sing from the separate part than in ordinary musical notation, and I had an opportunity when in one of the primary schools in London, of hearing more than forty children of between eight and {¶427}twelve years of age, that performed singing exercises in a manner that astonished me ('mich in Erstaunen setzten') by the certainty with which they read the notes, and by the accuracy of their intonation.⁎ Every year the London schools of Sol-faists are accustomed to give a concert of two or three thousand children's voices in the Crystal Palace at Sydenham, which, I have been assured by persons who understand music, makes the best impression on the audience by the harmoniousness and exactness of its execution.†

Footnote: ⁎ [On 20 April 1864, after we had heard Gen. Perronet Thompson's organ, I had the pleasure of taking Prof. Helmholtz to hear the singing of the children in the British and Foreign School here alluded to, which was situate behind the chapel in Tottenham Court Road. The master of the school, Mr. Gardiner, was a very good Tonic Sol-fa teacher, but the children were those who ordinarily attended (about forty were then present) and had received only ordinary instruction. After hearing them sing a few tunes in parts, from the Tonic Sol-fa notation, Prof. Helmholtz himself 'pointed' out an air on the 'modulator' or scale drawn out large on a chart, from which the pupils learn to sing (that is, by means of a pointer shewed the Tonic Sol-fa names of the tones the children were to sing), and the class followed in unison at sight. Then, on the suggestion of Mr. Gardiner, the class was divided into two sections, and Prof. Helmholtz pointed a piece in two parts, one with each hand, while the class took them at sight. Of course the piece was simple, but the dissonance of a Semitone was purposely introduced in one place between the parts, and Prof. Helmholtz was delighted at the firmness and correctness with which the children took it. I recollect his saying to me afterwards, 'We could not do that in Germany!' meaning, as he subsequently explained, that there was no German system of teaching to sing which could produce such results on such materials. The following is an extract of a letter from Prof. Helmholtz to Mr. Curwen printed on p. 159 of the *Memorials*, dated 21 April 1864, the day after his visit to the class: 'We were really surprised by the readiness and surety [certainty] with which the children succeeded in reading music that they did not know before, and in following a series of notes which were indicated to them on their modulatory board [modulator]. I think that what I saw shewed the complete success of your system, and I was peculiarly interested by it, because during my researches in musical acoustics I came from theoretica reasons to the conviction that this was the natural way of learning music, but I did not know that it had been carried out in England with such beautiful results.'—*Translator*.]

Footnote: † [I am informed by the Secretary of the Tonic Sol-fa College that the first Crystal Palace Festival of the Tonic Sol-faists was {¶427c}held on 2 September 1857, with a choir of about 3200 children and 300 adults. These concerts have been continued year by year to the present time. For many years two concerts were given, one juvenile and one adult, the singers varying in number from 3500 to 5000. Some of these performances were so popular that a repetition was given a few weeks later. The plan of testing the great choirs in sight singing was first tried at the Festival on 14 August 1867, at which I was present, when an anthem specially written for the occasion by Mr. (now Sir) G. A. Macfarren (Professor of Music at the Universityof Cambridge, and Principal of the Royal Academy of Music) was sung by a choir of 4500 voices. Of the performance of this anthem Mr. Macfarren wrote a short time after in the *Cornhill Magazine* thus: {¶427d}'A piece of music which had been composed for the occasion, and had not until then been seen by human eyes save those of the writer and the printers, was handed forth to the members of the chorus there present, and then, before an audience furnished at the same time with copies to test the accuracy of the performance, forty-five hundred singers sang it at first sight in a manner to fulfil the highest requirements of the severest judges.' Mr. Macfarren was himself present, and publicly expressed his own satisfaction.

Sight-singing tests have been given almost every year since, and always with the same success. They have become a common part of public concerts intended as 'demonstrations,' and are regarded by Tonic Sol-faists as no more extraordinary than reading the words at sight would be considered.—*Translator*.]

The Tonic Sol-faists, then, sing by natural, and not by tempered intervals. When their choirs are accompanied by a tempered organ, there are marked differences and disturbances, whereas they are in perfect unison with General Thompson's Enharmonic Organ. Many expressions used are very characteristic. A young girl had to sing a solo in *F* minor, and took it home to study it at her pianoforte. When she returned she said that the *A*♭ and *D*♭ on her piano were all wrong. These are the Third and Sixth of the key in which the deviation of tempered from just intonation is most marked. Another girl was so charmed with {¶427b}the Enharmonic Organ that she remained practising for three hours in succession, declaring that it was pleasant to be able to play *real notes*. Generally in a large number of cases, young people who have learned to sing by the Sol-fa method, find out by themselves, without any instruction, how to use the complicated manuals of the Enharmonic Organ, and always select the proper intervals.

Singers find that it is easier to sing to the accompaniment of this organ, and also that they do not hear the instrument while they are singing, because it is in perfect harmony with their voice and makes no beats.

{¶428}I have myself observed, that singers accustomed to a pianoforte accompaniment, when they sang a simple melody to my justly intoned harmonium, sang natural Thirds and Sixths, not tempered, nor yet Pythagorean. I accompanied the commencement of the melody, and then paused while the singer took the Third or Sixth of the key. After he had struck it, I touched on the instrument the natural, or the Pythagorean, or the tempered interval. The first was always in unison with the singer, the others gave shrill beats.

After this experience, I think that no doubt can remain, if ever any doubt existed, that *the intervals which have been theoretically determined in the preceding pages, and there called natural, are really natural for uncorrupted ears;* *that moreover the deviations of tempered intonation are really perceptible and unpleasant to uncorrupted ears; and lastly that, notwithstanding the delicate distinctions in particular intervals, correct singing by natural intervals is much easier than singing in tempered intonations*. The complicated calculation of intervals which the natural scale necessitates, and which undoubtedly much increases the {¶428b}manual difficulty of performance on instruments with fixed tones, does not exist for either singer or violinist, if the latter only lets himself be guided by his ear. For in the natural progression of correctly modulated music they have always and only to proceed by the intervals of the natural diatonic scale. It is only the theoretician who finds the calculation complicated, when at the end of numerous such progressions he sums up the result, and compares it with the starting-point.

That the natural system can be carried out by singers, is proved by the English Tonic Sol-faists. That it can also be carried out on bowed instruments, and is really carried out by distinguished players, I have no doubt at all after the experiments of Delezenne already mentioned (p. 325, note ⁎), and what I myself heard when I was listening to the violinist who accompanied the Enharmonic Organ. Among the other orchestral instruments, the brass instruments naturally play in just intonation, and can only be forced to the tempered system by being blown out of tune.⁎ The wooden instruments could have their tones slightly changed so as {¶428c}to bring them into tune with the rest. Hence I do not think that the difficulties of the natural system are invincible. On the contrary, I think that many of our best musical performances owe their beauty to an unconscious introduction of the natural system, and that we should oftener enjoy their charms if that system were taught pedagogically, and made the foundation of all instruction in music, in place of the tempered intonation which endeavours to prevent the human voice and bowed instruments from developing their full harmoniousness, for the sake of not interfering with the convenience of performers on the pianoforte and the organ.

Footnote: ⁎ [On this sentence Mr. Blaikley observes (*Proceedings of the Musical Association*, vol. iv. p. 56): 'It seemed to me worth attention that this must be taken as being particularly and not generally true: that is, that though the ideal brass instrument has such characteristics, this ideal is not necessarily attained to in practice.' See pp. 99 and 100.—*Translator*.]

Musicians have contested, in a very dogmatic manner, the correctness of the propositions here advanced. I do not doubt for a moment that many of these antagonists of mine really perform very good music, because their ear forces them to play better than they intended, better than would really be the case if they actually carried out the regulations of the school, and played exactly in Pythagorean or tempered intonation. On the other hand, it is generally possible to convince oneself from their very writings, that these writers have never taken the trouble to make a methodical comparison of just and tempered intonation. I can {¶428d}only once more invite them to hear, before uttering judgments, founded on an imperfect school-theory, concerning matters which are not within their own personal experience. Those who have no time for such observations, should at any rate glance over the literature of the period during which equal temperament was introduced. When the organ took the lead among musical instruments it was not yet tempered. And the pianoforte is doubtless a very useful instrument for making the acquaintance of musical literature, or for domestic amusement, or for accompanying singers. But for artistic purposes its importance is not such as to require its mechanism to be made the basis of the whole system of music.†

Footnote: † [This last paragraph, from 'Musicians have contested' to 'the whole system of music,' is an addition to the 4th German edition. The remainder of this Appendix, which concludes the work in the 3rd German edition, was occupied with a description of the musical notation which I employed in my footnotes and Appendix to the 1st English edition; but as I have long since abandoned this notation in favour of that introduced in Chapter XIV., p. 277, I have thought it right to omit the description.—*Translator*.]
