Canto Four

	A heavy thunder broke the deep sleep
	in my head, so that I shook myself
	like a person woken up by force;

	and I moved my rested eye around,
	standing straight up, and looked hard
	to make out the place where I was.

	The truth is I found myself on the edge
	of the valley of the grieving abyss
	that gathers the thunder of endless wailing.

	It was dark and deep and so full of mist
	that however hard I fixed my sight on the bottom
	I could make out nothing there at all.

	"Now let us go down there into the blind world,"
	the poet began, gone completely pale.
	"I will be first, and you will be second."

	And I, who had noticed the colour of his face,
	said: "How shall I come, if you are afraid,
	you who are my comfort when I doubt?"

	And he to me: "The anguish of the people
	who are down here paints on my face
	that pity you are taking for fear.

	Let us go: the long road is urging us on."
	So he set out, and so he made me enter
	the first circle that girdles the abyss.

	There, as far as listening could tell,
	there was no weeping, only sighs
	that made the eternal air tremble;

	and that came from grief without torment,
	felt by the crowds, which were many and large,
	of infants and of women and of men.

	My good master to me: "Are you not going to ask
	what spirits these are that you see?
	Now I want you to know, before you go further,

	that they did not sin; and if they have merits
	it is not enough, because they did not have baptism,
	which is the gate of the faith you believe in;

	and if they lived before Christianity
	they did not worship God as they should have:
	and I myself am one of these.

	For such shortcomings, and for no other wrong,
	we are lost, and hurt only this far:
	that we live in longing, and without hope."

	Great grief took me at the heart when I heard it,
	because I knew that people of great worth
	were suspended in that limbo.

	"Tell me, my master, tell me, my lord,"
	I began, wanting to be certain
	of that faith which conquers every error:

	"did anyone ever go out of here, by his own merit
	or by another's, and afterwards be blessed?"
	And he, who understood what I meant without saying it,

	answered: "I was new in this condition
	when I saw a mighty one come here,
	crowned with the sign of victory.

	He took out from among us the shade of our first father,
	and of Abel his son, and of Noah,
	of Moses the lawgiver, the obedient;

	Abraham the patriarch, and David the king,
	Israel with his father and with his sons
	and with Rachel, for whom he did so much,

	and many others; and he made them blessed.
	And I want you to know that before them
	no human spirits were saved."

	We did not stop walking while he talked,
	but went on crossing the wood the whole time —
	the wood, I mean, of crowded spirits.

	Our road had not yet taken us far
	from where I had slept, when I saw a fire
	that overcame a hemisphere of darkness.

	We were still a little way off from it,
	but not so far that I could not partly see
	that people of honour held that place.

	"O you who honour knowledge and art,
	who are these, with such honour on them
	that it sets them apart from the way of the rest?"

	And he to me: "The honoured name
	that sounds of them up there in your life
	wins them a grace in heaven that advances them."

	Meanwhile a voice reached me:
	"Honour the highest poet;
	his shade is coming back, that had gone away."

	When the voice had stopped and was quiet,
	I saw four great shades coming towards us:
	their faces were neither sad nor glad.

	My good master began to speak:
	"Look at the one with that sword in his hand,
	who comes in front of the three like a lord:

	that is Homer, the sovereign poet;
	the next is Horace the satirist;
	Ovid is the third, and the last is Lucan.

	Because each of them shares with me
	the name the single voice called out,
	they do me honour, and in that they do well."

	So I saw gathered the beautiful school
	of that lord of the highest song
	who flies over the others like an eagle.

	After they had talked together a while
	they turned to me with a sign of greeting,
	and my master smiled at it;

	and then they did me much more honour still,
	because they made me one of their company,
	so that I was sixth among so much wisdom.

	So we went on as far as the light,
	talking of things it is right to be silent about now,
	as it was right to speak of them there.

	We came to the foot of a noble castle,
	ringed seven times with high walls,
	defended all round by a beautiful little stream.

	We crossed this as if it were solid ground;
	through seven gates I went in with those sages:
	we came to a meadow of fresh green grass.

	There were people there with slow, grave eyes,
	with great authority in their faces:
	they spoke seldom, with gentle voices.

	So we drew off to one side,
	into an open place, bright and high,
	where all of them could be seen.

	There, straight ahead, on the green enamel,
	the great spirits were shown to me,
	and I lift my own heart for having seen them.

	I saw Electra with many companions,
	among whom I knew Hector and Aeneas,
	Caesar in armour with his falcon eyes.

	I saw Camilla and Penthesilea;
	on the other side I saw King Latinus,
	who sat with Lavinia his daughter.

	I saw that Brutus who drove out Tarquin,
	Lucretia, Julia, Marcia and Cornelia;
	and by himself, apart, I saw Saladin.

	When I lifted my eyes a little higher
	I saw the master of those who know
	sitting among his family of philosophers.

	All of them look at him, all do him honour:
	there I saw Socrates and Plato,
	who stand nearer to him than the rest;

	Democritus, who puts the world down to chance,
	Diogenes, Anaxagoras and Thales,
	Empedocles, Heraclitus and Zeno;

	and I saw the good gatherer of the qualities of plants —
	Dioscorides, I mean; and I saw Orpheus,
	Cicero, and Linus, and Seneca the moralist;

	Euclid the geometer, and Ptolemy,
	Hippocrates, Avicenna and Galen,
	Averroes, who made the great commentary.

	I cannot give a full account of all of them,
	because the long theme drives me so hard
	that many times the telling falls short of the fact.

	The company of six shrinks to two:
	my wise guide takes me another way,
	out of the quiet, into the trembling air.

	And I come to a place where nothing shines.
