Canto Fifteen

	Now one of the hard margins carries us along;
	and the smoke of the stream makes a shade above,
	so that it saves the water and the banks from the fire.

	As the Flemings between Wissant and Bruges,
	afraid of the flood that rushes at them,
	build their barrier to make the sea run away;

	and as the Paduans do along the Brenta,
	to defend their towns and their castles
	before Carinthia feels the heat:

	these were made on the same pattern,
	although whoever the builder was
	made them neither so high nor so thick.

	We had already gone so far from the wood
	that I would not have seen where it was
	even if I had turned round to look,

	when we met a troop of souls
	coming along the bank, and every one of them
	looked at us the way people do in the evening

	when they look at each other under a new moon;
	and they sharpened their eyebrows towards us
	the way an old tailor does at the eye of a needle.

	Eyed like that by such a household,
	I was recognised by one, who took me
	by the hem and cried: "What a marvel!"

	And I, when he stretched his arm out to me,
	fixed my eyes so hard on his baked face
	that the scorching did not stop

	my mind from knowing him;
	and bending my hand down towards his face
	I answered: "Are you here, Ser Brunetto?"

	And he: "O my son, do not be displeased
	if Brunetto Latini turns back a little way
	with you and lets the file go on."

	I said to him: "I beg it of you as much as I can;
	and if you want me to sit down with you,
	I will do it, if it pleases this man I am going with."

	"O my son," he said, "any of this flock
	who stops for a moment then lies a hundred years
	without brushing off the fire when it strikes him.

	So go on: I will come along at your skirts;
	and afterwards I will rejoin my band,
	who go weeping for their eternal losses."

	I did not dare come down off the road
	to walk level with him; but I kept my head
	bent, like a man walking reverently.

	He began: "What fortune or what destiny
	brings you down here before your last day?
	And who is this, showing you the way?"

	"Up there above, in the clear life,"
	I answered him, "I lost myself in a valley
	before my years were full.

	Only yesterday morning I turned my back on it:
	this one appeared to me as I was going back into it,
	and is bringing me home along this road."

	And he to me: "If you follow your star
	you cannot fail of a glorious harbour,
	if I judged rightly in the beautiful life;

	and if I had not died so early,
	seeing heaven so kind to you,
	I would have given you comfort in the work.

	But that ungrateful, malicious people
	who came down from Fiesole long ago,
	and still have something of the mountain and the rock in them,

	will make themselves your enemy for your good deeds;
	and there is a reason for it: it is not fitting
	for the sweet fig to bear fruit among sour sorb apples.

	Old report in the world calls them blind;
	they are a greedy, envious and arrogant people:
	see that you clean yourself of their habits.

	Your fortune keeps so much honour for you
	that both parties will be hungry
	for you; but the grass will be far from the beak.

	Let the beasts of Fiesole make fodder
	of themselves, and not touch the plant,
	if any still rises in their dung,

	in which the holy seed lives again
	of those Romans who stayed there when
	that nest of so much wickedness was made."

	"If everything I wish for had been granted,"
	I answered him, "you would not yet
	have been put in exile from human nature;

	because it is fixed in my mind, and grieves my heart now,
	that dear and good, fatherly image of you
	when, in the world, hour after hour,

	you taught me how a man makes himself eternal:
	and how much I value it, while I am alive,
	must be made out in my own tongue.

	What you tell me of my course I am writing down,
	and keeping it to be glossed, with another text,
	by a lady who will know how, if I reach her.

	This much I want to be plain to you:
	as long as my conscience does not scold me,
	I am ready for Fortune to do as she likes.

	Such an earnest is nothing new to my ears:
	so let Fortune turn her wheel
	as she pleases, and the peasant his mattock."

	Then my master turned back on his right
	cheek and looked at me;
	then he said: "He listens well who takes note of it."

	And none the less I go on talking
	with Ser Brunetto, and I ask him who
	his best known and highest companions are.

	And he to me: "It is good to know of some of them;
	about the others it will be praiseworthy to keep quiet,
	because the time would be short for so much talking.

	In short, know that they were all clerics
	and great men of letters, and of great fame,
	all filthy in the world with the same sin.

	Priscian goes along with that miserable crowd,
	and Francesco d'Accorso too; and if you had had
	any appetite for such scurf, you could have seen there

	the one who was transferred by the servant of servants
	from the Arno to the Bacchiglione,
	where he left his badly stretched nerves.

	I would say more; but the coming on and the talking
	can be no longer, because I see
	new smoke rising over there off the sand.

	People are coming with whom I must not be.
	Let my Treasure be commended to you,
	in which I am still alive; and I ask no more."

	Then he turned, and seemed like one of those
	who run for the green cloth at Verona
	across the country; and he seemed, of those,

	the one who wins, not the one who loses.
