Canto Sixteen

	I was already in a place where you could hear
	the rumbling of the water falling into the next circle,
	like the sound beehives make,

	when three shades together broke away,
	running, from a troop that was passing
	under the rain of that harsh torment.

	They came towards us, and each of them shouted:
	"Stop, you who by your clothes seem to us
	to be someone from our own corrupt town."

	Ah, what wounds I saw on their limbs,
	new ones and old, burned in by the flames!
	It still hurts me only to remember it.

	My teacher paid attention to their shouts;
	he turned his face to me and said: "Now wait;
	to these men we ought to be courteous.

	And if it were not for the fire that the nature
	of this place shoots down, I would say
	that haste suited you better than them."

	When we had stopped, they started up again
	their old refrain; and when they reached us
	all three of them made a wheel of themselves.

	As champions do, naked and oiled,
	sizing up their hold and their advantage
	before they come to blows and thrusts,

	so, wheeling round, each of them kept his face
	turned towards me, so that his neck
	travelled continually against his feet.

	And "If the misery of this loose ground
	makes us and our prayers despicable,"
	one of them began, "and our scorched and hairless look,

	let our reputation bend your mind
	to tell us who you are, who rub your living feet
	so confidently through Hell.

	This one, in whose footprints you see me treading,
	although he goes naked and stripped of his hair,
	was of higher rank than you would believe:

	he was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;
	his name was Guido Guerra, and in his life
	he did much with his good sense and with the sword.

	The other, who treads the sand behind me,
	is Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, whose voice
	ought to be welcome up in the world.

	And I, who am put on this cross with them,
	was Jacopo Rusticucci; and certainly
	my savage wife harms me more than anything else."

	If I had had any cover from the fire
	I would have thrown myself down among them,
	and I think my teacher would have allowed it;

	but because I would have been burnt and cooked,
	fear defeated the good will in me
	that was making me greedy to embrace them.

	Then I began: "Not contempt, but grief,
	your condition fixed inside me —
	so much of it that it will be slow to strip off —

	as soon as this lord of mine said
	words to me from which I understood
	that people such as you were coming.

	I am from your town, and always
	I have repeated your deeds and your honoured names
	with affection, and listened to them.

	I am leaving the gall and going for the sweet apples
	promised me by my truthful guide;
	but first I have to fall as far as the centre."

	"So may your soul go on guiding
	your limbs a long time," he answered then,
	"and may your fame shine after you —

	tell us whether courtesy and valour still live
	in our city as they used to,
	or whether they have gone right out of it;

	because Guglielmo Borsiere, who has been grieving
	with us only a short while, and goes there with the others,
	torments us a good deal with what he says."

	"The new people and the sudden profits
	have generated pride and excess
	in you, Florence, so that already you weep for it."

	So I cried out, with my face lifted;
	and the three, who took that for an answer,
	looked at one another as men do at the truth.

	"If it costs you so little at other times,"
	they all answered, "to satisfy other people,
	happy are you, if you speak so freely!

	So, if you escape from these dark places
	and go back to see the beautiful stars again,
	when it will please you to say 'I was there',

	see that you talk about us to people."
	Then they broke their wheel, and as they ran
	their nimble legs looked like wings.

	An "amen" could not have been said
	as quickly as they disappeared;
	so it seemed good to my master to move on.

	I followed him, and we had gone only a little way
	when the sound of the water was so close to us
	that we would hardly have heard each other speak.

	Like that river which has a course of its own
	first from Monte Viso towards the east,
	on the left slope of the Apennines,

	and is called the Acquacheta up there, before
	it goes down into its low bed
	and is empty of that name at Forlì,

	and roars up there above San Benedetto
	of the Alps, falling in a single drop
	where a thousand ought to have received it:

	so, down a steep bank,
	we found that dark water resounding,
	so that in a short time it would have hurt the ear.

	I had a cord tied round me,
	and with it I had once thought
	to catch the leopard with the painted hide.

	After I had untied the whole of it from me,
	as my guide had ordered me,
	I handed it to him, knotted and coiled up.

	At which he turned to the right-hand side
	and, some way out from the edge,
	threw it down into that deep gorge.

	"Something new is surely bound to answer,"
	I said inside myself, "that new signal
	which the master follows so with his eye."

	Ah, how careful men ought to be
	with those who see not only the deed
	but look with their minds inside your thoughts!

	He said to me: "Soon there will come up
	what I am waiting for, and what your thought is dreaming of;
	soon it must be uncovered to your sight."

	To a truth that has the face of a lie
	a man ought to keep his lips shut as long as he can,
	because it brings shame on him without any fault;

	but here I cannot keep quiet; and by the notes
	of this comedy, reader, I swear to you —
	so may they not be empty of long favour —

	that I saw, through that thick and dark air,
	a figure come swimming upwards,
	a marvel to any confident heart,

	just as a man comes back up who goes down
	sometimes to free an anchor that has caught
	on a rock or something else shut in the sea,

	stretching upward and drawing his feet in.
