Canto Eighteen

	There is a place in Hell called Malebolge,
	the evil ditches, all of stone the colour of iron,
	like the wall that circles round it.

	Right in the middle of that malignant field
	a well gapes, very wide and deep,
	whose construction I will describe in its place.

	So the belt that is left is round,
	between the well and the foot of the high hard bank,
	and it has its bottom divided into ten valleys.

	Just as, where more and more moats
	are ringed round castles to guard the walls,
	the part where they are makes a pattern,

	these made a pattern like that here;
	and as such fortresses have little bridges
	from their thresholds to the outer bank,

	so from the bottom of the rock there ran
	ridges that cut across the banks and the ditches
	as far as the well that clips and gathers them.

	This was the place we found ourselves in
	when we were shaken off Geryon's back; and the poet
	kept to the left, and I moved along behind.

	On the right hand I saw new misery,
	new torment and new whippers,
	with which the first pouch was filled.

	In the bottom the sinners were naked;
	from the middle towards us they came facing us,
	beyond it they went with us, but with longer strides,

	as the Romans, because of the great crowd,
	in the year of the jubilee, have found a way
	of getting people over the bridge,

	so that on one side they all have their faces
	towards the castle and go to Saint Peter's,
	and on the other bank they go towards the hill.

	On this side and on that, along the black stone,
	I saw horned demons with big whips,
	who beat them cruelly from behind.

	Ah, how they made them lift their heels
	at the first strokes! Nobody, by then,
	waited for the second or the third.

	As I went, my eyes met one of theirs;
	and immediately I said:
	"I am not fasting from having seen this man before."

	So I planted my feet to work out who he was;
	and my sweet guide stopped with me
	and consented to my going back a little.

	And that whipped one thought he could hide
	by lowering his face; but it did him little good,
	because I said: "You, throwing your eye at the ground —

	if the features you carry are not false,
	you are Venedico Caccianemico.
	But what brings you into such stinging pickle?"

	And he to me: "I say it unwillingly;
	but your clear speech forces me to,
	and makes me remember the old world.

	I was the one who brought Ghisolabella
	to do the marquis's will,
	whatever way the ugly story is told.

	And I am not the only Bolognese weeping here;
	the place is so full of us
	that there are not so many tongues taught now

	to say 'sipa' between Savena and Reno;
	and if you want faith or evidence of it,
	just bring our greedy nature to mind."

	As he spoke, a demon struck him
	with his lash, and said: "Get on,
	pimp! There are no women here to coin."

	I rejoined my escort;
	then with a few steps we came
	to where a ridge ran out of the bank.

	We climbed it easily enough;
	and turning right along its jagged spine
	we left those eternal circles behind.

	When we were at the place where it gapes
	underneath to give a passage to the whipped ones,
	my guide said: "Stop here, and let

	the sight of these other badly born ones strike you,
	whose faces you have not seen yet,
	because they have been going the same way as us."

	From the old bridge we watched the file
	that was coming towards us from the other side,
	and which the whip drives on in the same way.

	And my good master, without my asking,
	said to me: "Look at that big one coming,
	who does not seem to shed a tear for the pain:

	what a royal look he still keeps!
	That is Jason, who by courage and by cunning
	robbed the Colchians of the ram.

	He passed by the island of Lemnos
	after the bold, pitiless women
	had put all their males to death.

	There, with tokens and with ornamented words,
	he deceived Hypsipyle, the young girl
	who had first deceived all the others.

	He left her there, pregnant and alone;
	such guilt condemns him to such a torment;
	and Medea is avenged as well.

	With him goes everyone who deceives that way;
	and let that be enough to know about the first valley
	and about those it takes in its teeth."

	We were already where the narrow path
	crosses the second bank
	and makes of it the shoulder for another arch.

	From there we heard people whining
	in the next pouch, and snorting through their snouts,
	and beating themselves with their palms.

	The banks were crusted with a mould
	from the breath below that cakes on them,
	and it fought with our eyes and with our noses.

	The bottom is so hollow that there is nowhere
	it can be seen from without climbing to the crown
	of the arch, where the ridge stands highest.

	There we came; and from there, down in the ditch,
	I saw people dunked in a filth
	that seemed to have come out of human privies.

	And while I search down there with my eye,
	I saw one with his head so plastered with shit
	that it was not clear whether he was layman or cleric.

	He shouted at me: "Why are you so greedy
	to look at me more than the other filthy ones?"
	And I to him: "Because, if I remember rightly,

	I have seen you before with dry hair,
	and you are Alessio Interminei of Lucca:
	that is why I eye you more than all the rest."

	And he then, beating his own gourd:
	"The flatteries I could never get my tongue tired of
	have sunk me down here."

	After that my guide said to me: "See that you push
	your face a little further forward,
	so that your eye takes in properly

	the face of that filthy, dishevelled slut
	who is scratching herself over there with shitty nails,
	and now squats down and now stands up.

	She is Thaïs, the whore who answered
	her lover when he said, 'Have I
	great thanks from you?': 'Amazing ones!'

	And with this let our seeing be satisfied."
