Canto Nineteen

	O Simon Magus, O you wretched followers
	who take the things of God, which ought
	to be brides of goodness, and in your greed

	prostitute them for gold and for silver,
	now the trumpet must sound for you,
	because you are in the third pouch.

	We had already climbed to the next tomb,
	up onto that part of the ridge
	that hangs exactly over the middle of the ditch.

	O highest wisdom, how great is the art
	you show in heaven, on earth and in the evil world,
	and how justly your power distributes!

	I saw, along the sides and along the bottom,
	the livid stone full of holes,
	all of one width, and each of them round.

	They did not seem to me any wider or narrower
	than the ones in my beautiful San Giovanni
	that are made as places for the baptisers;

	and one of those, not many years ago,
	I broke, for the sake of someone drowning inside it:
	and let this be the seal to undeceive everyone.

	Out of the mouth of each one there stuck
	a sinner's feet, and his legs up to the calf,
	and the rest of him stayed inside.

	The soles of all of them were on fire,
	at which their joints twitched so hard
	that they would have snapped withies and ropes.

	As the flame on oiled things usually
	moves only along the outer skin,
	so it was there, from heels to toes.

	"Who is that one, master, who torments himself,
	twitching more than the others of his company,"
	I said, "and whom a redder flame sucks at?"

	And he to me: "If you want me to carry you
	down there by the bank that lies lower,
	you will learn from him about himself and his wrongs."

	And I: "Whatever pleases you is good for me:
	you are my lord, and you know that I do not depart
	from your wishes, and you know what is left unsaid."

	Then we came onto the fourth bank;
	we turned and went down on the left hand
	into the narrow bottom full of holes.

	My good master did not set me down
	off his hip until we reached the crack
	of the one who was weeping with his shanks.

	"Whoever you are, holding your upper part below,
	sad soul planted like a stake,"
	I began to say, "speak, if you can."

	I stood like the friar who confesses
	the treacherous assassin, who, once he is fixed in the hole,
	calls him back so as to put off his death.

	And he cried: "Are you standing there already,
	are you standing there already, Boniface?
	The writing lied to me by several years.

	Are you so soon glutted with that wealth
	for which you were not afraid to take by fraud
	the beautiful lady, and then to tear her apart?"

	I became like people who stand there
	not understanding what has been answered them,
	almost made fools of, and unable to reply.

	Then Virgil said: "Tell him at once:
	'I am not the one, I am not the one you think'";
	and I answered as I was told.

	At which the spirit twisted both his feet;
	then, sighing, and with a voice full of tears,
	he said to me: "Then what do you want from me?

	If knowing who I am matters so much to you
	that you have run down the bank for it,
	know that I was dressed in the great mantle;

	and truly I was a son of the she-bear,
	so greedy to advance the cubs
	that up there I pursed the money, and here myself.

	Underneath my head are dragged the others
	who went before me in simony,
	flattened into the cracks of the stone.

	Down there I shall fall as well, when
	the one comes whom I thought you were
	when I put my sudden question.

	But my feet have already been cooking,
	and I have already been upside down like this, longer
	than he will stand planted with red feet;

	because after him, from the west, there will come
	a shepherd without any law, of uglier deeds,
	one fit to cover over both him and me.

	He will be a new Jason, of the kind we read of
	in Maccabees; and as that one's king was soft to him,
	so the one who rules France will be to this man."

	I do not know whether I was too rash here,
	but I answered him in this measure:
	"Ah, tell me now: how much treasure

	did Our Lord require from Saint Peter
	before he put the keys into his keeping?
	Certainly he asked nothing but 'Follow me.'

	Neither Peter nor the others took gold
	or silver from Matthias when he was chosen by lot
	for the place the guilty soul had lost.

	So stay where you are, because you are well punished;
	and keep good guard over the ill-gotten money
	that made you bold against Charles.

	And if it were not that I am still forbidden
	by reverence for the highest keys
	that you held in the glad life,

	I would use words heavier still;
	because your greed makes the world sad,
	trampling the good and lifting up the wicked.

	The Evangelist had you shepherds in mind
	when the one who sits upon the waters
	was seen by him whoring with the kings —

	the one who was born with the seven heads,
	and had her strength out of the ten horns,
	as long as virtue pleased her husband.

	You have made yourselves a god of gold and silver;
	and what is the difference between you and the idolater,
	except that he prays to one and you to a hundred?

	Ah, Constantine, how much evil was mothered
	not by your conversion but by that dowry
	which the first rich father took from you!"

	And while I was singing him notes like these,
	whether it was anger or conscience gnawing at him,
	he kicked hard with both his soles.

	I do believe it pleased my guide,
	he listened with so contented a face
	to the sound of the true words spoken.

	So he took me up with both arms;
	and when he had me right up on his chest
	he climbed back by the way he had come down.

	And he did not tire of holding me clasped to him,
	but carried me right up to the crown of the arch
	that is the crossing from the fourth bank to the fifth.

	There he set his load down gently —
	gently, because of the rough and steep ridge,
	which would have been a hard crossing for goats.

	From there another valley was uncovered to me.
