Canto Twenty-One

	So, from bridge to bridge, talking of things
	my comedy does not care to sing,
	we came; and we were holding the crown of it when

	we stopped to see the next cleft
	of Malebolge, and the next futile weeping;
	and I saw it marvellously dark.

	As in the arsenal of the Venetians
	the sticky pitch boils in winter
	for caulking their unsound ships,

	because they cannot sail — and instead of sailing
	one builds his ship new, another plugs the ribs
	of one that has made many voyages;

	one hammers at the bow, another at the stern;
	some make oars, others twist rope;
	one patches the jib and the mainsail —

	so, not by fire but by divine art,
	a thick tar was boiling down there
	that plastered the bank on every side.

	I could see it, but I could see in it
	nothing except the bubbles the boiling raised,
	and the whole of it swelling and settling flat again.

	While I was staring down there
	my guide, saying "Look out, look out!",
	pulled me to him from the place where I stood.

	Then I turned like a man who is impatient
	to see the thing he has to run from,
	and whom a sudden fear unstrings,

	so that he does not put off going in order to look:
	and I saw behind us a black devil
	come running up along the ridge.

	Ah, how fierce he was to look at!
	And how savage he seemed to me in his movements,
	with his wings spread and light on his feet!

	His shoulder, which was sharp and high,
	was loaded with a sinner by both haunches,
	and he had him gripped by the tendon of the feet.

	From our bridge he said: "O Malebranche,
	you Evil Claws, here is one of Santa Zita's elders!
	Put him under, while I go back for more

	to that town, which is well stocked with them:
	every man there is a grafter except Bonturo;
	there they turn a no into a yes for money."

	He threw him down and turned back
	along the hard ridge; and no mastiff was ever loosed
	in such a hurry to chase a thief.

	That one went under and came up doubled over;
	but the demons who had the shelter of the bridge
	shouted: "There is no Holy Face here!

	Here you swim differently from the Serchio!
	So, if you do not want a taste of our hooks,
	do not stick up above the pitch."

	Then they bit into him with more than a hundred prongs
	and said: "You have to dance down here under cover,
	so that you can grab on the sly, if you can."

	It is no different from the way cooks make their boys
	duck the meat down in the middle of the cauldron
	with their hooks, so that it does not float.

	My good master said to me: "So that it does not show
	that you are here, squat down
	behind a splinter of rock, and take some cover from it;

	and whatever insult may be done to me,
	do not be afraid, because I know about these things:
	I was in a brawl like this once before."

	Then he went on past the head of the bridge;
	and when he reached the sixth bank
	he needed a steady face.

	With the fury and the storm
	that dogs come out at a poor man with
	when he stops suddenly and begs,

	those came out from under the little bridge
	and turned all their grappling hooks on him;
	but he shouted: "Let none of you be a villain!

	Before your hook takes hold of me,
	let one of you come forward and hear me,
	and after that take counsel about hooking me."

	They all shouted: "Let Malacoda go!"
	So one moved forward — and the others stood still —
	and came to him saying: "What good will it do him?"

	"Do you believe, Malacoda, that you see me
	come here," said my master,
	"already safe from all your defences,

	without divine will and favourable fate?
	Let us go on, because it is willed in heaven
	that I should show another man this wild road."

	Then his pride fell so far
	that he let the hook drop to his feet,
	and said to the others: "Now let him not be struck."

	And my guide to me: "You there, sitting
	among the splinters of the bridge, crouched down,
	you can safely come back to me now."

	So I moved and came to him quickly;
	and the devils all pressed forward,
	so that I was afraid they would not keep the bargain;

	that is how I once saw the soldiers who came out
	of Caprona under terms grow afraid,
	seeing themselves among so many enemies.

	I brought my whole body up close
	alongside my guide, and did not turn my eyes
	away from their looks, which were not good.

	They lowered their prongs, and "Shall I touch him,"
	one said to another, "on the rump?"
	And they answered: "Yes, see that you get him there."

	But that demon who was in conversation
	with my guide turned round very quickly
	and said: "Down, down, Scarmiglione!"

	Then he said to us: "You cannot go any further along
	this ridge, because the sixth arch
	lies all in pieces at the bottom.

	And if you would still like to go on,
	go along by this bank;
	there is another ridge close by that makes a way.

	Yesterday, five hours later than this hour,
	it was a thousand two hundred and sixty-six
	years since the road here was broken.

	I am sending some of my company that way
	to see whether anyone is airing himself;
	go with them, they will not be wicked."

	"Step forward, Alichino, and Calcabrina,"
	he began to say, "and you, Cagnazzo;
	and let Barbariccia lead the ten.

	Let Libicocco come too, and Draghignazzo,
	tusked Ciriatto and Graffiacane
	and Farfarello and mad Rubicante.

	Search around the boiling glue;
	let these two be safe as far as the next ridge
	that goes over the dens in one piece."

	"Oh, master, what is it that I see?"
	I said. "Please, let us go on alone, without an escort,
	if you know the way; I do not want one for myself.

	If you are as sharp as you usually are,
	do you not see that they are grinding their teeth
	and threatening us with harm in their eyebrows?"

	And he to me: "I do not want you to be frightened;
	let them grind as much as they please:
	they do it for the wretched boiled ones."

	They wheeled off along the left bank;
	but first each of them had gripped his tongue
	with his teeth, towards their leader, as a signal;

	and he had made a trumpet of his arse.
