Canto Twenty-Three

	Silent, alone, without company,
	we were going, one in front and the other behind,
	as the Friars Minor go along the road.

	My thoughts had turned, because of the brawl
	just now, to Aesop's fable,
	where he tells of the frog and the mouse;

	because "now" and "this instant" are no closer
	than the one is to the other, if you couple
	beginning and end together with an attentive mind.

	And as one thought bursts out of another,
	so out of that one another was born,
	which doubled my first fear.

	I was thinking like this: "These have been made
	fools of on our account, with damage and mockery
	of a kind that I am sure annoys them.

	If anger is wound onto their ill will,
	they will come after us more cruelly
	than the dog does after the hare it snaps up."

	I could already feel all my hair standing
	on end with fear, and I was straining to look behind,
	when I said: "Master, if you do not hide

	yourself and me quickly, I am terrified
	of the Malebranche. They are behind us already;
	I imagine them so hard that I already hear them."

	And he: "If I were a mirror of leaded glass
	I would not draw your outward image to me
	faster than I take in the one inside you.

	Your thoughts were coming in among mine just now,
	with the same gesture and the same face,
	so that I have made a single plan out of both.

	If the right-hand bank lies in such a way
	that we can go down into the next pouch,
	we shall escape the hunt you are imagining."

	He had not finished giving that advice
	when I saw them come with their wings spread,
	not far off, meaning to take us.

	My guide picked me up at once,
	like a mother woken by the noise
	who sees the flames burning close to her,

	and takes her son and runs, and does not stop,
	caring more about him than about herself,
	so that she puts on only a shift;

	and down from the top of the hard bank
	he gave himself, on his back, to the sloping rock
	that stops one of the sides of the next pouch.

	Water never ran so fast down a channel
	to turn the wheel of a land mill
	at the moment it comes closest to the paddles,

	as my master went down that edge,
	carrying me on his chest with him,
	like his son, not like a companion.

	Hardly had his feet reached the bed
	of the bottom when they were on the ridge
	right above us; but there was no danger there,

	because the high providence that willed
	to set them as ministers of the fifth ditch
	takes from every one of them the power to leave it.

	Down there we found a painted people
	going round with very slow steps,
	weeping, and looking tired and defeated.

	They had cloaks with hoods pulled down
	in front of their eyes, cut in the fashion
	that is made for the monks at Cluny.

	On the outside they are gilded, so that they dazzle;
	but inside they are all lead, and so heavy
	that Frederick's were straw beside them.

	Oh, a mantle to labour under eternally!
	We turned again, still to the left hand,
	along with them, attending to their sad weeping;

	but because of the weight, those tired people
	came so slowly that we had new company
	at every movement of the hip.

	So I to my guide: "See if you can find
	someone known by his deeds or by his name,
	and, as you go, move your eyes about."

	And one who caught the Tuscan speech
	shouted behind us: "Hold your feet,
	you who are running so through the dark air!

	Perhaps you will get from me what you are asking."
	At which my guide turned and said: "Wait,
	and then go on at his pace."

	I stopped, and saw two showing in their faces
	a great hurry of mind to be with me;
	but the load and the narrow road held them back.

	When they had come up they eyed me a long while
	with a sidelong look, saying nothing;
	then they turned to each other and said between themselves:

	"That one seems alive, by the working of his throat;
	and if they are dead, by what privilege
	do they go uncovered by the heavy stole?"

	Then they said to me: "O Tuscan, who have come
	to the college of the sad hypocrites,
	do not think it beneath you to say who you are."

	And I to them: "I was born and grew up
	on the beautiful river Arno, in the great town,
	and I am in the body I have always had.

	But who are you, down whose cheeks
	I see so much grief distilling?
	And what punishment is on you that glitters so?"

	And one of them answered me: "The orange cloaks
	are of lead, and so thick that the weights
	make our scales creak like this.

	We were Jovial Friars, and Bolognese;
	I was called Catalano and this one Loderingo,
	and we were taken together by your city

	as a single man is usually taken
	to keep its peace; and we were such
	that it still shows around the Gardingo."

	I began: "O friars, your evils..."
	but I said no more, because there ran into my eye
	one crucified on the ground with three stakes.

	When he saw me he twisted all over,
	blowing into his beard with sighs;
	and Friar Catalano, who noticed it,

	said to me: "That nailed one you are looking at
	advised the Pharisees that it was expedient
	to put one man to torture for the people.

	He is stretched across the road, naked,
	as you see, and it is necessary for him to feel
	how much everyone who passes weighs, first.

	And his father-in-law is racked in the same way
	in this ditch, and the others of that council
	which was a bad seed for the Jews."

	Then I saw Virgil marvel
	over the one stretched out on the cross
	so basely in the eternal exile.

	After that he turned this speech to the friar:
	"May it not displease you, if you are allowed, to tell us
	whether on the right hand there is any opening

	by which the two of us can get out
	without forcing the black angels
	to come and take us out of this bottom."

	So he answered: "Nearer than you hope
	there is a ridge that runs out of the great circling wall
	and crosses all the savage valleys,

	except that at this one it is broken and does not roof it;
	you will be able to climb up over the ruin,
	which slopes against the side and heaps up on the bottom."

	My guide stood a moment with his head bent;
	then he said: "That one who hooks the sinners over there
	gave a bad account of the business."

	And the friar: "I once heard it said at Bologna
	that the devil has plenty of vices, among which
	I heard that he is a liar, and the father of lies."

	After that my guide went off with long strides,
	disturbed a little with anger in his face;
	so I left the loaded people

	and followed after the prints of the dear feet.
