Canto Twenty-Four

	In that part of the young year
	when the sun tempers his hair under Aquarius
	and the nights are already going towards half the day,

	when the frost copies onto the ground
	the image of her white sister,
	but the temper of her pen does not last long,

	the little farmer, who is short of fodder,
	gets up and looks and sees the countryside
	all white; at which he slaps his thigh,

	goes back into the house, and grumbles here and there
	like a poor wretch who does not know what to do;
	then he comes out again, and gathers up hope again,

	seeing that the world has changed its face
	in a little while, and takes his crook
	and drives the sheep out to graze.

	So my master made me dismayed
	when I saw his forehead so troubled,
	and just as quickly the plaster came to the sore;

	because when we came to the broken bridge
	my guide turned to me with that sweet
	look I had first seen at the foot of the mountain.

	He opened his arms, after choosing some plan
	inside himself, having first looked hard
	at the landslide, and took hold of me.

	And like a man who works and calculates,
	who always seems to provide for what is ahead,
	so, lifting me up towards the top

	of one boulder, he was already picking out another spur,
	saying: "Then get a grip on that one;
	but test it first, to see if it will hold you."

	It was no road for anyone dressed in a cloak,
	because even we — he light, and I pushed from below —
	could hardly climb from hold to hold.

	And if it had not been that on that side of the wall
	the slope was shorter than on the other,
	I do not know about him, but I would have been beaten.

	But because the whole of Malebolge leans
	towards the mouth of the lowest well,
	the position of each valley means

	that one side rises and the other goes down;
	all the same we came out at last at the point
	where the last stone breaks away.

	My breath was so milked out of my lungs
	when I was up that I could go no further,
	and I sat down as soon as I arrived.

	"Now you must shake off this sloth,"
	said my master; "sitting on down,
	and under the bedclothes, brings nobody to fame;

	and whoever uses up his life without it
	leaves the same trace of himself on the earth
	as smoke in the air and foam on the water.

	So get up: overcome your breathlessness
	with the mind, which wins every battle
	unless it sinks under the weight of the body.

	There is a longer stairway still to be climbed;
	getting away from these is not enough.
	If you understand me, act on it now."

	Then I got up, showing myself better
	furnished with breath than I felt,
	and said: "Go on; I am strong and brave."

	We took our way up along the ridge,
	which was rocky, narrow and hard to manage,
	and far steeper than the one before.

	I went on talking, so as not to seem weak;
	at which a voice came out of the next ditch,
	not suited to forming words.

	I do not know what it said, although I was already
	on the crown of the arch that crosses there;
	but whoever was speaking seemed moved to anger.

	I was turned downward; but living eyes
	could not go to the bottom, because of the dark;
	so I said: "Master, get across

	to the next belt and let us go down the wall;
	because, as I hear from here and do not understand,
	so I look down and make out nothing."

	"The only answer I give you," he said,
	"is doing it; because a decent request
	should be followed by the deed, in silence."

	We came down from the bridge at the head
	where it joins the eighth bank,
	and then the pouch was plain to me:

	and inside it I saw a terrible mass
	of serpents, and of such various kinds
	that the memory still curdles my blood.

	Let Libya boast no more of her sand;
	because although she produces chelydri, jaculi and pharea,
	and cenchres with amphisbaena,

	she never showed such plagues, nor such evil ones,
	together with the whole of Ethiopia
	and everything that lies over the Red Sea.

	Among that cruel, most miserable heap
	naked, terrified people were running,
	with no hope of a hole or of a heliotrope:

	their hands were tied behind them with snakes;
	these drove their tails and their heads
	through the loins, and were knotted in front.

	And here, at one who was near our bank,
	a serpent flung itself and pierced him
	there where the neck is knotted to the shoulders.

	Neither O nor I was ever written so fast
	as he caught fire and burned, and had to become
	entirely ashes as he fell;

	and when he was so destroyed on the ground
	the dust gathered itself together of its own accord
	and immediately went back into the same man.

	So it is affirmed by the great sages
	that the phoenix dies and then is born again
	when it comes near its five hundredth year;

	it feeds on no grass or grain in its life
	but only on tears of incense and of balsam,
	and nard and myrrh are its last swaddling clothes.

	And like a man who falls, and does not know how,
	by the force of a demon that drags him to the ground
	or of some other stoppage that binds a man,

	who, when he gets up, looks around him
	completely lost from the great anguish
	he has been through, and sighs as he looks:

	that is what the sinner was like after he had got up.
	Oh, power of God, how severe it is,
	that showers down such blows for vengeance!

	My guide then asked him who he was;
	at which he answered: "I rained down out of Tuscany
	a short while ago, into this savage throat.

	A beast's life pleased me, not a man's,
	mule that I was; I am Vanni Fucci,
	a beast, and Pistoia was a fit den for me."

	And I to my guide: "Tell him not to slip away,
	and ask what sin has pushed him down here;
	because I knew him as a man of blood and rages."

	And the sinner, who heard, did not pretend,
	but turned his mind and his face towards me
	and was painted with a miserable shame;

	then he said: "It hurts me more that you have caught me
	in the misery where you see me
	than it did when I was taken out of the other life.

	I cannot deny what you are asking;
	I am put down so far because I was
	the thief of the fine furnishings from the sacristy,

	and it was falsely charged on somebody else.
	But so that you may not enjoy this sight,
	if you are ever outside these dark places,

	open your ears to my announcement, and hear it.
	First Pistoia grows thin of the Blacks;
	then Florence renews her people and her ways.

	Mars draws up a vapour from Val di Magra
	that is wrapped in turbid clouds;
	and with an impetuous and bitter storm

	there will be fighting over Campo Piceno;
	at which it will suddenly break the mist,
	so that every White will be wounded by it.

	And I have told you so that it may grieve you!"
