Canto Twenty-Six

	Rejoice, Florence, since you are so great
	that you beat your wings over sea and land,
	and your name is spread through Hell!

	Among the thieves I found five such
	citizens of yours, which brings me shame,
	and you do not rise to any great honour by it.

	But if we dream the truth near morning,
	you will feel, in a little while from now,
	what Prato, not to speak of others, longs for you.

	And if it had already happened, it would not be too soon.
	So let it be, since it has to be!
	Because it will weigh on me more, the older I get.

	We left, and up the stairs
	the projections had made for us to come down by before
	my guide climbed back, and drew me after him;

	and going on along that lonely road,
	among the splinters and the boulders of the ridge,
	the foot could not get on without the hand.

	I grieved then, and I grieve again now
	when I turn my mind to what I saw,
	and I curb my genius more than I usually do,

	so that it may not run where virtue does not guide it;
	so that, if a good star or something better
	has given me the gift, I may not begrudge it to myself.

	As many as the fireflies which the peasant,
	resting on the hillside at the season when
	the one who lights the world keeps his face least hidden,

	when the fly gives way to the mosquito,
	sees down along the valley,
	perhaps just where he gathers grapes and ploughs:

	with just so many flames the eighth pouch
	was all shining, as I made out
	as soon as I was where the bottom could be seen.

	And as the man who was avenged by the bears
	saw Elijah's chariot at its going,
	when the horses rose steeply into the sky

	and he could not follow it with his eyes
	so as to see anything but the flame alone,
	going up like a little cloud:

	so each of these moves along the throat
	of the ditch, because none of them shows its theft,
	and every flame steals away a sinner.

	I was standing on the bridge, risen up to see,
	so that if I had not caught hold of a rock
	I would have fallen down without being pushed.

	And my guide, who saw me so intent,
	said: "The spirits are inside the fires;
	each of them is wrapped in what burns him."

	"My master," I answered, "hearing you
	makes me more certain; but I had already thought
	that it was so, and was already going to ask you:

	who is in that fire that comes so divided
	at the top, as if it were rising from the pyre
	where Eteocles was laid with his brother?"

	He answered me: "In there Ulysses
	and Diomedes are tortured; and they go together
	in the vengeance as they went together in the anger;

	and inside their flame there is groaning
	for the ambush of the horse that made the gate
	out of which the noble seed of the Romans went;

	inside it there is weeping for the trick because of which
	Deidamia, dead, still grieves for Achilles;
	and there the penalty for the Palladium is carried."

	"If they can speak inside those sparks,"
	I said, "master, I beg you very much,
	and beg again, so that the prayer may count for a thousand,

	that you will not refuse me the waiting
	until the horned flame comes here;
	see how desire bends me towards it!"

	And he to me: "Your prayer deserves
	much praise, and so I accept it;
	but see that your tongue holds itself back.

	Let me do the talking; because I have grasped
	what you want; and they, being Greeks,
	would perhaps be shy of what you might say."

	When the flame had come to the place
	that seemed to my guide the right time and place,
	I heard him speak in this form:

	"O you who are two inside one fire,
	if I deserved anything of you while I lived,
	if I deserved anything of you, much or little,

	when I wrote the high verses in the world,
	do not move away; but let one of you tell
	where, having lost himself, he went to die."

	The greater horn of the ancient flame
	began to shake itself, murmuring,
	just like one that the wind wearies;

	then, moving its tip this way and that,
	as if it were the tongue that spoke,
	it threw a voice out and said: "When

	I left Circe, who had kept me
	more than a year there near Gaeta,
	before Aeneas gave it that name,

	neither the sweetness of a son, nor the duty
	to an old father, nor the love I owed
	that should have made Penelope glad,

	could overcome in me the burning
	I had to become experienced in the world,
	and in the vices of men, and in their worth;

	but I put out on the high open sea
	with a single ship, and with that small
	company that had never deserted me.

	I saw both shores as far as Spain,
	as far as Morocco, and the island of the Sardinians,
	and the others that sea washes round about.

	My companions and I were old and slow
	when we came to that narrow mouth
	where Hercules set up his markers

	so that no man should put himself further out;
	on the right hand I left Seville behind,
	on the other I had already left Ceuta.

	'O brothers,' I said, 'who through a hundred thousand
	dangers have reached the west,
	to this so brief a watch

	of our senses that is still left to us
	do not refuse the experience,
	following the sun, of the world where nobody lives.

	Consider the seed you came from:
	you were not made to live like brutes,
	but to follow virtue and knowledge.'

	With this little speech I made my companions
	so keen for the road
	that afterwards I could hardly have held them back;

	and, turning our stern towards the morning,
	we made wings of our oars for the mad flight,
	always gaining on the left-hand side.

	Night already saw all the stars
	of the other pole, and ours so low
	that it did not rise out of the ocean floor.

	The light underneath the moon had been
	rekindled five times, and as many times put out,
	since we had entered on the deep crossing,

	when a mountain appeared to us, dark
	with distance, and it seemed to me higher
	than any I had ever seen.

	We rejoiced, and it soon turned to weeping;
	because out of the new land a whirlwind rose
	and struck the ship on its forward corner.

	Three times it made her spin with all the waters;
	at the fourth it lifted her stern in the air
	and drove her bow down, as pleased Another,

	until the sea had closed again above us."
