Canto Twenty-Nine

	The many people and the various wounds
	had made my eyes so drunk
	that they wanted to stay and weep.

	But Virgil said to me: "What are you staring at?
	Why does your sight keep resting
	down there among the sad mutilated shades?

	You did not do this at the other pouches;
	consider, if you think you can count them,
	that the valley goes round twenty-two miles.

	And the moon is already under our feet;
	the time allowed us now is short,
	and there is more to see than you are seeing."

	"If you had paid attention," I answered then,
	"to the reason why I was looking,
	you would perhaps still have let me stay."

	My guide was moving off, and I was going behind him,
	already making my answer,
	and adding: "Inside that hollow

	where I was keeping my eyes fixed just now,
	I think a spirit of my own blood is weeping
	for the guilt that costs so much down there."

	Then my master said: "Do not let your thought
	break itself over him from now on.
	Attend to something else, and let him stay there;

	because I saw him at the foot of the little bridge
	pointing at you and threatening hard with his finger,
	and I heard him named as Geri del Bello.

	You were so completely taken up then
	with the one who once held Altaforte
	that you did not look that way, and he went off."

	"O my guide, the violent death
	that has still not been avenged for him," I said,
	"by any of those who share the shame,

	made him indignant; and so he went away
	without speaking to me, as I judge it:
	and by that he has made me pity him more."

	So we talked until we reached the first place
	on the ridge that would show the next valley,
	right to its bottom, if there were more light.

	When we were over the last cloister
	of Malebolge, so that its lay brothers
	could appear to our sight,

	laments of all kinds shot at me,
	with arrows barbed with pity;
	so I covered my ears with my hands.

	Such pain as there would be if the diseases
	from the hospitals of Valdichiana between July and September,
	and from Maremma and from Sardinia,

	were all together in a single ditch —
	that is what it was like there, and such a stench came out of it
	as usually comes off rotting limbs.

	We went down onto the last bank
	of the long ridge, still on the left hand;
	and then my sight grew keener

	down towards the bottom, where the servant
	of the high Lord, infallible justice,
	punishes the falsifiers she registers here.

	I do not believe it was a sadder sight
	when the whole people of Aegina were sick,
	when the air was so full of poison

	that all the animals, down to the little worm,
	fell dead; and afterwards the ancient people,
	as the poets hold for certain,

	were restored out of the seed of ants —
	than it was to see, through that dark valley,
	the spirits languishing in different heaps.

	One lay on the belly and one on the shoulders
	of another, and one was dragging himself on all fours
	along the miserable path.

	Step by step we went, without talking,
	looking at and listening to the sick people,
	who could not lift their bodies.

	I saw two sitting propped against each other,
	as one pan is propped on another to warm,
	spotted with scabs from head to foot;

	and I never saw a currycomb worked
	by a stable boy whose master is waiting for him,
	or by one who stays up unwillingly,

	the way each of these worked the bite
	of his nails on himself, in the great fury
	of the itching, which has no other relief;

	and their nails dragged the scab off
	as a knife does the scales of a bream
	or of some other fish with larger ones.

	"O you who unmail yourself with your fingers,"
	my guide began to one of them,
	"and who sometimes make pincers of them,

	tell us whether there is any Italian among those
	in here — so may your nails last you
	eternally for this work."

	"We are Italians, both of us, whom you see
	so ruined here," one answered, weeping;
	"but who are you, who asked about us?"

	And my guide said: "I am one who comes down
	with this living man from ledge to ledge,
	and I mean to show him Hell."

	Then their mutual propping broke apart;
	and each of them turned to me, trembling,
	with others who heard it at second hand.

	My good master drew right up to me,
	saying: "Say to them whatever you want";
	and I began, since he wished it:

	"So may your memory not be stolen
	from human minds in the first world,
	but live on under many suns —

	tell me who you are, and of what people;
	do not let your ugly and disgusting punishment
	frighten you out of showing yourselves to me."

	"I was from Arezzo, and Albero of Siena,"
	one of them answered, "had me put to the fire;
	but what I died for is not what brings me here.

	It is true that I said to him, talking for fun:
	'I know how to lift myself into the air and fly';
	and he, who had a lot of curiosity and little sense,

	wanted me to show him the art; and only
	because I did not make him Daedalus he had me
	burnt by one who treated him as a son.

	But to the last pouch of the ten
	Minos, who is not permitted to err,
	condemned me for the alchemy I practised in the world."

	And I said to the poet: "Now was there ever
	a people as vain as the Sienese?
	Certainly the French are not, by a long way!"

	At which the other leper, who caught what I said,
	answered: "Except Stricca,
	who knew how to spend in moderation;

	and Niccolò, who first discovered
	the expensive habit of the clove
	in the garden where such seed takes root;

	and except the club in which Caccia d'Asciano
	squandered his vineyard and his great estate,
	and Abbagliato showed off his good sense.

	But so that you may know who is backing you
	against the Sienese like this, sharpen your eye at me,
	so that my face may answer you properly:

	then you will see that I am the shade of Capocchio,
	who falsified metals by alchemy;
	and you must remember, if I eye you rightly,

	what a good ape of nature I was."
