Canto Thirty

	At the time when Juno was angry
	because of Semele, against the Theban blood,
	as she showed more than once,

	Athamas went so completely mad
	that when he saw his wife go by
	loaded with two sons, one on each hand,

	he shouted: "Let us spread the nets, so that I can take
	the lioness and the cubs at the pass";
	and then he stretched out his pitiless claws,

	taking the one who was called Learchus,
	and whirled him round and dashed him on a rock;
	and she drowned herself with the other load.

	And when fortune brought down
	the pride of the Trojans, who had dared everything,
	so that the king was cancelled along with the kingdom,

	Hecuba, sad, wretched and captive,
	after she had seen Polyxena dead,
	and, on the shore of the sea, had made out

	her Polydorus — the sorrowing woman —
	barked out of her senses like a dog;
	so much did grief twist her mind.

	But no fury of Thebes and no fury of Troy
	was ever seen so cruel in anyone,
	goading beasts, let alone human limbs,

	as I saw in two pale naked shades
	who ran biting in the way
	a pig does when it is let out of the sty.

	One of them reached Capocchio, and set his tusks
	in the knot of his neck, so that, dragging him,
	he made his belly scrape on the hard bottom.

	And the Aretine, who was left, said to me,
	trembling: "That goblin is Gianni Schicchi,
	and he goes about rabid, treating others like that."

	"Oh," I said to him, "so may the other not fix
	his teeth in you — do not find it a trouble
	to say who that is before it darts away from here."

	And he to me: "That is the ancient soul
	of criminal Myrrha, who became
	her father's lover, outside right love.

	She came to sin with him like that,
	falsifying herself into another's shape,
	just as the one going off there took on,

	so as to win the queen of the herd,
	the falsifying of Buoso Donati in himself,
	making a will and giving the will due form."

	And when the two rabid ones had gone past,
	on whom I had kept my eye,
	I turned it to look at the other badly born ones.

	I saw one made in the shape of a lute,
	if only he had had his groin
	cut off at the place where a man is forked.

	The heavy dropsy, which so unpairs
	the limbs with the humour it converts badly
	that the face does not answer to the belly,

	was making him hold his lips open
	as a consumptive does, who, out of thirst,
	turns the one down to the chin and the other up.

	"O you who are without any punishment,
	and I do not know why, in the wretched world,"
	he said to us, "look, and give your attention

	to the misery of Master Adam;
	alive, I had plenty of what I wanted,
	and now, alas, I long for a single drop of water.

	The little streams that come down from the green hills
	of the Casentino into the Arno,
	making their channels cool and soft,

	are always in front of me, and not for nothing,
	because the image of them dries me up far more
	than the disease that strips the flesh off my face.

	The rigid justice that searches me
	takes its occasion from the place where I sinned
	to set my sighs going faster.

	There stands Romena, where I falsified
	the alloy stamped with the Baptist;
	for which I left my body burnt up there.

	But if I could see down here the miserable soul
	of Guido, or of Alessandro, or of their brother,
	I would not give up the sight of it for Fonte Branda.

	One of them is in here already, if the raging
	shades who go about are telling the truth;
	but what use is it to me, with my limbs tied?

	If I were still light enough
	to move an inch in a hundred years,
	I would already have set out along the path

	looking for him among these disfigured people,
	even though it goes round eleven miles
	and is not less than half a mile across.

	It is because of them that I am in such a family;
	they induced me to strike the florins
	that had three carats of dross in them."

	And I to him: "Who are the two wretches
	who steam like wet hands in winter,
	lying pressed close on your right-hand border?"

	"I found them here — and they have not turned over since —"
	he answered, "when I rained down into this hollow,
	and I do not think they will turn for all eternity.

	One is the false woman who accused Joseph;
	the other is the false Sinon, the Greek from Troy:
	a sharp fever makes them give off such a stink."

	And one of them, who took it badly, perhaps,
	to be named so obscurely,
	struck him with his fist on his stiff paunch.

	It sounded as if it were a drum;
	and Master Adam struck him in the face
	with his arm, which seemed no less hard,

	saying to him: "Even though the moving
	of my limbs is taken from me, because they are heavy,
	I have my arm free for a job like this."

	At which he answered: "When you went to the fire
	you did not have it so ready;
	but you had it so, and more, when you were coining."

	And the dropsical one: "You tell the truth in that;
	but you were not so true a witness
	when you were asked for the truth at Troy."

	"If I spoke false, you falsified the coin,"
	said Sinon; "and I am here for one offence,
	and you for more than any other devil!"

	"Remember the horse, you perjurer,"
	answered the one with the swollen paunch;
	"and let it be your torment that the whole world knows it!"

	"And let it be yours, the thirst that cracks
	your tongue," said the Greek, "and the rotten water
	that hedges your belly up in front of your eyes!"

	Then the coiner: "So your mouth is split open
	for your own harm, as it always is;
	because if I am thirsty and the humour stuffs me,

	you have the burning and the aching head,
	and you would not want many words of invitation
	to lick the mirror of Narcissus."

	I was completely fixed on listening to them
	when my master said to me: "Just keep looking —
	it needs very little for me to quarrel with you!"

	When I heard him speak to me in anger
	I turned towards him with such shame
	that it still goes round in my memory.

	Like a man who dreams he is being harmed,
	and, dreaming, wishes he were dreaming,
	so that he longs for what is as if it were not,

	that is what I became, unable to speak,
	because I wanted to excuse myself, and was excusing
	myself all the time, and did not believe I was doing it.

	"Less shame washes away a greater fault,"
	said my master, "than yours has been;
	so unburden yourself of all your sadness.

	And consider that I am always at your side,
	if it happens again that fortune brings you
	where there are people in a squabble like that:

	because wanting to hear that is a low wish."
