Canto Thirty-One

	One and the same tongue first bit me,
	so that it coloured both my cheeks,
	and then held out the medicine to me;

	so I have heard that the lance of Achilles
	and of his father used to be the cause
	first of a sad gift and then of a good one.

	We turned our backs on that miserable valley,
	going up the bank that rings it round,
	crossing it without any talk.

	There it was less than night and less than day,
	so that my sight went only a little way ahead;
	but I heard a high horn sound

	so loud that it would have made any thunder faint,
	and, following its own way back against itself,
	it directed my eyes all to one place.

	After the sorrowful rout, when
	Charlemagne lost the holy company,
	Roland did not sound so terribly.

	I had not held my head turned that way long
	before it seemed to me I saw many high towers;
	so I said: "Master, tell me, what town is this?"

	And he to me: "Because you run on
	through the darkness from too far away,
	it happens that you go astray afterwards in imagining.

	You will see well enough, when you get there,
	how much the sense is deceived at a distance;
	so spur yourself on a little more."

	Then he took me tenderly by the hand
	and said: "Before we go any further,
	so that the fact may seem less strange to you,

	know that they are not towers but giants,
	and they are in the well, around its bank,
	every one of them from the navel down."

	As, when the fog is dispersing,
	the sight little by little makes out again
	what the vapour that packs the air is hiding,

	so, boring through that thick dark air,
	coming nearer and nearer to the edge,
	my error fled and my fear grew;

	because, as Montereggione crowns itself
	with towers on its round wall,
	so the rim that circles the well

	was towered over, from half their bodies up,
	by the horrible giants, whom Jove
	still threatens out of heaven when he thunders.

	And I could already make out the face of one of them,
	the shoulders and the chest and much of the belly,
	and both arms down along the ribs.

	Nature certainly did very well
	when she left off the art of animals like these,
	to take such executioners away from Mars.

	And if she does not repent of elephants
	and whales, anyone who looks carefully
	holds her the more just and the more discreet for it;

	because where the instrument of the mind
	is added to ill will and to power,
	people can put up no defence at all.

	His face seemed to me as long and as broad
	as the pine cone of Saint Peter's in Rome,
	and his other bones were in proportion to it;

	so that the bank, which was an apron
	from the middle down, still showed us so much of him
	above it that three Frisians would have boasted

	wrongly of reaching to his hair;
	because I could see thirty great spans of him
	down from the place where a man buckles his cloak.

	"Raphèl maì amècche zabì almi,"
	the savage mouth began to shout,
	for which no sweeter psalms were fitting.

	And my guide, towards him: "Stupid soul,
	stick to your horn, and let yourself out with that
	when anger or some other passion touches you!

	Feel at your neck, and you will find the strap
	that keeps it tied on, confused soul,
	and look at it lying across your great chest."

	Then he said to me: "He accuses himself;
	this is Nimrod, and because of his evil thought
	one single language is not used in the world.

	Let us leave him alone and not talk to no purpose;
	because every language is to him
	what his is to others, which nobody knows."

	So we made a longer journey,
	turning to the left; and at a crossbow shot
	we found the next one, far more savage and larger.

	Who the master was who girded him
	I cannot say, but he had the other arm
	bound in front and the right one behind

	by a chain that held him fastened
	from the neck down, so that on the uncovered part
	it was wound round as far as the fifth turn.

	"This proud one wanted to try out
	his own power against the highest Jove,"
	said my guide, "and this is what he has earned by it.

	His name is Ephialtes, and he made his great attempts
	when the giants frightened the gods;
	the arms he swung then he never moves again."

	And I to him: "If it can be, I would like
	my eyes to have experience
	of the immeasurable Briareus."

	So he answered: "You will see Antaeus
	near here, who speaks and is unbound,
	and who will set us down in the bottom of all guilt.

	The one you want to see is much further off,
	and is bound and made like this one,
	except that he seems more ferocious in the face."

	There was never an earthquake so violent
	that it shook a tower as hard
	as Ephialtes was quick to shake himself.

	Then I feared death more than ever,
	and the terror alone would have been enough for it
	if I had not seen the fetters.

	We went on further then,
	and came to Antaeus, who stood a good five ells,
	without the head, out of the pit.

	"O you who in the fated valley
	that made Scipio the heir of glory,
	when Hannibal and his men turned their backs,

	once brought home a thousand lions for prey,
	and about whom it still seems to be believed
	that if you had been at the high war

	with your brothers, the sons of the earth would have won:
	put us down below, and do not be disgusted at it,
	where the cold locks up Cocytus.

	Do not make us go to Tityos or to Typhon:
	this man can give what is longed for here;
	so bend down, and do not twist your snout at us.

	He can still give you fame back in the world,
	because he is alive, and expects a long life yet,
	if grace does not call him to itself before his time."

	So said my master; and the other in haste
	stretched out his hands and took hold of my guide,
	whose grip Hercules once felt to be great.

	Virgil, when he felt himself taken,
	said to me: "Come here, so that I can take you";
	then he made a single bundle of himself and me.

	As the Carisenda looks, seen from underneath
	the leaning side, when a cloud goes over it
	in such a way that it seems to be leaning the other way:

	that is how Antaeus looked to me as I stood watching
	for him to bend down; and it was such a moment
	that I would have liked to go by another road.

	But he set us down lightly on the bottom
	that devours Lucifer along with Judas;
	and, bent as he was, he did not stay there,

	but rose like a mast in a ship.
