Canto Thirty-Two

	If I had rhymes harsh and clucking enough
	to suit the miserable hole
	that all the other rocks bear down on,

	I would press the juice of my conception
	out more fully; but since I have not,
	it is not without fear that I bring myself to speak;

	because describing the bottom of the whole universe
	is not an undertaking to be picked up in fun,
	nor one for a tongue that says mummy and daddy.

	But let those ladies help my verse
	who helped Amphion to close Thebes in,
	so that the telling may not differ from the fact.

	Oh, rabble worse created than all others,
	who are in the place that is hard to speak of,
	better for you if you had been sheep or goats here!

	When we were down in the dark well,
	well below the giant's feet,
	and I was still looking up at the high wall,

	I heard someone say: "Watch how you go:
	walk so that you do not tread with your soles
	on the heads of the wretched, weary brothers."

	So I turned, and saw in front of me
	and under my feet a lake that with the freezing
	had the look of glass and not of water.

	The Danube in Austria never made
	so thick a veil over its course in winter,
	nor the Don, out there under the cold sky,

	as there was here; because if Tambernic
	had fallen on it, or Pietrapana,
	it would not have made a creak even at the edge.

	And as a frog sits croaking
	with its snout out of the water, at the season
	when the peasant woman often dreams of gleaning,

	livid, right up to where shame shows,
	the grieving shades were in the ice,
	setting their teeth to the note of the stork.

	Every one of them held his face turned down;
	their mouths bear witness to the cold
	and their eyes to the misery in their hearts.

	When I had looked around me a while
	I turned to my feet, and saw two so tightly pressed
	that the hair of their heads was mingled together.

	"Tell me, you who squeeze your chests together,"
	I said, "who are you?" And they bent their necks;
	and when they had lifted their faces to me,

	their eyes, which had only been wet inside before,
	dripped over their lips, and the frost bound
	the tears between them and locked them up again.

	No clamp ever bound wood to wood
	so tightly; so they butted together
	like two goats, so much did rage overcome them.

	And one who had lost both his ears
	to the cold said, still with his face down:
	"Why do you mirror yourself in us so long?

	If you want to know who those two are,
	the valley that the Bisenzo runs down
	belonged to their father Alberto, and to them.

	They came out of one body; and you can search
	the whole of Caina and not find a shade
	more deserving to be fixed in this jelly:

	not the one whose chest and shadow were broken
	at a single stroke by Arthur's hand;
	not Focaccia; not this one who blocks me

	so with his head that I can see no further,
	and who was called Sassol Mascheroni;
	if you are Tuscan you know by now who he was.

	And so that you do not set me to more talking,
	know that I was Camiscion de' Pazzi;
	and I am waiting for Carlino to excuse me."

	After that I saw a thousand faces made
	dog-like by the cold; at which a shudder comes over me,
	and always will, at frozen fords.

	And while we were going towards the middle
	where all heaviness gathers itself,
	and I was trembling in the eternal chill,

	whether it was will or destiny or fortune
	I do not know; but, walking among the heads,
	I struck my foot hard in the face of one of them.

	It shouted at me, weeping: "Why are you trampling me?
	If you have not come to increase the vengeance
	for Montaperti, why do you molest me?"

	And I: "My master, wait for me here,
	so that I may get out of a doubt through this one;
	then you can make me hurry as much as you like."

	My guide stopped, and I said to the one
	who was still cursing hard:
	"Who are you, who abuse other people like that?"

	"Now who are you, going through Antenora
	hitting other people's cheeks," he answered,
	"so hard that if you were alive it would be too much?"

	"Alive I am, and it can be worth something to you,"
	was my answer, "if you are asking for fame,
	that I should put your name among my other notes."

	And he to me: "I long for the opposite.
	Get away from here, and give me no more trouble,
	because you flatter badly down in this hollow!"

	Then I took him by the scruff of the neck
	and said: "You will have to name yourself,
	or you will have no hair left up here."

	So he to me: "Even if you strip me of my hair
	I will not tell you who I am, nor show you,
	not if you fall on my head a thousand times."

	I already had his hair twisted round my hand
	and had pulled out more than one lock of it,
	while he barked with his eyes gathered downwards,

	when another shouted: "What is the matter with you, Bocca?
	Is it not enough for you to make music with your jaws,
	without barking too? What devil is at you?"

	"Now," I said, "I do not want you to say another word,
	you evil traitor; because to your shame
	I will carry true news of you."

	"Get away," he answered, "and tell what you like;
	but do not keep quiet, if you get out of here,
	about the one who had his tongue so ready just now.

	He is weeping here for the Frenchmen's silver:
	'I saw,' you will be able to say, 'the man of Duera
	down where the sinners are kept cool.'

	If you are asked, 'Who else was there?',
	you have beside you the man of Beccheria,
	whose gorget Florence sawed through.

	Gianni de' Soldanier, I think, is
	further on, with Ganelon and Tebaldello,
	who opened Faenza while it slept."

	We had already left him behind
	when I saw two frozen in a single hole,
	so that one head was a hat for the other;

	and as bread is chewed when a man is starving,
	so the upper one set his teeth in the other
	at the place where the brain joins the nape:

	it is no different from the way Tydeus gnawed
	Menalippus's temples in his rage,
	from the way that one worked at the skull and the rest.

	"O you who show by so bestial a sign
	your hatred of the one you are eating,
	tell me why," I said, "on this agreement:

	that if you complain of him with reason,
	knowing who you both are and what his fault was,
	I may still repay you for it up in the world,

	if the tongue I speak with does not dry up."
