Canto Thirty-Three

	That sinner lifted his mouth from his savage meal,
	wiping it on the hair
	of the head he had been ruining behind.

	Then he began: "You want me to renew
	a desperate grief that already presses my heart
	merely at the thought, before I speak of it.

	But if my words are to be a seed
	that bears fruit of disgrace for the traitor I gnaw,
	you will see me speak and weep at once.

	I do not know who you are, nor by what means
	you have come down here; but truly
	you seem to me a Florentine when I hear you.

	You should know that I was Count Ugolino
	and this is Archbishop Ruggieri:
	now I will tell you why I am such a neighbour to him.

	That, through the working of his evil thoughts,
	trusting him, I was taken
	and afterwards put to death, there is no need to say;

	but what you cannot have heard,
	that is, how cruel my death was,
	you shall hear, and you will know whether he has wronged me.

	A narrow slit inside the Mew,
	which because of me has the name of hunger,
	and in which others still have to be shut,

	had already shown me through its opening
	several moons, when I had the bad dream
	that tore the veil of the future for me.

	This one seemed to me master and lord,
	hunting the wolf and the wolf cubs on the mountain
	that stops the Pisans from seeing Lucca.

	With lean, eager, well-trained bitches,
	he had put the Gualandi with the Sismondi
	and the Lanfranchi out in front of him.

	After a short run, the father and the sons
	seemed to me exhausted, and I seemed to see
	their flanks torn open by the sharp fangs.

	When I woke before the morning
	I heard my sons, who were with me,
	crying in their sleep and asking for bread.

	You are cruel indeed if you do not grieve already,
	thinking what my heart was announcing to me;
	and if you do not weep at this, what do you ever weep at?

	They were awake by now, and the hour was coming
	at which our food was usually brought to us,
	and each of them was uneasy because of his dream;

	and I heard the door of the horrible tower
	being nailed up below; at which I looked
	into my sons' faces without saying a word.

	I did not weep, I turned so stone inside:
	they wept; and my little Anselmo
	said: "You are staring so, father! What is wrong?"

	Even then I did not weep, nor did I answer,
	all that day, nor the night after,
	until the next sun came out into the world.

	When a little ray had got in
	to the sorrowful prison, and I made out
	in four faces the look of my own,

	I bit into both my hands for grief;
	and they, thinking I was doing it out of a wish
	to eat, immediately stood up

	and said: "Father, it will be far less pain to us
	if you eat of us: you dressed us
	in this miserable flesh, and you take it off."

	Then I calmed myself, so as not to make them sadder;
	that day and the next we all stayed silent;
	ah, hard earth, why did you not open?

	After we had come to the fourth day
	Gaddo threw himself down stretched at my feet,
	saying: "My father, why do you not help me?"

	There he died; and just as you see me,
	I saw the three fall one by one
	between the fifth day and the sixth; and then I set myself,

	blind by then, to groping over each of them,
	and for two days I called them, after they were dead.
	Then fasting had more power than grief."

	When he had said that, with his eyes twisted
	he took the miserable skull in his teeth again,
	which were strong on the bone, like a dog's.

	Ah, Pisa, disgrace to the peoples
	of the beautiful country where "sì" is spoken,
	since your neighbours are slow to punish you,

	let Capraia and Gorgona move
	and make a hedge for the Arno at its mouth,
	so that it may drown every person in you!

	Because even if Count Ugolino had the name
	of having betrayed you of your castles,
	you ought not to have put the sons on such a cross.

	Their young years made them innocent,
	you new Thebes — Uguccione and Brigata
	and the other two the song names above.

	We went on further, to where the ice
	roughly swaddles another people,
	not turned face down, but flat on their backs.

	There the weeping itself will not let them weep,
	and the grief, which finds an obstacle at the eyes,
	turns inward and makes the anguish grow;

	because the first tears make a clot,
	and, like visors of crystal,
	fill the whole cup under the eyebrow.

	And although, as if from a callus,
	because of the cold all feeling
	had left its lodging in my face,

	it already seemed to me that I felt some wind;
	so I said: "My master, who moves this?
	Is not every vapour put out down here?"

	So he to me: "Very soon you will be where
	your eye will answer you about that,
	seeing the cause that rains this breath down."

	And one of the wretches of the cold crust
	shouted to us: "O souls so cruel
	that the last station has been given you,

	lift the hard veils off my face,
	so that I may vent the grief that fills my heart,
	a little, before the weeping freezes again."

	So I to him: "If you want me to help you,
	tell me who you are; and if I do not free you,
	may I have to go to the bottom of the ice."

	So he answered: "I am Friar Alberigo;
	I am the one of the fruit from the bad garden,
	and here I get a date for my fig."

	"Oh," I said to him, "are you dead already, then?"
	And he to me: "How my body is doing
	up in the world I carry no knowledge.

	This Tolomea has that advantage,
	that many times the soul falls down here
	before Atropos has given it its push.

	And so that you may scrape the glazed
	tears off my face more willingly,
	know that as soon as a soul betrays

	as I did, its body is taken from it
	by a demon, who governs it afterwards
	until all its time has turned round.

	It falls headlong into a cistern like this one;
	and perhaps the body of the shade
	that winters here behind me still appears up there.

	You must know that, if you have only just come down:
	he is Ser Branca Doria, and several years
	have passed since he was shut in here."

	"I think," I said to him, "that you are deceiving me;
	because Branca Doria has never died at all,
	and eats and drinks and sleeps and puts on clothes."

	"Up in the ditch of the Malebranche," he said,
	"where the sticky pitch is boiling,
	Michel Zanche had not yet arrived

	when this one left a devil in his own place
	in his body, and so did one of his kinsmen
	who did the treachery along with him.

	But now stretch your hand out this way;
	open my eyes." And I did not open them;
	and to be a boor to him was courtesy.

	Ah, Genoese, men estranged
	from every good custom and full of every corruption,
	why are you not scattered from the world?

	Because along with the worst spirit of Romagna
	I found one of you such that for his work
	his soul is already bathing in Cocytus,

	and in body he still seems alive up above.
