Appendix VIII: Practical Directions for Performing the Experiments on the Composition of Vowels

{¶398}(See p. {@122d|122d}.)

To make the forks vibrate powerfully, it is necessary that the ratios of their pitch numbers should agree with the simple arithmetical ratios to the utmost nicety. After the forks have been tuned by the maker by ear and to the piano as accurately as is possible in this way, the necessary greater exactness is obtained by the electrical current itself. First the interrupting fork, fig. 33, p. {@122c|122c}, is connected with the fork that gives the prime tone, and the movable clamp on the former is {¶398b}arranged so as to make the unison perfect. This gives a maximum intensity to the prime tone, easily recognised by both eye and ear. The vibrations of this lowest fork are so powerful that the excursions of the extremities of the prongs under favourable circumstances amount to 2 or 3 millimetres (from ·08 to ·12 inch). It should also be observed that if the unison has not been perfectly attained, a few beats of the fork are heard when the electric current is first brought to bear upon it, although these disappear when the apparatus is in full action. [This is accounted for in Appendix IX.]

After perfect unison has been accomplished between the interrupting fork and that of the prime tone, the other forks are successively brought into electrical connection, with their resonance chambers wide open, and they are tuned until they reach a maximum intensity when excited by the current. The tuning is first performed with the file. The forks are sharpened, as is well known, by taking off some metal from their extremities, and flattened by reducing the thickness of the root of the prongs. Both must be done with the greatest possible uniformity to each prong. To discover whether the fork is too sharp or too flat, stick a little {¶398c}piece of wax at the ends of its prongs (which flattens the fork) and observe whether the tone becomes louder or weaker. If louder, the fork was too sharp; if weaker, it was too flat. Since alterations of temperature, and, perhaps, other causes exert a slight influence on the pitch of the forks, I have preferred to make the higher forks a little too sharp by filing, and to bring them into exact tune by attaching small quantities of wax to the extremities of the prongs. The quantity of wax is easily altered at pleasure, and by this means slight accidental variations of pitch can be readily corrected.

It is not necessary to tune the resonance tubes so accurately; if, when blown across, they give the same pitch as the forks, they are sufficiently well tuned. If they are too flat, some melted wax may be poured in to sharpen them. If they are too sharp, the opening must be reduced.

It cost me some trouble to get rid of the noise of the spark at the point of interruption. At first I inserted a large condenser of tin foil such as is used in induction machines. But this merely reduced the spark to a certain size. No {¶398d}good effect followed from increasing the size of the condenser. The layers of the condenser are separated by thin varnished paper; one is connected with the interrupting fork, and the other with the cup of quicksilver into which its end dips. After many vain attempts, I at last found that, by inserting a very long and thin wire between the two extremities of the conduction at the point of interruption, the noise of the spark was almost entirely destroyed, without injuring the action of the current on the forks. The wire thus inserted must have an amount of resistance far greater than that occasioned by the coils in all the electro-magnets taken together. When this is the case no sensible portion of the current will go through this wire. It is not till the conduction is broken and the thin wire forms the only connection for the extra current of the electro-magnets, that the current discharges itself through the wire. But to prevent the thin wire itself from generating any secondary current, it must not be coiled round a cylinder, but must be stretched up and down on a board in such a way that two adjacent pieces of the wire should be traversed by two currents, proceeding in opposite directions. For this purpose I screwed two hard india-rubber combs at the two ends of a board

{¶399}(one foot long), and passed a thin plated copper wire, such as is used for spinning over with silken threads, backwards and forwards (90 times) between the teeth of these combs. By this means a great length (90 feet) of this wire was brought well insulated into a comparatively small space, in such a way as not to produce any sensible secondary current. For when on breaking the primary current a secondary current would be formed in the wire, this would have a direction in the circuit formed by the electro-magnets and the thin wire, opposite to the secondary current in the electro-magnets, and the latter would be entirely or partly prevented from discharging itself through the thin wire.

For moving the forks I used two or three cells of a Grove's battery. The electro-magnets were placed in two rows beside one another. The whole arrangement is shewn in a diagram in fig. 64, below. The figures 1 to 8 shew the resonant chambers of the tuning forks; the dotted lines which lead to m₁ and m₈ are the threads which remove the cover from the opening of the resonance {¶399b}chambers; a₁ to a₈ are the electro-magnets which set in motion the tuning-forks {¶399c}{¶399d}between their legs; b is the interrupting fork, and f its own electro-magnet. The relative position of the two last has been somewhat changed in order to make the connection of the direction of the currents more intelligible. The cells of the galvanic battery are marked e₁ and e₂; the great resistance-wire dd; the condenser c, but its plates which are rolled in a spiral are seen only in section.

[Figure gk: Fig. 64. — Wiring diagram of the vowel apparatus: eight forks on electro-magnets a₁ to a₈ before numbered resonance chambers, threads m₁ to m₈, interrupting fork b with magnet f, mercury cups h and i, condenser c, resistance wire d d, cells e₁, e₂.]

The electric current passes from e₂, through all the electro-magnets in order, up to the handle of the interrupting fork g. It is sometimes more advantageous to arrange this part of the conduction so that it should be separated into two parallel branches, and that the three highest forks, which are the most difficult to set in motion, should be inserted into one branch, and the five lower forks into the other, thus allowing a stronger stream to pass through the former than the latter.

The remainder of the conduction from g to the second pole of the battery e₁ contains the interrupting apparatus, which is here so arranged that each vibration of the fork makes the current twice; once when the upper prong dips into the cup of mercury h, and once when the lower prong dips into the cup i. When the conduction is closed at h, it passes from g through the fork to h, and then {¶400}through the electro-magnet f to k and e₁. Between h and k it is generally necessary to insert a lateral branch h l k, having moderate resisting power, to weaken the current in the electro-magnet f sufficiently to prevent the fork b from making violent vibrations. The zigzag at l shews this branch.

When the prongs of the fork move apart, the conduction will be broken at h, and after a short interval again completed at i, so that the current now passes from g through the lower prong of the fork to i, and thence by k to the battery at e₁. But at the moment the conduction is broken either at h or at i, powerful secondary currents are formed by induction in the 8 electro-magnets of the tuning-forks, which would emit luminous and noisy sparks at the points of interruption, if the rush of electricity were not partly stored for the moment in the condenser c, and partly discharged through the very great resistance dd.

This resistance dd, as is seen by the figure, forms a perpetual connection between g and the battery, but it conducts so badly that no sensible part of the {¶400b}current can pass through it, except at the moment when, on breaking the conduction, the great electro-motive force of the secondary currents is generated.

The arrangement just described is preferable when the fork in front of the resonance chamber 1 is the Octave above the fork b. But if the fork opposite 1 makes the same number of vibrations as the fork b, the wire i k must be removed, and both the other wires ending in i must be connected with h.

To exclude particular forks from the circuit, short secondary connections of the coils of wire of their electro-magnets are introduced. The arrangement is shewn in fig. 32, p. {@121b|121b}. The metal knobs h h are connected conductively with the clamping screw g in which the wire of the electro-magnet terminates. If the lever i is moved down, it presses with some friction on the nearer knob h, and forms so good a secondary conducting connection for the wire of the electro-magnets, that the greater part of the electric current passes by h h, and only an infinitesimally small part travels round by the much longer path of the electro-magnets.

As regards the theory of the motion of the forks, it is immediately seen that {¶400c}the force of the current in the electro-magnets must be a function of the time. The length of the period is equal to the period of a vibration of the interrupting fork b. Let the number of interruptions in a second be *n*. Then the strength of the current in the electro-magnets, and consequently the magnitude of the force exerted by the electro-magnets on the forks, will be of the form: \[\begin{aligned} A_0 + A_1 \cdot \cos(2\pi nt + c_1) + A_2 \cdot \cos(4\pi nt + c_2)& \\ + A_3 \cdot \cos(6\pi nt + c_3) + \&c.& \end{aligned}\]

The general term of this series \(A_m \cdot \cos(2\pi mnt + c_m)\) is adapted for setting in motion a fork making *mn* vibrations in a second, but would have little effect on forks otherwise tuned.
