Anent the last of the three things required by Pyrrhus she was harder
put to it for a device; nevertheless, being of a surpassing wit and
Love making her yet quicker of invention, she soon bethought herself
what means she should use to give it accomplishment. Nicostratus had
two boys given him of their father, to the intent that, being of
gentle birth, they might learn somewhat of manners and good breeding
in his house, of whom, whenas he was at meat, one carved before him
and the other gave him to drink. Lydia called them both and giving
them to believe that they stank at the mouth, enjoined them that,
whenas they served Nicostratus, they should still hold their heads
backward as most they might nor ever tell this to any. The boys,
believing that which she said, proceeded to do as she had lessoned
them, and she after a while said to her husband one day, 'Hast thou
noted that which yonder boys do, whenas they serve thee?' 'Ay have I,'
replied Nicostratus; 'and indeed I had it in mind to ask them why they
did it.' Quoth the lady, 'Do it not, for I can tell thee the reason;
and I have kept it silent from thee this long while, not to cause thee
annoy; but, now I perceive that others begin to be aware thereof, it
skilleth not to hide it from thee longer. This betideth thee for none
other what than that thou stinkest terribly at the mouth, and I know
not what can be the cause thereof; for that it used not to be thus.
Now this is a very unseemly thing for thee who hast to do with
gentlemen, and needs must we see for a means of curing it.' Whereupon
said he, 'What can this be? Can I have some rotten tooth in my head?'
'Maybe ay,' answered Lydia and carried him to a window, where she made
him open his mouth, and after she had viewed it in every part, 'O
Nicostratus,' cried she, 'how canst thou have put up with it so long?
Thou hast a tooth on this side which meseemth is not only decayed, but
altogether rotten, and assuredly, and thou keep it much longer in thy
mouth, it will mar thee those which be on either side; wherefore I
counsel thee have it drawn, ere the thing go farther.' 'Since it
seemeth good to thee,' answered he, 'I will well; let a surgeon be
sent for without more delay, who shall draw it for me.' 'God forbid,'
rejoined the lady, 'that a surgeon come hither for that! Methinketh it
lieth on such wise that I myself, without any surgeon, can very well
draw it for thee; more by token that these same surgeons are so
barbarous in doing such offices that my heart would on no account
suffer me to see or know thee in the hands of any one of them; for, an
it irk thee overmuch, I will at least loose thee incontinent, which a
surgeon would not do.'

Accordingly, she let fetch the proper instruments and sent every one
forth of the chamber, except only Lusca; after which, locking herself
in, she made Nicostratus lie down on a table and thrusting the pincers
into his mouth, what while the maid held him fast, she pulled out one
of his teeth by main force, albeit he roared out lustily for the pain.
Then, keeping to herself that which she had drawn, she brought out a
frightfully decayed tooth she had ready in her hand and showed it to
her husband, half dead as he was for pain, saying, 'See what thou
hast had in thy mouth all this while.' Nicostratus believed what she
said and now that the tooth was out, for all he had suffered the most
grievous pain and made sore complaint thereof, him seemed he was
cured; and presently, having comforted himself with one thing and
another and the pain being abated, he went forth of the chamber;
whereupon his wife took the tooth and straightway despatched it to her
gallant, who, being now certified of her love, professed himself ready
to do her every pleasure.

The lady, albeit every hour seemed to her a thousand till she should
be with him, desiring to give him farther assurance and wishful to
perform that which she had promised him, made a show one day of being
ailing and being visited after dinner by Nicostratus, with no one in
his company but Pyrrhus, she prayed them, by way of allaying her
unease, to help her go into the garden. Accordingly, Nicostratus
taking her on one side and Pyrrhus on the other, they carried her into
the garden and set her down on a grassplot, at the foot of a fine
pear-tree; where, after they had sat awhile, the lady, who had already
given her gallant to know what he had to do, said, 'Pyrrhus, I have a
great desire to eat of yonder pears; do thou climb up and throw us
down some of them.' Pyrrhus straightway climbed up into the tree and
fell to throwing down of the pears, which as he did, he began to say,
'How now, my lord! What is this you do? And you, madam, are you not
ashamed to suffer it in my presence? Think you I am blind? But now you
were sore disordered; how cometh it you have so quickly recovered that
you do such things? An you have a mind unto this, you have store of
goodly chambers; why go you not do it in one of these? It were more
seemly than in my presence.'

The lady turned to her husband and said, 'What saith Pyrrhus? Doth he
rave?' 'No, madam,' answered the young man, 'I rave not. Think you I
cannot see?' As for Nicostratus, he marvelled sore and said, 'Verily,
Pyrrhus, methinketh thou dreamest.' 'My lord,' replied Pyrrhus, 'I
dream not a jot, neither do you dream; nay, you bestir yourselves on
such wise that were this tree to do likewise, there would not be a
pear left on it.' Quoth the lady, 'What may this be? Can it be that
this he saith appeareth to him to be true? So God save me, and I were
whole as I was aforetime, I would climb up into the tree, to see what
marvels are those which this fellow saith he seeth.' Meanwhile Pyrrhus
from the top of the pear-tree still said the same thing and kept up
the pretence; whereupon Nicostratus bade him come down. Accordingly he
came down and his master said to him, 'Now, what sayst thou thou
sawest?' 'Methinketh,' answered he, 'you take me for a lackwit or a
loggerhead. Since I must needs say it, I saw you a-top of your lady,
and after, as I came down, I saw you arise and seat yourself where you
presently are.' 'Assuredly,' said Nicostratus, 'thou dotest; for we
have not stirred a jot, save as thou seest, since thou climbest up
into the pear-tree.' Whereupon quoth Pyrrhus, 'What booteth it to make
words of the matter? I certainly saw you; and if I did see you, it was
a-top of your own.'

Nicostratus waxed momently more and more astonished, insomuch that he
said, 'Needs must I see if this pear-tree is enchanted and if whoso is
thereon seeth marvels.' Thereupon he climbed up into the tree and no
sooner was he come to the top than the lady and Pyrrhus fell to
solacing themselves together; which when Nicostratus saw, he began to
cry out, saying, 'Ah, vile woman that thou art, what is this thou
dost? And thou, Pyrrhus, in whom I most trusted?' So saying, he
proceeded to descend the tree, whilst the lovers said, 'We are sitting
here'; then, seeing him come down, they reseated themselves whereas he
had left them. As soon as he was down and saw his wife and Pyrrhus
where he had left them, he fell a-railing at them; whereupon quoth
Pyrrhus, 'Now, verily, Nicostratus, I acknowledged that, as you said
before, I must have seen falsely what while I was in the pear-tree,
nor do I know it otherwise than by this, that I see and know yourself
to have seen falsely in the like case. And that I speak the truth
nought else should be needful to certify you but that you have regard
to the circumstances of the case and consider if it be possible that
your lady, who is the most virtuous of women and discreeter than any
other of her sex, could, an she had a mind to outrage you on such
wise, bring herself to do it before your very eyes. I speak not of
myself, who would rather suffer myself to be torn limb-meal than so
much as think of such a thing, much more come to do it in your
presence. Wherefore the fault of this misseeing must needs proceed
from the pear-tree, for that all the world had not made me believe but
that you were in act to have carnal knowledge of your lady here, had I
not heard you say that it appeared to yourself that I did what I know
most certainly I never thought, much less did.'

Thereupon the lady, feigning to be mightily incensed, rose to her feet
and said, 'Ill luck betide thee, dost thou hold me so little of wit
that, an I had a mind to such filthy fashions as thou wouldst have us
believe thou sawest, I should come to do them before thy very eyes?
Thou mayst be assured of this that, if ever the fancy took me thereof,
I should not come hither; marry, methinketh I should have sense enough
to contrive it in one of our chambers, on such wise and after such a
fashion that it would seem to me an extraordinary thing if ever thou
camest to know of it.' Nicostratus, himseeming that what the lady and
Pyrrhus said was true, to wit, that they would never have ventured
upon such an act there before himself, gave over words and reproaches
and fell to discoursing of the strangeness of the fact and the miracle
of the sight, which was thus changed unto whoso climbed up into the
pear-tree. But his wife, feigning herself chagrined for the ill
thought he had shown of her, said, 'Verily, this pear-tree shall never
again, if I can help it, do me nor any other lady the like of this
shame; wherefore do thou run, Pyrrhus, and fetch a hatchet and at one
stroke avenge both thyself and me by cutting it down; albeit it were
better yet lay it about Nicostratus his cosard, who, without any
consideration, suffered the eyes of his understanding to be so quickly
blinded, whenas, however certain that which thou[355] saidst might
seem to those[356] which thou hast in thy head, thou shouldst for
nought in the world in the judgment of thy mind have believed or
allowed that such a thing could be.'

[Footnote 355: This sudden change from the third to the second person,
in speaking of Nicostratus, is a characteristic example of Boccaccio's
constant abuse of the figure enallage in his dialogues.]

[Footnote 356: _i.e._ those eyes.]

Pyrrhus very readily fetched the hatchet and cut down the tree, which
when the lady saw fallen, she said to Nicostratus, 'Since I see the
enemy of mine honour overthrown, my anger is past,' and graciously
forgave her husband, who besought her thereof, charging him that it
should never again happen to him to presume such a thing of her, who
loved him better than herself. Accordingly, the wretched husband, thus
befooled, returned with her and her lover to the palace, where many a
time thereafterward Pyrrhus took delight and pleasance more at ease of
Lydia and she of him. God grant us as much!"




