THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the Tenth]

     SOPHRONIA, THINKING TO MARRY GISIPPUS, BECOMETH THE WIFE OF
     TITUS QUINTIUS FULVUS AND WITH HIM BETAKETH HERSELF TO ROME,
     WHITHER GISIPPUS COMETH IN POOR CASE AND CONCEIVING HIMSELF
     SLIGHTED OF TITUS, DECLARETH, SO HE MAY DIE, TO HAVE SLAIN A
     MAN. TITUS, RECOGNIZING HIM, TO SAVE HIM, AVOUCHETH HIMSELF
     TO HAVE DONE THE DEED, AND THE TRUE MURDERER, SEEING THIS,
     DISCOVERETH HIMSELF; WHEREUPON THEY ARE ALL THREE LIBERATED
     BY OCTAVIANUS AND TITUS, GIVING GISIPPUS HIS SISTER TO WIFE,
     HATH ALL HIS GOOD IN COMMON WITH HIM


Pampinea having left speaking and all having commended King Pedro, the
Ghibelline lady more than the rest, Fiammetta, by the king's
commandment, began thus, "Illustrious ladies, who is there knoweth not
that kings, when they will, can do everything great and that it is, to
boot, especially required of them that they be magnificent? Whoso,
then, having the power, doth that which pertaineth unto him, doth
well; but folk should not so much marvel thereat nor exalt him to such
a height with supreme praise as it would behove them do with another,
of whom, for lack of means, less were required. Wherefore, if you with
such words extol the actions of kings and they seem to you fair, I
doubt not anywise but those of our peers, whenas they are like unto or
greater than those of kings, will please you yet more and be yet
highlier commended of you, and I purpose accordingly to recount to
you, in a story, the praiseworthy and magnanimous dealings of two
citizens and friends with each other.

You must know, then, that at the time when Octavianus Cæsar (not yet
styled Augustus) ruled the Roman empire in the office called
Triumvirate, there was in Rome a gentleman called Publius Quintius
Fulvus,[461] who, having a son of marvellous understanding, by name
Titus Quintius Fulvus, sent him to Athens to study philosophy and
commended him as most he might to a nobleman there called Chremes, his
very old friend, by whom Titus was lodged in his own house, in company
of a son of his called Gisippus, and set to study with the latter,
under the governance of a philosopher named Aristippus. The two young
men, coming to consort together, found each other's usances so
conformable that there was born thereof a brotherhood between them and
a friendship so great that it was never sundered by other accident
than death, and neither of them knew weal nor peace save in so much as
they were together. Entering upon their studies and being each alike
endowed with the highest understanding, they ascended with equal step
and marvellous commendation to the glorious altitudes of philosophy;
and in this way of life they continued good three years, to the
exceeding contentment of Chremes, who in a manner looked upon the one
as no more his son than the other. At the end of this time it befell,
even as it befalleth of all things, that Chremes, now an old man,
departed this life, whereof the two young men suffered a like sorrow,
as for a common father, nor could his friends and kinsfolk discern
which of the twain was the more in need of consolation for that which
had betided them.

[Footnote 461: Sic, _Publio Quinzio Fulvo_; but _quære_ should it not
rather be _Publio Quinto Fulvio_, _i.e._ Publius Quintus Fulvius, a
form of the name which seems more in accordance with the genius of the
Latin language?]

It came to pass, after some months, that the friends and kinsfolk of
Gisippus resorted to him and together with Titus exhorted him to take
a wife, to which he consenting, they found him a young Athenian lady
of marvellous beauty and very noble parentage, whose name was
Sophronia and who was maybe fifteen years old. The term of the future
nuptials drawing nigh, Gisippus one day besought Titus to go visit her
with him, for that he had not yet seen her. Accordingly, they being
come into her house and she seated between the twain, Titus proceeded
to consider her with the utmost attention, as if to judge of the
beauty of his friend's bride, and every part of her pleasing him
beyond measure, what while he inwardly commended her charms to the
utmost, he fell, without showing any sign thereof, as passionately
enamoured of her as ever yet man of woman. After they had been with
her awhile, they took their leave and returned home, where Titus,
betaking himself alone into his chamber, fell a-thinking of the
charming damsel and grew the more enkindled the more he enlarged upon
her in thought; which, perceiving, he fell to saying in himself, after
many ardent sighs, 'Alack, the wretchedness of thy life, Titus! Where
and on what settest thou thy mind and thy love and thy hope? Knowest
thou not that it behoveth thee, as well for the kindness received from
Chremes and his family as for the entire friendship that is between
thee and Gisippus, whose bride she is, to have yonder damsel in such
respect as a sister? Whom, then, lovest thou? Whither lettest thou
thyself be carried away by delusive love, whither by fallacious hope?
Open the eyes of thine understanding and recollect thyself, wretch
that thou art; give place to reason, curb thy carnal appetite, temper
thine unhallowed desires and direct thy thoughts unto otherwhat;
gainstand thy lust in this its beginning and conquer thyself, whilst
it is yet time. This thou wouldst have is unseemly, nay, it is
dishonourable; this thou art minded to ensue it behoveth thee, even
wert thou assured (which thou art not) of obtaining it, to flee from,
an thou have regard unto that which true friendship requireth and that
which thou oughtest. What, then, wilt thou do, Titus? Thou wilt leave
this unseemly love, an thou wouldst do that which behoveth.'

Then, remembering him of Sophronia and going over to the contrary, he
denounced all that he had said, saying, 'The laws of love are of
greater puissance than any others; they annul even the Divine laws,
let alone those of friendship; how often aforetime hath father loved
daughter, brother sister, stepmother stepson, things more monstrous
than for one friend to love the other's wife, the which hath already a
thousand times befallen! Moreover, I am young and youth is altogether
subject to the laws of Love; wherefor that which pleaseth Him, needs
must it please me. Things honourable pertain unto maturer folk; I can
will nought save that which Love willeth. The beauty of yonder damsel
deserveth to be loved of all, and if I love her, who am young, who can
justly blame me therefor? I love her not because she is Gisippus's;
nay, I love her for that I should love her, whosesoever she was. In
this fortune sinneth that hath allotted her to Gisippus my friend,
rather than to another; and if she must be loved, (as she must, and
deservedly, for her beauty,) Gisippus, an he came to know it, should
be better pleased that I should love her, I, than another.' Then, from
that reasoning he reverted again to the contrary, making mock of
himself, and wasted not only that day and the ensuing night in passing
from this to that and back again, but many others, insomuch that,
losing appetite and sleep therefor, he was constrained for weakness to
take to his bed.

Gisippus, having beheld him several days full of melancholy thought
and seeing him presently sick, was sore concerned and with every art
and all solicitude studied to comfort him, never leaving him and
questioning him often and instantly of the cause of his melancholy and
his sickness. Titus, after having once and again given him idle tales,
which Gisippus knew to be such, by way of answer, finding himself e'en
constrained thereunto, with tears and sighs replied to him on this
wise, 'Gisippus, had it pleased the Gods, death were far more a-gree
to me than to live longer, considering that fortune hath brought me to
a pass whereas it behoved me make proof of my virtue and that I have,
to my exceeding shame, found this latter overcome; but certes I look
thereof to have ere long the reward that befitteth me, to wit, death,
and this will be more pleasing to me than to live in remembrance of my
baseness, which latter, for that I cannot nor should hide aught from
thee, I will, not without sore blushing, discover to thee.' Then,
beginning from the beginning, he discovered to him the cause of his
melancholy and the conflict of his thoughts and ultimately gave him to
know which had gotten the victory and confessed himself perishing for
love of Sophronia, declaring that, knowing how much this misbeseemed
him, he had for penance thereof resolved himself to die, whereof he
trusted speedily to make an end.

Gisippus, hearing this and seeing his tears, abode awhile irresolute,
as one who, though more moderately, was himself taken with the charms
of the fair damsel, but speedily bethought himself that his friend's
life should be dearer to him than Sophronia. Accordingly, solicited to
tears by those of his friend, he answered him, weeping, 'Titus, wert
thou not in need as thou art of comfort, I should complain of thee to
thyself, as of one who hath transgressed against our friendship in
having so long kept thy most grievous passion hidden from me; since,
albeit it appeared not to thee honourable, nevertheless dishonourable
things should not, more than honourable, be hidden from a friend; for
that a friend, like as he rejoiceth with his friend in honourable
things, even so he studieth to do away the dishonourable from his
friend's mind; but for the present I will refrain therefrom and come
to that which I perceive to be of greater urgency. That thou lovest
Sophronia, who is betrothed to me, I marvel not: nay, I should
marvel, indeed, if it were not so, knowing her beauty and the nobility
of thy mind, so much the more susceptible of passion as the thing that
pleaseth hath the more excellence. And the more reason thou hast to
love Sophronia, so much the more unjustly dost thou complain of
fortune (albeit thou expressest this not in so many words) in that it
hath awarded her to me, it seeming to thee that thy love for her had
been honourable, were she other than mine; but tell me, if thou be as
well advised as thou usest to be, to whom could fortune have awarded
her, whereof thou shouldst have more cause to render it thanks, than
of having awarded her to me? Whoso else had had her, how honourable
soever thy love had been, had liefer loved her for himself[462] than
for thee,[463] a thing which thou shouldst not fear[464] from me, an
thou hold me a friend such as I am to thee, for that I mind me not,
since we have been friends, to have ever had aught that was not as
much thine as mine. Now, were the matter so far advanced that it might
not be otherwise, I would do with her as I have done with my other
possessions;[465] but it is yet at such a point that I can make her
thine alone; and I will do so, for that I know not why my friendship
should be dear to thee, if, in respect of a thing that may honourably
be done, I knew not of a desire of mine to make thine. True it is that
Sophronia is my promised bride and that I loved her much and looked
with great joyance for my nuptials with her; but, since thou, being
far more understanding than I, with more ardour desirest so dear a
thing as she is, live assured that she shall enter my chamber, not as
my wife, but as thine. Wherefore leave thought-taking, put away
melancholy, call back thy lost health and comfort and allegresse and
from this time forth expect with blitheness the reward of thy love,
far worthier than was mine.'

[Footnote 462: Or "his" (_a sè_).]

[Footnote 463: Or "thine" (_a te_).]

[Footnote 464: Lit. "hope" (_sperare_). See note, p. 5.]

[Footnote 465: _i.e._ I would have her in common with thee.]

When Titus heard Gisippus speak thus, the more the flattering hopes
given him of the latter afforded him pleasure, so much the more did
just reason inform him with shame, showing him that, the greater was
Gisippus his liberality, the more unworthy it appeared of himself to
use it; wherefore, without giving over weeping, he with difficulty
replied to him thus, 'Gisippus, thy generous and true friendship very
plainly showeth me that which it pertaineth unto mine to do. God
forfend that her, whom He hath bestowed upon thee as upon the
worthier, I should receive from thee for mine! Had He judged it
fitting that she should be mine, nor thou nor others can believe that
He would ever have bestowed her on thee. Use, therefore, joyfully,
thine election and discreet counsel and His gifts, and leave me to
languish in the tears, which, as to one undeserving of such a
treasure, He hath prepared unto me and which I will either overcome,
and that will be dear to thee, or they will overcome me and I shall be
out of pain.' 'Titus,' rejoined Gisippus, 'an our friendship might
accord me such license that I should enforce thee to ensue a desire of
mine and if it may avail to induce thee to do so, it is in this case
that I mean to use it to the utmost, and if thou yield not to my
prayers with a good grace, I will, with such violence as it behoveth
us use for the weal of our friends, procure that Sophronia shall be
thine. I know how great is the might of love and that, not once, but
many a time, it hath brought lovers to a miserable death; nay, unto
this I see thee so near that thou canst neither turn back nor avail to
master thy tears, but, proceeding thus, wouldst pine and die;
whereupon I, without any doubt, should speedily follow after. If,
then, I loved thee not for otherwhat, thy life is dear to me, so I
myself may live. Sophronia, therefore, shall be thine, for that thou
couldst not lightly find another woman who would so please thee, and
as I shall easily turn my love unto another, I shall thus have
contented both thyself and me. I should not, peradventure, be so free
to do this, were wives as scarce and as uneath to find as friends;
however, as I can very easily find me another wife, but not another
friend, I had liefer (I will not say _lose_ her, for that I shall not
lose her, giving her to thee, but shall transfer her to another and a
better self, but) transfer her than lose thee. Wherefore, if my
prayers avail aught with thee, I beseech thee put away from thee this
affliction and comforting at once thyself and me, address thee with
good hope to take that joyance which thy fervent love desireth of the
thing beloved.'

Although Titus was ashamed to consent to this, namely, that Sophronia
should become his wife, and on this account held out yet awhile,
nevertheless, love on the one hand drawing him and Gisippus his
exhortations on the other urging him, he said, 'Look you, Gisippus, I
know not which I can say I do most, my pleasure or thine, in doing
that whereof thou prayest me and which thou tellest me is so pleasing
to thee, and since thy generosity is such that it overcometh my just
shame, I will e'en do it; but of this thou mayst be assured that I do
it as one who knoweth himself to receive of thee, not only the beloved
lady, but with her his life. The Gods grant, an it be possible, that I
may yet be able to show thee, for thine honour and thy weal, how
grateful to me is that which thou, more pitiful for me than I for
myself, dost for me!' These things said, 'Titus,' quoth Gisippus, 'in
this matter, an we would have it take effect, meseemeth this course is
to be held. As thou knowest, Sophronia, after long treaty between my
kinsfolk and hers, is become my affianced bride; wherefore, should I
now go about to say that I will not have her to wife, a sore scandal
would ensue thereof and I should anger both her kinsfolk and mine own.
Of this, indeed, I should reck nothing, an I saw that she was thereby
to become thine; but I misdoubt me that, an I renounce her at this
point, her kinsfolk will straightway give her to another, who belike
will not be thyself, and so wilt thou have lost that which I shall not
have gained. Wherefore meseemeth well, an thou be content, that I
follow on with that which I have begun and bring her home as mine and
hold the nuptials, and thou mayst after, as we shall know how to
contrive, privily lie with her as with thy wife. Then, in due place
and season, we will make manifest the fact, which, if it please them
not, will still be done and they must perforce be content, being
unable to go back upon it.'

