CHAPTER XVI

Unrest in the Peloponnese -- The League of Mantinea, Elis, Argos, and Athens -- The Battle of Mantinea and the League's Collapse


After the ten years' war ended and both sides signed the treaty and the alliance -- during the magistracy of Pleistolas at Sparta and Alcaeus at Athens -- the states that had accepted the deal were technically at peace. But the Corinthians and several other cities in the Peloponnese were already working to undermine the settlement, and a fresh wave of unrest against Sparta began spreading through the allied states. On top of that, as time passed the Athenians grew increasingly suspicious of the Spartans, who weren't holding up their end of the treaty. For six years and ten months the two sides refrained from invading each other's territory, but abroad an unstable armistice didn't stop either side from doing the other as much damage as possible -- until they were finally forced to scrap the treaty made after the ten years' war and go back to open fighting.

This period too has been recorded by the same Thucydides, an Athenian, following events in order by summers and winters, down to the time when the Spartans and their allies destroyed the Athenian empire and captured the Long Walls and the Piraeus. The war, all told, lasted twenty-seven years. And anyone who dismisses the truce period as not being part of the war is simply wrong. Look at the facts: can you really call it "peace" when neither side gave back or received everything they'd agreed to? Set aside the violations that both sides committed during the wars at Mantinea and Epidaurus and elsewhere. Consider that the allies up in Thrace were as openly hostile as ever, and that the Boeotians had only a truce that had to be renewed every ten days. So the first ten years' war, the phony armistice that followed, and the war that came after, when you add up the seasons, come to the total I've mentioned -- give or take a few days. And for once, faith in oracles actually turned out to be justified. I certainly remember, from the very beginning right through to the end of the war, hearing people declare that it would last "thrice nine years." I lived through the whole thing, old enough to understand events and paying close attention so I could know the exact truth. It was also my fate to spend twenty years in exile after my command at Amphipolis, which put me in contact with both sides -- especially the Peloponnesians, thanks to my exile -- and gave me the leisure to observe events with particular care. I will now describe the disputes that arose after the ten years' war, the collapse of the treaty, and the fighting that followed.


After the fifty years' truce and the alliance were concluded, the delegations from the Peloponnese that had come to Sparta for this business headed home. Most went straight back to their own cities, but the Corinthians made a detour to Argos first. There they opened private negotiations with some Argive officials, making the case that Sparta couldn't possibly have good intentions. Her real aim, they argued, was the subjugation of the entire Peloponnese -- why else would she have signed a treaty and alliance with Athens, her longtime enemy? The duty of protecting the Peloponnese had now fallen to Argos, they said. Argos should immediately pass a decree inviting any Greek state that was independent and governed by fair and equal laws to form a defensive alliance with them. They recommended appointing a small committee with full negotiating authority rather than putting everything before the public assembly -- that way, if a state's application was turned down, the embarrassment of having its overtures rejected wouldn't become public knowledge. The Corinthians predicted that many states would join out of sheer hatred of Sparta. After laying all this out, they went home.

The Argive officials who'd been approached brought this proposal to their government and people. The Argives passed the decree and appointed twelve men to negotiate an alliance with any Greek state that wanted to join -- except Athens and Sparta, neither of which could be admitted without a vote of the full Argive assembly. Argos jumped at this plan for several reasons. They could see that war with Sparta was inevitable, since the truce was about to expire. They also hoped to win the leadership of the Peloponnese. At this point Sparta's reputation had sunk to rock bottom thanks to her recent disasters, while Argos was in excellent shape -- having sat out the war against Athens entirely and profited handsomely from their neutrality. So the Argives prepared to welcome into their alliance any Greek state that wanted in.


The Mantineans and their allies were the first to join, and they did it out of fear. During the war against Athens, Mantinea had taken advantage of the distraction to bring a large part of Arcadia under their control. Now that Sparta had her hands free, the Mantineans were sure she wouldn't let them keep those conquests. They were only too happy to turn to a powerful city like Argos -- Sparta's historic rival and a fellow democracy. Once Mantinea defected, the rest of the Peloponnese started buzzing about following her lead. If Mantinea had switched sides, people reasoned, they must have had good reason. There was also widespread anger at Sparta over a clause she'd inserted in the treaty with Athens: that both Sparta and Athens could modify the terms however they saw fit, by mutual agreement. This was the clause that really set off panic across the Peloponnese, because it raised the terrifying possibility of a joint Spartan-Athenian front against everyone else's freedom. Any changes to the treaty, people argued, should have required the consent of all the allies. With fears like these circulating, there was a rush across the Peloponnese for states to get themselves into an alliance with Argos.


The Spartans could see the agitation spreading through the Peloponnese, and they knew Corinth was behind it -- and was herself about to ally with Argos. So they sent ambassadors to Corinth, hoping to head off the whole thing. They accused her of starting the trouble and warned that abandoning Sparta for an Argive alliance would add a violation of her oaths on top of the offense she'd already committed by rejecting the treaty with Athens -- a treaty that, as everyone had explicitly agreed, would be binding if approved by the majority of allies, "unless the gods or heroes stand in the way."

Corinth responded in front of those allies who, like her, had refused the treaty, and whom she'd invited to be present. She didn't openly list her grievances -- things like the Athenians still holding Sollium and Anactorium, or other ways she felt she'd been shortchanged. Instead she took cover behind a different argument: she couldn't abandon her allies in Thrace. She had personally guaranteed their security back when they first rebelled along with Potidaea, and again on later occasions. Refusing to join the Athenian treaty, she insisted, wasn't a violation of her oaths to the alliance. After all, she'd sworn sacred oaths to her Thracian friends -- she couldn't in good conscience betray them. And besides, the clause said "unless the gods or heroes stand in the way." Well, here, as Corinth saw it, the gods stood in the way.

That was her position on her former oaths. As for the Argive alliance? She would consult with her friends and do whatever was right. The Spartan envoys went home. Some Argive ambassadors who happened to be in Corinth at the time pressed her to join the alliance immediately, but the Corinthians told them to come back at the next congress to be held in Corinth.


An Elean embassy arrived right away after this. They first made an alliance with Corinth, then traveled on to Argos as they'd been instructed, and became allies of the Argives. Elis had its own grudge against Sparta, stemming from a dispute over Lepreum. The backstory was this: some time ago, the Lepreans had gone to war with some Arcadians. The Eleans intervened on the Lepreans' side, on the condition that they'd get half of Leprean territory. After winning the war, the Eleans let the Lepreans keep farming their land but imposed a yearly tribute of one talent to Olympian Zeus. This tribute was paid regularly until the war with Athens, at which point the Lepreans used the war as an excuse to stop paying. When the Eleans tried to compel them, the Lepreans appealed to Sparta for arbitration. The Eleans agreed at first but then, suspecting the tribunal would be biased, pulled out and invaded Leprean territory. Sparta ruled anyway: the Lepreans were independent, and the Eleans were the aggressors. When the Eleans refused to accept this verdict, Sparta sent a garrison of heavy infantry into Lepreum. The Eleans were furious, arguing that Sparta had taken in one of their rebellious subjects. They pointed to the convention that said every allied state should come out of the war with Athens holding whatever territory it had going in -- and since they felt justice had been denied them, they went over to Argos. Their ambassadors had been authorized to do exactly that. Right on their heels, the Corinthians and the Chalcidians from Thrace also joined the Argive alliance.

Meanwhile, the Boeotians and Megarians, who always acted in concert, held back. Sparta left them alone, and they calculated that Argos's democratic government wouldn't sit well with their own oligarchies, which were much more in tune with Sparta's constitution.


Around this same time in the summer, Athens took Scione by force, executed all the adult men, enslaved the women and children, and gave the land to the Plataeans to resettle. She also brought the Delians back to Delos, moved both by her recent military setbacks and by a command from the oracle at Delphi. Meanwhile, the Phocians and Locrians went to war with each other.

The Corinthians and Argives, now allied, traveled to Tegea to persuade her to defect from Sparta. They understood that if they could win over such a major state, the rest of the Peloponnese would follow. But when the Tegeans said flatly that they would do nothing against Sparta, the Corinthians' enthusiasm suddenly deflated. They began to fear that no one else would come over either. Still, they went to the Boeotians and tried to convince them to ally with Argos and Corinth, and to act together on policy generally. They also asked the Boeotians to accompany them to Athens and get them a ten-day truce like the one the Boeotians had recently made with Athens shortly after the fifty years' treaty -- and if Athens refused, the Boeotians should cancel their own truce and make no future agreement without including Corinth.

Those were the Corinthian requests. The Boeotians brushed aside the idea of an Argive alliance but did go with them to Athens, where they failed to get the ten-day truce. The Athenians' answer was that the Corinthians already had a truce, since they were technically allies of Sparta. The Boeotians, however, did not cancel their own ten-day truce, despite the Corinthians' pleas and accusations of betrayal. The Corinthians had to settle for an informal, unwritten ceasefire with Athens.


That same summer, the Spartans marched into Arcadia with their full army under King Pleistoanax, son of Pausanias. Their target was the Parrhasians, subjects of Mantinea, some of whom had invited Spartan help. Sparta also planned to demolish, if possible, the fort of Cypsela, which Mantinea had built and garrisoned in Parrhasian territory to threaten the district of Sciritis in Spartan territory. The Spartans ravaged the Parrhasian countryside. The Mantineans, leaving their city in the hands of an Argive garrison, marched out to defend their allied territory. But unable to save either Cypsela or the Parrhasian towns, they went back to Mantinea. The Spartans, meanwhile, declared the Parrhasians independent, tore down the fortress, and went home.


That same summer, the soldiers who had fought under Brasidas in Thrace returned home, brought back by Clearidas after the treaty was signed. The Spartans decreed that the Helots who had served with Brasidas would be freed and could live wherever they chose. Not long after, they settled these freedmen -- along with the Neodamodes -- at Lepreum, on the border between Spartan and Elean territory. (Sparta and Elis were on bad terms at this point.)

As for the Spartans who had been captured on the island and had surrendered their weapons -- the authorities feared that these men, expecting to be punished or degraded because of their disgrace, might attempt a revolution if they were allowed to keep their full rights. So they were immediately stripped of their citizenship: barred from holding office, buying, or selling anything. Some of them had been in office at the time. Eventually, however, their rights were restored.


That same summer, the people of Dium captured Thyssus, a town on the Acte peninsula near Mount Athos that was allied with Athens.

Throughout this whole summer, contact between Athens and the Peloponnese continued, but each side grew more suspicious of the other from the moment the treaty was signed, because the places that were supposed to be handed over still hadn't been. Sparta, who was supposed to go first by returning Amphipolis and the other towns, had done no such thing. She'd also failed to get the treaty accepted by her Thracian allies, the Boeotians, or the Corinthians -- though she kept promising to join Athens in forcing them to comply if they refused any longer. She kept setting deadlines, promising that holdouts would be declared enemies of both sides, but was careful never to put any of this in writing.

Meanwhile, the Athenians, seeing that none of Sparta's promises were actually being kept, began to question whether her intentions were honest at all. So they refused to hand over Pylos and regretted having given back the prisoners from the island. They held tight to everything else, waiting for Sparta to fulfill her end of the deal first. Sparta countered that she'd done everything she could: she'd returned all Athenian prisoners of war in her hands, withdrawn her troops from Thrace, and carried out whatever else was within her power. Amphipolis, she said, was simply beyond her ability to deliver. But she would try to bring the Boeotians and Corinthians into the treaty, recover the fortress of Panactum, and get back all Athenian prisoners held in Boeotia. In the meantime, she demanded the return of Pylos -- or at least the withdrawal of the Messenians and Helots stationed there, suggesting the Athenians could garrison the place themselves if they wanted to.

After many back-and-forth negotiations over the course of the summer, Sparta finally persuaded Athens to withdraw the Messenians and the other Helots and Spartan deserters from Pylos. Athens resettled them at Cranii in Cephallenia. So for the rest of this summer, there was peace and communication between the two powers.


But the following winter, the magistrates who had negotiated the treaty were no longer in office, and some of their replacements were openly hostile to the deal. Delegations arrived from across the Spartan alliance, and Athens, Boeotia, and Corinth all sent representatives to Sparta. There was a great deal of discussion but no agreement, and everyone went home.

At that point, Cleobulus and Xenares -- the two magistrates most eager to blow up the treaty -- seized the opportunity to privately approach the Boeotians and Corinthians. They urged them to work together as closely as possible, and laid out a specific plan: the Boeotians should first ally with Argos, and then work to bring both themselves and Argos into alliance with Sparta. That way the Boeotians wouldn't be forced into the Athenian treaty, and Sparta would gain the friendship and alliance of Argos -- something she valued even at the cost of losing Athens and scrapping the peace. The Spartans had long wanted friendly relations with Argos, believing this would make it far easier to wage war outside the Peloponnese. The two magistrates also asked the Boeotians to hand Panactum over to Sparta, so she could trade it for Pylos and be in a better position to resume hostilities with Athens.


After receiving these instructions from Xenares, Cleobulus, and their Spartan allies, the Boeotian and Corinthian envoys headed home. On the road, they were intercepted by two senior Argive officials who had been waiting for them. These Argives floated the possibility of the Boeotians joining Corinth, Elis, and Mantinea in allying with Argos. If they could all unite, the Argives argued, they'd be in a position to make peace or war as they pleased -- against Sparta or anyone else. The Boeotian envoys were delighted: entirely by accident, the Argives were asking them to do exactly what their friends at Sparta had recommended. The two Argives, seeing their proposal warmly received, departed with a promise to send ambassadors to Boeotia.

When the envoys returned home and reported to the Boeotian generals -- relaying both the Spartan instructions and the Argive proposal -- the generals embraced the plan eagerly. It was a remarkable coincidence: Argos was independently pushing for the very thing that Sparta's secret allies wanted. Shortly afterward, Argive ambassadors arrived with the formal proposal. The Boeotian generals approved the terms and sent them off with a promise to dispatch their own envoys to Argos to finalize the alliance.


In the meantime, the Boeotian generals, together with the Corinthians, Megarians, and the envoys from Thrace, agreed among themselves to first exchange mutual oaths: they would help each other whenever needed and make neither war nor peace except by common consent. After that, the Boeotians and Megarians, acting together, would formalize the alliance with Argos.

But before the oaths could be taken, the Boeotian generals had to present the proposal to the four Boeotian councils, which held supreme authority. They recommended that the councils authorize oath exchanges with any city willing to enter a defensive league with Boeotia. But the council members voted it down. They were afraid of offending Sparta by making a pact with Corinth, who had deserted her. The problem was that the Boeotian generals hadn't told the councils the full story -- not a word about the secret conversations at Sparta, or the advice from Cleobulus and Xenares, or the plan that called for allying with Corinth and Argos as a stepping stone to a broader alliance with Sparta. The generals had assumed the councils would simply go along with whatever they recommended, even without knowing the reasoning behind it.

When the whole thing fell apart, the Corinthians and the Thracian envoys went home empty-handed. The Boeotian generals, who had planned to follow up by pushing the Argive alliance through the councils, now didn't even bother to bring it up. They never sent the envoys they'd promised to Argos. A general chill settled over the entire scheme, and nothing happened.


That same winter, the Olynthians assaulted and captured Mecyberna, which had an Athenian garrison.


All this while, Athens and Sparta had been negotiating over places that each side still held. Sparta, hoping that if Athens got Panactum back from the Boeotians she might herself recover Pylos, sent an embassy to Boeotia asking them to hand over Panactum and their Athenian prisoners so she could use them as bargaining chips. The Boeotians refused -- unless Sparta made a separate alliance with them, just as she'd done with Athens. Sparta knew this would be a betrayal of Athens, since they'd agreed that neither side would make peace or war without the other. But she wanted Panactum badly -- hoping to trade it for Pylos -- and the faction pushing to dissolve the Athenian treaty was eager for the Boeotian connection. So Sparta went ahead and concluded the alliance just as winter turned to spring. Panactum was immediately razed.

And so the eleventh year of the war came to an end.


In the first days of the following summer, the Argives noticed that the promised ambassadors from Boeotia had never shown up, that Panactum was being demolished, and that Sparta had signed a separate alliance with the Boeotians. They panicked. They were afraid that Argos would be left completely isolated -- that the whole alliance would collapse and everyone would go running back to Sparta. Their thinking went like this: the Spartans must have persuaded the Boeotians to tear down Panactum and join the Athenian treaty, and Athens must have been in on the whole arrangement. If that were true, even the Athenian alliance -- which Argos had always counted on as a fallback in case their truce with Sparta didn't hold -- was now closed to them.

Facing this nightmare scenario -- potentially fighting the Spartans, Tegeans, Boeotians, and Athenians all at once -- the Argives hastily dispatched Eustrophus and Aeson, their most diplomatically acceptable men, as envoys to Sparta. Their mission: negotiate the best treaty they could and secure peace on whatever terms were available.


When the ambassadors arrived, they opened negotiations. The Argives' first demand was that the dispute over the Cynurian borderland -- a region they'd been fighting over for generations, containing the towns of Thyrea and Anthene and currently held by Sparta -- be submitted to arbitration by some neutral state or individual. The Spartans initially refused to discuss this point but said they were willing to make a treaty on the previous terms. Eventually, though, the Argive ambassadors got them to agree to a compromise: a fifty-year truce, with the provision that either side could, at any time when neither Sparta nor Argos was suffering from plague or war, issue a formal challenge and settle the Cynurian question by combat -- as they had done once before, when both sides claimed victory. The one restriction was that the losing side could not be pursued beyond the border of Argos or Sparta. The Spartans initially thought this was absurd, but they wanted Argos's friendship so badly that they eventually agreed and put it all in writing. Before any of it became binding, however, the ambassadors had to return to Argos, report to their people, and -- if the people approved -- come back at the festival of the Hyacinthia to swear the oaths.


The envoys went home accordingly. But while the Argives were busy with these negotiations, Spartan ambassadors -- Andromedes, Phaedimus, and Antimenidas -- were on their way to collect the Athenian prisoners from the Boeotians and deliver them, along with Panactum, to Athens. What they found was that the Boeotians had already demolished Panactum themselves, claiming that ancient oaths existed between their people and the Athenians stipulating that neither side should occupy the place -- both could graze their herds on it, but no one should build there. As for the Athenian prisoners of war in Boeotian hands, the Spartans collected them, brought them to Athens, and handed them over. They also reported the destruction of Panactum, framing it as equivalent to returning it: after all, no enemy of Athens could use it now.

This did not go over well. The Athenians were furious. They felt the Spartans had cheated them on two counts: first, Panactum should have been returned intact, not demolished; second, they'd just learned that Sparta had made a separate alliance with the Boeotians, despite her previous promise to join Athens in forcing treaty holdouts to comply. The Athenians ran through the whole list of Sparta's failures and concluded they'd been played. They gave the ambassadors an angry response and sent them packing.


With the rift between Sparta and Athens now wide open, the faction at Athens that wanted to tear up the treaty sprang into action. The most prominent figure in this group was Alcibiades, son of Clinias. By Greek standards he would have been considered young for politics in most cities, but in Athens his illustrious ancestry gave him standing. Alcibiades genuinely believed the Argive alliance was the better strategic choice -- but personal grudges played a major role in his opposition too. He was furious at the Spartans for having negotiated the treaty through Nicias and Laches while ignoring him, supposedly because of his youth. He was also angry that they'd shown no respect for his family's historic connection to Sparta as their diplomatic representatives -- a relationship that his grandfather had given up but that Alcibiades had recently been trying to revive through his generous treatment of the Spartan prisoners from the island.

Feeling slighted on every side, Alcibiades had opposed the treaty from the start, arguing that the Spartans couldn't be trusted -- that they'd only made peace so they could crush Argos first and then attack Athens alone, without allies. Now, as soon as the breach occurred, he sent a private message to Argos: come to Athens immediately, he urged, along with Mantinea and Elis, and propose an alliance. The timing was perfect, and he would do everything in his power to make it happen.


When this message arrived, and the Argives realized that Athens -- far from being secretly in league with the Boeotians -- was actually in a bitter quarrel with Sparta, they dropped all interest in the treaty they'd just been negotiating at Sparta. Instead they turned toward Athens, reasoning that in the event of war, they'd have on their side a city that was not only an ancient ally and a fellow democracy but also extremely powerful at sea. They immediately sent ambassadors to Athens to negotiate an alliance, accompanied by envoys from Elis and Mantinea.


Hot on their heels, a Spartan embassy arrived in Athens -- Philocharidas, Leon, and Endius, all men considered friendly to the Athenians. They'd come in a rush, terrified that the angry Athenians would ally with Argos. They were also there to ask for Pylos back in exchange for Panactum, and to explain that the alliance with Boeotia hadn't been intended to harm Athens.

When the envoys appeared before the Council and stated that they'd come with full powers to settle all outstanding disputes, Alcibiades got nervous. If they made the same pitch to the full Assembly, the people might be won over, and the Argive alliance would be dead. So he resorted to a trick. In a private meeting with the Spartan envoys, he gave them his solemn word: if they would deny having full powers when they spoke before the Assembly, he would arrange for Pylos to be returned -- he personally, the man currently leading the opposition to returning it -- and would settle all the other issues too.

His real plan was to cut them off from Nicias and humiliate them in front of the Athenian people -- exposing them as dishonest and inconsistent -- so he could get the alliance with Argos, Elis, and Mantinea approved.

It worked perfectly. When the envoys appeared before the Assembly and were asked whether they'd come with full powers, they said no -- directly contradicting what they'd told the Council. The Athenians lost all patience. Alcibiades thundered against the Spartans more furiously than ever, and the Assembly was ready to bring in the Argives and their allies on the spot and sign the alliance. But then an earthquake struck, and before anything could be finalized, the session was adjourned.


At the assembly the next day, Nicias -- even though the Spartans had been tricked, and even though he himself had been made to look like a fool -- still argued that friendship with Sparta was the best policy. He urged the Athenians to set aside the Argive proposals, send another embassy to Sparta, and find out what her real intentions were. Delaying the war, he argued, could only enhance Athens's prestige while damaging Sparta's. Athens was in an excellent position; it was in her interest to preserve that prosperity as long as possible. Sparta, on the other hand, was in desperate straits -- the sooner she could roll the dice on another war, the better for her.

He succeeded in persuading them. A delegation was sent to Sparta -- Nicias among them -- with instructions to demand that Sparta restore Panactum intact along with Amphipolis, and abandon her alliance with the Boeotians (unless the Boeotians agreed to join the treaty), in keeping with the clause forbidding either side from making separate deals. The ambassadors were also to point out that if Athens had wanted to play the same game, she could have already allied with Argos -- who were, after all, in Athens at that very moment for exactly that purpose. They were also given a list of other Athenian grievances to raise.

When they reached Sparta and delivered their message, they concluded by saying that unless the Spartans dissolved their alliance with the Boeotians -- assuming the Boeotians still refused to join the treaty -- Athens would ally with Argos and her friends. The Spartans refused. The faction led by the magistrate Xenares and his allies won the day on the Boeotian question. But at Nicias's request, they did renew their oaths. Nicias was terrified of coming home empty-handed and being blamed -- and that's exactly what happened anyway. He was widely seen as the architect of the Spartan treaty, and people held him responsible for its failures.

When Nicias returned and the Athenians heard that nothing had been accomplished at Sparta, they were furious. Deciding that Sparta had broken faith with them, they took advantage of the Argive and allied delegations -- whom Alcibiades had arranged to be present -- and concluded a treaty and alliance on the following terms:


"The Athenians, Argives, Mantineans, and Eleans, acting for themselves and the allies in their respective spheres, hereby make a treaty for one hundred years, to be observed without fraud or harm, by land and by sea.

"It shall not be lawful for the Argives, Eleans, Mantineans, and their allies to make war against the Athenians or the allies in the Athenian sphere, or for the Athenians and their allies to make war against the Argives, Eleans, Mantineans, or their allies, in any way or by any means whatsoever.

"The Athenians, Argives, Eleans, and Mantineans shall be allies for one hundred years on the following terms:

"If an enemy invades the territory of Athens, the Argives, Eleans, and Mantineans shall come to her aid as quickly and effectively as possible, to the best of their ability, in whatever way Athens requests. If the invader withdraws after plundering, that state shall be treated as the enemy of all four powers. War shall be made against it by all of them, and none may make a separate peace without the consent of all.

"Likewise, if an enemy invades the territory of Argos, Mantinea, or Elis, the Athenians shall come to their aid as quickly and effectively as possible, to the best of their ability, in whatever way the attacked city requests. If the invader withdraws after plundering, that state shall be treated as the enemy of all four powers. War shall be made against it by all of them, and none may make a separate peace without the consent of all.

"No armed force shall be permitted to pass through the territory of any signatory or its allies for hostile purposes, either by land or by sea, unless all four cities -- Athens, Argos, Mantinea, and Elis -- vote to allow it.

"Troops sent as reinforcements shall be maintained by the sending city for thirty days after their arrival and again for the return journey. If their services are needed longer, the city that requested them shall pay: three Aeginetan obols per day for each heavy infantryman, archer, or light soldier, and one Aeginetan drachma per day for each cavalryman.

"The city requesting aid shall hold command when the war is fought on its own soil. When the allies agree on a joint campaign, command shall be shared equally among all four cities.

"The treaty shall be sworn to by the Athenians for themselves and their allies, by the Argives, Mantineans, Eleans, and their allies, state by state individually. Each shall swear the oath most sacred in their country, over full-grown sacrificial victims. The oath shall be:

"'I will stand by this alliance and its terms, justly, sincerely, and without deceit, and I will not violate them in any way whatsoever.'

"At Athens the oath shall be sworn by the Council and the magistrates, with the Prytanes administering it. At Argos by the Council, the Eighty, and the Artynae, with the Eighty administering it. At Mantinea by the Demiurgi, the Council, and the other magistrates, with the Theori and Polemarchs administering it. At Elis by the Demiurgi, the magistrates, and the Six Hundred, with the Demiurgi and the Thesmophylaces administering it.

"The oaths shall be renewed: by the Athenians traveling to Elis, Mantinea, and Argos thirty days before the Olympic games; by the Argives, Mantineans, and Eleans traveling to Athens ten days before the Great Panathenaea.

"The terms of this treaty, the oaths, and the alliance shall be inscribed on a stone pillar: by the Athenians on the Acropolis; by the Argives in the marketplace, in the temple of Apollo; by the Mantineans in the temple of Zeus, in the marketplace. A bronze pillar shall also be erected jointly by all parties at the Olympic games now approaching.

"Should the signatory cities agree that any additions to these terms are desirable, whatever all four cities decide together after consultation shall be binding."


Even though this new treaty and alliance were now in place, neither Athens nor Sparta formally renounced their earlier treaty with each other. Meanwhile, Corinth -- despite being allied with Argos -- refused to join the new league, just as she'd declined to join the previous offensive-defensive pact between Elis, Argos, and Mantinea. Corinth said she was satisfied with the original defensive alliance -- the one that bound them only to help each other, not to attack anyone together. The Corinthians thus stood apart from their allies, and once again turned their thoughts back toward Sparta.


At the Olympic games held that summer -- the ones where the Arcadian Androsthenes won the combined wrestling and boxing for the first time -- the Spartans were barred from the temple by the Eleans. They couldn't sacrifice or compete. The reason was that they'd refused to pay a fine imposed under Olympic law: the Eleans charged them with attacking Fort Phyrcus and sending troops into Lepreum during the Olympic truce. The fine was two thousand minae -- two minae for each soldier, as the law required.

The Spartans sent envoys to protest that the fine was unjust. The truce, they said, hadn't yet been announced at Sparta when the troops were sent out. The Eleans countered that the truce had already begun from their side -- they always proclaimed it among themselves first -- and that the Spartan attack had caught them completely off guard while they were living peacefully, with no expectation of trouble. The Spartans replied that if the Eleans really believed they'd committed a violation, then what was the point of proclaiming the truce at Sparta afterward? But they had proclaimed it -- precisely because they didn't believe there'd been any violation -- and from that point on had done nothing against Elean territory. None of it mattered. The Eleans held firm: the violation had occurred. But they offered a compromise: if Sparta returned Lepreum, they'd waive the Elean share of the fine and pay the god's share themselves.

When Sparta rejected this, the Eleans tried another approach. Forget returning Lepreum, they said -- if the Spartans wanted access to the temple so badly, let them ascend the altar of Olympian Zeus and swear an oath before all of Greece that they'd pay the fine later. Sparta refused that too. So the Spartans were shut out of the temple, the sacrifices, and the games, and had to conduct their own sacrifices at home. The only other Greeks who stayed away were the Lepreans.

Even so, the Eleans were nervous that Sparta might try to force her way in. They posted a company of armed young men on guard, joined by a thousand Argives, a thousand Mantineans, and some Athenian cavalry, who all stayed at Harpina during the festival. Real fear gripped the crowd that the Spartans might show up under arms -- especially after an incident involving Lichas, son of Arcesilaus, a prominent Spartan. When his horses won their race but the victory was announced in the name of "the Boeotian people" -- since he'd been barred from entering -- Lichas marched right onto the course and crowned the charioteer himself, making it clear to everyone that the chariot was his. After that, people were more frightened than ever. But the Spartans kept their composure and let the festival pass without incident.

After the games, the Argives and their allies went to Corinth to try once more to bring her over to their side. Some Spartan envoys were there too. A long discussion followed, but it came to nothing -- yet another earthquake broke up the meeting, and everyone dispersed.


Summer ended. The following winter, a battle was fought between the people of Heraclea in Trachis and a coalition of their neighbors -- the Aenianians, Dolopians, Malians, and some Thessalians. These tribes bordered on Heraclea and had always been hostile to the colony, which they saw as a threat to their territory. They'd opposed and harassed it from the day it was founded. In this battle they defeated the Heracleans, and the Spartan commander Xenares, son of Cnidis, was killed.

So ended the winter and the twelfth year of the war. After the battle, Heraclea was so weakened that early the following summer the Boeotians occupied the town and expelled the Spartan governor Agesippidas for incompetence. They were worried the Athenians would seize it while Sparta was distracted by the chaos in the Peloponnese. The Spartans were not pleased with the Boeotians for this.


That same summer, Alcibiades -- now serving as one of Athens's generals -- went into the Peloponnese in concert with the Argives and their allies. He brought along a small force of Athenian heavy infantry and archers, picked up some local allied troops along the way, and marched through the Peloponnese handling various matters related to the alliance. Among other things, he convinced the Patrians to build their walls down to the sea and planned to build a fort near Achaean Rhium. But the Corinthians and Sicyonians -- along with others who would have been threatened by the fort -- showed up and stopped him.


That same summer, war broke out between Epidaurus and Argos. The official reason was that the Epidaurians had failed to send the required offering to Apollo Pythaeus from their pasturelands -- a religious obligation that the Argives, as chief administrators of the temple, were entitled to enforce. But the real reason was strategic: Alcibiades and the Argives were determined to gain control of Epidaurus. If they could, it would guarantee Corinthian neutrality and give Athens a much shorter route for sending reinforcements from Aegina -- instead of having to sail all the way around Cape Scyllaeum. So the Argives prepared to invade Epidaurus on their own, ostensibly to exact the offering.


Around this time, the Spartans marched out with their entire army to Leuctra, on their border opposite Mount Lycaeum, under the command of King Agis, son of Archidamus. No one knew their destination -- not even the allied cities that had sent contingents. But the border sacrifices came back unfavorable, so the Spartans turned around and went home. They sent word to their allies to be ready to march after the current month, which happened to be the month of Carneus -- a holy time for the Dorians.

The moment the Spartans withdrew, the Argives marched out on the twenty-seventh day of the month before Carneus. Treating that day as their departure date for the entire expedition, they invaded and plundered Epidaurian territory. The Epidaurians called on their allies for help, but some begged off because of the sacred month, while others marched to the Epidaurian border and then just sat there, doing nothing.


While the Argives were in Epidaurus, the allies' ambassadors gathered at Mantinea at Athens's invitation to discuss the situation. The Corinthian delegate Euphamidas pointed out the obvious contradiction: they were sitting here talking about peace while the Epidaurians and their allies were facing off against the Argives in the field. He said that delegations from each side should go separate the armies first; then they could resume the peace talks. They took his advice, went and brought the Argives back from Epidaurus, and then reassembled -- but still couldn't reach any agreement. The Argives promptly invaded Epidaurus a second time and plundered the countryside.

The Spartans marched out again, this time to Caryae, but once again the border sacrifices came back unfavorable, and they went home. The Argives, having ravaged about a third of Epidaurian territory, also returned home. Meanwhile, a thousand Athenian heavy infantry had arrived to help them under the command of Alcibiades, but finding that the Spartan expedition had been called off and they were no longer needed, they went back to Athens.


So the summer passed. The following winter, the Spartans managed to slip a garrison of three hundred troops into Epidaurus by sea, past the Athenian naval patrols. The Argives promptly went to Athens and complained: the treaty said allies were not to let enemy forces pass through their territory, and the Spartans had sailed right by. If Athens didn't now reinstall the Messenians and Helots at Pylos to raid Spartan territory, the Argives would consider the treaty broken.

The Athenians -- at Alcibiades' urging -- inscribed a notice at the bottom of the Spartan treaty-pillar declaring that the Spartans had not kept their oaths, and they moved the Helots from Cranii back to Pylos to resume raiding. But beyond that, they stayed quiet.

Throughout this winter, low-level fighting continued between Argos and Epidaurus -- no pitched battles, but raids and ambushes in which the casualties were small and fell on both sides at different times. Toward the end of winter, as spring approached, the Argives came with scaling ladders to assault Epidaurus, hoping to find it undermanned because of the war. The assault failed, and they went home.

And the winter ended, and with it the thirteenth year of the war.


In the middle of the following summer, the Spartans decided they'd waited long enough. Their ally Epidaurus was in trouble. The rest of the Peloponnese was either in open revolt or quietly disaffected. If they didn't act now, things would only get worse. So they mobilized their full army, Helots included, and marched on Argos under the command of King Agis, son of Archidamus. The Tegeans and the other Arcadian allies of Sparta joined the expedition. Allied contingents from the rest of the Peloponnese and beyond assembled at Phlius: five thousand Boeotian heavy infantry with an equal number of light troops, plus five hundred cavalry and five hundred dismounted troopers; two thousand Corinthian heavy infantry; and forces from the other allies in varying numbers. The Phliasians turned out with their entire army, since the mustering point was in their territory.


The Argives had known about these preparations from the start, but they didn't take the field until the enemy was already on the road to Phlius. Reinforced by the Mantineans and their allies, along with three thousand Elean heavy infantry, they advanced and encountered the Spartans at Methydrium in Arcadia. Both sides took up positions on hills, and the Argives prepared to engage the Spartans while they were still alone, before their allies arrived. But Agis slipped away in the night, broke camp, and marched to Phlius to link up with the rest of his forces.

When the Argives discovered this at dawn, they marched first to Argos and then to the Nemean road, expecting the Spartans and their combined army to come down that way. But Agis didn't take the route they expected. Instead he gave separate orders to the Spartans, Arcadians, and Epidaurians and led them along a different, difficult road down into the plain of Argos. The Corinthians, Pellenians, and Phliasians took another steep route. The Boeotians, Megarians, and Sicyonians were told to come down the Nemean road -- where the Argives were positioned -- so that if the Argives advanced into the plain against Agis, these forces could hit them from behind with their cavalry.

With these arrangements made, Agis descended into the plain and began ravaging the area around Saminthus.


When the Argives discovered what had happened, they came down from Nemea -- day had now broken. On the way they ran into the Phliasian and Corinthian detachments and killed a few Phliasians, while the Corinthians killed perhaps a few more Argives in return. Meanwhile, the Boeotians, Megarians, and Sicyonians advanced on Nemea as ordered, only to find the Argives already gone -- they'd moved down the hill when they saw their territory being ravaged and were now forming up for battle. The Spartans did the same.

The Argives were now completely surrounded. From the plain, the Spartans and their allies blocked them from reaching their city. Above them, the Corinthians, Phliasians, and Pellenians held the high ground. And on the Nemean side, the Boeotians, Sicyonians, and Megarians closed off the escape route. To make matters worse, the Argive army had no cavalry -- the Athenians, the only allied contingent with horsemen, hadn't arrived yet.

Most of the Argive troops and their allies didn't grasp how bad their situation was. They actually thought it was a great opportunity: they'd intercepted the Spartans right in their own territory, practically under the walls of Argos. But two men in the Argive army -- Thrasylus, one of the five generals, and Alciphron, the Spartan diplomatic representative -- saw things differently. Just as the two armies were about to clash, they approached Agis and urged him not to fight. The Argives, they said, were willing to submit whatever grievances Sparta had to fair and impartial arbitration, sign a treaty, and live in peace going forward.


These two men made this offer entirely on their own authority, without orders from the Argive people. And Agis, on his own authority, accepted it. He didn't consult the majority of the army's leadership -- he simply spoke to one senior officer with him on the expedition, granted the Argives a four-month truce to fulfill their promises, and immediately led the army away. He gave no explanation to any of the other allies.

The Spartans and their allies followed their general -- out of respect for the law -- but among themselves they openly condemned him. They'd had the enemy boxed in on every side, hemmed in by infantry and cavalry, and they'd walked away without a fight. This was, without exaggeration, the finest Greek army ever assembled in one place. You should have seen it while it was all together at Nemea: the Spartans at full strength, the Arcadians, the Boeotians, the Corinthians, the Sicyonians, the Pellenians, the Phliasians, and the Megarians -- every one of them the elite of their city. They'd considered themselves more than a match not just for the Argive alliance, but for a second one just like it on top of that. And they'd been marched home with nothing to show for it.

The Argives, for their part, were even angrier. They blamed the men who'd arranged the truce without consulting the people. In their view, the Spartans -- so perfectly cornered just outside the city walls, alongside so many brave allies -- had been allowed to walk free. It was an opportunity that might never come again. When the army returned, they started stoning Thrasylus in the bed of the Charadrus river, where military trials were traditionally held before entering the city. Thrasylus fled to an altar and saved his life, but his property was confiscated.


After this, a thousand Athenian heavy infantry and three hundred cavalry arrived under the command of Laches and Nicostratus. The Argives, reluctant to violate the truce with Sparta, asked them to leave and refused to let them address the assembly. The Mantineans and Eleans, who were still in Argos, pressed the Argives to let the Athenians speak. Finally they relented.

Alcibiades, who was in Argos serving as Athens's ambassador, made the case to the Argives and their allies: they had no right to agree to a truce without the consent of their fellow league members. Now that the Athenians had arrived at just the right moment, they should resume the war. The argument worked. The allies marched at once on Orchomenos -- all of them except the Argives, who stayed behind at first despite having voted with the rest, though they eventually caught up and joined. The combined force sat down before Orchomenos and besieged it, launching assaults on the walls. One of their main reasons for wanting this particular town was that Spartan hostages from Arcadia had been deposited there for safekeeping.

The Orchomenians, alarmed by the weakness of their fortifications, the size of the enemy army, and the very real chance they'd be destroyed before any relief arrived, agreed to surrender. Their terms: they would join the league, hand over hostages of their own to the Mantineans, and give up the hostages the Spartans had lodged with them.

With Orchomenos secured, the allies debated where to strike next. The Eleans pushed hard for Lepreum. The Mantineans wanted Tegea. The Argives and Athenians sided with the Mantineans. The Eleans, furious that nobody had voted for Lepreum, went home in a rage. The rest of the allies began preparing at Mantinea for the attack on Tegea, where a faction inside the city had secretly arranged to hand it over.


Back at Sparta, when the army returned from Argos after the four-month truce debacle, the blame fell squarely on Agis. They'd had an opportunity like none before, people said -- and he'd thrown it away. It wasn't easy to assemble so many first-rate allies, and he'd let the chance slip through his fingers. When news arrived that Orchomenos had fallen, the Spartans' fury boiled over. In the heat of the moment they nearly decided -- contrary to all precedent -- to demolish his house and fine him ten thousand drachmas. Agis begged them to hold off, promising to redeem himself with good service in the field; if he failed, they could do whatever they pleased. They relented on the house and the fine, but they did pass a new law -- unprecedented in Spartan history -- assigning ten Spartan advisors to accompany him, without whose consent he could not lead an army out of the city.


Then urgent word arrived from their allies in Tegea: unless the Spartans appeared immediately, Tegea would go over to the Argives and their allies -- if it hadn't already. On hearing this, a force marched out of Sparta -- Spartans and Helots, every available man -- on a scale never before seen. They advanced to Orestheum in Maenalia and sent orders for their Arcadian allies to follow them to Tegea. From Orestheum they dispatched a sixth of the Spartan force -- the oldest and youngest men -- to guard the home territory, then pushed on to Tegea with the rest. Their Arcadian allies joined them shortly after. Meanwhile, they sent urgent messages to Corinth, Boeotia, Phocis, and Locris: get to Mantinea as fast as possible.

These reinforcements had painfully short notice. It wasn't easy to cross enemy territory -- the hostile states lay right across their route, blocking the way -- unless they all came together and forced passage as a group. Still, they made what speed they could.

Meanwhile, the Spartans and the Arcadian allies who'd already arrived entered Mantinean territory and pitched camp near the temple of Heracles, where they began plundering the countryside.


The Argives and their allies spotted them and immediately took up a strong defensive position on high ground, forming for battle. The Spartans marched straight toward them and got within a stone's throw -- almost javelin range -- when one of the older soldiers shouted to Agis that he was "trying to cure one evil with another." The point was clear: Agis was trying to make up for his disgraceful retreat from Argos through reckless aggression now.

Whether because of this shout or because he had second thoughts on his own, Agis suddenly pulled his army back without engaging. He marched into Tegean territory and began diverting a watercourse toward Mantinean land. This stream was the subject of an old feud between Mantinea and Tegea, because whichever territory it flooded suffered heavily. Agis calculated that when the Argives and their allies learned what he was doing, they'd have to come down from their strong hilltop position to stop him -- and then he could fight them on the flat plain. He spent the rest of the day working on the diversion.

The Argives and their allies were baffled by the sudden retreat. The enemy had advanced so close, then just... left. They didn't know what to make of it. But once Agis had disappeared without anyone pursuing him, the troops began blaming their generals again -- first for letting the Spartans escape before Argos, and now for letting them walk away a second time. The enemy was running, they said, and nobody was chasing them. Their own army was being "leisurely betrayed."

The generals, shaken, led their men down from the hill and advanced into the plain, intending to attack.


The next day, the Argives and their allies formed up in battle order and advanced, ready for a fight. The Spartans, returning from the watercourse to their old camp near the temple of Heracles, suddenly found the enemy right in front of them -- in full battle formation, already down from the hill.

The Spartans later said that this was the worst shock they could ever remember. There was almost no time to prepare. They rushed into their ranks, with King Agis directing everything -- as was the law. When a king is in the field, all orders flow from him: he commands the Polemarchs; they command the Lochages; the Lochages command the Pentecostyes; the Pentecostyes command the Enomotarchs; and the Enomotarchs command the Enomoties. In short, orders pass through the chain of command quickly and reach the troops at every level. Almost the entire Spartan army consists of officers commanding officers, and the responsibility for execution is spread across many men.


Here was the Spartan battle line. On the far left stood the Sciritae -- who by tradition always held that position. Next to them were the veterans of Brasidas's Thracian campaigns and the Neodamodes. Then the Spartan units themselves, company after company, with the Arcadians from Heraea beside them. After these came the Maenalians. On the right wing stood the Tegeans, with a few Spartans anchoring the far end. Cavalry was posted on both wings.

The Argive side was arranged like this. On the right were the Mantineans -- it was their home territory. Next to them, their Arcadian allies. Then a thousand picked Argive troops -- an elite corps that the state had trained at public expense over a long period. Beside them, the rest of the Argive army, and then their allies: the Cleonaeans and Orneans. On the far left stood the Athenians, with their own cavalry on the wing.


Those were the two armies and their formations. The Spartan side appeared to be the larger force. As for putting exact numbers on either army or its components, I couldn't do so with any precision. Spartan troop strength was always kept secret, thanks to their closed society, and men from other states tend to exaggerate their own numbers so much that opposing estimates are unreliable.

Still, one calculation gives a sense of the Spartan numbers that day. Seven companies were on the field, not counting the Sciritae, who numbered six hundred. Each company had four Pentecostyes, and each Pentecosty had four Enomoties. The front rank of each Enomoty was four soldiers wide. As for depth, the formation varied by captain's choice, but the standard depth was eight men. That gives a first rank -- across the entire line, minus the Sciritae -- of four hundred and forty-eight men.


As the two armies stood ready to engage, the commanders on each side offered their men words of encouragement. The Mantineans were told they were fighting for their homeland -- and to avoid falling back into subjection after tasting sovereignty. The Argives were reminded that they were fighting for their ancient supremacy, to reclaim their equal share of the Peloponnese from which they'd been shut out for so long, and to punish an enemy and neighbor for a thousand wrongs. The Athenians were told what glory awaited them in winning the day alongside so many brave allies, that a victory over Sparta in the heart of the Peloponnese would strengthen and extend their empire, and that it would protect Attica from invasion for the foreseeable future.

Those were the encouragements on the Argive side. The Spartans, meanwhile, spoke to each other man to man, with their battle hymns echoing through the ranks -- each soldier reminding his comrade of what they already knew. Long training in the reality of combat, they understood, was worth more than any speech, however well delivered.


Then they closed. The Argives and their allies charged forward with fury and aggression. The Spartans advanced slowly, to the music of many flute-players -- a traditional practice that has nothing to do with religion. Its purpose is to keep the soldiers in step and their lines from breaking apart, which tends to happen when large armies rush forward into contact.


Just before the two armies met, King Agis made a decision. Here's the dynamic he was dealing with: all armies behave the same way when going into battle -- they drift to the right. Every man instinctively tries to shelter his unprotected right side behind the shield of the man next to him, and the tighter the shields are locked together, the safer everyone feels. The man most responsible for this drift is the one on the far right of the line, who keeps edging away from the enemy to protect his exposed flank, and everyone else follows his lead.

On this day, the Mantineans on the right had stretched far past the Sciritae on the Spartan left, and the Spartans and Tegeans on their right had pushed even farther beyond the Athenians, since the Spartan army was the larger. Agis, worried that his left wing was about to be outflanked by the Mantineans, ordered the Sciritae and the Brasidean veterans to shift outward from their positions and extend the line to match the Mantinean front. He then told two Polemarchs -- Hipponoidas and Aristocles -- to fill the resulting gap by pulling two companies from the right wing and sliding them over. He believed his right would still be strong enough even after losing two companies, and that the line facing the Mantineans would gain much-needed solidity.


But the order came at the worst possible moment -- during the charge, with no time to spare. Aristocles and Hipponoidas refused to move. (They were later exiled from Sparta for cowardice.) And before the Sciritae -- whom Agis, seeing that the two companies weren't coming, ordered back to their original position -- could close the gap, the enemy was upon them.

It was at this moment that the Spartans, completely outmaneuvered in tactics, proved their superiority in raw courage.

On the Spartan left, everything collapsed. The Mantinean right wing smashed through the Sciritae and the Brasidean veterans. The Mantineans, their allies, and the thousand picked Argive troops poured into the open gap in the Spartan line, cutting off and surrounding the Spartans on that side. They drove them all the way back to the supply wagons, killing some of the older men who'd been left on guard there.

But everywhere else on the field, the Spartans were winning -- and winning decisively. In the center, where the three hundred "knights" -- as they were called -- fought around King Agis, they hit the older Argive troops, the five named companies, the Cleonaeans, the Orneans, and the Athenians beside them, and routed them almost instantly. Most didn't even stay to fight. The moment the Spartans charged, they broke and ran. Some were actually trampled underfoot by their own men in the panic to get away.


With the center and the left of the Argive line now shattered, the army was cut completely in two. On the right, the Spartan and Tegean troops wheeled around to envelop the Athenians from the side that overlapped them. The Athenians now found themselves caught between two fires: surrounded on one side and already defeated on the other. They would have suffered worse than any other part of the army if not for the cavalry they had with them, which helped cover them.

Then Agis, seeing that his own left wing was in trouble against the Mantineans and the picked Argive corps, ordered the entire army to shift in support of the collapsing flank. As the Spartan line pivoted away from them, the Athenians were able to slip out and escape at their leisure, along with the beaten Argive contingent.

Meanwhile, the Mantineans and their allies, along with the picked Argive troops, stopped pressing their advantage. They saw their friends defeated across the rest of the field and the full Spartan army now bearing down on them. They turned and ran. Many Mantineans were killed, but most of the elite Argive unit got away safely.

The flight and pursuit were neither frantic nor prolonged. The Spartans fought long and hard to break their opponents, but once the rout was achieved, they pursued only for a short time and not very far.


That, as closely as I can reconstruct it, was the Battle of Mantinea -- the largest battle among Greek states in a very long time, fought by the most formidable armies. The Spartans took up a position in front of the enemy dead, immediately set up a trophy, and stripped the fallen. They gathered their own dead and carried them back to Tegea for burial, then returned the enemy dead under a truce.

The losses: seven hundred killed on the Argive, Ornean, and Cleonaean side; two hundred Mantineans; and two hundred Athenians and Aeginetans, including both Athenian generals. On the Spartan side, their allies suffered no losses worth mentioning. As for the Spartans themselves, the truth was hard to determine -- but the reported figure was about three hundred killed.


While the battle was still being fought, the other Spartan king, Pleistoanax, had set out with a relief force made up of the oldest and youngest men. He got as far as Tegea, where he heard news of the victory, and turned back. The Spartans also sent word recalling the allied reinforcements from Corinth and the region beyond the Isthmus. Then they went home, dismissed their allies, and observed the Carnean festival, which happened to fall at that time.

The criticisms that had been leveled at Sparta by the rest of Greece -- accusations of cowardice because of the island disaster, of incompetence and sluggishness in general -- were erased in a single day. Fortune might have dealt them setbacks, people now concluded, but the men themselves were as formidable as ever.


The day before the battle, the Epidaurians had invaded the undefended Argive countryside with their full army and cut down many of the guards left behind when the Argive forces marched out. After the battle, three thousand Elean heavy infantry arrived to help the Mantineans, along with a fresh Athenian reinforcement of one thousand. The whole allied force marched immediately on Epidaurus while the Spartans were busy with the Carnean festival. They divided up the work and began building a wall to encircle the city. Most of them eventually gave up, but the Athenians finished their assigned section around Cape Heraeum. They all contributed to leaving a garrison in the completed fortification, then returned to their respective cities.

Summer came to an end.


In the first days of the following winter, once the Carnean holidays were over, the Spartans took the field again. They advanced to Tegea and from there sent proposals to Argos, offering terms for an accommodation. Sparta had always had supporters inside Argos who wanted to overthrow the democracy, and after the Battle of Mantinea, these men were in a much stronger position to push for a deal. Their scheme was straightforward: first, get Argos to sign a treaty with Sparta; then convert it into a full alliance; and finally, use that alliance to crush the democratic faction.

Lichas, son of Arcesilaus -- Argos's Spartan diplomatic representative -- arrived with two proposals from Sparta: one set of terms for war, another for peace, depending on which the Argives preferred. After much debate, and with Alcibiades happening to be in town, the pro-Spartan faction -- now bold enough to act openly -- persuaded the Argives to accept the peace terms. They were as follows:

"The Spartan assembly agrees to treat with the Argives on the following terms:

"The Argives shall return the children to the Orchomenians, and the men to the Maenalians, and shall return the men they are holding in Mantinea to the Spartans.

"They shall evacuate Epidaurus and demolish the fortification there. If the Athenians refuse to withdraw from Epidaurus, they shall be declared enemies of both Argos and Sparta, and of all their respective allies.

"If the Spartans are holding any children as hostages, they shall return every one of them to his city.

"As for the offering to the god, the Argives may, if they wish, impose an oath upon the Epidaurians; otherwise, they shall swear the oath themselves.

"All cities in the Peloponnese, both small and great, shall be independent, according to the customs of their country.

"If any power from outside the Peloponnese invades Peloponnesian territory, the parties to this treaty shall unite to repel the invader, on whatever terms they consider fairest for the Peloponnesians.

"All allies of Sparta outside the Peloponnese shall have the same status as Sparta, and all allies of Argos shall have the same status as Argos, each retaining possession of their own territory.

"This treaty shall be presented to the allies for their approval. If the allies see fit, they may send it home for further consideration."


The Argives initially accepted this proposal, and the Spartan army withdrew from Tegea. Regular contact between the two states resumed, and before long the same pro-Spartan party engineered the next step: Argos abandoned her league with Mantinea, Elis, and Athens, and signed a treaty and alliance with Sparta. The terms were as follows:

"The Spartans and Argives agree to a treaty and alliance for fifty years on the following terms:

"All disputes shall be decided by fair and impartial arbitration, in accordance with the customs of both countries.

"The rest of the cities in the Peloponnese may be included in this treaty and alliance as independent and sovereign states, in full possession of their territories, with all disputes decided by fair and impartial arbitration according to each city's customs.

"All allies of Sparta outside the Peloponnese shall have the same status as Sparta, and all allies of Argos shall have the same status as Argos, each continuing to hold what they possess.

"If a joint military expedition is required, the Spartans and Argives shall consult and decide on the fairest terms for the allies.

"If any city, whether inside or outside the Peloponnese, has a dispute -- whether over borders or anything else -- it must be resolved. If two allied cities quarrel with each other, the matter shall be referred to a third city considered impartial by both sides. Private citizens shall have their disputes settled under the laws of their own cities."


The moment the treaty and alliance were signed, both sides released everything they'd seized from each other, whether by war or otherwise. From then on they acted in concert: they voted jointly to refuse any Athenian herald or embassy unless Athens evacuated her forts and withdrew from the Peloponnese. They also agreed to make neither peace nor war with any state except jointly.

Both sides threw themselves into the new arrangement. They sent envoys to the Thracian region and to Perdiccas, king of Macedon, and persuaded him to join their league. Perdiccas didn't break with Athens right away, but he was leaning that way -- following the example of Argos, the original home of his royal family. They also renewed their old oaths with the Chalcidians and swore new ones. The Argives also sent ambassadors to Athens demanding that the Athenians evacuate the fort at Epidaurus.

The Athenians, seeing that their men were vastly outnumbered by the rest of the garrison, sent Demosthenes to bring them out. When he arrived, Demosthenes organized a gymnastic competition as a cover. While the rest of the garrison came outside to watch, he quietly pulled out his men and locked the gates behind them. Afterward, the Athenians renewed their own treaty with Epidaurus and formally handed back the fortress.


With Argos out of the league, the Mantineans held out for a while, but they couldn't manage without Argos. They too came to terms with Sparta and gave up their sovereignty over the towns they'd controlled.

Then the Spartans and Argives -- each contributing a thousand men -- took the field together. The Spartans first marched to Sicyon on their own and tightened the oligarchy there. Then the combined force moved on Argos itself, where they overthrew the democracy and installed an oligarchic government friendly to Sparta.

These events took place at the very end of winter, just before spring, and the fourteenth year of the war came to an end.

The following summer, the people of Dium on Mount Athos revolted from Athens and went over to the Chalcidians. The Spartans reorganized affairs in Achaea to better suit their interests.

Meanwhile, at Argos the democratic faction was slowly regrouping -- gathering their courage and biding their time. They waited until the festival of the Gymnopaediae was being celebrated at Sparta, when the Spartans would be distracted, and then rose up against the oligarchs. In a battle fought inside the city, the democrats won. Some oligarchs were killed, others driven into exile.

For a long while, the Spartans ignored the urgent messages from their friends in Argos. At last they postponed the Gymnopaediae and marched out to help, but when they reached Tegea and learned that the oligarchs had already been overthrown, they refused to go any further -- despite the exiles' desperate pleas -- and went home to finish the festival.

Later, envoys arrived at Sparta from both sides: the democratic government now running Argos, and the oligarchic exiles. The Spartan allies were also present. After hearing lengthy arguments from both parties, the Spartans concluded that the democrats were in the wrong and voted to march against Argos -- but then kept stalling and putting it off.

Meanwhile, the Argive democrats -- terrified of Sparta -- began courting Athens again. They were convinced that an Athenian alliance would be invaluable, and they started building long walls down to the sea. The idea was that even if Sparta invaded by land, Athens could keep them supplied by sea, just as Athens had done for herself. Several other Peloponnesian cities were secretly aware of the wall-building project. The entire population of Argos -- men, women, and slaves -- threw themselves into the work, and carpenters and masons came from Athens to help.


Summer ended. The following winter, the Spartans -- hearing about the walls going up -- marched against Argos with their allies (except the Corinthians). They were also counting on sympathizers inside the city. King Agis commanded the expedition. But the expected internal help never materialized. The Spartans captured and demolished the half-built walls, then took the Argive town of Hysiae, killing every free man they found there. After that, they withdrew and everyone went home.

The Argives responded by marching into the territory of Phlius -- where most of the Argive oligarchic exiles had settled -- and plundered it, then returned home.

That same winter, the Athenians imposed a blockade on Macedon. Their grievances against Perdiccas were piling up: he'd joined the league with Argos and Sparta, and he'd broken his commitments when Athens had organized the expedition against the Chalcidians in Thrace and Amphipolis under Nicias, son of Niceratus -- a campaign that had to be abandoned largely because of Perdiccas's betrayal. He was formally declared an enemy.

And so the winter ended, and the fifteenth year of the war ended with it.