Problem.—"Two travellers spend from 3 o'clock till 9 in walking along
a level road, up a hill, and home again: their pace on the level being 4
miles an hour, up hill 3, and down hill 6. Find distance walked: also
(within half an hour) time of reaching top of hill."

Answer.—"24 miles: half-past 6."

Solution.—A level mile takes ¼ of an hour, up hill 1⁄3,
down hill
1⁄6. Hence to go and return over the same mile, whether on the level or
on the hill-side, takes ½ an hour. Hence in 6 hours they went 12 miles
out and 12 back. If the 12 miles out had been nearly all level, they
would have taken a little over 3 hours; if nearly all up hill, a little
under 4. Hence 3½ hours must be within ½ an hour of the time taken
in reaching the peak; thus, as they started at 3, they got there within
½ an hour of ½ past 6.

Twenty-seven answers have come in. Of these, 9 are right, 16 partially
right, and 2 wrong. The 16 give the distance correctly, but they have
failed to grasp the fact that the top of the hill might have been
reached at any moment between 6 o'clock and 7.

The two wrong answers are from Gerty Vernon and A Nihilist. The former
makes the distance "23 miles," while her revolutionary companion puts it
at "27." Gerty Vernon says "they had to go 4 miles along the plain, and
got to the foot of the hill at 4 o'clock." They might have done so, I
grant; but you have no ground for saying they did so. "It was 7½
miles to the top of the hill, and they reached that at ¼ before 7
o'clock." Here you go wrong in your arithmetic, and I must, however
reluctantly, bid you farewell. 7½ miles, at 3 miles an hour, would
not require 2¾ hours. A Nihilist says "Let x denote the whole
number of miles; y the number of hours to hill-top; ∴ 3y =
number of miles to hill-top, and x-3y = number of miles on the other
side." You bewilder me. The other side of what? "Of the hill," you
say. But then, how did they get home again? However, to accommodate your
views we will build a new hostelry at the foot of the hill on the
opposite side, and also assume (what I grant you is possible, though
it is not necessarily true) that there was no level road at all. Even
then you go wrong.

You say

"y = 6 - (x - 3y)⁄6, ..... (i); 
 
x⁄4½ = 6 ..... (ii)."

I grant you (i), but I deny (ii): it rests on the assumption that to go
part of the time at 3 miles an hour, and the rest at 6 miles an hour,
comes to the same result as going the whole time at 4½ miles an
hour. But this would only be true if the "part" were an exact half,
i.e., if they went up hill for 3 hours, and down hill for the other 3:
which they certainly did not do.

The sixteen, who are partially right, are Agnes Bailey, F. K., Fifee, G.
E. B., H. P., Kit, M. E. T., Mysie, A Mother's Son, Nairam, A
Redruthian, A Socialist, Spear Maiden, T. B. C., Vis Inertiæ, and Yak. Of
these, F. K., Fifee, T. B. C., and Vis Inertiæ do not attempt the second
part at all. F. K. and H. P. give no working. The rest make particular
assumptions, such as that there was no level road—that there were 6
miles of level road—and so on, all leading to particular times being
fixed for reaching the hill-top. The most curious assumption is that of
Agnes Bailey, who says "Let x = number of hours occupied in ascent;
then x⁄2 = hours occupied in descent; and 4x⁄3 = hours occupied on
the level." I suppose you were thinking of the relative rates, up
hill and on the level; which we might express by saying that, if they
went x miles up hill in a certain time, they would go 4x⁄3 miles on
the level in the same time. You have, in fact, assumed that they took
the same time on the level that they took in ascending the hill. Fifee
assumes that, when the aged knight said they had gone "four miles in the
hour" on the level, he meant that four miles was the distance gone,
not merely the rate. This would have been—if Fifee will excuse the
slang expression—a "sell," ill-suited to the dignity of the hero.

And now "descend, ye classic Nine!" who have solved the whole problem,
and let me sing your praises. Your names are Blithe, E. W., L. B., A
Marlborough Boy, O. V. L., Putney Walker, Rose, Sea Breeze, Simple
Susan, and Money Spinner. (These last two I count as one, as they send a
joint answer.) Rose and Simple Susan and Co. do not actually state that
the hill-top was reached some time between 6 and 7, but, as they have
clearly grasped the fact that a mile, ascended and descended, took the
same time as two level miles, I mark them as "right." A Marlborough Boy
and Putney Walker deserve honourable mention for their algebraical
solutions being the only two who have perceived that the question leads
to an indeterminate equation. E. W. brings a charge of untruthfulness
against the aged knight—a serious charge, for he was the very pink of
chivalry! She says "According to the data given, the time at the summit
affords no clue to the total distance. It does not enable us to state
precisely to an inch how much level and how much hill there was on the
road." "Fair damsel," the aged knight replies, "—if, as I surmise, thy
initials denote Early Womanhood—bethink thee that the word 'enable' is
thine, not mine. I did but ask the time of reaching the hill-top as my
condition for further parley. If now thou wilt not grant that I am a
truth-loving man, then will I affirm that those same initials denote
Envenomed Wickedness!"

CLASS LIST.

I.

A Marlborough Boy. 
Putney Walker.

II.

Blithe. 
E. W. 
L. B. 
O. V. L. 
Rose. 
Sea Breeze. 
{Simple Susan. 
{Money-Spinner.

Blithe has made so ingenious an addition to the problem, and Simple
Susan and Co. have solved it in such tuneful verse, that I record both
their answers in full. I have altered a word or two in Blithe's—which I
trust she will excuse; it did not seem quite clear as it stood.

"Yet stay," said the youth, as a gleam of inspiration lighted up the
relaxing muscles of his quiescent features. "Stay. Methinks it matters
little when we reached that summit, the crown of our toil. For in the
space of time wherein we clambered up one mile and bounded down the same
on our return, we could have trudged the twain on the level. We have
plodded, then, four-and-twenty miles in these six mortal hours; for
never a moment did we stop for catching of fleeting breath or for gazing
on the scene around!"

"Very good," said the old man. "Twelve miles out and twelve miles in.
And we reached the top some time between six and seven of the clock. Now
mark me! For every five minutes that had fled since six of the clock
when we stood on yonder peak, so many miles had we toiled upwards on the
dreary mountainside!"

The youth moaned and rushed into the hostel.

Blithe.

	The elder and the younger knight,
	They sallied forth at three;
	How far they went on level ground
	It matters not to me;
	What time they reached the foot of hill,
	When they began to mount,
	Are problems which I hold to be
	Of very small account.

Simple Susan. 
Money Spinner.
