Problem 1.—A and B began the year with only 1,000l. a-piece.
They borrowed nought; they stole nought. On the next New-Year's Day they
had 60,000l. between them. How did they do it?

Solution.—They went that day to the Bank of England. A stood in
front of it, while B went round and stood behind it.

Two answers have been received, both worthy of much honour. Addlepate
makes them borrow "0" and steal "0," and uses both cyphers by putting
them at the right-hand end of the 1,000l., thus producing 100,000l.,
which is well over the mark. But (or to express it in Latin) At Spes
infracta has solved it even more ingeniously: with the first cypher she
turns the "1" of the 1,000l. into a "9," and adds the result to the
original sum, thus getting 10,000l.: and in this, by means of the
other "0," she turns the "1" into a "6," thus hitting the exact
60,000l.

CLASS LIST

I.

At Spes Infracta.

II.

Addlepate.

Problem 2.—L makes 5 scarves, while M makes 2: Z makes 4 while
L makes 3. Five scarves of Z's weigh one of L's; 5 of M's weigh
3 of Z's. One of M's is as warm as 4 of Z's: and one of L's as
warm as 3 of M's. Which is best, giving equal weight in the result to
rapidity of work, lightness, and warmth?

Answer.—The order is M, L, Z.

Solution.—As to rapidity (other things being constant) L's merit is
to M's in the ratio of 5 to 2: Z's to L's in the ratio of 4 to 3.
In order to get one set of 3 numbers fulfilling these conditions, it is
perhaps simplest to take the one that occurs twice as unity, and
reduce the others to fractions: this gives, for L, M, and Z, the
marks 1, 2⁄5, 2⁄3. In estimating for lightness, we observe that the
greater the weight, the less the merit, so that Z's merit is to L's
as 5 to 1. Thus the marks for lightness are 1⁄5, 2⁄3, 1. And
similarly, the marks for warmth are 3, 1, ¼. To get the total result,
we must multiply L's 3 marks together, and do the same for M and
for Z. The final numbers are 1 × 1⁄5 × 3, 2⁄5 × 2⁄3 × 1,
2⁄3 × 1 ×
¼; i.e. 3⁄5,
2⁄3, 1⁄3; i.e. multiplying throughout by 15 (which
will not alter the proportion), 9, 10, 5; showing the order of merit to
be M, L, Z.

Twenty-nine answers have been received, of which five are right, and
twenty-four wrong. These hapless ones have all (with three exceptions)
fallen into the error of adding the proportional numbers together, for
each candidate, instead of multiplying. Why the latter is right,
rather than the former, is fully proved in text-books, so I will not
occupy space by stating it here: but it can be illustrated very easily
by the case of length, breadth, and depth. Suppose A and B are rival
diggers of rectangular tanks: the amount of work done is evidently
measured by the number of cubical feet dug out. Let A dig a tank 10
feet long, 10 wide, 2 deep: let B dig one 6 feet long, 5 wide, 10
deep. The cubical contents are 200, 300; i.e. B is best digger in
the ratio of 3 to 2. Now try marking for length, width, and depth,
separately; giving a maximum mark of 10 to the best in each contest, and
then adding the results!

Of the twenty-four malefactors, one gives no working, and so has no real
claim to be named; but I break the rule for once, in deference to its
success in Problem 1: he, she, or it, is Addlepate. The other
twenty-three may be divided into five groups.

First and worst are, I take it, those who put the rightful winner
last; arranging them as "Lolo, Zuzu, Mimi." The names of these
desperate wrong-doers are Ayr, Bradshaw of the Future, Furze-bush and
Pollux (who send a joint answer), Greystead, Guy, Old Hen, and Simple
Susan. The latter was once best of all; the Old Hen has taken
advantage of her simplicity, and beguiled her with the chaff which was
the bane of her own chickenhood.

Secondly, I point the finger of scorn at those who have put the worst
candidate at the top; arranging them as "Zuzu, Mimi, Lolo." They are
Graecia, M. M., Old Cat, and R. E. X. "'Tis Greece, but——."

The third set have avoided both these enormities, and have even
succeeded in putting the worst last, their answer being "Lolo, Mimi,
Zuzu." Their names are Ayr (who also appears among the "quite too too"),
Clifton C., F. B., Fifee, Grig, Janet, and Mrs. Sairey Gamp. F. B. has
not fallen into the common error; she multiplies together the
proportionate numbers she gets, but in getting them she goes wrong, by
reckoning warmth as a de-merit. Possibly she is "Freshly Burnt," or
comes "From Bombay." Janet and Mrs. Sairey Gamp have also avoided this
error: the method they have adopted is shrouded in mystery—I scarcely
feel competent to criticize it. Mrs. Gamp says "if Zuzu makes 4 while
Lolo makes 3, Zuzu makes 6 while Lolo makes 5 (bad reasoning), while
Mimi makes 2." From this she concludes "therefore Zuzu excels in speed
by 1" (i.e. when compared with Lolo; but what about Mimi?). She then
compares the 3 kinds of excellence, measured on this mystic scale. Janet
takes the statement, that "Lolo makes 5 while Mimi makes 2," to prove
that "Lolo makes 3 while Mimi makes 1 and Zuzu 4" (worse reasoning than
Mrs. Gamp's), and thence concludes that "Zuzu excels in speed by 1⁄8"!
Janet should have been Adeline, "mystery of mysteries!"

The fourth set actually put Mimi at the top, arranging them as "Mimi,
Zuzu, Lolo." They are Marquis and Co., Martreb, S. B. B. (first initial
scarcely legible: may be meant for "J"), and Stanza.

The fifth set consist of An ancient Fish and Camel. These ill-assorted
comrades, by dint of foot and fin, have scrambled into the right answer,
but, as their method is wrong, of course it counts for nothing. Also An
ancient Fish has very ancient and fishlike ideas as to how numbers
represent merit: she says "Lolo gains 2½ on Mimi." Two and a half
what? Fish, fish, art thou in thy duty?

Of the five winners I put Balbus and The elder Traveller slightly below
the other three—Balbus for defective reasoning, the other for scanty
working. Balbus gives two reasons for saying that addition of marks is
not the right method, and then adds "it follows that the decision must
be made by multiplying the marks together." This is hardly more
logical than to say "This is not Spring: therefore it must be Autumn."

CLASS LIST.

I.

Dinah Mite. 
E. B. D. L. 
Joram.

II.

Balbus. 
The Elder Traveller.

With regard to Knot V., I beg to express to Vis Inertiæ and to any
others who, like her, understood the condition to be that every marked
picture must have three marks, my sincere regret that the unfortunate
phrase "fill the columns with oughts and crosses" should have caused
them to waste so much time and trouble. I can only repeat that a
literal interpretation of "fill" would seem to me to require that
every picture in the gallery should be marked. Vis Inertiæ would have
been in the First Class if she had sent in the solution she now offers.
