Problem.—Given that one glass of lemonade, 3 sandwiches, and 7
biscuits, cost 1s. 2d.; and that one glass of lemonade, 4
sandwiches, and 10 biscuits, cost 1s. 5d.: find the cost of (1) a
glass of lemonade, a sandwich, and a biscuit; and (2) 2 glasses of
lemonade, 3 sandwiches, and 5 biscuits.

Answer.—(1) 8d.; (2) 1s. 7d.

Solution.—This is best treated algebraically. Let x = the cost (in
pence) of a glass of lemonade, y of a sandwich, and z of a biscuit.
Then we have x + 3y + 7z = 14, and x + 4y + 10z = 17. And we
require the values of x + y + z, and of 2x + 3y + 5z. Now,
from two equations only, we cannot find, separately, the values of
three unknowns: certain combinations of them may, however, be found.
Also we know that we can, by the help of the given equations, eliminate
2 of the 3 unknowns from the quantity whose value is required, which
will then contain one only. If, then, the required value is
ascertainable at all, it can only be by the 3rd unknown vanishing of
itself: otherwise the problem is impossible.

Let us then eliminate lemonade and sandwiches, and reduce everything to
biscuits—a state of things even more depressing than "if all the world
were apple-pie"—by subtracting the 1st equation from the 2nd, which
eliminates lemonade, and gives y + 3z = 3, or y = 3-3z; and then
substituting this value of y in the 1st, which gives x-2z = 5,
i.e. x = 5 + 2z. Now if we substitute these values of x, y, in
the quantities whose values are required, the first becomes (5 + 2z) +
(3-3z) + z, i.e. 8: and the second becomes 2(5 + 2z) + 3(3-3z)
+ 5z, i.e. 19. Hence the answers are (1) 8d., (2) 1s. 7d.

The above is a universal method: that is, it is absolutely certain
either to produce the answer, or to prove that no answer is possible.
The question may also be solved by combining the quantities whose values
are given, so as to form those whose values are required. This is merely
a matter of ingenuity and good luck: and as it may fail, even when the
thing is possible, and is of no use in proving it impossible, I cannot
rank this method as equal in value with the other. Even when it
succeeds, it may prove a very tedious process. Suppose the 26
competitors, who have sent in what I may call accidental solutions,
had had a question to deal with where every number contained 8 or 10
digits! I suspect it would have been a case of "silvered is the raven
hair" (see "Patience") before any solution would have been hit on by
the most ingenious of them.

Forty-five answers have come in, of which 44 give, I am happy to say,
some sort of working, and therefore deserve to be mentioned by name,
and to have their virtues, or vices as the case may be, discussed.
Thirteen have made assumptions to which they have no right, and so
cannot figure in the Class-list, even though, in 10 of the
13 cases, the
answer is right. Of the remaining 28, no less than 26 have sent in
accidental solutions, and therefore fall short of the highest honours.

I will now discuss individual cases, taking the worst first, as my
custom is.

Froggy gives no working—at least this is all he gives: after stating
the given equations, he says "therefore the difference, 1 sandwich + 3
biscuits, = 3d.": then follow the amounts of the unknown bills, with
no further hint as to how he got them. Froggy has had a very narrow
escape of not being named at all!

Of those who are wrong, Vis Inertiæ has sent in a piece of incorrect
working. Peruse the horrid details, and shudder! She takes x (call it
"y") as the cost of a sandwich, and concludes (rightly enough) that a
biscuit will cost (3-y)/3. She then subtracts the second equation from
the first, and deduces 3y + 7 × (3-y)/3-4y + 10 × (3-y)/3 = 3.
By making two mistakes in this line, she brings out y = 2⁄2. Try it
again, oh Vis Inertiæ! Away with Inertiæ: infuse a little more Vis: and
you will bring out the correct (though uninteresting) result, 0 = 0!
This will show you that it is hopeless to try to coax any one of these 3
unknowns to reveal its separate value. The other competitor, who is
wrong throughout, is either J. M. C. or T. M. C.: but, whether he be a
Juvenile Mis-Calculator or a True Mathematician Confused, he makes the
answers 7d. and 1s. 5d. He assumes, with Too Much Confidence, that
biscuits were ½d. each, and that Clara paid for 8, though she only
ate 7!

We will now consider the 13 whose working is wrong, though the answer is
right: and, not to measure their demerits too exactly, I will take them
in alphabetical order. Anita finds (rightly) that "1 sandwich and 3
biscuits cost 3d.," and proceeds "therefore 1 sandwich = 1½d., 3
biscuits = 1½d., 1 lemonade = 6d." Dinah Mite begins like Anita:
and thence proves (rightly) that a biscuit costs less than a 1d.:
whence she concludes (wrongly) that it must cost ½d. F. C. W. is
so beautifully resigned to the certainty of a verdict of "guilty," that
I have hardly the heart to utter the word, without adding a "recommended
to mercy owing to extenuating circumstances." But really, you know,
where are the extenuating circumstances? She begins by assuming that
lemonade is 4d. a glass, and sandwiches 3d. each, (making with the 2
given equations, four conditions to be fulfilled by three miserable
unknowns!). And, having (naturally) developed this into a contradiction,
she then tries 5d. and 2d. with a similar result. (N.B. This
process might have been carried on through the whole of the Tertiary
Period, without gratifying one single Megatherium.) She then, by a
"happy thought," tries half-penny biscuits, and so obtains a consistent
result. This may be a good solution, viewing the problem as a conundrum:
but it is not scientific. Janet identifies sandwiches with biscuits!
"One sandwich + 3 biscuits" she makes equal to "4." Four what? Mayfair
makes the astounding assertion that the equation, s + 3b = 3, "is
evidently only satisfied by s = 2⁄2, b = ½"! Old Cat believes that
the assumption that a sandwich costs 1½d. is "the only way to avoid
unmanageable fractions." But why avoid them? Is there not a certain
glow of triumph in taming such a fraction? "Ladies and gentlemen, the
fraction now before you is one that for years defied all efforts of a
refining nature: it was, in a word, hopelessly vulgar. Treating it as a
circulating decimal (the treadmill of fractions) only made matters
worse. As a last resource, I reduced it to its lowest terms, and
extracted its square root!" Joking apart, let me thank Old Cat for some
very kind words of sympathy, in reference to a correspondent (whose name
I am happy to say I have now forgotten) who had found fault with me as a
discourteous critic. O. V. L. is beyond my comprehension. He takes the
given equations as (1) and (2): thence, by the process [(2)-(1)] deduces
(rightly) equation (3) viz. s + 3b = 3: and thence again, by the
process [×33] (a hopeless mystery), deduces 3s + 4b = 4. I have
nothing to say about it: I give it up. Sea-Breeze says "it is immaterial
to the answer" (why?) "in what proportion 3d. is divided between the
sandwich and the 3 biscuits": so she assumes s = l½d., b =
½d. Stanza is one of a very irregular metre. At first she (like
Janet) identifies sandwiches with biscuits. She then tries two
assumptions (s = 1, b = 2⁄3, and s = ½ b = 2⁄6), and
(naturally) ends in contradictions. Then she returns to the first
assumption, and finds the 3 unknowns separately: quod est absurdum.
Stiletto identifies sandwiches and biscuits, as "articles." Is the word
ever used by confectioners? I fancied "What is the next article, Ma'am?"
was limited to linendrapers. Two Sisters first assume that biscuits are
4 a penny, and then that they are 2 a penny, adding that "the answer
will of course be the same in both cases." It is a dreamy remark,
making one feel something like Macbeth grasping at the spectral dagger.
"Is this a statement that I see before me?" If you were to say "we both
walked the same way this morning," and I were to say "one of you
walked the same way, but the other didn't," which of the three would be
the most hopelessly confused? Turtle Pyate (what is a Turtle Pyate,
please?) and Old Crow, who send a joint answer, and Y. Y., adopt the
same method. Y. Y. gets the equation s + 3b = 3: and then says "this
sum must be apportioned in one of the three following ways." It may
be, I grant you: but Y. Y. do you say "must"? I fear it is possible
for Y. Y. to be two Y's. The other two conspirators are less positive:
they say it "can" be so divided: but they add "either of the three
prices being right"! This is bad grammar and bad arithmetic at once, oh
mysterious birds!

Of those who win honours, The Shetland Snark must have the 3rd class all
to himself. He has only answered half the question, viz. the amount of
Clara's luncheon: the two little old ladies he pitilessly leaves in the
midst of their "difficulty." I beg to assure him (with thanks for his
friendly remarks) that entrance-fees and subscriptions are things
unknown in that most economical of clubs, "The Knot-Untiers."

The authors of the 26 "accidental" solutions differ only in the number
of steps they have taken between the data and the answers. In order
to do them full justice I have arranged the 2nd class in sections,
according to the number of steps. The two Kings are fearfully
deliberate! I suppose walking quick, or taking short cuts, is
inconsistent with kingly dignity: but really, in reading Theseus'
solution, one almost fancied he was "marking time," and making no
advance at all! The other King will, I hope, pardon me for having
altered "Coal" into "Cole." King Coilus, or Coil, seems to have reigned
soon after Arthur's time. Henry of Huntingdon identifies him with the
King Coël who first built walls round Colchester, which was named after
him. In the Chronicle of Robert of Gloucester we read:—

	"Aftur Kyng Aruirag, of wam we habbeth y told,
	Marius ys sone was kyng, quoynte mon & bold.
	And ys sone was aftur hym,
	Coil
	was ys name,
	Bothe it were quoynte men, & of noble fame."

Balbus lays it down as a general principle that "in order to ascertain
the cost of any one luncheon, it must come to the same amount upon two
different assumptions." (Query. Should not "it" be "we"? Otherwise the
luncheon is represented as wishing to ascertain its own cost!) He then
makes two assumptions—one, that sandwiches cost nothing; the other,
that biscuits cost nothing, (either arrangement would lead to the shop
being inconveniently crowded!)—and brings out the unknown luncheons as
8d. and 19d., on each assumption. He then concludes that this
agreement of results "shows that the answers are correct." Now I propose
to disprove his general law by simply giving one instance of its
failing. One instance is quite enough. In logical language, in order to
disprove a "universal affirmative," it is enough to prove its
contradictory, which is a "particular negative." (I must pause for a
digression on Logic, and especially on Ladies' Logic. The universal
affirmative "everybody says he's a duck" is crushed instantly by proving
the particular negative "Peter says he's a goose," which is equivalent
to "Peter does not say he's a duck." And the universal negative
"nobody calls on her" is well met by the particular affirmative "I
called yesterday." In short, either of two contradictories disproves the
other: and the moral is that, since a particular proposition is much
more easily proved than a universal one, it is the wisest course, in
arguing with a Lady, to limit one's own assertions to "particulars,"
and leave her to prove the "universal" contradictory, if she can. You
will thus generally secure a logical victory: a practical victory is
not to be hoped for, since she can always fall back upon the crushing
remark "that has nothing to do with it!"—a move for which Man has not
yet discovered any satisfactory answer. Now let us return to Balbus.)
Here is my "particular negative," on which to test his rule. Suppose the
two recorded luncheons to have been "2 buns, one queen-cake, 2
sausage-rolls, and a bottle of Zoëdone: total, one-and-ninepence," and
"one bun, 2 queen-cakes, a sausage-roll, and a bottle of Zoëdone: total,
one-and-fourpence." And suppose Clara's unknown luncheon to have been "3
buns, one queen-cake, one sausage-roll, and 2 bottles of Zoëdone:" while
the two little sisters had been indulging in "8 buns, 4 queen-cakes, 2
sausage-rolls, and 6 bottles of Zoëdone." (Poor souls, how thirsty they
must have been!) If Balbus will kindly try this by his principle of "two
assumptions," first assuming that a bun is 1d. and a queen-cake 2d.,
and then that a bun is 3d. and a queen-cake 3d., he will bring out
the other two luncheons, on each assumption, as "one-and-nine-pence" and
"four-and-ten-pence" respectively, which harmony of results, he will
say, "shows that the answers are correct." And yet, as a matter of fact,
the buns were 2d. each, the queen-cakes 3d., the sausage-rolls
6d., and the Zoëdone 2d. a bottle: so that Clara's third luncheon
had cost one-and-sevenpence, and her thirsty friends had spent
four-and-fourpence!

Another remark of Balbus I will quote and discuss: for I think that it
also may yield a moral for some of my readers. He says "it is the same
thing in substance whether in solving this problem we use words and call
it Arithmetic, or use letters and signs and call it Algebra." Now this
does not appear to me a correct description of the two methods: the
Arithmetical method is that of "synthesis" only; it goes from one known
fact to another, till it reaches its goal: whereas the Algebraical
method is that of "analysis": it begins with the goal, symbolically
represented, and so goes backwards, dragging its veiled victim with it,
till it has reached the full daylight of known facts, in which it can
tear off the veil and say "I know you!"

Take an illustration. Your house has been broken into and robbed, and
you appeal to the policeman who was on duty that night. "Well, Mum, I
did see a chap getting out over your garden-wall: but I was a good bit
off, so I didn't chase him, like. I just cut down the short way to the
Chequers, and who should I meet but Bill Sykes, coming full split round
the corner. So I just ups and says 'My lad, you're wanted.' That's all I
says. And he says 'I'll go along quiet, Bobby,' he says, 'without the
darbies,' he says." There's your Arithmetical policeman. Now try the
other method. "I seed somebody a running, but he was well gone or ever
I got nigh the place. So I just took a look round in the garden. And I
noticed the foot-marks, where the chap had come right across your
flower-beds. They was good big foot-marks sure-ly. And I noticed as the
left foot went down at the heel, ever so much deeper than the other. And
I says to myself 'The chap's been a big hulking chap: and he goes lame
on his left foot.' And I rubs my hand on the wall where he got over, and
there was soot on it, and no mistake. So I says to myself 'Now where can
I light on a big man, in the chimbley-sweep line, what's lame of one
foot?' And I flashes up permiscuous: and I says 'It's Bill Sykes!' says
I." There is your Algebraical policeman—a higher intellectual type,
to my thinking, than the other.

Little Jack's solution calls for a word of praise, as he has written out
what really is an algebraical proof in words, without representing any
of his facts as equations. If it is all his own, he will make a good
algebraist in the time to come. I beg to thank Simple Susan for some
kind words of sympathy, to the same effect as those received from Old
Cat.

Hecla and Martreb are the only two who have used a method certain
either to produce the answer, or else to prove it impossible: so they
must share between them the highest honours.

CLASS LIST.

I.

Hecla. 
Martreb.

II.

§ 1 (2 steps).

Adelaide. 
Clifton C.... 
E. K. C. 
Guy. 
L'Inconnu. 
Little Jack. 
Nil desperandum. 
Simple Susan. 
Yellow-Hammer. 
Woolly One.

§ 2 (3 steps).

A. A. 
A Christmas Carol. 
Afternoon Tea. 
An appreciative Schoolma'am. 
Baby. 
Balbus. 
Bog-Oak. 
The Red Queen. 
Wall-flower.

§ 3 (4 steps).

Hawthorn. 
Joram. 
S. S. G.

§ 4 (5 steps).

A Stepney Coach.

§ 5 (6 steps).

Bay Laurel. 
Bradshaw of the Future.

§ 6 (9 steps).

Old King Cole.

§ 7 (14 steps).

Theseus.
