I have received several letters on the subjects of Knots II. and VI.,
which lead me to think some further explanation desirable.

In Knot II., I had intended the numbering of the houses to begin at one
corner of the Square, and this was assumed by most, if not all, of the
competitors. Trojanus however says "assuming, in default of any
information, that the street enters the square in the middle of each
side, it may be supposed that the numbering begins at a street." But
surely the other is the more natural assumption?

In Knot VI., the first Problem was of course a mere jeu de mots, whose
presence I thought excusable in a series of Problems whose aim is to
entertain rather than to instruct: but it has not escaped the
contemptuous criticisms of two of my correspondents, who seem to think
that Apollo is in duty bound to keep his bow always on the stretch.
Neither of them has guessed it: and this is true human nature. Only the
other day—the 31st of September, to be quite exact—I met my old friend
Brown, and gave him a riddle I had just heard. With one great effort of
his colossal mind, Brown guessed it. "Right!" said I. "Ah," said he,
"it's very neat—very neat. And it isn't an answer that would occur to
everybody. Very neat indeed." A few yards further on, I fell in with
Smith and to him I propounded the same riddle. He frowned over it for a
minute, and then gave it up. Meekly I faltered out the answer. "A poor
thing, sir!" Smith growled, as he turned away. "A very poor thing! I
wonder you care to repeat such rubbish!" Yet Smith's mind is, if
possible, even more colossal than Brown's.

The second Problem of Knot VI. is an example in ordinary Double Rule of
Three, whose essential feature is that the result depends on the
variation of several elements, which are so related to it that, if all
but one be constant, it varies as that one: hence, if none be constant,
it varies as their product. Thus, for example, the cubical contents of a
rectangular tank vary as its length, if breadth and depth be constant,
and so on; hence, if none be constant, it varies as the product of the
length, breadth, and depth.

When the result is not thus connected with the varying elements, the
Problem ceases to be Double Rule of Three and often becomes one of great
complexity.

To illustrate this, let us take two candidates for a prize, A and B,
who are to compete in French, German, and Italian:

(a) Let it be laid down that the result is to depend on their
relative knowledge of each subject, so that, whether their marks, for
French, be "1, 2" or "100, 200," the result will be the same: and let it
also be laid down that, if they get equal marks on 2 papers, the final
marks are to have the same ratio as those of the 3rd paper. This is a
case of ordinary Double Rule of Three. We multiply A's 3 marks
together, and do the same for B. Note that, if A gets a single "0,"
his final mark is "0," even if he gets full marks for 2 papers while B
gets only one mark for each paper. This of course would be very unfair
on A, though a correct solution under the given conditions.

(b) The result is to depend, as before, on relative knowledge; but
French is to have twice as much weight as German or Italian. This is an
unusual form of question. I should be inclined to say "the resulting
ratio is to be nearer to the French ratio than if we multiplied as in
(a), and so much nearer that it would be necessary to use the other
multipliers twice to produce the same result as in (a):" e.g. if
the French Ratio were 2⁄10, and the others 2⁄9, 1⁄9 so that the ultimate
ratio, by method (a), would be 2⁄45, I should multiply instead by 2⁄3,
1⁄3, giving the result, 1⁄3 which is nearer to 2⁄10 than if he had used
method (a).

(c) The result is to depend on actual amount of knowledge of the 3
subjects collectively. Here we have to ask two questions. (1) What is
to be the "unit" (i.e. "standard to measure by") in each subject? (2)
Are these units to be of equal, or unequal value? The usual "unit" is
the knowledge shown by answering the whole paper correctly; calling this
"100," all lower amounts are represented by numbers between "0" and
"100." Then, if these units are to be of equal value, we simply add
A's 3 marks together, and do the same for B.

(d) The conditions are the same as (c), but French is to have double
weight. Here we simply double the French marks, and add as before.

(e) French is to have such weight, that, if other marks be equal, the
ultimate ratio is to be that of the French paper, so that a "0" in this
would swamp the candidate: but the other two subjects are only to affect
the result collectively, by the amount of knowledge shown, the two being
reckoned of equal value. Here I should add A's German and Italian
marks together, and multiply by his French mark.

But I need not go on: the problem may evidently be set with many varying
conditions, each requiring its own method of solution. The Problem in
Knot VI. was meant to belong to variety (a), and to make this clear, I
inserted the following passage:

"Usually the competitors differ in one point only. Thus, last year, Fifi
and Gogo made the same number of scarves in the trial week, and they
were equally light; but Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo's, and she was
pronounced twice as good."

What I have said will suffice, I hope, as an answer to Balbus, who holds
that (a) and (c) are the only possible varieties of the problem, and
that to say "We cannot use addition, therefore we must be intended to
use multiplication," is "no more illogical than, from knowledge that one
was not born in the night, to infer that he was born in the daytime";
and also to Fifee, who says "I think a little more consideration will
show you that our 'error of adding the proportional numbers together
for each candidate instead of multiplying' is no error at all." Why,
even if addition had been the right method to use, not one of the
writers (I speak from memory) showed any consciousness of the necessity
of fixing a "unit" for each subject. "No error at all!" They were
positively steeped in error!

One correspondent (I do not name him, as the communication is not quite
friendly in tone) writes thus:—"I wish to add, very respectfully, that
I think it would be in better taste if you were to abstain from the very
trenchant expressions which you are accustomed to indulge in when
criticising the answer. That such a tone must not be" ("be not"?)
"agreeable to the persons concerned who have made mistakes may possibly
have no great weight with you, but I hope you will feel that it would be
as well not to employ it, unless you are quite certain of being correct
yourself." The only instances the writer gives of the "trenchant
expressions" are "hapless" and "malefactors." I beg to assure him (and
any others who may need the assurance: I trust there are none) that all
such words have been used in jest, and with no idea that they could
possibly annoy any one, and that I sincerely regret any annoyance I may
have thus inadvertently given. May I hope that in future they will
recognise the distinction between severe language used in sober earnest,
and the "words of unmeant bitterness," which Coleridge has alluded to in
that lovely passage beginning "A little child, a limber elf"? If the
writer will refer to that passage, or to the preface to "Fire, Famine,
and Slaughter," he will find the distinction, for which I plead, far
better drawn out than I could hope to do in any words of mine.

The writer's insinuation that I care not how much annoyance I give to my
readers I think it best to pass over in silence; but to his concluding
remark I must entirely demur. I hold that to use language likely to
annoy any of my correspondents would not be in the least justified by
the plea that I was "quite certain of being correct." I trust that the
knot-untiers and I are not on such terms as those!

I beg to thank G. B. for the offer of a puzzle—which, however, is too
like the old one "Make four 9's into 100."
