§ 1. The Pigs.

Problem.—Place twenty-four pigs in four sties so that, as you go
round and round, you may always find the number in each sty nearer to
ten than the number in the last.

Answer.—Place 8 pigs in the first sty, 10 in the second, nothing in
the third, and 6 in the fourth: 10 is nearer ten than 8; nothing is
nearer ten than 10; 6 is nearer ten than nothing; and 8 is nearer ten
than 6.

This problem is noticed by only two correspondents. Balbus says "it
certainly cannot be solved mathematically, nor do I see how to solve it
by any verbal quibble." Nolens Volens makes Her Radiancy change the
direction of going round; and even then is obliged to add "the pigs must
be carried in front of her"!

§ 2. The Grurmstipths.

Problem.—Omnibuses start from a certain point, both ways, every 15
minutes. A traveller, starting on foot along with one of them, meets
one in 12½ minutes: when will he be overtaken by one?

Answer.—In 6¼ minutes.

Solution.—Let "a" be the distance an omnibus goes in 15 minutes,
and "x" the distance from the starting-point to where the traveller is
overtaken. Since the omnibus met is due at the starting-point in 2½
minutes, it goes in that time as far as the traveller walks in 12½;
i.e. it goes 5 times as fast. Now the overtaking omnibus is "a"
behind the traveller when he starts, and therefore goes "a + x"
while he goes "x." Hence a + x = 5x; i.e. 4x = a, and x
= a/4. This distance would be traversed by an omnibus in 15⁄4 minutes,
and therefore by the traveller in 5 × 15⁄4. Hence he is overtaken in
18¾ minutes after starting, i.e. in 6¼ minutes after meeting the
omnibus.

Four answers have been received, of which two are wrong. Dinah Mite
rightly states that the overtaking omnibus reached the point where they
met the other omnibus 5 minutes after they left, but wrongly concludes
that, going 5 times as fast, it would overtake them in another minute.
The travellers are 5-minutes-walk ahead of the omnibus, and must walk
1-4th of this distance farther before the omnibus overtakes them, which
will be 1-5th of the distance traversed by the omnibus in the same time:
this will require 1¼ minutes more. Nolens Volens tries it by a
process like "Achilles and the Tortoise." He rightly states that, when
the overtaking omnibus leaves the gate, the travellers are 1-5th of
"a" ahead, and that it will take the omnibus 3 minutes to traverse
this distance; "during which time" the travellers, he tells us, go
1-15th of "a" (this should be 1-25th). The travellers being now 1-15th
of "a" ahead, he concludes that the work remaining to be done is for
the travellers to go 1-60th of "a," while the omnibus goes 1-12th. The
principle is correct, and might have been applied earlier.

CLASS LIST.

I.

Balbus. 
Delta.
