§ 1. The Buckets.

Problem.—Lardner states that a solid, immersed in a fluid, displaces
an amount equal to itself in bulk. How can this be true of a small
bucket floating in a larger one?

Solution.—Lardner means, by "displaces," "occupies a space which
might be filled with water without any change in the surroundings." If
the portion of the floating bucket, which is above the water, could be
annihilated, and the rest of it transformed into water, the surrounding
water would not change its position: which agrees with Lardner's
statement.

Five answers have been received, none of which explains the difficulty
arising from the well-known fact that a floating body is the same weight
as the displaced fluid. Hecla says that "only that portion of the
smaller bucket which descends below the original level of the water can
be properly said to be immersed, and only an equal bulk of water is
displaced." Hence, according to Hecla, a solid, whose weight was equal
to that of an equal bulk of water, would not float till the whole of it
was below "the original level" of the water: but, as a matter of fact,
it would float as soon as it was all under water. Magpie says the
fallacy is "the assumption that one body can displace another from a
place where it isn't," and that Lardner's assertion is incorrect, except
when the containing vessel "was originally full to the brim." But the
question of floating depends on the present state of things, not on past
history. Old King Cole takes the same view as Hecla. Tympanum and Vindex
assume that "displaced" means "raised above its original level," and
merely explain how it comes to pass that the water, so raised, is less
in bulk than the immersed portion of bucket, and thus land
themselves—or rather set themselves floating—in the same boat as
Hecla.

I regret that there is no Class-list to publish for this Problem.

§ 2. Balbus' Essay.

Problem.—Balbus states that if a certain solid be immersed in a
certain vessel of water, the water will rise through a series of
distances, two inches, one inch, half an inch, &c., which series has no
end. He concludes that the water will rise without limit. Is this true?

Solution.—No. This series can never reach 4 inches, since, however
many terms we take, we are always short of 4 inches by an amount equal
to the last term taken.

Three answers have been received—but only two seem to me worthy of
honours.

Tympanum says that the statement about the stick "is merely a blind, to
which the old answer may well be applied, solvitur ambulando, or
rather mergendo." I trust Tympanum will not test this in his own
person, by taking the place of the man in Balbus' Essay! He would
infallibly be drowned.

Old King Cole rightly points out that the series, 2, 1, &c., is a
decreasing Geometrical Progression: while Vindex rightly identifies the
fallacy as that of "Achilles and the Tortoise."

CLASS LIST.

I.

Old King Cole. 
Vindex.

§ 3. The Garden.

Problem.—An oblong garden, half a yard longer than wide, consists
entirely of a gravel-walk, spirally arranged, a yard wide and 3,630
yards long. Find the dimensions of the garden.

Answer.—60, 60½.

Solution.—The number of yards and fractions of a yard traversed in
walking along a straight piece of walk, is evidently the same as the
number of square-yards and fractions of a square-yard, contained in that
piece of walk: and the distance, traversed in passing through a
square-yard at a corner, is evidently a yard. Hence the area of the
garden is 3,630 square-yards: i.e., if x be the width, x (x +
½) = 3,630. Solving this Quadratic, we find x = 60. Hence the
dimensions are 60, 60½.

Twelve answers have been received—seven right and five wrong.

C. G. L., Nabob, Old Crow, and Tympanum assume that the number of yards
in the length of the path is equal to the number of square-yards in the
garden. This is true, but should have been proved. But each is guilty of
darker deeds. C. G. L.'s "working" consists of dividing 3,630 by 60.
Whence came this divisor, oh Segiel? Divination? Or was it a dream? I
fear this solution is worth nothing. Old Crow's is shorter, and so (if
possible) worth rather less. He says the answer "is at once seen to be
60 × 60½"! Nabob's calculation is short, but "as rich as a Nabob" in
error. He says that the square root of 3,630, multiplied by 2, equals
the length plus the breadth. That is 60.25 × 2 = 120½. His first
assertion is only true of a square garden. His second is irrelevant,
since 60.25 is not the square-root of 3,630! Nay, Bob, this will not
do! Tympanum says that, by extracting the square-root of 3,630, we get
60 yards with a remainder of 30/60, or half-a-yard, which we add so as
to make the oblong 60 × 60½. This is very terrible: but worse remains
behind. Tympanum proceeds thus:—"But why should there be the half-yard
at all? Because without it there would be no space at all for flowers.
By means of it, we find reserved in the very centre a small plot of
ground, two yards long by half-a-yard wide, the only space not occupied
by walk." But Balbus expressly said that the walk "used up the whole of
the area." Oh, Tympanum! My tympa is exhausted: my brain is num! I can
say no more.

Hecla indulges, again and again, in that most fatal of all habits in
computation—the making two mistakes which cancel each other. She
takes x as the width of the garden, in yards, and x + ½ as its
length, and makes her first "coil" the sum of x½, x½, x-1,
x-1, i.e. 4x-3: but the fourth term should be x-1½, so that
her first coil is ½ a yard too long. Her second coil is the sum of
x-2½, x-2½, x-3, x-3: here the first term should be x-2
and the last x-3½: these two mistakes cancel, and this coil is
therefore right. And the same thing is true of every other coil but the
last, which needs an extra half-yard to reach the end of the path: and
this exactly balances the mistake in the first coil. Thus the sum total
of the coils comes right though the working is all wrong.

Of the seven who are right, Dinah Mite, Janet, Magpie, and Taffy make
the same assumption as C. G. L. and Co. They then solve by a Quadratic.
Magpie also tries it by Arithmetical Progression, but fails to notice
that the first and last "coils" have special values.

Alumnus Etonæ attempts to prove what C. G. L. assumes by a particular
instance, taking a garden 6 by 5½. He ought to have proved it
generally: what is true of one number is not always true of others. Old
King Cole solves it by an Arithmetical Progression. It is right, but too
lengthy to be worth as much as a Quadratic.

Vindex proves it very neatly, by pointing out that a yard of walk
measured along the middle represents a square yard of garden, "whether
we consider the straight stretches of walk or the square yards at the
angles, in which the middle line goes half a yard in one direction and
then turns a right angle and goes half a yard in another direction."

CLASS LIST.

I.

Vindex.

II.

Alumnus Etonæ. 
Old King Cole.

III.

Dinah Mite. 
Janet. 
Magpie. 
Taffy.
