§ 1. The Chelsea Pensioners.

Problem.—If 70 per cent. have lost an eye, 75 per cent. an ear, 80
per cent. an arm, 85 per cent. a leg: what percentage, at least, must
have lost all four?

Answer.—Ten.

Solution.—(I adopt that of Polar Star, as being better than my own).
Adding the wounds together, we get 70 + 75 + 80 + 85 = 310, among 100
men; which gives 3 to each, and 4 to 10 men. Therefore the least
percentage is 10.

Nineteen answers have been received. One is "5," but, as no working is
given with it, it must, in accordance with the rule, remain "a deed
without a name." Janet makes it "35 and 2⁄10ths." I am sorry she has
misunderstood the question, and has supposed that those who had lost an
ear were 75 per cent. of those who had lost an eye; and so on. Of
course, on this supposition, the percentages must all be multiplied
together. This she has done correctly, but I can give her no honours,
as I do not think the question will fairly bear her interpretation,
Three Score and Ten makes it "19 and 2⁄8ths." Her solution has given
me—I will not say "many anxious days and sleepless nights," for I wish
to be strictly truthful, but—some trouble in making any sense at all of
it. She makes the number of "pensioners wounded once" to be 310 ("per
cent.," I suppose!): dividing by 4, she gets 77 and a half as "average
percentage:" again dividing by 4, she gets 19 and 2⁄8ths as "percentage
wounded four times." Does she suppose wounds of different kinds to
"absorb" each other, so to speak? Then, no doubt, the data are
equivalent to 77 pensioners with one wound each, and a half-pensioner
with a half-wound. And does she then suppose these concentrated wounds
to be transferable, so that 2⁄4ths of these unfortunates can obtain
perfect health by handing over their wounds to the remaining 1⁄4th?
Granting these suppositions, her answer is right; or rather, if the
question had been "A road is covered with one inch of gravel, along 77
and a half per cent. of it. How much of it could be covered 4 inches
deep with the same material?" her answer would have been right. But
alas, that wasn't the question! Delta makes some most amazing
assumptions: "let every one who has not lost an eye have lost an ear,"
"let every one who has not lost both eyes and ears have lost an arm."
Her ideas of a battle-field are grim indeed. Fancy a warrior who would
continue fighting after losing both eyes, both ears, and both arms! This
is a case which she (or "it?") evidently considers possible.

Next come eight writers who have made the unwarrantable assumption that,
because 70 per cent. have lost an eye, therefore 30 per cent. have
not lost one, so that they have both eyes. This is illogical. If you
give me a bag containing 100 sovereigns, and if in an hour I come to you
(my face not beaming with gratitude nearly so much as when I received
the bag) to say "I am sorry to tell you that 70 of these sovereigns are
bad," do I thereby guarantee the other 30 to be good? Perhaps I have not
tested them yet. The sides of this illogical octagon are as follows, in
alphabetical order:—Algernon Bray, Dinah Mite, G. S. C., Jane E., J. D.
W., Magpie (who makes the delightful remark "therefore 90 per cent. have
two of something," recalling to one's memory that fortunate monarch,
with whom Xerxes was so much pleased that "he gave him ten of
everything!"), S. S. G., and Tokio.

Bradshaw of the Future and T. R. do the question in a piecemeal
fashion—on the principle that the 70 per cent. and the 75 per cent.,
though commenced at opposite ends of the 100, must overlap by at least
45 per cent.; and so on. This is quite correct working, but not, I
think, quite the best way of doing it.

The other five competitors will, I hope, feel themselves sufficiently
glorified by being placed in the first class, without my composing a
Triumphal Ode for each!

CLASS LIST.

I.

Old Cat. 
Old Hen. 
Polar Star. 
Simple Susan. 
White Sugar.

II.

Bradshaw of the Future. 
T. R.

III.

Algernon Bray. 
Dinah Mite. 
G. S. C. 
Jane E. 
J. D. W. 
Magpie. 
S. S. G. 
Tokio.

§ 2. Change of Day.

I must postpone, sine die, the geographical problem—partly because I
have not yet received the statistics I am hoping for, and partly because
I am myself so entirely puzzled by it; and when an examiner is himself
dimly hovering between a second class and a third how is he to decide
the position of others?

§ 3. The Sons' Ages.

Problem.—"At first, two of the ages are together equal to the third.
A few years afterwards, two of them are together double of the third.
When the number of years since the first occasion is two-thirds of the
sum of the ages on that occasion, one age is 21. What are the other two?

Answer.—"15 and 18."

Solution.—Let the ages at first be x, y, (x + y). Now, if a
+ b = 2c, then (a-n) + (b-n) = 2(c-n), whatever be the
value of n. Hence the second relationship, if ever true, was
always true. Hence it was true at first. But it cannot be true that
x and y are together double of (x + y). Hence it must be true of
(x + y), together with x or y; and it does not matter which we
take. We assume, then, (x + y) + x = 2y; i.e. y = 2x.
Hence the three ages were, at first, x, 2x, 3x; and the number of
years, since that time is two-thirds of 6x, i.e. is 4x. Hence the
present ages are 5x, 6x, 7x. The ages are clearly integers,
since this is only "the year when one of my sons comes of age." Hence
7x = 21, x = 3, and the other ages are 15, 18.

Eighteen answers have been received. One of the writers merely asserts
that the first occasion was 12 years ago, that the ages were then 9, 6,
and 3; and that on the second occasion they were 14, 11, and 8! As a
Roman father, I ought to withhold the name of the rash writer; but
respect for age makes me break the rule: it is Three Score and Ten. Jane
E. also asserts that the ages at first were 9, 6, 3: then she calculates
the present ages, leaving the second occasion unnoticed. Old Hen is
nearly as bad; she "tried various numbers till I found one that fitted
all the conditions"; but merely scratching up the earth, and pecking
about, is not the way to solve a problem, oh venerable bird! And close
after Old Hen prowls, with hungry eyes, Old Cat, who calmly assumes, to
begin with, that the son who comes of age is the eldest. Eat your
bird, Puss, for you will get nothing from me!

There are yet two zeroes to dispose of. Minerva assumes that, on every
occasion, a son comes of age; and that it is only such a son who is
"tipped with gold." Is it wise thus to interpret "now, my boys,
calculate your ages, and you shall have the money"? Bradshaw of the
Future says "let" the ages at first be 9, 6, 3, then assumes that the
second occasion was 6 years afterwards, and on these baseless
assumptions brings out the right answers. Guide future travellers, an
thou wilt: thou art no Bradshaw for this Age!

Of those who win honours, the merely "honourable" are two. Dinah Mite
ascertains (rightly) the relationship between the three ages at first,
but then assumes one of them to be "6," thus making the rest of her
solution tentative. M. F. C. does the algebra all right up to the
conclusion that the present ages are 5z, 6z, and 7z; it then
assumes, without giving any reason, that 7z = 21.

Of the more honourable, Delta attempts a novelty—to discover which
son comes of age by elimination: it assumes, successively, that it is
the middle one, and that it is the youngest; and in each case it
apparently brings out an absurdity. Still, as the proof contains the
following bit of algebra, "63 = 7x + 4y; ∴ 21 = x + 4
sevenths of y," I trust it will admit that its proof is not quite
conclusive. The rest of its work is good. Magpie betrays the deplorable
tendency of her tribe—to appropriate any stray conclusion she comes
across, without having any strict logical right to it. Assuming A,
B, C, as the ages at first, and D as the number of the years that
have elapsed since then, she finds (rightly) the 3 equations, 2A =
B, C = B + A, D = 2B. She then says "supposing that A = 1,
then B = 2, C = 3, and D = 4. Therefore for A, B, C, D,
four numbers are wanted which shall be to each other as 1:2:3:4." It is
in the "therefore" that I detect the unconscientiousness of this bird.
The conclusion is true, but this is only because the equations are
"homogeneous" (i.e. having one "unknown" in each term), a fact which I
strongly suspect had not been grasped—I beg pardon, clawed—by her.
Were I to lay this little pitfall, "A + 1 = B, B + 1 = C;
supposing A = 1, then B = 2 and C = 3. Therefore for A, B,
C, three numbers are wanted which shall be to one another as 1:2:3,"
would you not flutter down into it, oh Magpie, as amiably as a Dove?
Simple Susan is anything but simple to me. After ascertaining that the
3 ages at first are as 3:2:1, she says "then, as two-thirds of their
sum, added to one of them, = 21, the sum cannot exceed 30, and
consequently the highest cannot exceed 15." I suppose her (mental)
argument is something like this:—"two-thirds of sum, + one age, = 21;
∴ sum, + 3 halves of one age, = 31 and a half. But 3 halves of
one age cannot be less than 1 and-a-half (here I perceive that Simple
Susan would on no account present a guinea to a new-born baby!) hence
the sum cannot exceed 30." This is ingenious, but her proof, after that,
is (as she candidly admits) "clumsy and roundabout." She finds that
there are 5 possible sets of ages, and eliminates four of them. Suppose
that, instead of 5, there had been 5 million possible sets? Would Simple
Susan have courageously ordered in the necessary gallon of ink and ream
of paper?

The solution sent in by C. R. is, like that of Simple Susan, partly
tentative, and so does not rise higher than being Clumsily Right.

Among those who have earned the highest honours, Algernon Bray solves
the problem quite correctly, but adds that there is nothing to exclude
the supposition that all the ages were fractional. This would make the
number of answers infinite. Let me meekly protest that I never
intended my readers to devote the rest of their lives to writing out
answers! E. M. Rix points out that, if fractional ages be admissible,
any one of the three sons might be the one "come of age"; but she
rightly rejects this supposition on the ground that it would make the
problem indeterminate. White Sugar is the only one who has detected an
oversight of mine: I had forgotten the possibility (which of course
ought to be allowed for) that the son, who came of age that year, need
not have done so by that day, so that he might be only 20. This
gives a second solution, viz., 20, 24, 28. Well said, pure Crystal!
Verily, thy "fair discourse hath been as sugar"!

CLASS LIST.

I.

Algernon Bray. 
An Old Fogey. 
E. M. Rix. 
G. S. C. 
S. S. G. 
Tokio. 
T. R. 
White Sugar.

II.

C. R. 
Delta. 
Magpie. 
Simple Susan.

III.

Dinah Mite. 
M. F. C.

I have received more than one remonstrance on my assertion, in the
Chelsea Pensioners' problem, that it was illogical to assume, from the
datum "70 p. c. have lost an eye," that 30 p. c. have not. Algernon
Bray states, as a parallel case, "suppose Tommy's father gives him 4
apples, and he eats one of them, how many has he left?" and says "I
think we are justified in answering, 3." I think so too. There is no
"must" here, and the data are evidently meant to fix the answer
exactly: but, if the question were set me "how many must he have
left?", I should understand the data to be that his father gave him 4
at least, but may have given him more.

I take this opportunity of thanking those who have sent, along with
their answers to the Tenth Knot, regrets that there are no more Knots to
come, or petitions that I should recall my resolution to bring them to
an end. I am most grateful for their kind words; but I think it wisest
to end what, at best, was but a lame attempt. "The stretched metre of an
antique song" is beyond my compass; and my puppets were neither
distinctly in my life (like those I now address), nor yet (like Alice
and the Mock Turtle) distinctly out of it. Yet let me at least fancy,
as I lay down the pen, that I carry with me into my silent life, dear
reader, a farewell smile from your unseen face, and a kindly farewell
pressure from your unfelt hand! And so, good night! Parting is such
sweet sorrow, that I shall say "good night!" till it be morrow.

THE END

LONDON: RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, PRINTERS.

[TURN OVER.
