Book III

(Part 3 of 3)

Chapter 8

Courage proper, then, is something of this sort.

But besides it there are five other things that go by the name of courage.

First, "civic courage" — the kind that most resembles the real thing.

Citizens often seem to face danger because of the legal pains and penalties on one side and the honors on the other; and this is why the most courageous peoples seem to be found in those states where cowards are disgraced and brave men honored.

This, too, is the courage that inspires Homer's characters — Diomede, for instance, and Hector.

  Polydamas will be the first to taunt me,

says Hector; and Diomede likewise:

  Hector one day will speak among his people
  and say, "The son of Tydeus, at my hand—"

This courage is most like the one we described above because its impulse is a virtuous one: a sense of honor, a desire for something noble (glory), and an aversion to reproach, which is disgraceful.

We might, perhaps, put in the same class men who are forced to fight by their officers; but they are a grade lower, because what drives them is not a sense of honor but fear, and what they are running from is not disgrace but pain. For those in authority compel them in Hector's own fashion:

  Whoever I catch skulking away from the fight
  will have no hope of saving his carcass from the dogs.

Commanders do the same thing when they order their men to stand and flog them if they run, or when they draw them up with a ditch at their backs: all of these, I mean, are using compulsion.

But a man ought to be courageous not because he is compelled to be, but because it is noble.

Second, experience of some particular business is sometimes taken for a kind of courage; this, in fact, is the basis of Socrates' notion that courage is knowledge.

Different people show this sort of courage in different fields, but professional soldiers show it above all in war. War is full of false alarms, and the regulars have seen through them many times; so they look courageous simply because the other troops do not understand the real state of the case.

Again, their experience makes the regulars more effective both in attack and in defense: they are skilled in handling their weapons, and they carry the kind of arms best suited for both purposes. So they fight with the advantage of armed men over unarmed, of trained men over untrained; for in athletic contests too it is not the bravest men who fight best, but the strongest and best conditioned.

But these regulars turn coward whenever the danger climbs too high and they find themselves outmatched in numbers and equipment. Then they are the first to run, while the citizen troops stand their ground and are cut to pieces — as happened at the temple of Hermes. For the citizens held it shameful to run, and preferred death to saving their lives on those terms; but the regulars had faced the danger in the first place only because they fancied themselves the stronger side, and when they learned the truth they ran, fearing death more than disgrace. And that is not what we mean by courageous.

Third, people sometimes count rage as part of what "courage" means.

Men who in sheer rage turn like wild beasts on those who have wounded them are taken for courageous, because the courageous man is also full of rage; for rage, more than anything, is eager to rush at danger. Hence Homer's phrases: "put might into his rage," "roused his wrath and rage," "fierce wrath breathed through his nostrils," "his blood boiled." All these expressions seem to signal rage waking up and bursting out.

Now the truly courageous man acts because it is noble to act, with rage backing him up. Beasts act from pain — from blows, or from fear; in a wood or a marsh they do not attack a man. So beasts are not courageous: it is pain and rage that drive them to rush at danger, without foreseeing any of the terrors involved. If that counted as courage, then hungry donkeys would have to be called courageous — beat them all you like, they will not stop eating. (Adulterers, for that matter, are driven by lust to do plenty of daring things.)

Being driven at danger by pain or rage, then, is not courage proper. Still, this kind — the kind whose impulse is rage — seems to be the most natural, and when deliberate purpose and the right motive are added to it, it becomes real courage.

Again, anger is a painful state, and revenge is pleasant; but those who fight from these motives — to escape the pain or to win the pleasure — may fight well, yet they are not courageous. They do not act because it is noble to act so, or as reason directs; they are driven by their feelings. Still, they bear some resemblance to the courageous man.

Fourth, the confident optimist is not properly called courageous either. He is confident in danger because he has won often and beaten many opponents. He and the courageous man resemble each other, since both are confident; but the courageous man is confident for the reasons already given, while the optimist is confident because he thinks he is the better man and will win without taking a scratch. (People behave the same way when they are drunk — drink makes optimists.) But when he finds out otherwise, he runs; whereas the mark of the courageous man, as we saw, is to face what is terrible to a human being, seeing the danger plainly, because facing it is noble and flinching from it is base.

And so it seems to take greater courage — this is the common view — to be fearless and cool in sudden danger than in danger that has been foreseen; for there the response must come more directly from formed character, since it depends less on preparation. When we can see what is coming, we can choose to meet it by calculation and reasoning; when it is upon us suddenly, we choose according to what we are.

Fifth, those who are unaware of their danger sometimes appear courageous. They are not far removed from the optimists just described, but they are inferior in that they need have no opinion of themselves at all, which the optimist must have. So while the optimist holds his ground for a time, these people — whose boldness rested on a false belief — run the moment they see or suspect that the case is otherwise; as the Argives did when they engaged the Spartans thinking they were Sicyonians.

We have now described what the courageous man is like, and what those who pass for courageous are like.

But there is one more point to notice.

Chapter 9

Courage, as we said, is concerned with feelings both of confidence and of fear; but not equally with both — more with occasions of fear. It is the man who keeps cool and behaves as he ought when things are frightening who is called courageous, rather than the man who does so when things look encouraging.

That is why, as we said, men are called courageous for enduring what is painful.

Courage therefore brings pain, and is justly praised; for it is harder to endure what is painful than to hold back from what is pleasant.

Not that the end of courage is unpleasant — I do not mean that. But it seems to be hidden from view by the circumstances that surround it, as happens in athletic contests too. Boxers have a pleasant end in view, the thing they are striving for — the crown and the honors; but the blows they take are grievous to flesh and blood, and painful, and so is all the training they endure. And since the painful parts are many while the end is small, the pleasantness of the end is hardly visible.

If courage is like this, then death and wounds will be painful to the courageous man, and against his will; but he endures them because enduring is noble and refusing is base.

And the more completely a man possesses every virtue, and the happier he is, the more his death will cost him. Life is worth more to a man of his sort than to anyone else, and he knows he is giving up the very best of things — and that is painful. But he is no less courageous for feeling the pain; we may even say he is more courageous, because in spite of it he chooses noble conduct in battle over all those goods.

So we see that the rule that exercising a virtue is pleasant does not hold for every virtue — except so far as the end is attained.

Still, there is perhaps no reason why men of this character should not make less efficient soldiers than men who are not courageous at all but have nothing good to lose; for such men are reckless of risk, and will sell their lives for a small price.

Here let us close our account of courage. From what we have said, it will not be hard to gather an outline of its nature.

Chapter 10

After courage, let us speak of self-control; for these two seem to be the virtues of the irrational parts of our nature.

We have already said that self-control is the observance of the mean with regard to pleasures (it is not concerned with pains so much, nor in the same way); and self-indulgence shows itself in the same field.

Let us now determine what kind of pleasures these are.

First, let us accept as established the distinction between pleasures of the body and pleasures of the soul — the pleasure of gratified ambition, say, or of the love of learning. When a lover of honor or of learning delights in the thing he loves, it is not his body that is affected but his mind. Now men are not called either self-controlled or self-indulgent for their behavior toward these pleasures, nor toward any other pleasures that are not bodily. People who are fond of gossip and storytelling, and fritter their days away on trifles, we call idle chatterers, but not self-indulgent; nor do we apply that term to those who take the loss of money or friends harder than they should.

Self-control, then, will be concerned with the pleasures of the body — but not even with all of these. Those who delight in what the eye takes in — colors, shapes, painting — are not called either self-controlled or self-indulgent; and yet it would seem possible to delight in these things as one ought, or more or less than one ought.

The same holds for hearing: no one is ever called self-indulgent for taking excessive delight in music or the theater, or self-controlled for enjoying them properly.

Nor do we apply these terms to those who delight in smells, except incidentally. We do not call people self-indulgent for delighting in the smell of fruit or roses or incense, but rather for delighting in the smell of perfumes and rich dishes; for the self-indulgent man delights in these smells because they remind him of the things he craves.

You may see other people, too, enjoying the smell of food when they are hungry; but delighting in such smells constantly is the mark of the self-indulgent man alone, since he alone is constantly craving what they promise.

The lower animals, moreover, get no pleasure through these senses, except incidentally. It is not the scent of the hare that delights a dog, but the eating of it; the scent only made the announcement. The lion rejoices not in the lowing of the ox but in devouring him; the lowing merely told him the ox was near, and so he appears to delight in the sound itself. Likewise, it is not the sight of a stag or a wild goat that pleases him, but the prospect of a meal.

Self-control and self-indulgence, then, have to do with the kinds of pleasure that we share with the lower animals — which is why these pleasures look slavish and brutish. I mean the pleasures of touch and taste.

Even taste seems to play only a small part here, or perhaps no part at all. The function of taste is to discriminate flavors, as wine-tasters do, and cooks seasoning their dishes; but it is by no means this fine discrimination that gives the delight — not to the self-indulgent, at any rate — but the actual enjoyment, and the medium of that is always the sense of touch, in eating and drinking alike, and in sex.

Hence the gourmand who wished his throat were longer than a crane's: what he meant was that his pleasure came through the touch.

The sense involved in self-indulgence, then, is the most common and widespread of all the senses; and so self-indulgence would seem to deserve its place as the most censured of the vices, since it attaches not to our human nature but to our animal nature.

To fix one's delight on things of this kind, and to love them above everything else, is brutish.

And further, even the more manly pleasures of touch lie outside the sphere of self-indulgence — the pleasure a gymnast takes in a rubdown and a warm bath; for the self-indulgent man does not cultivate the sense of touch over his whole body, but only in certain parts.

Chapter 11

Now, some of our desires or appetites appear to be common to the race, others individual and acquired.

The desire for food is natural, or common to the race: every man in want of it desires food or drink, or sometimes both — and sexual intercourse too, as Homer says, when he is young and vigorous.

But not everyone desires to satisfy these wants in this or that particular way, and not everyone desires the same things; so desire of that kind appears to be peculiarly our own — individual.

Of course it is also partly natural: different things please different people, and yet there are some things all men like better than others.

First, then, in the matter of the natural or common desires few people go wrong, and only in one direction — excess. To eat or drink whatever is set in front of you until you can hold no more is to exceed the natural measure in point of quantity, since natural appetite is simply for the filling of the want. That is why such people are called "belly-mad": they fill their bellies past the mark.

It is only thoroughly slavish natures that acquire this vice.

Second, with regard to the individual pleasures — those that attend the gratification of our individual desires — many people go wrong, and in many ways.

People are called "fond of" this or that because they delight in the wrong things, or to an unusual degree, or in the wrong fashion; and the self-indulgent exceed in all these ways at once. They delight in some things they ought not to delight in, since those things are hateful; and where delight is legitimate, they delight more than is right and more than most people do.

Plainly, then, excess in these pleasures is self-indulgence, and a thing to be blamed.

But with the corresponding pains the case is not the same as it was with courage. A man is not called self-controlled for bearing them and self-indulgent for failing to. Rather, the self-indulgent man is called self-indulgent because he is pained more than he ought to be at not getting certain pleasant things — his pleasure causing his pain — and the self-controlled man is called self-controlled because going without these pleasant things, or abstaining from them, does not pain him.

The self-indulgent man, then, desires all pleasant things, or the most intensely pleasant of them, and is led by his desire to choose them ahead of everything else. And so he is constantly in pain — pained at missing them, pained by craving them; for all appetite involves pain. It seems a strange arrangement, being pained for the sake of pleasure.

People who fall short in the matter of pleasure, and delight in these things less than they ought, are hardly found at all; such insensibility is scarcely human. Even the lower animals discriminate among kinds of food, and delight in some and not in others; and a being to whom nothing was pleasant, and to whom one thing was no different from another, would be a long way from being a man. He has no name, because he does not exist.

But the self-controlled man holds the mean in these things. He takes no pleasure in what the self-indulgent man most delights in — he is rather disgusted by it — nor, in general, in the wrong things, nor very much in any of them. When they are absent he is not pained, and he does not desire them — or desires them only moderately: not more than he ought, not at the wrong time, and so on. But things that are pleasant and at the same time conduce to health and good condition he will desire moderately and in the right way; and other pleasant things too, provided they are not harmful, or incompatible with what is noble, or beyond his means. A man who cares for such pleasures on any other terms cares for them more than they are worth; and the self-controlled man is not like that — he is guided by right reason.

Chapter 12

Self-indulgence seems to be more voluntary than cowardice.

For self-indulgence is driven by pleasure, cowardice by pain; and pleasure is something we choose, pain something we avoid. Moreover, pain unhinges us — it upsets the nature of the sufferer — while pleasure does nothing of the sort. Self-indulgence, therefore, is the more voluntary of the two.

For these reasons it is also the more blameworthy, and for another reason besides: it is easier to train oneself to behave rightly toward pleasure, since the occasions for it come up constantly in our lives and the training carries no risk; with occasions of fear the reverse is true.

Again, the settled character we call cowardice would seem to be more voluntary than the particular acts that display it. Being a coward is not itself painful; but the occasions that expose cowardice drive men out of their senses with the fear of pain, so that they throw away their weapons and disgrace themselves completely — which is why the particular acts are even thought to be compulsory. With the self-indulgent man it is the other way around: the particular acts are voluntary, for they are done with appetite and desire, but the character itself is less so; for no one desires to be self-indulgent.

The name we give to self-indulgence we apply also to the faults of children, for the two have a certain resemblance. Which of them is named after the other makes no difference for our present purpose; but plainly the later is named after the earlier.

And the metaphor, I think, is not a bad one. What needs "chastening," or correction, is whatever inclines toward base things and has great powers of growth; and nowhere are those two marks so strong as in appetite and in childhood. Children, like the self-indulgent, live by their appetites, and the desire for pleasant things is most pronounced in them. If this element is not made submissive and obedient to the governing principle, it will run to great lengths; for in an irrational being the desire for pleasant things is insatiable and will feed itself from any source, and every gratification of appetite strengthens the natural tendency — and if the gratifications are great and intense, they push reason out altogether. The gratifications of appetite, therefore, should be moderate and few; and appetite should never be set against reason — this is what we mean by calling it submissive and "chastened" — but should be ruled by reason, as a child should be ruled by his tutor.

And so the self-controlled man's appetites should be in harmony with his reason; for the aim of both is the noble. The self-controlled man desires what he ought, as he ought, and when he ought — and this, again, is exactly what reason prescribes.

This, then, may stand as our account of self-control.
