Book VII

(Part 3 of 3)

Chapter 10

The same man cannot be at once practically wise and weak-willed; for we have shown that a man cannot have practical wisdom without being morally good at the same time.

Besides, a man is not practically wise just because he knows; he must also be ready to act on what he knows. But the weak-willed man is not ready to act on his knowledge. (Nothing prevents a man who is clever at calculating means from being weak-willed — which is why people sometimes think a man can be practically wise and weak-willed at once: cleverness is related to practical wisdom in the way we explained earlier, resembling it as an intellectual power but differing from it because choice is absent.) Nor does the weak-willed man know in the way a man knows who is actually using his knowledge; he knows the way a man asleep or drunk knows.

He acts voluntarily — in a sense he knows what he is doing and why — and yet he is not a bad man, for his choice is good. He is only half bad. Nor are weak-willed men unjust, for they are not deliberately malicious: some of them are the kind who swerve from their deliberate resolutions; others, of the melancholic temperament, act without deliberating at all. The weak-willed man, then, is like a city that always passes excellent decrees and has good laws, but never enforces them — as Anaxandrides joked:

  So willed the city that cares nothing for its laws.

The bad man, on the contrary, is like a city that enforces its laws, but its laws are bad.

Both weakness of will and self-restraint go beyond the average run of men: the self-restrained man is more steadfast than most men can manage, the weak-willed man less.

Of the kinds of weakness of will, the melancholic sort is more curable than that of the men who make resolutions and fail to keep them; and the kind that comes from habit is more curable than the kind rooted in nature. It is easier to change a habit than to change one's nature — indeed, the very reason habits are hard to change is that they are a kind of second nature, as Euenus says:

  Train men long enough to what you will,
  and in the end it will be their nature.

We have now said what self-restraint and weakness of will are, and endurance and softness, and how these types of character stand to one another.

Of Pleasure

Chapter 11

Pleasure and pain also fall within the province of the political philosopher, since it is his business to fix the end by reference to which we call each thing good or bad.

Besides, we are bound to discuss them. We said that moral virtue and vice have to do with pleasures and pains, and most people say that happiness involves pleasure — which is why the blessed man is called makarios, from chairein, "to rejoice."

Now (1) some people think no pleasure is good, either in itself or incidentally; good and pleasure, they say, are simply two different things. (2) Others think that some pleasures are good but most are bad. (3) Others again think that even if every pleasure is good, still the highest good cannot be pleasure.

(1) It is argued that pleasure cannot be good at all: (a) because every pleasure is a felt transition to a natural state, and a transition or process is never the same kind of thing as an end — the building of a house is one kind of thing, the house another; (b) because the self-controlled man avoids pleasures; (c) because the man of practical wisdom pursues the painless, not the pleasant; (d) because pleasures get in the way of thinking, and the more intense the pleasure the worse the interference — sexual pleasure, for instance: no one in the middle of that could think at all; (e) because there is no art of pleasure, yet every good thing has an art devoted to producing it; (f) because pleasure is what children and animals pursue.

(2) It is argued that not all pleasures are good, because some are base and disgraceful, and some are actually harmful — some pleasant things are unhealthy.

(3) It is argued that pleasure is not the highest good, because it is not an end but a process or transition.

These, then, are the current opinions on the subject.

Chapter 12

But these arguments do not prove that pleasure is not good, or even that it is not the highest good. Here is why.

In the first place, "good" is used in two senses — good in itself and good for somebody — so natures and faculties will be called good in two senses, and so will motions and processes. When these are called bad, it sometimes means bad in themselves, though for particular persons not bad but desirable; sometimes not even desirable for particular persons except now and then, for a little while, though not desirable in themselves. And some of them are not even pleasures at all, though they look like it — I mean the ones that involve pain and are taken as medicine, like the pleasures of the sick.

In the second place, since "good" applies both to activities and to faculties, the activities that restore us to our natural state are only incidentally pleasant.

But in the satisfaction of the animal appetites, what is active is not the part of our nature that feels the want, but the part that is in its normal state. For there are pleasures that involve no previous pain or appetite at all — the pleasures of philosophic study, for instance — where our nature is conscious of no want.

This is confirmed by the fact that while a natural want is being filled we do not delight in the same things as when it has been filled. Once the want is filled, we delight in things pleasant in themselves; while it is filling, in their opposites — in sharp and bitter things, none of which is pleasant by nature or pleasant in itself. So the pleasures these things give are not real pleasures either; for pleasures stand to one another as the things that produce them do.

Again, it does not follow, as some maintain, that there must be something better than pleasure, on the ground that the end is better than the process toward it. Pleasure is not a transition, and it does not even always involve one. It is an activity, and itself an end. Further, pleasure comes not from becoming something but from doing something. And lastly, the end is not always different from the process: that holds only where something is being brought to the completion of its nature.

For these reasons it is not right to call pleasure a felt transition. Call it rather an activity of our nature in its natural state, and in place of "felt" write "unimpeded."

Some people, it is true, think pleasure must be a transition precisely because it is good in the full sense — they suppose that activity is a transition. But activity is in fact something different.

To say that pleasures are bad because some pleasant things are unhealthy is like saying that health is bad because some healthy things are bad for moneymaking. Both are bad in that one respect, but that does not make them bad; even philosophic study is sometimes bad for your health.

As for pleasure being an obstacle to thinking: neither practical wisdom nor any other faculty is hindered by the pleasure proper to its own exercise — only by alien pleasures. The pleasure we take in study and learning makes us study and learn all the more.

That there is no art devoted to producing pleasure is only natural, for art never produces an activity; it only makes activity possible. (Though perfumery and cookery are usually counted arts of pleasure.)

As for the arguments that the self-controlled man avoids pleasure, that the man of practical wisdom pursues the painless life, and that children and animals pursue pleasure — one answer meets them all. We have already explained in what sense all pleasures are good in themselves and in what sense they are not. The pleasures that children and animals pursue, and whose corresponding pains the man of practical wisdom seeks to escape, are the pleasures that involve appetite and pain — that is, the bodily pleasures (for those are of this kind) — and the excesses of them, the deliberate pursuit of which is exactly what makes a man self-indulgent. These, then, are the pleasures the self-controlled man avoids. But he has pleasures of his own.

Chapter 13

Everyone agrees that pain is a bad thing and to be avoided: partly bad in itself, partly bad as somehow impeding activity. But the opposite of what is to be avoided — opposite in the very respect in which it is to be avoided and bad — is good. It follows that pleasure is a good thing. Speusippus tried to dodge this argument with an analogy: the greater, he said, is opposed both to the equal and to the less. But the dodge fails, for no one would say that pleasure is essentially a bad thing.

Moreover, there is no reason why a certain kind of pleasure should not be the highest good, even though some pleasures are bad — just as a certain kind of knowledge might be, though some kinds are bad. Indeed, perhaps we ought to put it more strongly: since every faculty admits of unimpeded activity, then whether happiness is the activity of all our faculties or of some one of them, that activity must be most desirable when it is unimpeded. But unimpeded activity is pleasure. So a certain kind of pleasure will be the highest good, even if most pleasures should turn out to be bad in themselves.

And this is why all men suppose the happy life is a pleasant one and weave pleasure into happiness — reasonably enough, for no activity is complete if it is impeded, and happiness we count among complete things. That is why the happy man needs the goods of the body and external goods and good fortune as well: so that his activity may not be impeded. As for those who say that a man on the rack, overwhelmed by misfortune, is happy so long as he is good — whether they know it or not, they are talking nonsense.

Because fortune is a necessary condition, some people take good fortune to be the same thing as happiness. It is not. Good fortune in excess actually becomes an impediment, and then perhaps no longer deserves the name; for good fortune is defined by its relation to happiness.

Again, the fact that all animals and all men pursue pleasure is some sign that it is in some way the highest good:

  A saying never wholly dies
  that many peoples share.

But since neither the nature of man nor the best development of his faculties is the same for all, or is thought to be, the pleasure men pursue is not always the same either — though all pursue pleasure. Yet perhaps they are in fact pursuing not the pleasure they think they pursue, and would say they pursue, but one and the same pleasure for all; for every being has something divine implanted in it by nature.

But the bodily pleasures have taken over the very name of pleasure, because they are the ones most often reached and the ones everybody shares. Being the only pleasures men know, they are supposed to be the only pleasures there are.

And it is plain that unless pleasure — that is, unimpeded activity — is good, we can no longer say that the happy man lives a pleasant life. Why should he need pleasure if it is not good? He might just as well live a painful life; for pain is neither bad nor good, if pleasure is neither — so why avoid it? The good man's life, then, would be no pleasanter than anyone else's, unless the activity of his faculties were pleasanter too.

Chapter 14

Those who grant that some pleasures — the noble ones — are highly desirable, but deny it of the bodily pleasures that are the self-indulgent man's territory, should look harder at those bodily pleasures. Why, if they are bad, are the opposite pains bad? For the opposite of bad is good. Shall we say the "necessary" pleasures are good only in the sense that whatever is not bad is good? Or that they are good up to a point?

Faculties and activities that cannot run to excess beyond what is good cannot yield excessive pleasure; those that can run to excess admit excessive pleasure too. Now, bodily goods do admit of excess, and the bad man is bad because he pursues the excess, not because he pursues the necessary pleasures — everyone takes some delight in food and drink and sex, but not everyone as he ought. With pain it is the reverse: the bad man does not merely avoid excessive pain, he avoids pain altogether. And this is quite consistent with pain being bad; for the opposite of excessive pleasure is not painful, except to the man who chases the excess.

But we ought to state not only the truth, but also the cause of the error; it helps to produce conviction. Once we see what would naturally make a false view look true, we believe the true one more readily. So we must say why the bodily pleasures seem more desirable.

First of all, then, bodily pleasure drives out pain. Because pain can be extreme, men pursue excessive pleasure — and bodily pleasure generally — as its antidote. These remedies are intense, and that is why they are pursued: they stand out in sharp contrast to the opposite pain.

(As we said before, there are two reasons pleasure has a bad name: some pleasures are the doings of a bad nature — bad from birth, as with an animal, or bad by habit, as with bad men; while the remedial pleasures imply want, and it is better to be in the natural state than to be on the way to it. These remedial pleasures are felt while a want is being filled up, and so they are only incidentally good.)

Again, bodily pleasures are pursued for their intensity by people who cannot enjoy anything else — some even work up a thirst on purpose. When the pleasures are harmless, we do not blame this; when they are harmful, the pursuit is bad. Such people simply have no other sources of enjoyment, and to many the neutral state is itself painful, because of their nature. For an animal is always laboring, as natural science teaches us — even seeing and hearing are labor and pain, it says; we have just grown used to them, as the saying goes. In youth, likewise, men are in a state resembling drunkenness, because they are growing — and youth is pleasant. Men of a melancholic nature, on the other hand, are always needing something to restore their balance; their bodies keep vexing them, thanks to their temperament, and they live in a state of violent desire. Now pain is driven out by the opposite pleasure — indeed by any pleasure, if it is strong enough. That is how such men come to be self-indulgent and bad.

But pleasures that have no antecedent pain do not admit of excess. These come from things that are pleasant by nature and not merely incidentally. By incidentally pleasant I mean the restoratives: the restoration happens only because the part of the system that remains healthy is somehow active, and so the restoration itself seems pleasant. By naturally pleasant I mean what stimulates the activity of a healthy system.

But no one thing can go on pleasing us without interruption, because our nature is not simple; there is a second element in us — this is what makes us mortal beings — so that whatever the one element does runs against the nature of the other, and when the two are in balance, what we are doing feels neither painful nor pleasant. If there were a being with a simple nature, the same activity would always be most pleasant to that being. This is why God enjoys forever one simple pleasure: for there is activity without movement as well as activity of movement, and there is truer pleasure in rest than in motion. Change is "the sweetest of all things," as the poet says, only because of a certain badness in us: just as it is the bad man who is most apt to change, so it is the bad nature that needs change — for it is neither simple nor good.

We have now considered self-restraint and weakness of will, and pleasure and pain — what each of them is, and in what way some of them are good and some bad. It remains to speak of friendship.
