Book VIII

(Part 2 of 2)

Chapter 9

It seems, as we said at the outset, that friendship and justice have the same field and arise on the same occasions. Every community, every association, gives some occasion for justice — and some occasion for friendship too. At any rate, people speak of their partners on a voyage or in a campaign as friends, and the same with partners in other associations. And just as far as the partnership extends, so far extends the friendship; for so far extends the justice as well.

Moreover, "friends' goods are common property," as the proverb says — and says rightly, for friendship implies community. Brothers and close comrades have everything in common; other friends have certain definite things in common, some more and some less — for friendships, too, differ in degree. And what justice requires differs in the same way. It does not demand the same from parents toward children as from brothers toward one another, nor the same from comrades as from fellow-citizens, and so on through the other kinds of friendship.

Injustice, too, takes different forms in these different relations, and it grows more serious as the friendship grows closer. It is a grosser wrong to rob a comrade than a fellow-citizen, to refuse help to a brother than to a stranger, to strike your father than to strike any other man. The claims of justice, in fact, naturally increase as friendship increases; the two cover the same ground and grow step for step together.

But all associations, all communities, seem to be — so to speak — parts of the political community, the association of citizens. For in every one of them, people join together with a view to some common interest, in pursuit of one or another of the things they need for life. But the association of citizens seems both to have been founded, and to endure, for the sake of the common interest as a whole; for this is what lawgivers aim at, and what serves the common interest of all is called just.

The other associations, then, aim at some particular advantage. Sailors work together for a successful voyage, with a view to making money or something of the kind; soldiers for a successful campaign, whether the further goal is riches, or victory, or the founding of a state; and so with the members of a tribe or a district. Other associations seem to aim at pleasure — people joining together for a feast or a club dinner, where the whole point is the food and the company. But all of these stand subordinate to the association of citizens, for that association aims not at the interest of the moment but at the interest of our whole life — even when its members hold festivals and gatherings on such occasions, honoring the gods and providing rest and amusement for themselves. For the ancient festivals and assemblies seem to have come after the harvest was gathered in — a kind of dedication of the firstfruits — since those were the seasons when people had the most leisure.

All associations, then, seem to be parts of the association of citizens; and the several kinds of friendship will correspond to the several kinds of association.

Chapter 10

Now, of constitutions there are three kinds, and an equal number of perverted forms — corruptions, so to speak, of the three. The true constitutions are kingly government and aristocracy; and third, there is a form of government based on a property assessment, which strictly ought to be called timocracy, though most people simply call it constitutional government.

Of these, kingly government is the best and timocracy the worst. The perversion of kingly government is tyranny. Both are monarchies, but there is a vast difference between them: the tyrant seeks his own interest, the king the interest of his subjects. For a man is not properly a king unless he is self-sufficient and supplied with every good thing in overflowing measure; such a man wants nothing more, so his aim will not be his own advantage but his subjects'. A king of any other character would be a mere king by lot.

Tyranny is the opposite of kingly rule, because the tyrant pursues his own good. And of tyranny it is quite obvious that it is the worst of all — for the opposite of the best must be the worst.

Kingly government degenerates into tyranny; for tyranny is monarchy gone bad, and the bad king becomes a tyrant.

Aristocracy degenerates into oligarchy through the vice of the rulers — who, instead of distributing public property and honors according to merit, take all or most of the good things for themselves, keep the offices always in the same hands, and set the greatest store by wealth. You then have a small number of bad men in power instead of the best men.

Lastly, timocracy degenerates into democracy — and indeed the two border closely on each other; for even timocracy is meant to be rule by the many, and everyone who meets the property qualification counts as equal.

Democracy is the least bad of the corrupt forms, for it departs only slightly from the constitution it corrupts.

These, then, are the changes to which the constitutions are most liable; for these are the smallest shifts, and the ones that meet the least resistance.

Likenesses of these forms of government — patterns of them, so to speak — can be found in families. The association of a father and his sons has the form of kingly rule, for the father cares for his children. That is why Homer addresses Zeus as father; for kingly government aims at being a fatherly government. In Persia, however, the relation of father to son is tyrannical, for fathers there use their sons as slaves. The relation of master to slave is tyrannical too, since it is the master's interest that it secures. But this seems a legitimate kind of tyranny, while the Persian kind seems wrong; for different beings require different kinds of rule.

The association of husband and wife seems to be aristocratic. The husband rules in proportion to his worth — that is, in the matters that are his province — and entrusts to his wife the matters that properly belong to her. But when the man lords it over everything, he perverts the relation into an oligarchic one; for then he takes rule where he has no title to it, and not only where he is the better. Sometimes, on the other hand, the wife rules, because she is an heiress. In such cases authority rests not on merit but on wealth and influence — just as in oligarchies.

The association of brothers resembles a timocracy, for they are equal except so far as they differ in age. That is why, if they differ very widely in age, their friendship can no longer be a brotherly one.

A democratic form of association is found chiefly in households that have no master — for there everyone stands on an equal footing — or where the head of the house is weak and everyone does as he likes.

Chapter 11

In each of these forms of government, friendship has a place exactly as far as justice does. The king shows his friendship for his subjects by the surpassing benefits he confers: being good, he does good to his subjects, and tends them with a view to their welfare as a shepherd tends his sheep — which is why Homer calls Agamemnon "shepherd of peoples."

The friendship of a father for his child is of the same kind, though the benefits conferred are greater still. For the father is the author of the child's very existence — which seems the greatest benefit of all — and of his nurture and education; and we credit these to our forefathers generally. Thus it is according to nature that fathers rule their children, forefathers their descendants, and kings their subjects.

These friendships involve the superiority of one side over the other; and that is why parents receive honor as well as service. What justice requires here is not the same on both sides, but what is proportionate to each party's worth — for that is the rule of friendship as well as of justice.

The friendship of husband and wife, again, is the same as the friendship found in an aristocracy: each benefits in proportion to merit, the better getting the greater good and each what is fitting — which is the rule of justice too.

The friendship of brothers resembles that of comrades, for they are equal and of like age — and people of that sort generally have the same feelings and the same character. The friendship in a timocracy is of this same type; for the citizens there mean to be equal and fair, so they take office in turn and share it equally, and their friendship follows the same rule.

In the corrupt forms, just as there is little room for justice, so there is little room for friendship — and least of all in the worst: in a tyranny there is little or no friendship. For where ruler and subject have nothing in common, there can be no friendship, just as there can be no justice — no more than between a workman and his tools, or the soul and the body, or master and slave. Tools, body, and slave are all benefited by those who use them; but our relations with inanimate things admit of no friendship and no justice — nor do our relations with a horse or an ox, nor with a slave as slave. For master and slave have nothing in common: the slave is a living tool, and the tool is a lifeless slave. As a slave, then, the master's relations with him admit of no friendship; but as a man, they may. For there seems to be room for some kind of justice between any man and any being that can share in law and contract — and if for justice, then for some kind of friendship too, just so far as the other deserves the name of man.

And so friendship and justice are found to some small extent even in tyrannies; but they are found to a greater extent in democracies than in any other of the corrupt forms, for there the citizens are equal and have many things in common.

Chapter 12

All friendship, as we have said, implies association; but we may set apart from the rest the friendship of kinsmen and that of comrades. The friendships of fellow-citizens, fellow-tribesmen, fellow-sailors, and the like look, by contrast, more like association pure and simple, for they seem to rest on a kind of compact. With these we might also class the friendship of host and guest.

The friendship of kinsmen seems to include several species, but all of them appear to depend on the friendship of parent and child. Parents love their children as part of themselves; children love their parents as the source of their being. But parents know their children better than the children know that these are their parents; and the one who gives life is more closely attached to what springs from him than the offspring is to its maker. For what proceeds from us belongs to us — as a tooth or a hair or anything of the sort belongs to its owner — but we do not belong to it at all, or belong to it in a lesser degree.

There is a difference in time as well: parents love their offspring from the moment of birth, but children come to love their parents only after time has passed, when they have acquired understanding, or at least perception.

These considerations also show why mothers love their children more than fathers do.

Parents, then, love their children as themselves — for what proceeds from us is, as it were, a second self, a self set apart — while children love their parents as the source of their being, and brothers love one another because they spring from the same source. Their common relation to that source makes an identity between them; hence the sayings "the same blood," "the same stock," and so on. They are, in a way, the same thing in separate persons.

Friendship between brothers is greatly furthered by being brought up together and by nearness in age; for those of the same age naturally take to one another, as the saying goes, and those who are used to one another naturally make comrades of one another — which is why the friendship of brothers comes to resemble the friendship of comrades.

Cousins and other kinsfolk are attached to one another for the same reason — namely, that they come of the same stock; and the attachment is closer or looser according as the founder of the family is nearer or more remote.

The friendship of children for their parents — like that of men for the gods — is friendship for what is good and superior to oneself: for the source of the greatest benefits, of life itself, of nurture, of education from birth onward.

Friendship of this kind brings more of both pleasure and profit than the friendship of strangers, in proportion as the life shared is greater.

The friendship of brothers has all the marks of the friendship of comrades, and has them in a greater degree — provided the brothers are good, and generally alike — inasmuch as they belong more to each other and have loved each other from birth; they are more alike in character, being of the same stock, brought up together, and educated alike; and they have had the longest and surest experience of one another.

In all the other friendships of kinship, the same elements will be found in proportion to the closeness of the tie.

The friendship of husband and wife seems to be natural; for human beings are by nature more inclined to join in couples than to form states — since the family is earlier than the state and more indispensable, and the propagation of the species is more fundamental to animal life. The other animals associate for this purpose alone; but husband and wife live together not merely to have children but to supply the needs of life. For their functions are divided and distinct from the start: they supply each other's wants, each contributing to the common stock. And so this kind of friendship is thought to bring both pleasure and profit with it. But it will rest on virtue too, if the two are good; for each has a virtue of their own, and each will delight in the goodness that answers it.

Children, moreover, seem to be a bond that knits husband and wife together — which is why childless unions dissolve more quickly. For children are a good that both have in common, and what people have in common holds them together.

To ask on what terms a man should live with his wife — and, in general, friend with friend — is the same as asking what justice requires in each case; for what is required of a man toward a friend is not what is required toward a stranger, a comrade, or a fellow-student.

Chapter 13

There are three kinds of friendship, as we said at the outset; and within each kind there are friendships between equals and friendships between unequals. Sometimes two equally good men become friends, sometimes a better man and a worse; and so with those who are pleasant to each other, and with those whose friendship aims at profit — sometimes their services are equal, sometimes not.

Now, those who are equal should establish equality by loving each other, and doing everything else, equally; those who are unequal should establish it by making what each renders proportionate to the other's greater or lesser merit.

But accusations and reproaches arise solely, or mostly, in friendships whose motive is profit — as we should expect. Those whose friendship rests on virtue are eager to do good to one another (for that is the office of virtue and of friendship), and between people who are rivals in that, no accusations or quarrels can arise. No one is embittered against a man who loves him and does him good; if he has any grace in him, he pays the service back with a like service. And the one who outdoes the other will not reproach his friend, since he is getting exactly what he desires — for what each desires is the good.

Nor do such quarrels readily arise in friendships whose motive is pleasure; for both get what they want at the same moment, if they delight in each other's company. And a man who accused his friend of not being agreeable would only make himself ridiculous, since he was under no compulsion to keep the company.

But the friendship whose motive is utility is fruitful in accusations. Since the parties use each other purely for their own advantage, each always wants the larger share, each thinks he has less than his due, and each reproaches the other for not doing as much for him as he needs and deserves — though in truth the one doing the service can never supply all that the other wants.

Now it seems that, just as the rules of justice are of two kinds — the unwritten, and those set down in law — so the friendship of utility is of two kinds: one moral, resting on character and trust, the other legal, resting on stated terms. And accusations arise most readily when the relation is understood in one sense at the beginning and in the other at the end.

The legal kind is the kind with specified conditions, and it has two forms. One is purely commercial, on the principle of cash on delivery; the other allows more time, but still stipulates a definite return for a definite service. In this second form what is owed is plain and cannot be disputed, but the delay in payment carries an element of friendliness — which is why in some states there is no legal recovery in such cases: it is held that a man who gives credit must take the consequences.

The moral kind has no specified conditions: a man gives a present, or whatever it may be, as one friend to another. But afterward he claims as much back, or more — treating what he gave not as a gift but as a loan. And since he wants to end the relation in a different spirit from the one in which he entered it, he will accuse the other. This happens because all men, or nearly all, wish for what is noble but choose what is profitable; and while it is noble to do a good turn without expecting a return, it is profitable to be on the receiving end.

In such cases, then, we should make an equivalent return for what we received, if we have the power — for we must not hold a man as a friend against his will. We should recognize that we made a mistake at the start and accepted a benefit from the wrong person: he was no friend and was not acting for the deed's own sake, so we should close the relation just as if we had received a service on stated terms. And what we should return is what we would have agreed to repay had we been able; if we had been unable, the giver himself would not have expected repayment. So we may fairly say: repay if you can.

But at the very outset we ought to consider carefully who is doing us the service, and on what understanding — so that we can accept it on that understanding, or else decline it.

It is a debatable question whether the return should be measured by the value of the service to the receiver or by its cost to the giver. Receivers tend to say that what they got was a small matter to their benefactors and could just as well have been had from others — talking the service down. Givers say the opposite: that it was the best they had, that it could not have been had from anyone else, and that it was given in a moment of danger or some other pressing need.

Perhaps we may settle it this way: if profit is the friendship's motive, the benefit to the receiver is the measure. He is the one who asked for the service, and the other renders it expecting an equal return; so the amount of the assistance is fixed by the extent of the benefit, and the receiver should pay back as much as he got — or even more, for that would be the nobler course.

In friendships based on virtue, on the other hand, accusations of this sort do not occur; there, the measure of the service would seem to be the giver's choice — the purpose behind the deed. For virtue and moral character lie in choice.

Chapter 14

Quarrels occur in unequal friendships too; for sometimes each party claims the larger share — and when that happens, the friendship dissolves. The better of the two thinks he ought to have more: "the larger share belongs to the good man," he says. The more useful of the two makes the same claim: "everyone agrees," he says, "that a useless person should not share equally; friendship turns into unpaid charity unless what each gets out of it is proportionate to what he puts in." Such people imagine that the same rule should hold in friendship as in a business partnership, where those who invest more take the larger share.

The needy man and the inferior man argue the opposite way: "it is precisely a good friend's business," they say, "to help you when you are in need. What is the use of being friends with a good man or a powerful man if you are to get nothing by it?"

It seems that both claims are right — that each ought to receive the larger share, but not of the same things. The superior should get more honor, the needy man more profit; for honor is the tribute due to virtue and to doing good, while need finds its proper relief in material gain.

This is recognized in constitutions as well. No honor is paid to the man who contributes nothing to the common stock of good; what is common is distributed among those who benefit the community, and honor is part of what is common. A man cannot make money off the community and expect to be honored by it too; no one is content to take the smaller share of everything. So to the man who spends his money on public objects we pay honor, and to the man whose services can be paid in money we pay money; for by giving each what is proportionate to his merit, equality is established and friendship preserved — as we said before.

The same principles, then, must govern the dealings of unequal individuals. He who is benefited by another — in his purse or in his character — must give honor in return, repaying with what it is in his power to give. For friendship asks for what is possible, not for what is strictly owed; what is owed is sometimes impossible to pay, as with the honor owed to the gods and to parents. No one could ever pay that debt in full; but the man who serves them as well as he is able is held to fulfill his obligation.

For this reason it would seem that a son may not disown his father, though a father may disown his son. A debtor must pay; and nothing a son can do will ever make full return for what he has received, so he remains forever in debt. But a creditor is free to release his debtor — and so a father is free to cast off his son. At the same time, it seems unlikely that anyone would ever actually disown a son unless the son were an utter scoundrel; for natural affection aside, it is only human not to push away the support a son would bring. The son, though — if he is a scoundrel — will look for ways to avoid helping his father, or at least will not be eager to; for most men are glad enough to receive benefits, but avoid conferring them as unprofitable.

So much, then, for these questions.
