Book IX

(Part 2 of 2)

Chapter 8

Here is another question people raise: ought we to love ourselves most, or someone else?

We criticize, it is said, those who love themselves most, and we call them "self-loving" as an insult. The bad man, it is thought, does everything with an eye to his own advantage — and the worse he is, the more he does so; hence the complaint that he never acts except for himself. The good man, by contrast, is supposed to act because the act is noble — and the better he is, the more the noble is his motive — and for his friend's sake, setting his own interest aside.

But this theory disagrees with the facts, and no wonder. For everyone grants that we ought to love best the man who is most truly a friend; and the truest friend is the one who, in wishing another well, wishes it for the other's own sake, even if no one will ever know. But all these marks of friendship — these and all the others that go into its definition — are found most of all in a man's relation to himself. We have already seen that all our friendly relations to others grow out of our relation to ourselves. And the proverbs all point the same way: "Friends have one soul," "Friends hold everything in common," "Equality makes friendship," "The knee is nearer than the shin." Every one of these holds above all of a man's relation to himself, for a man is his own best friend. So, it seems, he ought to love himself most of all.

Naturally people are puzzled about which side to take, since both have their appeal. Perhaps the right method with conflicting claims of this kind is first to pull them apart, and then to determine how far, and in what sense, each is true. So here: if we first find out what "self-loving" means in each claim, the difficulty may clear itself up.

Those who use "self-loving" as a reproach apply it to people who take more than their share of money, honors, and bodily pleasures. These are the things most men crave; they set their hearts on them as the best things in the world, which is why the competition for them is so fierce. Those who grab for more than their share of them are indulging their animal appetites and their passions generally — in a word, the irrational part of their nature. And most men are like this; that is how the word came by its bad sense — from the fact that most self-love is self-love of the bad kind. People who are self-loving in this way deserve the reproach.

That it really is to grabbers of this sort that most people apply the word is easy to show. If what a man always insisted on were that he, rather than anyone else, should do the just thing, or the self-controlled thing, or any other virtuous thing — if, in a word, he were always claiming the noble course for himself — no one would call him self-loving, and no one would blame him.

And yet such a man would seem to be the truer lover of self. At any rate, he assigns the noblest things to himself, the things most truly good; he gratifies the ruling part of himself and obeys it in everything. Just as the ruling part of a state, or of any other system, seems more than anything else to be the state or the system, so the ruling part of a man seems most truly to be the man himself. The man who loves and gratifies this part of himself is the truest lover of self.

Again, we call a man self-restrained or weak-willed according to whether his reason is or is not in command — implying that his reason is his self; and when a man has acted under the guidance of his reason, we say in the fullest sense that he did the deed himself, and did it willingly.

Clearly, then, this part of us is our self, or is most truly our self, and the good man loves it more than anyone else does. So he, above all men, will be self-loving — but in a different sense from the man we reproach, differing from him by the whole distance between living by reason and living by passion, between desiring the noble and desiring what looks profitable.

Those who care beyond other men for noble deeds are welcomed and praised by everyone. And if all men were competing with each other for the noble, each straining every nerve to act as nobly as possible, then the community would have everything it needs, and each man individually would have the greatest of all goods — for that is what virtue is.

The good man, therefore, ought to be self-loving: by doing what is noble he benefits himself and helps others at the same time. The bad man ought not to be: by following his passions, which are not good, he will injure both himself and his neighbors.

With the bad man, then, what he ought to do and what he does pull apart; with the good man, what he ought to do is exactly what he does — for reason always chooses what is best for itself, and the good man obeys his reason.

Again, it is quite true that the good man does much for his friends and for his country, and will even die for them if he must. He will throw away money, honors — in a word, all the goods men fight over — keeping the noble for himself. He would rather have one brief spell of intense joy than a long stretch of mild pleasure; one year of noble living than many years of the ordinary kind; one great and noble deed than many little ones. That, we may say, is what the man gets who gives his life for others: he chooses for himself something noble on a grand scale.

Such a man will hand over wealth to make his friend richer: the friend gets the money, but he gets the noble deed — so the greater good falls to him.

He acts the same way with honors and offices: he will give them all up to his friend, since that, to him, is noble and praiseworthy.

No wonder, then, that we count him good, when he chooses the noble above everything else.

He may even give up an opportunity for action to his friend: it can be nobler to be the cause of your friend's doing a deed than to do it yourself.

In everything for which he is praised, then, the good man plainly assigns the larger share of the noble to himself. In this sense, as we said, a man ought to be self-loving — but not in the sense in which most men are.

Chapter 9

Another disputed question: does the happy man need friends or not?

It is said that the blessed and self-sufficient have no need of friends. They are already stocked with good things; being self-sufficient, they need nothing more; and a friend — being another self — is there to supply what you cannot supply for yourself. Hence the line:

  When the god provides, what need of friends?

But it seems strange, while granting the happy man every good thing, to deny him friends — supposedly the greatest of all external goods.

Besides, if it is more the mark of a friend to confer benefits than to receive them, and if doing good to others is the mark of the good man and of virtue, and if it is nobler to benefit friends than strangers, then the good man will need friends to receive his benefits.

Hence the further question whether friends are more needed in prosperity or in adversity — the thought being that in adversity we need people to help us, and in prosperity people for us to help.

Again, it is surely absurd to make the happy man a hermit. No one would choose to have every good in the world on condition of having it alone; for man is a social being, built by nature to share his life with others. So the happy man must have this good too, since he has everything that is naturally good for man. And obviously it is better to spend one's days with friends and good men than with strangers and whoever happens along. The happy man, then, must have friends.

Then what do the people on the other side mean, and in what sense are they right? Is it that most men take "friends" to mean useful people? Friends of that sort the blessed man certainly will not need, since he already has everything good. Nor will he need — or will need only a little — the friendship based on pleasure: his life is pleasant already and requires no imported pleasure. Because he does not need those kinds of friends, people conclude that he does not need friends at all.

But that conclusion, I think, is false. We said at the outset that happiness is a certain activity, an exercise of our powers; and an activity plainly comes to be in time — it is not a possession, like property acquired once and for all. Now, if happiness consists in living and being active; if the good man's activity is good and pleasant in itself, as we said at the start; if the sense that a thing is our own is itself a source of pleasure; and if we can contemplate our neighbors better than ourselves, and their actions better than our own — then the actions of good men who are his friends are a pleasure to the good man, for they unite both marks of the naturally pleasant. The blessed man, therefore, will need friends of this kind, since he desires to contemplate actions that are good and that are his own — and the actions of a good man who is his friend are both.

Again, the happy man's life is supposed to be pleasant. But if he is solitary, life is hard for him: it is very difficult to keep continuously active all by yourself, and much easier in company and toward others. With friends, then, his activity will be more continuous — and it is pleasant in itself, which is just what the blessed man's life ought to be. For the good man, as good, delights in acts of virtue and is pained by acts of vice, exactly as a musician delights in good music and winces at bad.

Besides, as Theognis says, living with good men gives a kind of training in virtue.

But if we look a little deeper into the nature of things, a good friend appears to be desirable to the good man by nature. Here is the argument.

What is naturally good, we have already said, is good and pleasant in itself to the good man.

Now, life in animals is defined by the power of feeling; in man, by the power of feeling or thought. But a power points to its exercise, and the reality lies in the exercise. So life, in its full reality, seems to be feeling or thinking.

Life, again, is one of the things good and pleasant in themselves; for it is determinate — formed — and the formed belongs to the nature of the good. And what is naturally good is good to the good man; which is why life seems pleasant to everyone. (But we must not take as our sample a bad and corrupt life, or a life of pain; such a life is formless, as is everything in it. We shall try to throw some light on the nature of pain later on.)

Life itself, then, is good and pleasant — as we can also see from the fact that everyone desires it, and the good and blessed most of all; for life is most desirable to them, and their life is the most blessed.

Now, he who sees is aware that he sees; he who hears is aware that he hears; he who walks is aware that he walks. Whatever we do, something in us perceives that we are active; so whenever we feel or think, we are conscious that we feel or think.

But to be conscious that we feel or think is to be conscious that we exist; for our existence, we found, is feeling or thinking.

And consciousness of life is pleasant in itself; for life is naturally good, and to be conscious that a good thing is present is pleasant.

Life, then, is desirable, and most of all desirable to the good man, because his existence is good and pleasant to him: the consciousness of what is good in itself gives him joy.

But the good man stands to his friend as he stands to himself — for his friend is another self. So, just as his own existence is desirable to each man, his friend's existence is desirable too, in the same way or nearly so.

Now, existence, we found, is desirable because of the consciousness that one's self is good — and such consciousness is pleasant in itself.

So the good man needs to be conscious of his friend's existence as well; and this consciousness comes from living together and sharing talk and thought. That, surely, is what "living together" means when we say it of human beings — not grazing in the same field, which is what it means when we say it of cattle.

Put it all together, then. If his own existence is desirable in itself to the good man, being naturally good and pleasant; and if his friend's existence is desirable to him in nearly the same way — then a friend is one of the things desirable for him. But what is desirable for him he ought to have, or else he is incomplete at just that point. Our conclusion, therefore: the man who is to be happy must have good friends.

Chapter 10

Should we make as many friends as possible? Or — as with guest-friends, where we approve the saying "neither a host of guests nor yet none" — is it best in friendship too neither to be friendless nor to have too many friends?

For friends chosen with an eye to usefulness, the saying fits perfectly. Repaying the services of a crowd is troublesome, and life is simply not long enough to do it. More useful friends than one's own life requires are superfluous, and a hindrance to living nobly; so we have no need of them.

Of friends chosen for pleasure, again, a few are enough — as a little sweetening is enough in our diet.

But good men — should we make as many of them our friends as we can, or is there a limit to the size of a circle of friends, as there is to the size of a state? Ten men do not make a state, and a hundred thousand make something that is no longer a state. The right number of citizens is perhaps not one fixed figure, but any number within certain limits. So too with friends there is a limit, and it is, we may say, the largest number one can live with — for living together, as we saw, is one of the most essential marks of friendship, and it is quite plainly impossible to live with a great many people and spread yourself among them all.

Moreover, one's friends must be friends with one another if they are all to spend their days together; and among many, this is hard to arrange.

Again, it becomes hard to share properly in the joys and sorrows of many; you are likely to find yourself called on to rejoice with one and grieve with another at the same moment. Perhaps, then, the best plan is not to collect as many friends as possible, but as many as suffice for a life in common; indeed, an intense friendship with a great number seems impossible.

For the same reason, one cannot be in love with several people at once: erotic love is a sort of superlative friendship, and that is possible only toward one person — just as intense friendship is possible only toward a few.

And this is what we actually find. People are not bound together in crowds by the sort of friendship comrades have; the friendships the poets celebrate are friendships of two. The man with a host of friends, who greets everyone like a brother, seems to be really friends with no one — except in the way fellow-citizens are friends. He is the man we call obsequious.

As fellow-citizens, it is true, one can be friends with a great many people without being obsequious — being, in fact, a genuinely good man. But the friendship that rests on virtue and on the friend's own self cannot be felt for many; we should be well content to find even a few friends of that kind.

Chapter 11

Is it in prosperity or in adversity that we need friends more? We turn to them in both: in misfortune we need help; in prosperity we need people to live with and people to do good to — for we wish to do good.

In adversity, then, the need is more pressing, and what we need there are useful friends. But friendship is a nobler thing in prosperity, and there we seek out good men as friends; for it is more desirable to do good to men like that and to spend our days in their company.

The mere presence of friends is sweet, even in misfortune; our grief is lightened when our friends share it. One might ask whether they literally take up part of it, as of a weight, or whether it is rather that their presence, which is sweet, and the consciousness of their sympathy make the grief smaller. Whether this or something else is the cause of the relief, we need not pursue; the fact, at any rate, is as we said.

But their presence seems to be a mixed thing. On the one hand, the very sight of friends is pleasant, especially in adversity, and does something to ease the grief; for a friend, if he has tact, can comfort us greatly both by his face and by his words — he knows our character, and what pleases us and what pains us. On the other hand, to see a friend grieving over our misfortunes is itself painful, for no one likes being a cause of sorrow to his friends. That is why a man of firm nature is careful not to pass his grief along to his friends: he shrinks from the pain it would give them, unless the relief to himself far outweighs it; and in general he does not allow others to join in his laments, since he is not given to lamenting himself. Weak women, and men who resemble them, delight in people who wail along with them, and love them as friends and fellow-sufferers. But plainly, in everything, our model must be the better man.

In prosperity, again, the presence of friends not only makes the time pass pleasantly but brings with it the consciousness that our friends are pleased at our good fortune. Hence, it would seem, we should be eager to invite our friends to share our prosperity — for readiness to confer benefits is noble — but slow to summon them into our adversity, since we ought to give others as small a share of our evils as possible; whence the saying, "That I suffer is suffering enough." We should be least reluctant to call them in when they can relieve us greatly at little trouble to themselves.

Conversely, when our friends are in trouble, the right course, I think, is to go to them unsummoned and with a will; for it is a friend's part to serve his friend, above all when the friend is in need and has not asked — then it is nobler and pleasanter for both. When they prosper, we should go readily to help in their affairs (for this too is one of the uses of a friend), but not so readily to take a share of their good things; for eagerness to receive benefits is not a noble thing. Still, we must take care that our refusal does not come across as ungracious, as sometimes happens.

The presence of friends, then, in conclusion, is plainly desirable in all circumstances.

Chapter 12

Lovers delight in the sight of each other above everything, and would keep that sense sooner than all the rest, because love owes its being and its origin to it more than to any other. In just the same way, we may venture to say, friends desire nothing so much as to live together. For friendship is, at bottom, community; and a man stands to his friend as he stands to himself. Now, the consciousness of his own existence is desirable to him; so the same consciousness of his friend's existence is desirable too; and it is in a life in common that this consciousness becomes active; so it is natural that friends aim at a life in common.

And whatever existence means for each man — whatever it is that makes life worth choosing for him — in that he wishes to pass his time with his friends. So some drink together, some dice together, others train together, or hunt together, or do philosophy together: each group spending its days in the thing it loves best of everything in life. For, wishing to live in common with their friends, they do the things, and share in the things, which for them make up a life in common.

So the friendship of bad men turns out to be a positively bad thing. Having no stability of character, they confirm each other in pursuits that are not good, and they become positively bad as each grows more like the other. But the friendship of good men is good, and it grows with their companionship. They even seem to become better as they are active together and correct each other's faults; for each molds himself on what he admires in the other — whence the line,

  From good men you will learn good things.

So much, then, for friendship. Our next task is to consider pleasure.
