Preface to the Second Edition

The principal changes made in this Second Edition of Pillow-Problems are these.

(1) After the numeral that precedes each Question, Answer or Solution, references are given to the pages where the corresponding matter may be found.

(2) Some of the Solutions have been rearranged, and duplicate diagrams inserted, so that every stretch of text has its illustrative diagram visible alongside it, and the reader is spared the trouble — and the strain on his temper — of turning a leaf backwards and forwards while looking from one to the other.

(3) In the title of the book, the words "sleepless nights" have been replaced by "wakeful hours".

This last change has been made to set at rest the anxiety of kind friends who have written to me expressing their sympathy in my broken-down state of health, believing that I suffer from chronic insomnia, and that it is as a remedy for that exhausting complaint that I have recommended mathematical calculation.

The title was not, I fear, wisely chosen, and it certainly was liable to suggest a meaning I never intended: namely that my nights are very often wholly sleepless. That is by no means the case. I have never suffered from insomnia; and the over-wakeful hours I have had to spend at night have often been simply the result of the over-sleepy hours I had spent during the preceding evening! Nor have I suggested mathematical calculation as a remedy for wakefulness, but as a remedy for the harassing thoughts that are apt to invade a wholly-unoccupied mind. I hope the new title will express my meaning more clearly.

To put the matter logically: the dilemma my friends suppose me to be in has for its two horns the enduring of a sleepless night, and the taking of some recipe for inducing sleep. Now so far as my experience goes, no such recipe has any effect unless you are sleepy already — and mathematical calculation would be more likely to delay the coming of sleep than to hasten it.

The real dilemma I have had to face is this. Given that the brain is in so wakeful a condition that, do what I will, I am certain to stay awake for the next hour or so, I must choose between two courses: either to submit to the fruitless self-torture of going over some worrying topic again and again, or else to set myself some topic absorbing enough to keep the worry at bay. A mathematical problem is, for me, such a topic; and it is a benefit even if it lengthens the wakeful period a little. I believe an hour of calculation is much better for me than half an hour of worry.

The reader will, I think, be interested to see a curiously illogical solution that has been proposed, by a correspondent of the Educational Times, for Problem 61: "Prove that, if any 3 Numbers be taken, which cannot be arranged in A.P., and whose sum is a multiple of 3, the sum of their squares is also the sum of another set of 3 squares, the 2 sets having no common term."

The proposed solution runs as follows.

"Let 3m, 21m, 30m be the three Numbers; then

	3m + 21m + 30m = 3 × 18m.

Also (3m)² + (21m)² + (30m)² = (6m)² + (15m)² + (33m)²

= (5m)² + (13m)² + (34m)² = (10m)² + (17m)² + (31m)²

= (14m)² + (23m)² + (25m)²."

Now if we write "α" for the property "which cannot be arranged in A.P., and whose sum is a multiple of 3", and "β" for the property "the sum of whose squares is also the sum of another set of 3 squares, the 2 sets having no common term", we see that all this writer has managed to prove is that certain selected Numbers which have property α also have property β. But that does not prove my Theorem, which is that any Numbers whatever that have property α also have property β. If his argument were set out as a syllogism, it would be found to assume a quite untenable Major Premiss: "that which is true of certain selected Numbers which have property α is true of any Numbers whatever which have property α."

C. L. D.

Christ Church, Oxford.
September, 1893.
