Introduction

Nearly all of the following seventy-two Problems are genuine "Pillow-Problems", having been solved in the head while lying awake at night. (I have put the exact dates of some of them on record.) No. 37 and one or two others belong to the daylight, having been solved on a solitary walk; but every one of them was worked out to the very end before any diagram was drawn or a single word of the solution written down. I generally wrote down the answer first of all, and afterwards the question and its solution. In No. 70, for instance, the very first words I wrote down were these: "(1) down back-edge; up again; down again; and so on; (2) about 0.7 of the way down the back-edge; (3) about 18° 18′; (4) about 14°." Those answers are not quite correct; but at least they are genuine, being the results of mental work only. "A poor thing, Sir, but mine own!"

My motive for publishing these Problems, with the solutions I worked out in my head, is most certainly not any wish to display powers of mental calculation. Mine, I feel sure, are nothing out of the way, and I have no doubt there are many mathematicians who could produce much shorter and better solutions mentally. It is not for such people that I intend my little book, but rather for the much larger class of ordinary mathematicians who have perhaps never tried this resource when they needed something to occupy the mind, and who will, I hope, be encouraged by seeing what can be done after a little practice by a man of average mathematical powers, and will try the experiment for themselves, and find in it as much benefit and comfort as I have.

The word "comfort" may perhaps sound out of place in connection with so entirely intellectual an occupation; but I think it will come home to many who know what it is to be haunted by some worrying subject of thought that no effort of will can banish. Again and again I have said to myself on lying down at night, after a day embittered by some vexatious business, "I will not think of it any more! I have gone through it all, thoroughly. It can do no good whatever to go through it again. I will think of something else!" And ten minutes later I have found myself once more in the very thick of the miserable business, torturing myself to no purpose with all the old troubles.

Now it is not possible — and here, I think, all psychologists will agree with me — to carry out by any effort of will the resolution "I will not think of such-and-such a thing." (Witness the common trick played on a child, of saying "I'll give you a penny if you'll stand in that corner for five minutes and not once think of strawberry-jam." No human child ever yet won that tempting wager.) But it is possible — as I am most thankful to know — to carry out the resolution "I will think of such-and-such a thing." Once fasten the attention on a subject so chosen, and you will find that the worrying subject you want to be rid of is practically annulled. It may come back from time to time, just looking in at the door, so to speak; but it will find itself so coldly received, and get so little attention paid to it, that after a while it will cease to be any worry at all.

Perhaps I may venture for a moment to use a more serious tone, and to point out that there are mental troubles much worse than mere worry, for which an absorbing subject of thought may serve as a remedy. There are sceptical thoughts, which seem for the moment to uproot the firmest faith; there are blasphemous thoughts, which dart unbidden into the most reverent souls; there are unholy thoughts, which torture, with their hateful presence, the fancy that would fain be pure. Against all of these, some real mental work is a most helpful ally. That "unclean spirit" of the parable, who brought back with him seven others more wicked than himself, only did so because he found the chamber "swept and garnished" and its owner sitting with folded hands. Had he found it all alive with the busy hum of active work, there would have been scant welcome for him and his seven.

My purpose — to give this encouragement to others — would not have been so well served had I allowed myself, in writing out my solutions, to improve on the work done in my head. It seemed to me far more important to set down what had actually been done in the head than to supply shorter or neater solutions, which would perhaps be much harder to manage without paper. A long multiplication, for example — say the multiplying together of two numbers of 7 digits — is no doubt best done on paper by beginning at the units end, writing out 7 rows of figures, and adding up the columns in the usual way. But it would be very difficult indeed, and to me quite impossible, to do such a thing in the head. The only chance seems to be to begin with the millions and get them properly grouped, then the hundred-thousands, adding the result to the previous one, and so on. Very often it seems to happen that the easiest mental process looks decidedly long and roundabout once it is committed to paper.

When I first tried this plan, easy geometrical problems were all I could manage; and even in those I had to pause from time to time in order to redraw the diagram, which would persist in getting rubbed out. Algebraic problems I avoided at first, because of the provoking fact that if one single coefficient escaped the memory there was nothing for it but to begin the whole calculation again. But I soon got over both difficulties, and found I could remember fairly large numerical coefficients, and could hold fairly complex diagrams in the mind's eye — even to the point of finding my way about from one part of a diagram to another. The lettering of the diagrams proved such a troublesome thing to keep in the memory that I almost gave it up, and learned to recognise Points by their position alone. In my manuscript of No. 53 I find this memorandum:

"I had never set myself this Problem before the week ending Ap. 6, 1889. I tried it, two or three nights, lying awake; and finally worked it out on the night of Ap. 6/7. All the conclusions were worked out mentally before any use was made of pen and paper. While working it, I did not give names to any Points, except A, B, C, and P: I merely thought of them by their positions (e.g. 'the foot of the perpendicular from P on BC')."

If any of my readers should feel inclined to reproach me with having worked too steadily in the region of the commonplace, and with never having ventured off the beaten track, I can point proudly to my one Problem in "Transcendental Probabilities" — a subject in which, I believe, very little has yet been done by even the most enterprising of mathematical explorers. To the casual reader it may seem abnormal, and even paradoxical; but I would have such a reader ask himself candidly the question "Is not Life itself a Paradox?"

To give the Reader some idea of how these Problems are put together, I will give the biography of No. 63. The history of one is, to a great extent, the history of all.

It was begun during the night of Sept. 3/4, 1890, and finished during the following night. The idea had occurred to me a short time before that something interesting might be found in the subject of what I may call "partially-regular" Solids. The regular Solids are provokingly few in number, and it would be hopeless to find any question connected with them that has not already been exhaustively analysed; some of the partially-regular ones too (rhomboidal crystals, for instance) have probably had the same treatment. But there seemed to be room for inventing other such Solids.

Accordingly I devised a Solid enclosed above and below by 2 equal and parallel Squares, their centres in the same vertical line, and the upper one twisted round so that its sides ran parallel to the diagonals of the lower Square. Then I imagined the upper one raised until its corners formed the vertices of 4 equilateral Triangles whose bases were the sides of the lower one. The Solid so obtained was plainly enclosed by 2 Squares and 8 equilateral Triangles, and the Problem I set myself was to find its Volume.

There was no great difficulty in proving that the distance between the 2 Squares, taking each side as equal to 2, was 2^(3/4). But when I looked about for some trigonometrical method of calculating the Volume, despair soon seized on me. A calculable Prism could be cut out of the middle of the Solid, I saw; but the outlying projections completely baffled me. After a while the happy idea occurred to me of trying algebraic geometry, and treating each facet as the base of a Pyramid with its vertex at the centre of the Solid, which I decided to take as the Origin. I saw at once that I could calculate the coordinates of all the vertical Points, from those get equations to the Planes containing the facets, and from those calculate their distances from the Origin, which would be the altitudes of the Pyramids. It was evident too that one sample Pyramid would do. I worked out a value for the Volume that first night; but the thing got into a tangle, and I felt pretty sure I had it wrong.

The next night I began again and worked it all through from the beginning. In the morning the answer was clear in my memory, and I wrote it down at once, and did not write out the Problem and its solution until later in the day, when I was well pleased to find the written proof confirm the result I had reached in the hours of darkness.

It is not, perhaps, much to be wondered at that when these Problems came to be rewritten and arranged for publication, a good many mistakes were discovered. Some were so bad as quite to spoil the solutions they occurred in, and those Problems I have left out altogether. The others I have corrected in the solutions as given in Chapter III; but so that I may not be credited with an accuracy as a computer which I am well aware I do not possess, I append a list of them here.

In No. 7, in the denominator "2 sin A", I forgot the "2".

In No. 10, I failed to notice that the 3 coins might also be a half-crown and 2 shillings.

In No. 13, in the last line but one, I put "2bc·ca" instead of "4bc·ca".

In No. 32, I brought out the arithmetical value as 358520 instead of 358550.

In No. 38, I got the decimal wrong, making it 0.476 instead of 0.478, and so brought out the answer as 0.042 instead of 0.044.

In No. 44, I said the denominator would be of the form (10ⁿ − 1)·10^m. This last factor is superfluous: that is, m = 0.

In No. 50, I made a mistake near the end, bringing out 41/108 instead of 50/108.

In No. 55, I put "tan" for "sin".

In No. 57, in the last paragraph, I replaced the denominator "a sin B sin C" by what I imagined to be its equivalent, "2m". Apparently I was under the delusion that "a sin B sin C" was the same thing as "sin A·bc"!

In No. 70, section (3), I forgot to add in the 0.45, thus making the answer half a degree wrong; and in section (4) I forgot to add in the 0.53, thus again making the answer half a degree wrong.

Let me in conclusion acknowledge, with gratitude, the valuable help I have had from Mr. F. G. Brabant, M.A., of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, who has gone through my proofs most patiently and carefully, working out each result independently, and has so detected many mistakes that had escaped my notice. He has also supplied, for No. 59, a much neater answer than mine: abc/3·√(cos A cos B cos C).

Other mistakes may perchance have eluded us both, and await the penetrating eye of some critical reader — to whom the joy of discovery, and the intellectual superiority he will thereby recognise in himself over the author of this little book, will, I hope, repay to some extent the time and trouble its perusal may have cost him.

C. L. D.

Christ Church, Oxford.
May, 1893.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] In the trigonometrical Problems, I have used the symbols ⫙ and ⌓ to stand for the words "sine" and "cosine".
