Front Matter

Preface

Which came first, matter or force? If we think about that question, we find we are unable to conceive of matter without force, or of force without matter. When God created the elements of which the earth is composed, He created certain wondrous forces which are set free, and become evident, when matter acts upon matter. All these forces, for all their differences, have much in common; and if one of them is set free it will immediately try to free its companions. So heat will let us draw out light, electricity, magnetism and chemical action; and chemical action will bring out light, electricity and heat. In this way we find that all the forces in nature tend to form mutually dependent systems; and as the motion of one star affects another, so a force in action liberates and makes evident forces that were previously at rest.

We say at rest — and yet the phrase is almost without meaning in the universe. Where do we find tranquillity? The sea, the seat of animal, vegetable and mineral change, is at war with the land, and the air lends itself to the struggle. The globe, the scene of perpetual internal change, is as a whole acting on the other planets of our system and being acted on by them; and the system itself is changing its place in space under the influence of a known force springing from an unknown centre.

For many years the English public had the privilege of listening to Professor Faraday's discourses and speculations at the Royal Institution on matter and forces; and it is not too much to say that no lecturer on physical science since the time of Sir Humphry Davy was ever listened to with more delight. The pleasure everyone took in Faraday's expositions was of a somewhat different kind from that produced by any other man of science whose lectures we have attended. It came partly from his extreme dexterity as an operator. With him there was no risk of apologies for an unsuccessful experiment — no hanging fire in the middle of a series of brilliant demonstrations, with that sinking feeling akin to the pain an audience feels at a false note from a singer. It was all a sparkling stream of eloquence and experimental illustration. We would have defied any chemist who loved his science, however often he might have performed an experiment himself, to feel uninterested watching Faraday do it.

The present publication has one or two points of interest. In the first place, the lectures were especially intended for young people, and are therefore as free of technicalities as possible. In the second place, they are printed as they were spoken, word for word and letter for letter. A careful and skilful reporter took them down, and the manuscript deciphered from his notes was afterwards corrected with great care by the editor, as regards any scientific points that were not clear to the shorthand writer. So whatever is missing arises solely from the impossibility — alas — of conveying the manner of the lecturer as well as his matter.

May the readers of these lectures derive one-tenth of the pleasure and instruction from reading them that they gave to those who had the happiness of hearing them.

W. Crookes.
