Lecture One: The Force of Gravitation

(Part 1 of 2)

It grieves me very much to think that I may have caused a disturbance in your Christmas arrangements, for nothing is more satisfying to my mind than to do what I have undertaken to do. But such things are not always left in our own power, and we must submit to circumstances as they are appointed.

I will do my best today, and I must ask you to bear with me if I am unable to give you more than a few words. As a substitute I shall try to make the illustrations of what I am attempting to say as full as possible; and if by the end of this lecture we find we are justified in going on with them — thinking that next week my strength may be greater — then, with your permission, we will take whatever course you think fit, either to continue or to stop. And although I feel much weakened at present by the pressure of illness upon me (a mere cold), both in ease of expression and in clearness of thought, I shall claim here, as I always have on these occasions, the right of addressing myself to the younger members of the audience. And for that purpose — unfitted as it may seem for an elderly and infirm man to do it — I shall return to second childhood and become, as it were, young again among the young.

Editor's note: The opening lecture was twice postponed on account of Dr. Faraday's illness.

Let us consider for a little while how wonderfully we stand upon this world. Here we are born, and bred, and live; and yet we look at these things with almost no wonder at all about the way in which it all happens. So little do we wonder, in fact, that we are never taken by surprise. I really believe that to a young person of ten, or fifteen, or twenty, the first sight of a waterfall or a mountain would cause more surprise than he has ever felt about the means of his own existence — how he came here, how he lives, by what means he stands upright, and by what means he moves about from place to place.

So we come into this world, we live, and we depart from it without our thoughts being specifically called to consider how all this takes place. And were it not for the efforts of a few inquiring minds who have looked into these things, and worked out the beautiful laws and conditions by which we live and stand upon the earth, we should hardly be aware that there was anything wonderful about it. These inquiries have occupied scientific men from the earliest days, when they first began to find out the laws by which we grow and exist and enjoy ourselves, right up to the present time; and they have shown us that all of it comes about through the existence of certain forces, or abilities to do things, or powers — powers so common that nothing could be commoner. For nothing is commoner than the wonderful powers that allow us to stand upright; they are essential to our existence every moment of our lives.

My purpose today is to make you acquainted with some of these powers — not the vital ones, but some of the more elementary, what we call physical powers. And at the outset, what can I do to bring to your minds a notion of exactly what I mean by the word power, or force?

Suppose I take this sheet of paper and stand it upright on one edge, resting against a support in front of me, as the roughest possible illustration of something to be disturbed. Suppose I then pull this piece of string attached to it. I pull the paper over. I have therefore brought into use a power of doing so — the power of my hand, carried along this string in a way which is very remarkable when we come to analyse it; and it is by these powers acting together (for there are several powers employed here) that I pull the paper over. Again, if I give it a push on the other side, I bring a power into play, but a very different exertion of power from the first.

Or take this piece of shellac [a stick of shellac about twelve inches long and an inch and a half thick] and let me rub it with flannel and hold it an inch or so in front of the upper part of this upright sheet. The paper immediately moves towards the shellac; and by now drawing the shellac away, the paper falls over without having been touched by anything at all. You see, in the first demonstration I produced an effect than which nothing could be commoner; now I pull it over not by the string or the pull of my hand, but by some action in the shellac. The shellac, then, has a power by which it acts on the sheet of paper. And as an illustration of yet another kind of power, I might use gunpowder to throw it over.

Now, I want you to try to grasp that when I speak of a power or a force, I am speaking of the thing I have just used to pull this piece of paper over. I will not burden you with the name of that power at present, but it is clear there was something in the shellac which acted by attraction and pulled the paper over. That, then, is one of the things we call a power, or a force; and you will now be able to recognise it as such in whatever form I show it to you.

We must not suppose there are a great many different powers. On the contrary, it is wonderful to think how few are the powers by which all the phenomena of nature are governed. There is an illustration of another kind of power in that lamp: the power of heat — a power of doing something, but not the same power as the one that pulled the paper over. And so, by degrees, we find there are certain other powers, not many, in the various bodies around us. Beginning with the simplest experiments of pushing and pulling, I shall gradually go on to distinguish these powers from one another, and to compare the ways in which they combine.

This world we stand upon — and we have not much need to travel out of the world for illustrations of our subject, though the mind of man is not confined as the matter of his body is, and so he may travel outwards, and does; for wherever his sight can pierce, there his observations can penetrate — this world is very nearly a round globe, with its surface arranged rather like the terrestrial globe here beside me. So much is land and so much is water, and by looking at it here we see in a sort of map or picture how the world is formed on its surface. Then, when we come to examine further, I refer you to this sectional diagram of the geological strata of the earth, which gives a more elaborate view of what lies beneath the surface of our globe.

And when we dig into it or examine it, as man does for his own instruction and advantage in a variety of ways, we see that it is made up of different kinds of matter, subject to very few powers, and all arranged in this strange and wonderful way which gives man a history — and such a history — as to what there is in those veins, in those rocks, the ores, the water springs, the atmosphere around, and all the varieties of material substance held together by forces in one great mass eight thousand miles across. The mind is overwhelmed in contemplating the wonderful history told by these strata, some of which are as fine and thin as sheets of paper, all formed one after another by the forces I have spoken of.

Now I shall try to help your attention by directing our thoughts today to one kind of power. You see what I mean by the term matter: any of these things I can take hold of with my hand, or in a bag — for I may take hold of the air by shutting it up in a bag. They are all portions of matter, and it is with these we have to deal at present, generally or particularly as I may need them to illustrate my subject.

Here is the sort of matter we call water. There it is ice [pointing to a block of ice on the table]; there it is water [pointing to water boiling in a flask]; and here it is vapour — you can see it issuing from the top of the flask. Do not suppose that the ice and the water are two entirely different things, or that the steam rising in bubbles and going up as vapour is absolutely different from the liquid water. It may differ in some particulars, having to do with the amounts of power it contains; but it is the same, nevertheless, as the great ocean of water round our globe. I use it here for the sake of illustration, because if we look into it we shall find it supplies us with examples of all the powers I shall have to refer to.

For instance, here is water, and it is heavy. But let us examine it with regard to the amount of its heaviness, or its gravity. In front of me is a little glass vessel and a pair of scales [nearly balanced scales, one of which held a half-pint glass vessel], and the glass vessel is at present the lighter of the two. But if I take some water and pour it in, you see that side of the scales goes down at once. That shows you — using ordinary language, which I shall not assume you have so far applied very strictly — that it is heavy. And if I now put this extra weight into the opposite scale, I should not wonder if this vessel will hold water enough to weigh it down. [The lecturer poured more water into the jar, which again went down.]

Why do I hold the bottle above the vessel to pour the water into it? You will say it is because experience has taught me it is necessary. I do it for a better reason: because it is a law of nature that the water should fall towards the earth, and so the very means I use to get the water into the vessel are the means that will carry the whole body of water down. That power is what we call gravity; and there [pointing to the scales] you see a good deal of water gravitating towards the earth.

Now here [showing a small piece of platinum] is another thing which gravitates towards the earth as much as all that water does. See how little there is of it — that little thing is heavier than all that water [placing the metal in the scale opposite the water]. What a wonderful thing it is to see that it takes so much water as that, a half-pint vessel full, to fall towards the earth, compared with this little mass of substance I have here. And again, if I take this metal [a bar of aluminium about eight times the bulk of the platinum], we find the water will balance that as well as it balanced the platinum. So at the very outset we get an example of what we want to understand by the words force or power.

Editor's note: Platinum, with one exception, the heaviest body known, is 21½ times heavier than water.

Editor's note: Aluminium is 2½ times heavier than water.

I have spoken of water, and first of all of its property of falling downwards. You know very well how the oceans surround the globe, how they lie round its surface, giving roundness to it, clothing it like a garment. But besides that, water has other properties. Here, for instance, is some quicklime; and if I add some water to it, you will find another power, another property, in the water. It is very hot now, it is steaming up, and I could perhaps light phosphorus or a match with it. Now, that could not happen without a force in the water to produce the result; but that force is entirely distinct from its power of falling to the earth.

Again, here is another substance [some anhydrous sulphate of copper] which will illustrate another kind of power. [The lecturer here poured some water over the white sulphate of copper, which immediately turned blue, giving off considerable heat at the same time.] Here is the same water with a substance that heats nearly as much as the lime does, but see how differently. Indeed, the heat in the case of the lime is so great that it is sometimes enough — as you see here — to set wood on fire. That explains something we have all heard of: barges loaded with quicklime catching fire in the middle of the river, because of this power of heat brought into play by water leaking into the barge. You see how strangely different the subjects for our consideration become when we come to think these matters over: the power of heat given off by acting on lime with water, and the power water has of turning this salt of copper from white to blue.

Editor's note: Power or property in water. This power — the heat by which the water is kept in a fluid state — is said, under ordinary circumstances, to be latent, or insensible. When, however, the water changes its form and, by uniting with the lime or the sulphate of copper, becomes solid, the heat which kept it in a liquid state is given off.

Editor's note: Anhydrous sulphate of copper: sulphate of copper deprived of its water of crystallisation. To obtain it, the blue sulphate is calcined in an earthen crucible.

I want you now to understand the nature of the simplest exertion of this power of matter called weight, or gravity. Bodies are heavy — you saw that with the water when I put it in the balance. Here I have what we call a weight [an iron half hundredweight]: a thing called a weight because in it that power of pressing downwards is used especially for the purpose of weighing. And I have here one of these little inflated rubber bladders, which are very beautiful although very common — most beautiful things are common. I am going to put the weight on it, to give you a sort of illustration of the downward pressure of the iron and of the power the air has of resisting that pressure. It may burst, but we must try to avoid that. [During the last few remarks the lecturer had succeeded in getting the half hundredweight to rest quietly on the inflated rubber ball, which had consequently taken a shape very much like a flat cheese with rounded edges.]

There you see a bubble of air carrying half a hundredweight; and you must conceive for yourselves what a wonderful power there must be to pull this weight downwards, and to sink it like that into the ball of air.

[Figure 1: A pendulum. The solid line shows the string at one end of the swing and the dotted line at the other; the ball is higher at both ends of its journey than at the lowest point in the middle, and is always trying to fall to that lowest point.]

Let me now give you another illustration of this power. You know what a pendulum is. I have one here (Figure 1), and if I set it swinging it will go on swinging to and fro. Now, I wonder whether you can tell me why that body swings to and fro — that pendulum bob, as it is sometimes called.

Notice that if I hold this straight stick horizontally, level with the position of the ball at the two ends of its journey, you can see that the ball is higher at the two extremities than it is in the middle. Starting from one end of the stick, the ball falls towards the centre; and then, rising again to the opposite end, it is constantly trying to fall to the lowest point, swinging and vibrating most beautifully — and with wonderful properties in other respects, such as the time of its swing, about which we will not trouble ourselves now.

If a gold leaf, or a piece of thread, or any other substance were hung where this ball is, it would swing to and fro in the same manner, and in the same time too. Do not be startled at that statement: I repeat, in the same manner and in the same time; and you will see by and by how that is.

Now, the power that made the water go down in the balance, that made the iron weight press on and flatten the bubble of air, that caused the swinging to and fro of the pendulum — that power is entirely due to the attraction between the falling body and the earth. Let us be slow and careful in understanding this. It is not that the earth has some particular attraction towards bodies that fall to it, but that all these bodies possess an attraction, every one towards every other. It is not that the earth has a special power that these balls themselves lack; for just as much power as the earth has to attract these two balls [dropping two ivory balls], just so much power have they, in proportion to their bulk, to draw themselves one towards the other. The only reason they fall so quickly to the earth is the earth's greater size.

Now, if I were to place these two balls near together, I should not be able, by the most delicate arrangement of apparatus, to make you or myself aware that they attract one another. And yet we know that they do; because if, instead of a small ivory ball, we take a mountain and put a ball like this near it, we find that, owing to the vast size of the mountain compared with the billiard ball, the ball is drawn slightly towards it. That shows clearly that an attraction does exist — just as it did between the shellac I rubbed and the piece of paper it overturned.
