Lecture One: The Force of Gravitation

(Part 2 of 2)

Now, it is not very easy to make these things quite clear at the outset, and I must take care to leave nothing unexplained as I go along. So I must make sure you clearly understand that all bodies are attracted to the earth — or, to use a more learned word, that they gravitate. You will not mind my using that word; for when I say this penny gravitates, I mean nothing more and nothing less than that it falls towards the earth, and that if it were not stopped it would go on falling and falling until it reached what we call the centre of gravity of the earth, which I shall explain to you by and by.

[Figure 2: A large vessel standing on a balance. The invisible gas poured into it from the jar of marble and acid tips the index down, showing that it gravitates like anything else.]

I want you to understand that this property of gravitation is never lost, that every substance possesses it, and that the quantity of it never changes. First of all I will take a piece of marble as an illustration. This marble has weight, as you will see if I put it in these scales: it weighs the balance down, and if I take it off, the balance goes back and settles again.

I can decompose this marble and change it, in the same way as I can change ice into water and water into steam. I can easily turn part of it into its own kind of steam, and show you that this steam from the marble has the property of staying where it is put at ordinary temperatures, which water-steam has not. If I add a little liquid to the marble and decompose it, I get what you see here. [The lecturer here put several lumps of marble into a glass jar and poured water and then acid over them; the carbonic acid immediately began to escape with considerable effervescence.] It has the appearance of boiling, but that is only one part of the marble separating from another.

Now this marble steam, and that water steam, and all other steams gravitate just as any other substance does. They are all attracted one towards another, and all fall towards the earth; and what I want you to see is that this steam gravitates. Here (Figure 2) I have a large vessel standing on a balance, and the moment I pour this steam into it, you see that it gravitates. Just watch the index and see whether it tips over or not. [The lecturer here poured the carbonic acid from the glass in which it was being generated into the vessel hanging on the balance, and the gravitation of the carbonic acid was at once apparent.]

Look how it is going down. How pretty that is! I poured in nothing but the invisible steam, or vapour, or gas that came off the marble; and yet you see that this part of the marble, although it has taken the form of air, still gravitates as it did before. Now, will it weigh down that piece of paper? [Placing a piece of paper in the opposite scale.] Yes — and more than that; it nearly weighs down this piece too. [Placing another piece in.] So you see that other forms of matter besides solids and liquids tend to fall to the earth; and you will therefore accept from me the fact that all things gravitate, whatever their form or condition may be.

Here is another chemical test, very easily applied. [Some of the carbonic acid was poured from one vessel into another, and its presence in the second was shown by putting a lighted taper into it, which was immediately extinguished.] You see from this result too that it gravitates. All these experiments show you that, tested by the balance and tested by pouring it like water from one vessel to another, this steam, or vapour, or gas is, like everything else, attracted to the earth.

Editor's note: Add a little liquid to the marble, and decompose it. Marble is composed of carbonic acid and lime, and in chemical language is called carbonate of lime. When sulphuric acid is added to it, the carbonic acid is set free and the sulphuric acid unites with the lime to form sulphate of lime. Carbonic acid, under ordinary circumstances, is a colourless invisible gas about half as heavy again as air. Dr. Faraday first showed that under great pressure it could be obtained in a liquid state. Thilorier, a French chemist, afterwards found that it could be solidified.

[Figure 3-4: Finding the centre of gravity of a sheet of card. On the left, the card is hung from a bradawl at corner A with a plumb line falling to B, and a line is drawn along the string. On the right, it has been hung from a second point and a second line drawn; the two cross at C, which is the centre of gravity.]

There is another point I want to draw your attention to next. Here is a quantity of shot. Each of these falls separately, and each has its own gravitating power, as you can see when I let them fall loosely onto a sheet of paper. If I put them into a bottle, I collect them together as one mass; and scientific men have found that there is a certain point in the middle of the whole collection of shot which may be regarded as the one point where all their gravitating power is concentrated. That point they call the centre of gravity — not at all a bad name, and rather a short one.

Now suppose I take a sheet of pasteboard, or anything else easy to handle, and run a bradawl through it at one corner, A (Figure 3), and Mr. Anderson holds it up in front of us. I then take a piece of thread with an ivory ball on it and hang that on the awl. The centres of gravity of the pasteboard, and of the ball and string, are then as near as they can get to the centre of the earth; that is to say, the whole attracting power of the earth is, as it were, concentrated at a single point of the card, and that point lies exactly below the point of suspension. All I have to do, therefore, is to draw a line, A to B, along the string, and we shall know that the centre of gravity lies somewhere on that line.

But where on it? To find that out, all we need do is put the awl in another place (Figure 4), hang the plumb line again, and repeat the experiment — and there, at the point C, is the centre of gravity, where the two lines I have drawn cross each other. And if I take that pasteboard and make a hole with the bradawl at that point, you will see that it will be supported in any position I put it in.

Now, knowing that, what do I do when I try to stand on one leg? Do you not see that I push myself over to the left side and quietly take up the right leg, and so bring some central point in my body over the left one? What is that point I throw over? You will know at once that it is the centre of gravity — the point in me where the whole gravitating force of my body is concentrated, and which I bring in this way into a line over my foot.

[Figure 5-6: A tumbler toy. On the left it is lying on its side, as it ought to lie if it were uniform throughout. On the right it stands upright on its rounded, weighted base; the dotted outline shows it tilted, and the mark a shows the centre of gravity being lifted as it tilts.]

Here is a toy I happened to see the other day which will, I think, illustrate our subject very well. This toy ought to lie something like this (Figure 5), and would do so if it were uniform in substance. But you see it does not: it gets up again. And now science comes to our aid, and I am perfectly sure, without looking inside the figure, that there is some arrangement by which the centre of gravity is at its lowest point when the figure is standing upright. We may be certain that when I tilt it over (see Figure 6) I am lifting the centre of gravity, marked a, and raising it away from the earth. All this is done by putting a piece of lead inside the lower part of the figure and giving the base a large curvature; and there you have the whole secret.

But what will happen if I try to make the figure stand on a sharp point? You will notice that I must get that point exactly under the centre of gravity, or it will fall over like this [trying unsuccessfully to balance it]; and, as you see, it is a difficult matter — I cannot make it stand steadily. But if I burden this poor old lady with a world of trouble, and hang this wire with a bullet at each end about her neck, then plainly, because of those balls of lead hanging down on either side in addition to the lead inside her, I have lowered the centre of gravity, and now she will stand on this point (Figure 7). What is more, she proves the truth of our science by standing sideways.

[Figure 7: The same toy, with a wire carrying a bullet at each end hung round her neck. The extra lead has lowered the centre of gravity so far that she will now balance on a sharp point — and even stand sideways.]

[Figure 8: The conjuring-book problem: how to hang a pail of water on the edge of a table by means of a stick.]

I remember an experiment which puzzled me very much as a boy. I read it in a conjuring book, and the problem was put like this: "How to hang a pail of water, by means of a stick, on the side of a table" (Figure 8). Here I have a table, a piece of stick and a pail; and the question is, how can that pail be hung on the edge of this table? It can be done. Can you at all guess what arrangement I shall make to succeed?

Why, this. I take the stick and put it into the pail, between the bottom and the horizontal piece of wood, and so give it a stiff handle — and there it is. What is more, the more water I put in the pail, the better it will hang. It is quite true that before I succeeded I had the misfortune to push the bottoms out of several pails; but here it is hanging firmly (Figure 9), and you can now see how to hang up the pail in the way the conjuring books require.

[Figure 9: The solution. The stick is wedged into the pail between its bottom and the horizontal bar, so that the pail's centre of gravity comes under the table top — and the fuller the pail, the better it hangs.]

Again, if you are really so inclined — and I do hope all of you are — you will find a great deal of science in this [holding up a cork and a thin pointed stick about a foot long]. Do not turn to your toy books and say you have seen that before. Answer me rather this: have you understood it before? It is an experiment that seemed very wonderful to me when I was a boy. I used to take a piece of cork (and I remember thinking at first that it was very important that it should be cut in the shape of a man, though by degrees I got rid of that idea), and the problem was to balance it on the point of a stick. Now, you see, I have only to fix two sharp-pointed sticks, one on each side, giving it wings like this, and you will find the beautiful condition fulfilled.

[Figure 10: A cork balanced on the point of an upright stick. Two long pointed sticks pushed into it on either side, like wings, bring the centre of gravity below the point of support.]

We come now to another point. All bodies, heavy or light, fall to the earth by this force we call gravity. By observation, though, we see that bodies do not all take the same time in falling. I think you will be able to see that this piece of paper and this ivory ball fall to the table at different speeds [dropping them]; and again, if I take a feather and an ivory ball and let them fall, you see they reach the table at different times — the ball falls faster than the feather.

Now, that ought not to be so, because all bodies do fall equally fast to the earth. There are one or two beautiful points contained in that statement. First of all, it is plain that an ounce, or a pound, or a ton, or a thousand tons all fall equally fast, no one faster than another. Here are two balls of lead, a very light one and a very heavy one, and you can see they both fall to the earth in the same time. And if I were to put into a little bag enough of these small balls to make a bulk equal to the large one, they too would fall in the same time. When an avalanche falls from the mountains, the rocks and snow and ice all fall towards the earth with the same velocity, whatever their size may be.

I cannot take a better illustration of this than gold leaf, because it brings the reason for the apparent difference in falling time right before us. Here is a piece of gold leaf. If I take a lump of gold and this gold leaf and let them fall through the air together, you see that the lump — the sovereign, the coin — falls much faster than the leaf. But why? They are both gold, sovereign or leaf. Why should they not fall to the earth with the same quickness? They would, but for the fact that the air around our globe interferes a great deal when the piece of gold is beaten out so wide and thin that it meets so much obstruction in falling through it.

I will, however, show you that gold leaf does fall just as fast when the resistance of the air is taken away. If I take a piece of gold leaf and hang it in the middle of a bottle, so that the gold, the bottle and the air inside all have an equal chance of falling, then the gold leaf will fall as fast as anything else. And if I hang the bottle with the gold leaf in it from a string and set it swinging like a pendulum, I may make it swing as hard as I please and the gold leaf will not be disturbed: it will swing as steadily as a piece of iron would. I might even whirl it round my head with any degree of force and it would remain undisturbed.

Or I can try another sort of experiment. If I raise the gold leaf like this [pulling the bottle up to the ceiling of the theatre with a cord and pulley, and then suddenly letting it fall to within a few inches of the lecture table] and let it fall from the ceiling — I will put something underneath to catch it, in case I am clumsy — you will see that the gold leaf is not disturbed in the least. With the resistance of the air avoided, the glass bottle and the gold leaf fall in exactly the same time.

Here is another illustration. I have hung a piece of gold leaf in the upper part of this long glass vessel, and by a little arrangement at the top I can let the gold leaf loose. Before we do that we will pump the air out with an air pump; and while that is being done, let me show you another experiment of the same kind.

Take a penny, or a half-crown, and a round piece of paper a little smaller across than the coin, and try them side by side to see whether they fall in the same time [dropping them]. You see they do not — the penny goes down first. But now lay the paper flat on top of the coin, so that it meets no resistance from the air, and on dropping them you see they do both fall in the same time [showing the effect]. I dare say that if I put this piece of gold leaf on the coin instead of the paper it would do as well. It is very difficult to lay the gold leaf so flat that the air will not get under it and lift it in falling, and I am rather doubtful of success here, because the gold leaf is puckered; but I will risk it. There they go together! [letting them fall] — and you see at once that they both reach the table at the same moment.

We have now pumped the air out of the vessel, and you will see that the gold leaf falls as quickly in this vacuum as the coin does in air. I am going to let it loose now, and you must watch how rapidly it falls. There! [letting the gold loose] There it is, falling as gold should fall.

I am sorry to see that our time for parting is drawing so near. As we go on, I intend to write certain words on the board behind me, to bring back to your minds what we have already examined. I put the word FORCES as a heading, and beneath it I shall add the names of the particular forces in the order in which we take them. And although I am afraid I have not sufficiently pointed out to you the more important circumstances connected with this force of GRAVITATION — especially the law which governs its attraction, for which I think I must take a little time at our next meeting — still I shall put that word on the board, and I hope you will remember now that we have to some degree considered the force of gravitation: that force which makes all bodies attract one another when they are any appreciable distance apart, and tends to draw them together.
