Lecture Two: Gravitation and Cohesion

(Part 1 of 2)

Do me the favour of paying me as much attention as you did at our last meeting, and I shall not regret what I have undertaken. It will be impossible for us to consider the laws of nature and what they do unless we now and then give them our whole attention, so as to get a clear idea of the subject. Give me that attention now, and then I trust we shall not part without your knowing something about those laws and the way they act.

You will remember that last time I explained that all bodies attract each other, and that we call this power gravitation. I told you that when we bring these two bodies near together [two ivory balls of equal size hung on threads] they attract each other, and that we may suppose the whole power of that attraction to be exerted between their respective centres of gravity. And you learned from me further that if, instead of a small ball, I take a larger one, like this [changing one ball for a much larger one], much more of this attraction is exerted; and that if I made the ball larger and larger until, if it were possible, it became as large as the earth itself — or if I simply took the earth as the large ball — the attraction would become so powerful as to make them rush together like this [dropping the ivory ball].

You sit there upright, and I stand upright here, because we keep our centres of gravity properly balanced with respect to the earth. And I need not tell you that on the other side of this world people are standing and moving about with their feet towards our feet, in a reversed position compared with us — and all by means of this power of gravitation towards the centre of the earth.

I must not, however, leave the subject of gravitation without telling you something of its laws and its regularity; and first of all as regards its strength in relation to how far apart bodies are. If I take one of these balls and put it within an inch of the other, they attract each other with a certain power. If I hold it further off, they attract with less power; and further off still, less again.

Now this fact is of the greatest consequence, for by knowing this law scientific men have discovered most wonderful things. You know that there is a planet, Uranus, going round the sun with us, but eighteen hundred million miles away; and because there is another planet as far off as three thousand million miles, and this law of attraction, of gravitation, still holds good there, scientific men actually discovered that further planet, Neptune, from the effects of its attraction at that overwhelming distance.

Now I want you to understand clearly what this law is. They say — and they are right — that two bodies attract each other inversely as the square of the distance. That is a sad jumble of words until you understand them; but I think we shall soon see what the law is, and what "the inverse square of the distance" means.

[Figure 11: A lamp at A shining on the large screen B C D. The small card E, held halfway between them, throws a shadow B D four times its own area; held a third of the way, it would throw a shadow nine times the size.]

Here (Figure 11) I have a lamp, A, shining very brightly on this disc, B, C, D. This light acts as a sun by which I can throw a shadow from this little screen, B F — merely a square piece of card — which, as you know, when I place it close to the large screen shadows exactly as much of it as equals its own size.

But now let me take this card E, which is the same size as the other, and place it halfway between the lamp and the screen. Look at the size of the shadow B D: it is four times the original size. Here, then, comes the inverse square of the distance. This distance, A to E, is one; that distance, A to B, is two. But the card E being one in size, the shadow B D is four in size instead of two — which is the square of the distance. And if I put the screen at a third of the distance from the lamp, the shadow on the large screen would be nine times the size.

Again, if I hold this screen here at B F, a certain amount of light falls on it; and if I hold it nearer the lamp at E, more light shines on it. And you can see at once how much more: exactly the quantity I have shut off from the part of the screen B D now in shadow. Moreover, you can see that if I put a single screen here at G, beside the shadow, it can only receive a quarter of the proportion of light that has been blocked. That, then, is what is meant by the inverse of the square of the distance. This screen E is the brightest because it is the nearest; and there is the whole secret of that curious expression, inversely as the square of the distance.

Now, if you cannot remember this perfectly when you go home, get a candle and throw a shadow of something — your profile, if you like — on the wall, and then move back and forward. You will find that your shadow is exactly in proportion to the square of your distance from the wall; and then, if you consider how much light shines on you at one distance and how much at another, you get the inverse in the same way. So it is with the attraction of these two balls: they attract according to the square of the distance, inversely. I want you to try to remember those words, and then you will be able to follow all the astronomers' calculations about the planets and other bodies, and to say why they move so fast, and why they go round the sun without falling into it, and be ready to take up many other interesting inquiries of the same kind.

Let us now leave this subject, which I have written on the board under the word FORCE — GRAVITATION — and go a step further. All bodies attract each other at appreciable distances. I showed you the electric attraction last time, though I did not call it that; that attracts at a distance too. And to make our progress a little more gradual, suppose I take a few particles of iron [dropping some small fragments of iron on the table]. I have already told you that in every case where bodies fall, it is the particles that are attracted. You may think of these, then, as separate particles magnified so as to be visible to you. They are loose from one another; they all gravitate; they all fall to the earth, for the force of gravitation never fails.

Now, here I have a centre of power which I will not name at present; and when these particles are placed on it, see what an attraction they have for each other.

[Figure 12: An arch of iron filings, standing up over a magnet like an iron bridge. Off the magnet, the same filings lie loose and show no attraction for one another at all.]

Here I have an arch of iron filings (Figure 12), built up as regularly as an iron bridge, because I have put them within a sphere of action that makes them attract each other. See — I could let a mouse run through it! And yet if I try the same thing with them here [on the table], they do not attract each other at all. It is that [the magnet] which makes them hold together.

Now, just as those iron particles hold together in the form of an arch, so do the different particles of iron that make up this nail hold together and make it one thing. And here is a bar of iron: it is held together in one mass only because its different parts are so worked as to keep close together by the attraction between the particles. It is held together, in fact, merely by the attraction of one particle to another; and that is the point I want to illustrate now.

If I take a piece of flint and strike it with a hammer and break it like this [breaking a piece off the flint], I have done nothing more than separate the particles composing these two pieces far enough apart that their attraction is too weak to hold them together; and it is only for that reason that there are now two pieces where there was one.

I will show you an experiment to prove that this attraction still exists in those particles. Here is a piece of glass — for what was true of the flint and the iron bar is true of glass and of every other solid; they are all held together in the lump by the attraction between their parts. I can show you the attraction between its separate particles: for if I take this glass, which I have reduced to a very fine powder, you see that I can actually build it up into a solid wall by pressing it between two flat surfaces. The power I have of building this wall is due to the attraction of the particles, which acts as it were as the cement holding them together; and so here, where I have taken no very great pains to bring the particles together, you see perhaps a couple of ounces of finely powdered glass standing as an upright wall.

Is not this attraction most wonderful? That bar of iron, one inch square, has such power of attraction in its particles — giving it such strength — that it will hold up twenty tons weight before the little set of particles in the small space across which it can be pulled apart will separate. In this way suspension bridges and chains are held together by the attraction of their particles. And I am going to make an experiment which will show how strong this attraction of the particles is. [The lecturer here put his foot in a loop of wire fastened to a support above, and swung with his whole weight resting on it for some moments.] You see that while I hang here all my weight is supported by these little particles of the wire, just as in the pantomimes they sometimes suspend gentlemen and damsels.

How can we make this attraction of particles a little simpler? There are many things which, brought together properly, will show it. Here is a boy's experiment — and I like a boy's experiment. Get a tobacco pipe, fill it with lead, melt the lead and pour it out onto a stone, and so get a clean piece of lead. (This is a better plan than scraping it; scraping alters the condition of the surface.) I have here some pieces of lead which I melted this morning for the sake of having them clean.

Now, these pieces of lead hold together by the attraction of their particles; and if I press these two separate pieces close together, so as to bring their particles within the sphere of attraction, you will see how soon they become one. I have only to give them a good squeeze and turn the upper piece slightly round at the same time — and here they are as one, and all the bending and twisting I can give them will not separate them again. I have joined the lead together, not with solder, but simply by the attraction of the particles.

This, however, is not the best way of bringing particles together; we have many better plans. I will show you one that does very well for young people's experiments. Here is some alum, crystallised very beautifully by nature — for all things are far more beautiful in their natural form than in their artificial one — and here I have some of the same alum broken into fine powder. In the powder I have destroyed that force whose name I have now put on the board: COHESION, the attraction exerted between the particles of bodies to hold them together.

Now I am going to show you that if we take this powdered alum and some hot water and mix them, I shall dissolve the alum: all the particles will be separated by the water far more completely than they are in the powder. But then, being in the water, they will have the opportunity, as it cools — for that is the condition which favours their coming together — of uniting again and forming one mass.

Editor's note: Crystallisation of alum. The solution must be saturated — that is, it must contain as much alum as can possibly be dissolved. In making the solution it is best to add powdered alum to hot water as long as it dissolves; and when no more is taken up, let the solution stand a few minutes and then pour it off from the dirt and undissolved alum.

Now, having got the alum into solution, I will pour it into this glass basin; and tomorrow you will find that those particles of alum which I put into the water, and so separated that they are no longer solid, will, as the water cools, come together and cohere. By tomorrow morning we shall have a great deal of the alum crystallised out — that is to say, come back to the solid form. [The lecturer here poured a little of the hot alum solution into the glass dish, and when the dish had been warmed by it, added the rest.]

I am doing here what I advise you to do if you use a glass vessel: warming it slowly and gradually. And when you repeat this experiment, do as I do — pour the liquid out gently, leaving all the dirt behind in the basin. Remember that the more carefully and quietly you make this experiment at home, the better the crystals will be. Tomorrow you will see the particles of alum drawn together; and if I put two pieces of coke into part of the solution — the coke should first be washed very clean and dried — you will find tomorrow that we have a beautiful crystallisation all over the coke, making it look exactly like a natural mineral.

Now, how curiously our ideas expand as we watch these conditions of the attraction of cohesion! How many new phenomena it gives us, beyond those of the attraction of gravitation! See how it gives us great strength. The things we deal with in putting up structures on the earth are things of strength — we use iron and stone and other strong materials. And only think that all those structures around you — think of the Great Eastern, if you like, which is of such size and power as to be almost more than man can manage — are the result of this power of cohesion and attraction.

Here is a body in which I think you will see a change taking place in its state of cohesion at the very moment it is made. It is yellow at first, and then it becomes a fine crimson red. Just watch when I pour these two liquids together, both as colourless as water. [The lecturer here mixed solutions of perchloride of mercury and iodide of potassium, and a yellow precipitate of biniodide of mercury fell, which almost immediately turned crimson red.]

There is a substance which is very beautiful — but see how it is changing colour. It was reddish-yellow at first, and now it has become red. I prepared a little of this red substance beforehand, the same that you see forming in the liquid, and have put some of it on paper. [Showing several sheets of paper coated with scarlet biniodide of mercury.] There it is, the same substance spread on paper; and there is the same substance again; and here is some more of it [showing a piece of paper as large as the others, but with very little red on it, most of it being yellow] — a little more of it, you will say.

Do not be mistaken: there is as much on the surface of the one piece of paper as on the other. What you see as yellow is the same thing as the red body, only the attraction of cohesion has been changed to a certain degree. I will take this red body and apply heat to it — you may perhaps see a little smoke rise, but that is of no consequence — and if you look at it, it will first darken; but see how it is turning yellow. I have now made it all yellow, and what is more, it will stay so. But if I take any hard substance and rub the yellow part with it, it will go straight back to the red condition. [Showing the experiment.] There it is. You see the red is not put back but brought back, by a change in the substance itself. And now [warming it over the spirit lamp] here it is turning yellow again — and all because its attraction of cohesion has been changed.

And what will you say to me when I tell you that this piece of common charcoal is just the same thing, only differently held together, as the diamonds you wear? (I have put a specimen outside of a piece of straw charred in a particular way; it looks just like black lead.) This charred straw, this charcoal and these diamonds are all of them the same substance, differing only in their properties as regards the force of cohesion.
