Lecture Two: Gravitation and Cohesion

(Part 2 of 2)

Editor's note: Red precipitate of biniodide of mercury. A little care is necessary to obtain this precipitate. The solution of iodide of potassium should be added to the solution of perchloride of mercury (corrosive sublimate) very gradually. The red precipitate which first falls is redissolved when the liquid is stirred; when a little more of the iodide of potassium is added, a pale red precipitate is formed, which on the further addition of the iodide changes into the brilliant scarlet biniodide of mercury. If too much iodide of potassium is added, the scarlet precipitate disappears and a colourless solution is left.

Editor's note: Paper coated with scarlet biniodide of mercury. In order to fix the biniodide on paper it must be mixed with a little weak gum water and then spread over the paper, which must be dried without heat. Biniodide of mercury is said to be dimorphous — that is, able to take two different forms.

Here is a piece of glass [producing a piece of plate glass about two inches square]. I shall want this later, to look into it and examine its internal condition. And here is some of the same sort of glass, differing only in its power of cohesion, because while still molten it was dropped into cold water [showing a Prince Rupert's drop (Figure 13)]. If I take one of these little tear-shaped pieces and break off ever so little from the point, the whole thing will burst at once and fall to pieces. I will break a piece off this one now. [The lecturer nipped a small piece off the end of one of the Rupert's drops, whereupon the whole immediately fell to pieces.]

There! You see the solid glass has suddenly become powder — and more than that, it has knocked a hole in the glass vessel that was holding it. I can show the effect better in this bottle of water, and it is very likely the whole bottle will go. [A six-ounce vial was filled with water and a Rupert's drop placed in it, with the point of the tail just projecting out. On the tip being broken off, the drop burst, and the shock, transmitted through the water to the sides of the bottle, shattered it to pieces.]

Editor's note: Prince Rupert's drops. These are made by pouring drops of melted green glass into cold water. They were not, as is commonly supposed, invented by Prince Rupert, but were first brought to England by him in 1660. They excited a great deal of curiosity and were considered "a kind of miracle in nature."

Here is another form of the same kind of experiment. I have here some more glass which has not been annealed [showing some thick glass vessels (Figure 14)]. If I take one of these vessels and drop a piece of powdered glass into it — or I will take some of these small pieces of rock crystal, which have the advantage of being harder than glass — and so make the least scratch on the inside, the whole bottle will break to pieces. It cannot hold together. [The lecturer here dropped a small fragment of rock crystal into one of the vessels, and the bottom immediately came out and fell onto the plate.] There! It goes straight through, just as it would through a sieve.

Editor's note: Thick glass vessels. They are called proofs, or Bologna phials.

[Figure 13-14: On the left, a Prince Rupert's drop — molten glass dropped into cold water, which flies to powder if the least piece is nipped off its tail. On the right, one of the thick unannealed glass vessels, which falls to pieces at the slightest scratch inside.]

Now, I have shown you these things to bring your minds round to seeing that bodies are not merely held together by this power of cohesion, but that they are held together in very curious ways. Suppose I take some things that are held together by this force and examine them more closely.

I will take a piece of glass first; and if I give it a blow with a hammer I shall simply break it to pieces. You saw how it was with the flint when I broke a piece off: a similar sort of piece came away, just as you would expect; and if I broke it up further it would be, as you have seen, simply a collection of small particles of no definite shape or form.

But suppose I take something else — this stone, for instance (Figure 15) [taking a piece of mica]. If I hammer this stone, I may batter it a great deal before I can break it up. I may even bend it without breaking it; that is to say, I may bend it in one particular direction without breaking it much, although I feel in my hands that I am doing it some injury. But now, if I take it by the edges, I find that it breaks up into leaf after leaf in a most extraordinary way.

Why should it break up like that? Not because all stones do, or all crystals; for here is some salt (Figure 16) — you know what common salt is. Here is a piece of salt whose particles have been brought together by natural circumstances in such a way that they had a free opportunity of combining, of coalescing. You shall see what happens when I break it. It does not break as the flint did, or as the mica did, but with a clean sharp angle and exact surfaces, beautiful and glittering as diamonds [breaking it with gentle blows of a hammer]. There is a square prism, which I can break up into a square cube. You see these fragments are all square; one side may be longer than another, but they will only split so as to form square or oblong pieces with cubical sides.

Now I go a little further, and I find another stone (Figure 17) [Iceland, or calc-spar], which I can break in a similar way but not with the same result. Here is a piece I have broken off, and you see it has plain surfaces, perfectly regular with respect to one another; but it is not cubical. It is what we call a rhomboid. It still breaks in three directions, most beautifully and regularly, with polished surfaces, but with sloping sides, not like the salt.

Why not? It is very plain that this is because the attraction of the particles for one another is less in the direction in which they give way than in other directions. I have on the table in front of me a number of little bits of calcareous spar, and I recommend each of you to take a piece home. Then you can take a knife and try to divide it along the direction of any of the surfaces that already exist; you will be able to do it at once. But if you try to cut it across the crystals you cannot: by hammering you may bruise it and break it up, but you can only divide it into these beautiful little rhomboids.

Editor's note: Mica. A silicate of alumina and magnesia. It has a bright metallic lustre — hence its name, from mico, to shine.

Editor's note: Common salt, or chloride of sodium, crystallises in the form of solid cubes, which, aggregated together, form a mass that may be broken up into the separate cubes.

Editor's note: Iceland, or calc spar. Native carbonate of lime in its primitive crystalline form.

[Figure 15-16-17: The three stones, left to right. Mica, which splits into leaf after leaf; common salt, which breaks only into squares and cubes; and Iceland spar, which breaks with equally regular polished faces but into sloping rhomboids, never cubes.]

Now I want you to understand a little more of how this comes about, and for that purpose I am going to use the electric light again. You see, we cannot look into the middle of a body like this piece of glass. We see the outside form and the inside form, and we look through it; but we cannot easily find out how those forms come to be. So I want you to take a lesson in the way we use a ray of light to see what is inside bodies.

Light is a thing which is, so to speak, attracted by every substance that gravitates — and we know of nothing that does not. All matter affects light more or less by what we may think of as a kind of attraction, and I have arranged a very simple experiment on the floor of the room to illustrate this (Figure 18). I have put a few things into that basin which those of you in the body of the theatre will not be able to see, and I am going to make use of this power that matter has of attracting a ray of light.

If Mr. Anderson pours some water gently and steadily into the basin, the water will attract the rays of light downwards, and the piece of silver and the sealing-wax will appear to rise up into the sight of those who were not high enough before to see over the side of the basin to its bottom. [Mr. Anderson here poured water into the basin, and when the lecturer asked whether anybody could see the silver and the sealing-wax, he was answered with a general yes.]

Now, I suppose everybody can see that they have not been disturbed at all; and yet, from the way they seem to have risen, you would imagine the bottom of the basin and the things in it were two inches thick, although they are only one of our small silver dishes and a piece of sealing-wax. The light that now comes to you from that piece of silver was cut off by the edge of the basin when there was no water there, and you could see nothing of it. But when we poured the water in, the rays were attracted downwards by it, over the edge of the basin, and so you were able to see the things at the bottom.

[Figure 18: A basin on the floor with a silver dish and a piece of sealing-wax at the bottom. Empty, the rim hides them from the audience; filled with water, which bends the light down over the rim, they come into view and seem to have risen.]

[Figure 19: The beam from the electric lamp. Passing through the flat plate of glass at A it goes straight on; passing through the prism at B it is bent aside onto the screen at C, and split into the colours of the spectrum.]

I have shown you this experiment first so that you might understand how glass attracts light, and might then see how other substances — rock salt, calcareous spar, mica and other stones — affect light. And if Dr. Tyndall will be good enough to let us use his light again, we will first show you how it can be bent by a piece of glass (Figure 19). [The electric lamp was lit again, and the beam of parallel rays it emitted was bent and decomposed by means of the prism.]

Now, here you see that if I send the light through this piece of plain glass, A, it goes straight through without being bent — unless the glass is held at an angle, and then the effect becomes more complicated. But if I take this piece of glass, B [a prism], you see it gives a very different effect. The light no longer goes to that wall; it is bent round to this screen, C. And how much more beautiful it is now [throwing the prismatic spectrum on the screen]. This ray of light is bent out of its course by the attraction of the glass upon it. And you see I can turn and twist the rays to and fro about different parts of the room, just as I please. Now it goes there, now here. [The lecturer projected the spectrum about the theatre.]

Here I have the rays bent onto the screen once more, and you see how wonderfully and beautifully that piece of glass not only bends the light by virtue of its attraction, but actually splits it up into different colours. Now, I want you to understand that this prism, being perfectly uniform in its internal structure, tells us about the action of those other bodies which are not uniform — bodies whose parts do not merely cohere, but cohere in different degrees in different directions, and so attract and bend the light with varying power.

We will now let the light pass through one or two of the things I showed you breaking so curiously; and first of all I will take a piece of mica. Here, you see, is our ray of light. We have first to make it what we call polarised, but you need not trouble yourselves about that; it is only to make our demonstration clearer. Here, then, is our polarised ray, and I can adjust it so as to make the screen it shines on either light or dark, although there is nothing in the path of the ray but what is perfectly transparent [turning the analyser round].

I will now set it so that the screen is quite dark. And first we will put a piece of common glass into the polarised ray, to show you that it does not let the light get through. You see the screen stays dark. The glass, then, has no internal effect on the light. [The glass was removed and a piece of mica introduced.]

Now, there is the mica, which we split so curiously into leaf after leaf — and see how it lets the light pass through to the screen; and how, as Dr. Tyndall turns it round in his hand, you get those different colours, pink and purple and green, coming and going most beautifully. Not because the mica is more transparent than the glass, but because of the different way its particles are arranged by the force of cohesion.

[Figure 20: What the polarised light shows when a slice of calcareous spar is put in its path: a set of coloured rings crossed by a black cross, drawn out of the crystal by the arrangement of its particles.]

Now we will see how calcareous spar acts on this light — the stone that split into rhombs, of which you are each going to take a piece home. [The mica was removed and a piece of calc-spar introduced at A.] See how that turns the light round and round, and produces these rings and that black cross (Figure 20). Look at those colours — are they not most beautiful, for you and for me? For I enjoy these things as much as you do. In what a wonderful way they open out to us the internal arrangement of the particles of this calcareous spar by the force of cohesion.

And now I will show you another experiment. Here is that piece of glass which had no action on the light before. You shall see what it does when we apply pressure to it. Here, then, is our ray of polarised light; and first I will show you that the glass has no effect on it in its ordinary state — when I put it in the path of the light, the screen still stays dark.

Now Dr. Tyndall will press that piece of glass between three little points, one point against two, so as to put a strain on its parts; and you will see what a curious effect that has. [Two white dots gradually appeared on the screen.] Ah, those points show where the strain is. In those parts the force of cohesion is being exerted to a different degree from the rest, and so it lets the light through. How beautiful that is — how it makes the light come through in some parts and leaves it dark in others, and all because we have weakened the force of cohesion between particle and particle.

Whether you use this mechanical way of straining it, or whether we take other means, we get the same result. Indeed, I will show you by another experiment that heating the glass in one part will alter its internal structure and produce a similar effect. Here is a piece of common glass, and if I put it in the path of the polarised ray I believe it will do nothing. There is the common glass [putting it in place]: no light passes through, the screen stays quite dark.

But I am going to warm this glass in the lamp; and you know for yourselves that when you pour hot water on glass you put a strain on it sufficient sometimes to break it — something like what happened with the Prince Rupert's drops. [The glass was warmed in the spirit lamp and again placed across the ray of light.] Now you see how beautifully the light goes through the parts that are hot, making dark and light lines just as the crystal did, and all because of the alteration I have made in its internal condition. For those dark and light patches are a proof that forces are present, acting and dragging in different directions within the solid mass.
