Lecture Three: Cohesion and Chemical Affinity

(Part 1 of 2)

We will first go back for a few minutes to one of yesterday's experiments. You remember what we put together on that occasion — powdered alum and warm water. Here is one of the basins we used. Nothing has been done to it since; but you will find, on examining it, that it no longer holds any powder, but a multitude of beautiful crystals. Here too are the pieces of coke I put into the other basin: they have a fine mass of crystals all over them.

That other basin I shall leave as it is. I will not pour the water off, because it shows you that the particles of alum have done something more than merely crystallise together. They have pushed the dirty matter away from themselves, laying it round the outer edge of the lower crystals — squeezed out, as it were, by the strong attraction the particles of alum have for one another.

And now for another experiment. We have already learned something of the way in which the particles of bodies — of solid bodies — attract each other, and we have learned that it is this which makes calcareous spar and alum and the rest crystallise in these regular forms. Now let me lead your minds gradually to a knowledge of the means we have of altering the force of that attraction a little: of increasing it, or lessening it, or apparently destroying it altogether.

I will take this piece of iron [a rod of iron about two feet long and a quarter of an inch thick]. At present it has a great deal of strength, owing to its attraction of cohesion. But if Mr. Anderson will make part of it red hot in the fire, we shall find that it becomes soft, just as sealing-wax does when it is heated; and we shall find, too, that the hotter it gets the softer it becomes. Ah — but what does soft mean? Why, that the attraction between the particles has been so weakened that it is no longer enough to resist the power we bring to bear on it. [Mr. Anderson handed the lecturer the iron rod with one end red hot, and he showed that it could easily be twisted about with a pair of pliers.]

You see I now have no difficulty in bending this end about as I like, whereas I cannot bend the cold part at all. And you know how the smith takes a piece of iron and heats it to make it soft for his purpose. He is acting on our principle of lessening the adhesion of the particles, although he is not exactly acquainted with the terms in which we express it.

Now we have another point to examine, and water is again a very good substance to take as an illustration. (As scientists we call it all water, even when it is in the form of ice or steam.) Why is this water hard? [pointing to a block of ice] Because the attraction of the particles for each other is enough to make them hold their places against force applied to them. But what happens when we warm the ice? Why, in that case we diminish the power of attraction so far that the solid substance is destroyed altogether.

Let me illustrate this. I will take a red-hot ball of iron [Mr. Anderson handed the lecturer, with a pair of tongs, a red-hot ball of iron about two inches across], because it is a convenient source of heat [placing the red-hot iron in the middle of the block of ice]. You see I am melting the ice where the iron touches it. You see the iron sinking into it; and while part of the solid water is turning liquid, the heat of the ball is rapidly going off. A certain amount of the water is actually rising as steam: the attraction of some of the particles is so far diminished that they cannot even hold together in the liquid form, but escape as vapour. At the same time, you see I cannot melt all this ice with the heat contained in the ball. In a very short while I shall find it has become quite cold.

Here is the water we have produced by destroying some of the attraction which existed between the particles of the ice. For below a certain temperature the particles of water increase their mutual attraction and become ice; and above a certain temperature the attraction decreases and the water becomes steam. Exactly the same thing happens with platinum, and with nearly every substance in nature: raise the temperature to a certain point and it becomes liquid, and a further rise turns it into a gas.

Is it not a glorious thing to look at the sea and the rivers, and to know that this same body, in the northern regions, is all solid ice and icebergs, while here in a warmer climate its attraction of cohesion is so far lessened that it is liquid water?

Well, in lessening this force of attraction between the particles of ice we made use of another force, namely heat; and I want you to understand now that this force of heat is always involved when water passes from the solid to the liquid state — even if I melt ice in other ways, I cannot do without heat. For we have means of making ice liquid without heat, that is to say without using heat as the direct cause.

Suppose, by way of illustration, I make a vessel out of this piece of tinfoil [bending the foil up into the shape of a dish]. I am making it of metal because I want the heat I am about to deal with to pass readily through it. Now I will pour a little water onto this board and set the tin vessel on it. If I put some ice into the metal dish and then set about making it liquid by any of the various means at our command, it must still take the necessary quantity of heat from something — and in this case it will take it from the tray, and from the water underneath, and from the other things round about.

Now, a little salt added to the ice has the power of making it melt; and we shall very shortly see the mixture become quite fluid, and you will then find that the water beneath has frozen — frozen because it has been forced to give up the heat that kept it liquid to the ice that is becoming liquid.

I remember, when I was a boy, hearing of a trick in a country alehouse. The point was how to melt ice in a quart pot by the fire and freeze the pot to the stool. The way they did it was this: they put some pounded ice in a pewter pot and added salt to it, and the consequence was that when the salt was mixed in, the ice in the pot melted. (They told me nothing about the salt, and they set the pot by the fire just to make the result more mysterious.) In a short time the pot and the stool were frozen together — as we shall very shortly find is the case here. And all because salt has the power of lessening the attraction between the particles of ice. Here you see the tin dish is frozen to the board; I can even lift this little stool up by it.

[Figure 21: A bulb of air, A, with its tube dipping into coloured liquid in the vessel B. Warm the bulb and the coloured liquid standing at C is driven along the tube — so the instrument shows at once when heat is given out.]

This experiment cannot, I think, fail to impress on your minds the fact that whenever a solid body loses some of the force of attraction that keeps it solid, heat is absorbed; and that if, on the other hand, we turn a liquid into a solid — water into ice, say — a corresponding amount of heat is given out.

I have an experiment showing this to be so. Here (Figure 21) is a bulb, A, filled with air, whose tube dips into some coloured liquid in the vessel B. I dare say you know that if I put my hand on the bulb A and warm it, the coloured liquid now standing in the tube at C will travel forward. Now, by great care and much research into the properties of various bodies, we have found a way of preparing a solution of a salt which, if it is shaken or disturbed, will at once become solid. And, as I explained just now — for what is true of water is true of every other liquid — because it becomes solid, heat is given out. I can make this evident to you by pouring it over this bulb. There! It is becoming solid; and look at the coloured liquid, how it is being driven down the tube, and how it is bubbling out through the water at the end.

And so we learn this beautiful law of our science: that whenever we lessen the attraction of cohesion, heat is absorbed, and whenever we increase that attraction, heat is given out. This is a great step forward, for you have now learned a great deal more than the mere fact that particles attract each other.

But you must not now suppose that because bodies are liquid they have lost their attraction of cohesion. Here is fluid mercury; and if I pour it from one vessel into another, I find it forms a stream from the bottle down to the glass — a continuous rod of fluid mercury, whose particles have attraction enough to hold together all the way through the air down to the glass. And if I pour water quietly from a jug, I can make it run in a continuous stream in the same way.

Again, let me put a little water on this piece of plate glass and then take another plate and lay it on the water. There! The upper plate is quite free to move, gliding about on the lower one from side to side; and yet, if I take hold of the upper plate and lift it straight up, the cohesion is so great that the lower one is held up with it. See how it slides about as I move the upper one! And all of that is owing to the strong attraction of the particles of the water.

Let me show you another experiment. I will take a little soap and water — not that the soap makes the particles of water more adhesive to each other, but it certainly has the power of maintaining the attraction of the particles better. (And let me advise you, when you are about to experiment with soap bubbles, to take care to have everything clean and soapy.)

I will now blow a bubble; and so that I may be able to talk and blow a bubble at the same time, I will take a plate with a little of the soapsuds in it, soap the edge of the pipe, and blow a bubble onto the plate. Now, there is our bubble. Why does it hold together like that? Because the water it is made of has an attraction of particle for particle — so great, indeed, that it gives this bubble the very power of a rubber ball. For you see, if I put one end of this glass tube into the bubble, it has the power of contracting so strongly as to force enough air through the tube to blow out a light (Figure 22). The light is blown out. And look — see how the bubble is disappearing, see how it is getting smaller and smaller.

Editor's note: Solution of a salt. Acetate of soda. A solution saturated, or nearly so, at the boiling point is necessary; and it must be allowed to cool and remain at rest until the experiment is made.

[Figure 22-23: On the left, a soap bubble blown on a plate with a glass tube in it; the bubble contracts so strongly that the air driven out of the tube blows out a candle. On the right, the cubic inch of water at A and the volume of steam it makes at B — about seventeen hundred cubic inches, close to a cubic foot.]

There are twenty other experiments I might show you to illustrate this power of cohesion in the particles of liquids. For instance, what would you suggest to me if, having lost the stopper out of this alcohol bottle, I wanted to close it quickly with something near at hand? Well, a bit of paper would not do; but a piece of linen cloth would, or some of this cotton wool I have here. I will put a tuft of it into the neck of the alcohol bottle; and you see, when I turn it upside down, that it is perfectly well stoppered so far as the alcohol is concerned. The air can pass through, but the alcohol cannot.

And if I took an oil vessel, this plan would do equally well; for in former times they used to send us oil from Italy in flasks stoppered with nothing but cotton wool. (Nowadays the cotton is put in after the oil arrives here, but formerly it used to be sent stoppered that way.) Now, if it were not for the particles of liquid cohering together, this alcohol would run out; and if I had time I could have shown you a vessel with its top, bottom and sides all made like a sieve, which will nevertheless hold water, owing to this cohesion.

You have now seen that solid water can be made fluid by adding heat, because that lessens the attractive force between its particles; and yet you see there is a good deal of attractive force left behind. I want now to take you a step further. We saw that if we go on applying heat to the water — as indeed happened with our piece of ice here — we do at last break up the attraction which holds the liquid together.

I am going to take some ether to illustrate what happens when this cohesion is broken up. Any other liquid would do, but ether makes a better experiment for my purpose. This liquid ether, exposed to a very low temperature, will become a solid; but if we apply heat to it, it becomes vapour, and I want to show you the enormous bulk of the substance in this new form. When we turn ice into water we lessen its bulk; but when we turn water into steam we increase it enormously.

It is very clear that as I apply heat to the liquid I diminish its attraction of cohesion. It is boiling now, and I will set fire to the vapour, so that you can judge the space the ether occupies in this form from the size of its flame. You see now what an enormously bulky flame I get from that small volume of ether below. The heat from the spirit lamp is now being spent not on making the ether any warmer, but on turning it into vapour. And if I wanted to catch this vapour and condense it — as I could without much difficulty — I should have to do the same as if I wished to turn steam into water and water into ice: in either case I should have to increase the attraction of the particles, by cold or otherwise.

So greatly is the bulk occupied by the particles increased when we give them this diminished attraction, that if I took a portion of water one cubic inch in bulk (A, Figure 23), I should get a volume of steam of that size, B [1,700 cubic inches, nearly a cubic foot] — so greatly is the attraction of cohesion diminished by heat. And yet it is still water. You can easily imagine the consequences of this change of volume by heat: the mighty powers of steam, and the tremendous explosions sometimes produced by this force of water.

I want you now to see another experiment which will perhaps give you a better idea of the bulk a body occupies in the state of vapour. Here is a substance we call iodine, and I am about to put this solid body into the same condition as regards heat as I did the water and the ether. [Putting a few grains of iodine into a hot glass globe, which immediately filled with violet vapour.] You see the same kind of change produced. And it gives us the chance of noticing how beautiful the violet-coloured vapour from this black substance is — or rather, the mixture of the vapour with air; for I would not have you understand that this globe is entirely filled with the vapour of iodine.
