Lecture Three: Cohesion and Chemical Affinity

(Part 2 of 2)

If I had taken mercury and turned it into vapour, as I easily could, I should have a perfectly colourless vapour. For you must understand this about vapours: that bodies in what we call the vaporous or gaseous state are always perfectly transparent, never cloudy or smoky. They are, however, often coloured; and we can frequently get coloured vapours or gases produced by colourless particles mixing together, as in this case. [The lecturer here inverted a glass cylinder full of binoxide of nitrogen over a cylinder of oxygen, and the dark red vapour of hyponitrous acid was produced.]

Here too you see an excellent illustration of the effect of a power of nature we have not yet come to, but which stands next on our list: CHEMICAL AFFINITY. And so you see we can have a violet vapour, or an orange vapour, or various other kinds of vapour; but they are always perfectly transparent, or else they would cease to be vapours.

Editor's note: Binoxide of nitrogen and hyponitrous acid. Binoxide of nitrogen is formed when nitric acid and a little water are added to some copper turnings. It produces deep red fumes as soon as it comes into contact with the air, by combining with the oxygen of the air to form hyponitrous acid. Binoxide of nitrogen is composed of two parts oxygen and one part nitrogen; hyponitrous acid is composed of one part nitrogen and three parts oxygen.

I am now going to take you a step beyond this business of the attraction of particles for one another. You see we have come to understand that if we take water as our example — whether it is ice, or water, or steam — we are always to think of it as water. Well, now prepare your minds to go a little deeper into the subject.

We have means of searching into the constitution of water beyond anything the action of heat can give us; and among these, one of the most important is that force we call voltaic electricity, which we used at our last meeting to get light, and which we carried about the room on these wires. This force is produced by the battery behind me, which I will not describe more particularly just now; before we have finished we shall know more about this battery, but it must grow up in our knowledge as we go along.

Now, here (Figure 24) is a quantity of water in this little vessel C; and besides the water there are two plates of platinum connected to the wires A and B that come outside. I want to examine that water, and the state and arrangement of its particles. If I applied heat to it you know what we should get: it would take the state of vapour, but it would still be water, and would return to the liquid state as soon as the heat was taken away.

But by means of these wires — connected to the battery behind me, coming under the floor and up through the table — we shall have a certain amount of this new power at our disposal. Here you see it is [making the ends of the wires touch]: that is the electric light we used yesterday. And by means of these wires we can make water submit itself to this power; for the moment I put them into metallic connection at A and B, you see the water boiling in that little vessel C, and you hear the bubbling of the gas going along the tube D.

See how I am turning the water into vapour. And if I take a little vessel, E, fill it with water and put it in the trough over the end of the tube D, there goes the vapour, rising into the vessel. And yet that is not steam; for you know that if steam were brought near cold water it would at once condense and go back to being water. This cannot be steam, then, because it is bubbling up through the cold water in this trough. But it is a vaporous substance, and we must examine it carefully to see in what way the water has been changed. And to give you a proof that it is not steam, I am going to show you that it is combustible; for if I take this small vessel to a light, the vapour inside explodes in a way that steam never could.

[Figure 24: The decomposing vessel C, with its two platinum plates joined to the wires A and B, and the gas bubbling along the tube D into the vessel E. At the right, the strong glass vessel G, with the wires I and K through its top for firing the collected gas by a spark.]

I will now fill this large bell jar, F, with water, and let the gas rise up into it; and then I shall show you that we can get the water back again out of the vapour, or air, collected there. Here is a strong glass vessel, G, into which we will let the gas from F pass. We will fire it there by an electric spark, and then after the explosion you will find we have the water back again. It will not be much, though, for you will remember I showed you how small a quantity of water produces a very large volume of vapour.

Mr. Anderson will now pump all the air out of this vessel G; and when I have screwed it onto the top of our jar of gas F, you will see, on opening the stopcocks, that the water jumps up, showing that some of the gas has passed into the glass vessel. I will now shut these stopcocks, and we shall be able to send the electric spark through the gas by means of the wires I and K in the upper part of the vessel; and you will see it burn with a most intense flash. [Mr. Anderson here brought a Leyden jar, which he discharged through the enclosed gas by means of the wires I and K.]

You saw the flash. And now, so that you may see there is no gas left, if I put the vessel over the jar and open the stopcocks again, up goes more gas, and we can have a second explosion. I might go on again and again like this, accumulating more and more of the water that the gas has turned back into. Now, is this not curious? In this vessel C we can go on making a large bulk of what we call permanent gas out of water, and then we can turn it back into water in this way.

[Mr. Anderson brought in another Leyden jar which, for some reason, would not fire the gas. It was therefore recharged, and the explosion took place as desired.] How beautifully we get our results when we go about it rightly! It is not that Nature is wrong when we make a mistake. Now, I will lay this vessel G down here by my right hand, and you can examine it by and by. There is not very much water running down it, but quite enough for you to see.

Another wonderful thing about this way of changing the condition of water is that we are able to get the separate parts it is made of at a distance from each other, and to examine them, and see what they are like and how much there is of each. For this purpose I have some more water here in an apparatus slightly different from the last (Figure 25); and if I connect this to the wires of the battery at A and B, I shall get a similar decomposition of the water at the two platinum plates.

Now, I will put this little tube O over there, and it will collect the gas coming from this side, A; and this tube H will collect the gas coming from the other side, B. I think we shall soon see a difference. In this apparatus the wires are a good way apart, and it now appears that each of them is able to draw particles out of the water and send them off — and you see that one set of particles, at H, is coming off twice as fast as the other, at O.

Something is coming out of the water there, at H, which burns [setting fire to the gas]. But what comes out of the water here, at O, although it will not burn itself, will support burning very vigorously. [The lecturer here put a match with a glowing tip into the gas, and it immediately rekindled.]

[Figure 25: The second apparatus, with the two platinum plates set well apart and a tube over each. The tube H collects twice as fast as the tube O — hydrogen at the one, oxygen at the other.]

Here, then, we have two things, neither of them water, which we have got out of water. Water is therefore composed of two substances different from itself, which appear in separate places when it is made to submit to the force I have in these wires. And if I take an inverted tube of water and collect this gas from H, you will see it is by no means the same as the gas we collected in the earlier apparatus. That exploded with a loud noise when it was lit; this will burn quite silently. It is called hydrogen; and the other we call oxygen — the gas which so beautifully brightens all burning but does not burn itself.

So now we see that water consists of two kinds of particles which attract each other in a very different manner from the attraction of gravitation or of cohesion; and this new attraction we call chemical affinity, or the force of chemical action between different bodies. We are no longer concerned with the attraction of iron for iron, water for water, wood for wood, or of like bodies for one another, as we were when we were dealing with the force of cohesion. We are dealing with another kind of attraction: the attraction between particles of different natures. Chemical affinity depends entirely on the energy with which particles of different kinds attract each other. Oxygen and hydrogen are particles of different kinds, and it is their attraction for one another that makes them combine chemically and produce water.

I must now show you a little more fully what chemical affinity is. I can prepare these gases from other substances besides water, and we will now prepare some oxygen. Here is another substance containing oxygen: chlorate of potash. I will put some of it into this glass retort and Mr. Anderson will apply heat to it. We have several jars here filled with water; and when the heat has decomposed the chlorate of potash, we will drive the water out and fill the jars with gas.

Now, when water is opened out this way by means of the battery — which adds nothing to it materially and takes nothing from it materially (I mean no matter; I am not speaking of force) — it is changed in this way: the gas you saw burning a little while ago, hydrogen, is given off in large quantity, and the other gas, oxygen, in only half the quantity. So these two areas represent water, and these are always the proportions between the two gases:

        By volume                 By weight
            Oxygen . . 1              Oxygen . . . .  88.9
            Hydrogen . 2              Hydrogen . . .  11.1
                                                     ------
                                      Water  . . . . 100.0

But oxygen is sixteen times the weight of the other — eight times as heavy as the hydrogen in the water. So you know that water is composed of nine parts by weight: one of hydrogen and eight of oxygen, thus:

        Hydrogen  . . . .  46.2 cubic inches  =  1 grain
        Oxygen  . . . . .  23.1 cubic inches  =  8 grains
                          ------------------    ---------
        Water (steam) . .  69.3 cubic inches  =  9 grains

Now, Mr. Anderson has prepared some oxygen, and we will go on to examine the character of this gas. First of all, you remember I told you that it does not burn, but that it affects the burning of other bodies. I will set fire to the point of this little piece of wood and then plunge it into the jar of oxygen, and you will see what this gas does to increase the brilliance of the burning. It does not burn — it does not catch fire as hydrogen would — but see how vividly the burning of the match goes on.

Again, if I take this wax taper, light it and turn it upside down in the air, it will in all probability put itself out, because the wax runs down into the wick. [The lecturer here turned the lighted taper upside down, and in a few seconds it went out.] That will not happen in oxygen gas; you will see how differently it behaves (Figure 26). [The taper was lit again, turned upside down, and then put into a jar of oxygen.] Look at that! See how the wax itself burns and falls in a dazzling stream of fire, so powerfully does the oxygen support the burning.

Here is another experiment which will illustrate the force, if I may call it that, of oxygen. I have here a circular flame of spirits of wine, and with it I am going to show you the way iron burns, because it will serve very well for a comparison between the effect of air and the effect of oxygen. Holding this ring of flame, I can shake fine particles of iron filings down through it with a sieve, and you will see the way they burn. [The lecturer here shook some iron filings through the flame, and they took fire and fell through in beautiful scintillations.]

But if I now hold the flame over a jar of oxygen — [the experiment was repeated over a jar of oxygen, and the burning of the filings as they fell into it became almost unbearably brilliant] — you see how wonderfully different the effect is in the jar, because there we have oxygen instead of common air.

[Figure 26: A lighted wax taper turned upside down and lowered into a jar of oxygen. Instead of putting itself out, as it would in air, the wax itself takes fire and falls in a dazzling stream.]
