Lecture Four: Chemical Affinity and Heat

(Part 1 of 2)

We shall have to pay a little more attention to the forces existing in water before we can have a clear idea of the subject. Besides the attraction between its particles which makes it hold together as a liquid or a solid, there is another force, different from that one — the force we overcame yesterday by means of the voltaic battery, drawing two different substances out of the water, which, when heated by the electric spark, attracted each other and rushed into combination to make water again.

I propose today to go on with this subject and to trace the various phenomena of chemical affinity. Yesterday we considered the character of oxygen, of which I have two jars here — oxygen being those particles got from water which enable other bodies to burn. We will now consider the other constituent of water; and, without troubling you too much with the way these things are made, I will show you our common method of making hydrogen. (I called it hydrogen yesterday; it is so called because it helps to generate water — from the Greek hudor, "water", and gennao, "I generate".) I put some zinc, water and oil of vitriol into this retort, and immediately an action begins which produces an abundant flow of gas, now coming over into this jar and bubbling up exactly like the oxygen we got yesterday.

[Figure 27: The retort charged with zinc, water and oil of vitriol. The hydrogen it gives off passes along the tube and bubbles up into the jar standing over water.]

The processes, you see, are very different, though the result is the same, in that each gives us certain gaseous particles. Here, then, is the hydrogen. I showed you some qualities of this gas yesterday; now let me show you some others. Unlike oxygen, which supports burning but will not burn itself, hydrogen is itself combustible. There is a jar full of it; and if I carry it along like this and put a light to it, I think you will see it take fire — not with a bright light; at all events you will hear it, if you do not see it.

Now, that is a body entirely different from oxygen: it is extremely light. Although yesterday you saw twice as much of this hydrogen produced on the one side as oxygen on the other by the voltaic battery, it was only one-eighth the weight of the oxygen. I am carrying this jar upside down. Why? Because I know it is a very light body, and that it will stay in this jar upside down quite as effectively as water stays in a jar the right way up. And just as I can pour water from one vessel into another held in the right position to receive it, so I can pour this gas from one jar into another when they are both upside down.

See what I am about to do. There is no hydrogen in this jar at present, but I will gently turn this jar of hydrogen up underneath the other one (Figure 28), and then we will examine the two. On applying a light we shall find that the hydrogen has left the jar it was in at first and has poured upwards into the other, and there we shall find it.

[Figure 28: Pouring a gas upwards. The jar of hydrogen is turned up beneath a second jar held mouth downwards above it, and the gas leaves the lower jar and rises into the upper one.]

You now understand that we can have particles of very different kinds, and that they can have different bulks and weights; and there are two or three very interesting experiments which illustrate this. For instance, if I blow soap bubbles with the breath from my mouth, you will see them fall, because I fill them with common air and the water forming the bubble carries it down. But now, if I breathe hydrogen gas into my lungs — it does them no harm, though it does them no good either — see what happens. [The lecturer breathed in some hydrogen and, after one or two unsuccessful attempts, succeeded in blowing a splendid bubble, which rose majestically and slowly to the ceiling of the theatre, where it burst.]

That shows you very well how light a substance this is; for in spite of all the heavy bad air from my lungs and the weight of the bubble itself, you saw how it was carried up.

I want you now to think about this business of weight as showing how exceedingly different particles are from one another; and I will take as illustrations these very common things — air, water, the heaviest body, platinum, and this gas — and let you see how they differ in this respect. For if I take a piece of platinum of that size (Figure 29), it weighs as much as the portions of water, air and hydrogen whose bulks I have represented by these spheres. That illustration gives you a very good idea of the extraordinary difference in gravity between things which differ so enormously in bulk. [The following table, relating to this illustration, appeared on the diagram board.]

[Figure 29: A small piece of platinum, and beside it three spheres showing the bulk that equal weights of water, of air and of hydrogen would fill. The hydrogen sphere dwarfs everything else.]

        Weights of equal bulks
                          against    against   against
                          hydrogen     air      water
        Hydrogen  . . . .        1
        Air . . . . . . .     14.4        1
        Water . . . . . .   11,943      829         1
        Platinum  . . . .  256,774   17,831      21.5

Whenever oxygen and hydrogen unite they produce water; and you have seen the extraordinary difference between the bulk and appearance of the water so produced and of the particles it chemically consists of. Now, we have never yet been able to reduce either oxygen or hydrogen to the liquid state; and yet their first impulse, when chemically combined, is to take up first this liquid condition and then the solid one.

We never combine these different particles without producing water; and it is curious to think how often you must have made the experiment of combining oxygen and hydrogen to form water without knowing it. Take a candle, for instance, and a clean silver spoon — or a piece of clean tin will do — and if you hold it over the flame you immediately cover it with dew, not with smoke, and the dew presently evaporates. This will perhaps show it better. Mr. Anderson will put a candle under that jar, and you will see how soon the water appears (Figure 30). Look at that dimness on the sides of the glass, which will soon gather into drops and trickle down into the plate. That dimness and those drops are water, formed by the union of the oxygen of the air with the hydrogen that exists in the wax the candle is made of.

[Figure 30: A candle burning under a jar standing in a plate. The inside of the glass grows dim, the dimness gathers into drops, and the drops trickle down — water made by the burning.]

And now, having brought you first to the idea of chemical attraction, I must enlarge your notions so as to include all substances that have this attraction for one another. For it changes the character of bodies, and alters them this way and that in the most extraordinary manner, and produces other phenomena that are wonderful to think about.

Here is some chlorate of potash, and there some sulphuret of antimony. We will mix these two different sets of particles together; and I want to show you, in a general way, some of the things that happen when we make different particles act on one another. I can make these bodies act on each other in several ways. In this case I am going to apply heat to the mixture; but if I struck it with a hammer, the same thing would follow. [A lighted match was brought to the mixture, which immediately exploded with a sudden flash, giving off a dense white smoke.]

There you see the result of chemical affinity overcoming the attraction of cohesion between the particles. Again, here is a little sugar, quite a different substance from the black sulphuret of antimony, and you shall see what happens when we put the two together. [The mixture was touched with sulphuric acid, whereupon it caught fire and burnt gradually, with a brighter flame than in the previous case.] Observe this chemical affinity travelling about the mass, setting it on fire and throwing it into such wonderful agitation.

Editor's note: Chlorate of potash and sulphuret of antimony. Great care must be taken in mixing these substances, as the mixture is dangerously explosive. They must be powdered separately and mixed together with a feather on a sheet of paper, or by passing them several times through a small sieve.

Editor's note: The mixture of chlorate of potash and sugar does not require the same precautions. They may be rubbed together in a pestle and mortar without fear. One part of chlorate of potash to three parts of sugar will answer. The mixture need only be touched with a glass rod dipped in oil of vitriol.

I must now come to a few circumstances which need careful consideration. We have already examined one of the effects of chemical affinity, but to make the matter clearer we must point out some others.

Here are two salts dissolved in water. Both are colourless solutions, and in these glasses you cannot see any difference between them. But if I mix them, chemical attraction will take place. I will pour the two together into this glass, and you will at once see, I have no doubt, a certain amount of change. Look — they are already becoming milky; but they are sluggish about it, not quick as the others were, for there are endless varieties of speed in chemical action.

Now, if I mix them and stir them, so as to bring them properly together, you will soon see how different the result is. As I mix them they get thicker and thicker, and you see the liquid hardening and stiffening; before long I shall have it quite hard, and before the end of the lecture it will be a solid stone — a wet stone, no doubt, but more or less solid — all in consequence of chemical affinity. Is not this changing of two liquids into a solid body a wonderful manifestation of it?

Editor's note: Two salts dissolved in water. Sulphate of soda and chloride of calcium. The solutions must be saturated for the experiment to succeed well.

There is another remarkable thing about chemical affinity, which is that it is able either to wait or to act at once. This is very singular, because we know nothing of the kind in the forces of gravitation or cohesion.

For instance, here are some oxygen particles, and here is a lump of carbon particles. I am going to put the carbon into the oxygen. They can act, but they do not — they are just like this unlighted candle, which stands here quietly on the table waiting until we want to light it. But it is not so in this other case. Here is a substance, gaseous like the oxygen; and if I put these particles of metal into it, the two combine at once. The copper and the chlorine unite by their power of chemical affinity and produce a body entirely unlike either of the substances used.

And in the other case it is not that there is any lack of affinity between the carbon and the oxygen; for the moment I choose to put them in a condition to exert their affinity, you will see the difference. [The piece of charcoal was lit and put into the jar of oxygen, where the burning went on with vivid scintillations.]

Now, this chemical action is set going exactly as it would be if I lit the candle, or as it is when the servant puts on coals and lights the fire: the substances wait until we do something able to start the action. Can anything be more beautiful than this burning of charcoal in oxygen? You must understand that each of these little sparks is a portion of the charcoal, or of the bark of the charcoal, thrown off white hot into the oxygen and burning there most brilliantly, as you see.

And now let me tell you another thing, or you will go away with a very imperfect notion of the powers and effects of this affinity. There you see charcoal burning in oxygen. Well, a piece of lead will burn in oxygen just as well as the charcoal does — better, indeed; for that piece of lead will act on the oxygen at once, as the copper did in the other vessel with the chlorine. And here is a piece of iron: if I light it and put it into the oxygen, it will burn away just as the carbon did.

I will take some lead and show you that it will burn in the ordinary oxygen of the atmosphere at ordinary temperature. These are the lumps of lead we had the other day, you remember — the two pieces that clung together. Now, if I take these pieces today and press them together they will not stick; and the reason is that they have drawn to themselves part of the oxygen present in the atmosphere and have become coated, as if with a varnish, by the oxide of lead formed on the surface by a real process of burning, of combination.

There you see the iron burning very well in oxygen; and I will tell you why those scissors and that lead do not catch fire while they lie on the table. Here the lead is in a lump and the coating of oxide stays on its surface; whereas there you see the melted oxide clearing itself off the iron and letting more and more of it go on burning.

In this case, however [holding up a small glass tube containing lead pyrophorus], the lead has been very carefully produced as a fine powder, put into a glass tube and hermetically sealed to preserve it; and I expect you will see it take fire at once. This was made about a month ago and has therefore had time enough to sink to its normal temperature. What you see is therefore the result of chemical affinity alone. [The tube was broken at the end and the lead poured out onto a piece of paper, whereupon it immediately took fire.]

Look, look at the lead burning — why, it has set fire to the paper! Now, that is nothing more than the ordinary affinity which always exists between very clean lead and the oxygen of the atmosphere. And the reason this iron does not burn until it is made red hot is that it has a coating of oxide about it which stops the action of the oxygen — putting a varnish, as it were, on its surface, as we varnish a picture, forming a substance which absolutely prevents the natural chemical affinity between the bodies from acting.
