Lecture Four: Chemical Affinity and Heat

(Part 2 of 2)

Editor's note: Lead pyrophorus. This is a tartrate of lead which has been heated in a glass tube to dull redness for as long as vapours are given off. As soon as they stop being evolved, the end of the tube is sealed and it is allowed to cool.

I must now take you a little further in this kind of illustration — or consideration, as I would rather call it — of chemical affinity. This attraction between different particles exists, very curiously, even in cases where they are already combined with other substances.

Here is a little chlorate of potash, containing the oxygen which we found yesterday could be got out of it. It holds that oxygen combined and held down by its chemical affinity with other things; and yet it can still combine with sugar, as you saw. This affinity can act across substances, then; and I want you to see how curiously what we call combustion behaves with respect to this force.

If I take a piece of phosphorus, set fire to it and then put a jar of air over it, you see the burning going on there on account of chemical affinity — combustion being in every case the result of chemical affinity. The phosphorus is escaping in that vapour, which will settle into a snow-like mass by the end of the lecture. But suppose I limit the atmosphere: what then? Why, even the phosphorus will go out.

Here is a piece of camphor, which burns very well in the open air; it will even float about on water and burn there, because some of its particles get access to the air. But if I limit the quantity of air by putting a jar over it, as I am doing now, you will soon find the camphor goes out. Why does it go out? Not for want of air, because there is plenty of air left in the jar. Perhaps you will be shrewd enough to say: for want of oxygen.

This leads us to ask whether oxygen can do more than a certain amount of work. The oxygen in that jar (Figure 30) cannot go on burning an unlimited quantity of candle, for the candle has gone out, as you see. Its amount of chemical attraction, or affinity, is just as strikingly limited: it can no more be fallen short of, or exceeded, than the attraction of gravitation can. You might as soon attempt to destroy gravitation, or weight, or all the things that exist, as to alter the exact amount of force this oxygen exerts.

And when I pointed out to you that 8 by weight of oxygen goes with 1 by weight of hydrogen to make water, I meant this: that neither of them will combine with the other in any other proportion. You cannot get 10 of hydrogen to combine with 6 of oxygen, or 10 of oxygen with 6 of hydrogen. It must be 8 of oxygen and 1 of hydrogen.

Now suppose I limit the action in this way. This piece of cotton wool burns very well in the air, as you see. I have known cases of cotton mills being fired as if with gunpowder, through very finely divided particles of cotton being scattered through the air of the mill; a flame has sometimes caught these floating particles and run from one end of the mill to the other and blown it up. That is on account of the affinity the cotton has for oxygen.

But suppose I set fire to this piece of cotton, which is rolled up tightly: it does not go on burning, because I have limited the supply of oxygen, and the inside is prevented from reaching the oxygen — just as the lead was by its coat of oxide.

Here, though, is some cotton which has had oxygen worked into it in a certain way. I need not trouble you now with how it is prepared; it is called guncotton. See how that burns [setting fire to a piece]. It is very different from the other, because the oxygen that has to be present in its proper amount is put there beforehand.

I have here some pieces of paper prepared like the guncotton, soaked in bodies containing oxygen. Here is one soaked in nitrate of strontia — you will see the beautiful red of its flame. Here is another which I think contains baryta, which gives that fine green light. And here is some more soaked in nitrate of copper; it does not burn quite so brightly, but still very beautifully. In all these cases the burning goes on independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere.

And here is some gunpowder in a case, to show that it can burn under water. You know we put it into a gun, shutting the air out with the shot, and yet the oxygen the powder contains supplies the particles with the thing without which chemical action could not go on. I have a vessel of water here, and I am going to make the experiment of putting this fuse under the water, and you shall see whether the water can put it out. Here it is burning out of the water — and there it is burning under the water; and so it will go on until it is spent, all because the necessary amount of oxygen is contained within the substance itself.

It is by this kind of attraction of different particles for one another that we are able to trace the laws of chemical affinity, and the wonderful variety of ways in which those laws are exerted.

Editor's note: Guncotton is made by immersing cotton wool in a mixture of sulphuric acid and the strongest nitric acid, or of sulphuric acid and nitrate of potash.

Editor's note: Paper prepared like guncotton. It should be bibulous paper, and must be soaked for ten minutes in a mixture of ten parts by measure of oil of vitriol with five parts of strong fuming nitric acid. The paper must afterwards be thoroughly washed with warm distilled water and then carefully dried at a gentle heat. It is then saturated with chlorate of strontia, or chlorate of baryta, or nitrate of copper, by immersion in a warm solution of these salts.

Now, I want you to notice that one great exertion of this power known as chemical affinity is to produce HEAT and light. No doubt you know as a matter of fact that when bodies burn they give out heat. But it is a curious thing that this heat does not continue: the heat goes away as soon as the action stops, and you see from that how it depends on the action while it is going on.

It is not so with gravitation. That force is continuous, and is just as effective in making that lead press on the table as it was when the lead first fell there. Nothing happens there which disappears when the falling is over; the pressure is on the table and will remain until the lead is removed. Whereas with the action of chemical affinity in giving light and heat, they go away the moment the action is over. This lamp seems to give out heat and light continuously, but that is because of a constant stream of air coming into it on all sides; and this work of producing light and heat by chemical affinity will stop as soon as the stream of air is interrupted.

What, then, is this curious condition of heat? It is the evolution of another power of matter — a power new to us, and one we must consider as though it were now being brought to our notice for the very first time. What is heat? We recognise heat by its power of liquefying solid bodies and vaporising liquid ones, and by its power of setting chemical affinity in action and very often overcoming it.

Then how do we obtain heat? We obtain it in various ways: most abundantly by means of the chemical affinity we have just been speaking of, but in many other ways too. Friction will produce heat. The Indians rub pieces of wood together until they get hot enough to take fire; and such things have been known as two branches of a tree rubbing together hard enough to set the tree alight. I do not suppose I shall set these two pieces of wood on fire by friction, but I can easily produce heat enough to ignite some phosphorus. [The lecturer here rubbed two pieces of cedar wood hard against each other for a minute, and then laid a piece of phosphorus on them, which immediately took fire.]

And if you take a smooth metal button stuck on a cork and rub it on a piece of soft deal, you will make it hot enough to scorch wood and paper and to light a match.

[Figure 31: The fire syringe. A pellet of cotton moistened with ether is dropped into the glass tube, and the piston driven suddenly down; the compression of the air alone is enough to fire the ether vapour, and the flame is seen in the lower part of the tube.]

I am now going to show you that we can get heat not only by chemical affinity but by the pressure of air. Suppose I take a pellet of cotton, moisten it with a little ether and put it into a glass tube (Figure 31), and then take a piston and press it down suddenly. I expect I shall be able to burn a little of that ether inside the vessel. It needs a suddenness of pressure, or we shall not get what we want. [The piston was forcibly pressed down, and a flame, from the burning of the ether, was visible in the lower part of the syringe.] All we need is to get a little ether in vapour and to give fresh air each time; and so we can go on again and again, getting heat enough by compressing the air to fire the ether vapour.

This, I think, together with everything you have seen before, will be enough to show you how we get heat. And now for the effects of this power. We need not consider many of them on this occasion, because when you have seen its power of changing ice into water and water into steam, you have seen the two principal results of applying heat.

I want you now to see how it expands all bodies — all bodies but one, and that under limited circumstances. Mr. Anderson will hold a lamp under that retort, and you will see the moment he does so that air issues abundantly from the neck, which is under water, because the heat he is applying to the air makes it expand.

And here is a brass rod (Figure 32) which goes through that hole, and also fits accurately into this gauge. But if I warm it with this spirit lamp, it will only go into the gauge or through the hole with difficulty; and if I put it into boiling water it would not go through at all.

Again, as soon as heat escapes from bodies they collapse. See how the air is contracting in the vessel now that Mr. Anderson has taken his lamp away: the stem is filling with water. And notice, too, that although I cannot get the rod through this hole or into the gauge now, the moment I cool it by dipping it in water it goes through with perfect ease. So we have a perfect proof of this power of heat to contract and expand bodies.

[Figure 32: The brass rod with its hole and its gauge. Cold, the rod passes through the hole and fits the gauge exactly; warmed in the spirit lamp, it will barely go in at all.]
