Lecture Five: Magnetism and Electricity

(Part 1 of 2)

I wonder whether we shall be too deep today or not. Remember that we spoke of the attraction of all bodies to all bodies by gravitation, simply on approaching one another. Remember that we spoke of the attraction of particles of the same kind for each other — the power that keeps them together in masses, iron attracted to iron, brass to brass, water to water. And remember that we found, on looking into water, that there were particles of two different kinds attracted to each other; and that this was a great step beyond the first simple attraction of gravitation, because here we were dealing with attraction between different kinds of matter. The hydrogen could attract the oxygen and make water with it, but it could not attract any of its own particles. So there we got our first indication of the existence of two attractions.

Today we come to a kind of attraction more curious still: one which we find to be of a double nature — of a curious dual nature. And first of all I want to make the nature of that doubleness clear to you.

Bodies are sometimes endowed with a wonderful attraction which is not found in them in their ordinary state. Here, for instance, is a piece of shellac. It has the attraction of gravitation and the attraction of cohesion; and if I set fire to it, it would have the attraction of chemical affinity for the oxygen of the air. All these powers we find in it as though they were parts of its substance.

But there is another property, which I will try to make evident by means of this ball, this bubble of air [a light rubber ball, inflated and hung by a thread]. At present there is no attraction between this ball and this shellac; there may be a little draught in the room moving the ball slightly, but there is no attraction. But if I rub the shellac with a piece of flannel [rubbing the shellac and then holding it near the ball] — look at the attraction that has arisen in the shellac simply from this rubbing, and which I can take away just as easily by drawing it gently through my hand. [The lecturer repeated the experiment of exciting the shellac and then removing the attractive power by drawing it through his hand.]

And you will see I can repeat the experiment with another substance. If I take a glass rod and rub it with a piece of silk covered with what we call amalgam, look at the attraction it has, how it draws the ball towards it; and then, as before, by quietly rubbing it through my hand the attraction is all removed again — to come back on rubbing it with this silk.

[Figure 33: A piece of excited shellac hung in a little paper stirrup, so that it swings freely and shows at once whether it is attracted or repelled.]

But now we come to another fact. I will take this piece of shellac and make it attractive by rubbing. And remember that whenever we get an attraction — of gravity, of chemical affinity, of adhesion, or of electricity as in this case — the body which attracts is itself attracted too; just as much as the ball was attracted by the shellac, the shellac was attracted by the ball.

Now I will hang this piece of excited shellac in a little paper stirrup like this (Figure 33), so that it can move easily; and I will take another piece of shellac, rub it with flannel, and bring the two near together. You will expect that they ought to attract each other. But what happens? It does not attract; on the contrary, it repels very strongly, and I can drive it round and round to any extent. So these two repel one another, although each is so strongly attractive — repel each other enough to drive this heavy piece of shellac round and round like this.

But if I excite this piece of shellac as before, and take this piece of glass and rub it with silk, and then bring them near — what do you think will happen? [The lecturer held the excited glass near the excited shellac, and they attracted each other strongly.] You see, then, what a difference there is between these two attractions. There are actually two kinds of attraction at work here, quite different from anything we have met before; and yet the force is the same. We have here a double attraction — a dual attraction, or force — the one attracting and the other repelling.

Now let me show you another experiment which will help to make this clear. Suppose I set up this rough indicator again [the excited shellac hanging in the stirrup]; it is rough, but delicate enough for my purpose. Suppose I take this other piece of shellac and take the power away from it, which I can do by drawing it gently through my hand. And suppose I take a piece of flannel (Figure 34), which I have shaped into a cap for it and dried.

I put the shellac into the flannel, and here comes a very beautiful result. I rub the shellac and the flannel together — which I can do by twisting the shellac round — and leave them in contact. And then, if I ask, by bringing them near our indicator, what the attractive force is, the answer is: nothing at all. But if I take them apart and then ask what they will do when separated — why, the shellac is strongly repelled, as before, and the cap is strongly attractive. And yet if I bring them together again there is no attraction; it has all disappeared. [The experiment was repeated.] Those two bodies, then, still contain this attractive power; when they were parted it was evident to your senses that they had it, although they do not attract while they are together.

[Figure 34: The stick of shellac and the flannel cap made to fit over it. Rubbed together and left in contact they show no attraction at all; parted, the shellac repels and the cap attracts.]

[Figure 35: A home-made indicator: a lath balanced across a piece of flat glass resting on a watch glass, so freely poised that a rubbed stick of sealing-wax will pull the whole plank round.]

This is enough at the outset to give you an idea of the nature of the force we call ELECTRICITY. There is no end to the things from which you can draw out this power.

When you go home, take a stick of sealing-wax — I have a rather large stick here, but a smaller one will do — and make an indicator like this (Figure 35). Take a watch glass, or your watch itself will do; you only want something with a rounded face. Put a piece of flat glass on it, and you have a very easily moved centre. Now, if I take this lath and lay it on the flat glass — you see I am hunting for the lath's centre of gravity, because I want to balance it on the watch glass — it turns round very easily. And if I take this piece of sealing-wax, rub it against my coat and then try whether it is attractive [holding it near the lath], you see how strong the attraction is; I can even lead the lath about.

Here, then, is a very beautiful indicator, for with a small piece of sealing-wax and my coat I have pulled a plank of that size round. So you need never be short of indicators to detect this attraction. There is hardly a substance we may not use.

Here are some more indicators (Figure 36). I bend a strip of paper round into a hoop, and we have as good an indicator as anyone could want. See how it rolls along, travelling after the sealing-wax. If I make them smaller they run faster, and sometimes they are actually drawn up into the air.

Here too is a little collodion balloon. It is so electrical that it will hardly leave my hand except to go to the other. See how curiously electrical it is: I can hardly touch it without making it electrical. And here is a piece which clings to anything it is brought near, and which is not easy to put down. And here is another substance, gutta-percha, in thin strips: it is astonishing how, by rubbing this in your hands, you make it electrical.

But our time forbids us to go further into this subject at present. You see clearly that there are two kinds of electricity, which may be got by rubbing shellac with flannel or glass with silk.

[Figure 36: Hoops of paper bent round and set on the table. They roll along after a rubbed stick of sealing-wax; made smaller, they run faster, and sometimes fly up into the air.]

Now, there are some curious bodies in nature, of which I have two specimens on the table, called magnets or lodestones — ores of iron, a great deal of which is sent to us from Sweden. They have the attraction of gravitation, and of cohesion, and a certain chemical attraction; but they also have a great attractive power of another sort, for this little key is held up by this stone.

Now, that is not chemical attraction. It is not the attraction of chemical affinity, nor of the aggregation of particles, nor of cohesion, nor of electricity — for it will not attract this ball if I bring it near. It is a separate and dual attraction; and, what is more, one which is not readily removed from the substance, for it has existed in this stone for ages and ages in the bowels of the earth.

We can make artificial magnets, and you will see me tomorrow make artificial magnets of extraordinary power. Let us take one of these artificial magnets and examine it, and see where the power lies in the mass, and whether it is a dual power. You see it attracts these keys, two or three one after another, and it will attract a very large piece of iron. That is a very different thing from what you saw with the shellac, which only attracted a light ball; here I have several ounces of iron held up.

And if we examine this attraction a little more closely we shall find it presents some other remarkable differences. First of all, one end of this bar (Figure 37) attracts this key, but the middle does not. It is not, then, the whole of the substance that attracts. If I put this little key in the middle it does not stick; but if I put it a little nearer the end it does, though feebly.

Is it not very curious to find an attractive power at the ends which is not in the middle — to have, in one bar, two places where this force of attraction resides? If I take this bar and balance it carefully on a point, so that it is free to turn, I can try what effect this piece of iron has on it. Well, it attracts one end, and it also attracts the other end, just as you saw the shellac and the glass do — with the exception that it does not attract at the middle. But if now, instead of a piece of iron, I take a magnet and try it in the same way, you see that one of its ends repels the suspended magnet: the force is no longer attraction but repulsion. And if I take the other end of the magnet and bring it near, it shows attraction again.

[Figure 37-38: On the left, the bar magnet, its ends marked N and S, resting on supports. On the right, a small magnetic needle with its two ends differently coloured, balanced on a pivot so that either end can be drawn round.]

You will see this better, perhaps, by another kind of experiment. Here (Figure 38) is a little magnet, and I have coloured its ends differently so that you can tell one from the other. Now, this end, S, of the bar magnet (Figure 37) attracts the uncoloured end of the little magnet. You see it pulls it towards itself with great power; and as I carry it round, the uncoloured end still follows.

But now, if I gradually bring the middle of the bar magnet opposite the uncoloured end of the needle, it has no effect on it at all, neither attraction nor repulsion — until, as I come to the opposite end, N, you see that it is the coloured end of the needle which is pulled towards it. We are dealing here, therefore, with two kinds of power, attracting different ends of the magnet: a double power, already existing in these bodies, which takes the form of attraction and repulsion. And now, when I put up this label with the word MAGNETISM, you will understand that it is meant to express this double power.

Now, with this lodestone you can make magnets artificially. Here is an artificial magnet (Figure 39) in which both ends have been brought together in order to increase the attraction. This mass will lift that lump of iron; and what is more, by putting this keeper, as it is called, on top of the magnet and taking hold of the handle, it will hold on strongly enough to let itself be lifted up — so wonderful is its power of attraction.

If you take a needle and just draw one of its ends along one end of the magnet, and then draw the other end along the other end of the magnet, and then lay it gently on the surface of some water — the needle will generally float, owing to the slight greasiness your fingers have given it — you will be able to get all the phenomena of attraction and repulsion by bringing another magnetised needle near it.
