Lecture Five: Magnetism and Electricity

(Part 2 of 2)

[Figure 39: A powerful artificial magnet, bent round so that both its ends come together to increase the attraction. The flat bar laid across them is the keeper, which holds on so strongly that the whole mass can be lifted by it.]

I want you now to notice that although I have shown you in these magnets that the double power becomes evident chiefly at the ends, the whole of the magnet is concerned in giving that power. That will seem rather strange at first, so I must show you an experiment to prove that this is not an accident, but that the whole of the mass is really involved in the force — just as, in falling, the whole of a mass is acted on by the force of gravitation.

Here (Figure 40) is a steel bar, and I am going to make a magnet of it by rubbing it on the large magnet (Figure 39). I have now made its two ends magnetic in opposite ways. At present I do not know one from the other, but we can soon find out. You see that when I bring it near our magnetic needle (Figure 38), one end repels and the other attracts; and the middle will neither attract nor repel — it cannot, because it is halfway between the two ends.

But now, if I break that piece out of the middle and examine it — see how strongly one end of it pulls at this end of the needle, and how it repels the other end. And so it can be shown that every part of the magnet contains this power of attraction and repulsion, but that the power is only made evident at the ends of the mass.

You will understand all this in a little while; but what you have to consider now is that every part of this steel is itself a magnet. Here is a little fragment I have broken out of the very centre of the bar, and you can still see that one end of it is attractive and the other repulsive.

Now, is this power not a most wonderful thing? And are the means of taking it from one substance and giving it to another not very strange? I cannot make a piece of iron, or anything else, heavier or lighter than it is. Its cohesive power it must and does have. But, as you have seen from these experiments, we can add or subtract this power of magnetism, and do almost as we like with it.

[Figure 40: A steel bar made into a magnet by rubbing it on the large one. Break a piece out of its middle and that piece is itself a complete magnet, one end attracting and the other repelling.]

[Figure 41: The electrical machine: a glass plate rubbed by silk, with brass conductors at B B, and the little straw electrometer at A whose pith ball rises as the charge accumulates.]

And now we will go back for a short time to the subject we began this lecture with. Here (Figure 41) is a large machine arranged for rubbing glass with silk and so obtaining the power called electricity. The moment the handle of the machine is turned, a certain amount of electricity is evolved, as you can see from the rise of the little straw indicator at A.

Now, I know from the way the pith ball at the end of the straw is repelled that electricity is present in those brass conductors; and I want you to see how that electricity can be taken away. [Touching the conductor with his finger, the lecturer drew a spark from it, and the straw electrometer immediately fell.] There — it has all gone.

And to show you that I have really taken it away, watch this experiment. If I hold this brass cylinder by its glass handle and touch the conductor with it, I take away a little of the electricity. You see the spark in which it passes, and you see the pith-ball indicator fall a little, which seems to mean that so much electricity has been lost. But it is not lost: it is here, in this brass. I can take it away and carry it about — not because it has any substance of its own, but by some strange property we have not met with in any other force.

Let us see whether we have it here or not. [The lecturer brought the charged cylinder up to a jet from which gas was issuing; the spark was seen to pass from the cylinder to the jet, but the gas did not light.] Ah, the gas did not light — but you saw the spark. Perhaps there is some draught in the room blowing the gas to one side, or else it would light. We will try this experiment again later.

You see from the spark that I can transfer the power from the machine to this cylinder, and then carry it away and give it to some other body. You know very well, as a matter of experiment, that we can transfer the power of heat from one thing to another; if I put my hand near the fire it becomes hot. I can show you this with this ball, which has just been brought red hot from the fire. If I press this wire against it, some of the heat is transferred from the ball; and I have only to touch this piece of guncotton with the hot wire, and you see how I can carry the heat from the ball to the wire and from the wire to the cotton.

So you see that some powers are transferable and others are not. Notice how long the heat stays in this ball. I might touch it with the wire, or with my finger, and if I did it quickly I should merely burn the surface of the skin — whereas if I touch that cylinder with my finger, however rapidly, the electricity is gone at once, dispersed on the instant, in a manner wonderful to think of.

[Figure 42: A bar of copper with a spirit lamp playing on one end, and wooden balls stuck along it with wax at intervals. As the heat creeps along the bar the balls drop off one after another, the nearest first.]

I must now take up a little of your time in showing you the way these powers are transferred from one thing to another; for the manner in which force can be conducted or transmitted is extraordinary, and it is essential for us to understand it. Let us see how these powers travel from place to place.

Both heat and electricity can be conducted, and here is an arrangement I have made to show how heat travels. It consists of a bar of copper (Figure 42); and if I take a spirit lamp — this is one way of getting the power of heat — and set it under that little chimney, the flame will strike against the bar of copper and keep it hot.

Now, you know that power is being transferred from the flame of that lamp to the copper; and you will see presently that it is being conducted along the copper from particle to particle. For I have fastened these wooden balls with a little wax at various distances from the point where the copper is first heated; first one ball will fall and then the more distant ones, as the heat travels along. So you will learn that the heat travels gradually through the copper.

You will see that this is very slow conduction of power compared with electricity. If I take cylinders of wood and metal joined together at the ends, wrap a piece of paper round them and then apply the heat of this lamp where the metal and wood join, you will see how the heat accumulates where the wood is and burns the paper covering it; but where the metal is underneath, the heat is conducted away too fast for the paper to burn.

And so, if I take a piece of wood and a piece of metal joined together and hold it so that the flame plays equally on both, we shall soon find that the metal becomes hot before the wood. For if I put a piece of phosphorus on the wood and another piece on the copper, you will find that the phosphorus on the copper takes fire before the one on the wood is even melted; and that shows you how badly wood conducts heat.

But when it comes to electricity travelling from place to place, its speed is astonishing. First of all I will take these pieces of glass and metal, and you will soon understand why the glass does not lose the power it acquires when it is rubbed with silk. One or two experiments will show you.

If I take this piece of brass and bring it near the machine, you see how the electricity leaves the machine and passes to the brass cylinder. And again, if I take a metal rod and touch the machine with it, the indicator falls; but when I touch it with a glass rod, no power is drawn away. That shows you that electricity is conducted by glass and by metal in entirely different ways.

To make you see that more clearly, we will take one of our Leyden jars. I must not burden your minds too much with this subject; but if I take a piece of metal and bring it against the knob at the top and the metal coating at the bottom, you will see the electricity passing through the air as a brilliant spark. It takes no perceptible time to pass. And if I take a long metal wire — no matter what the length, at least as far as we are concerned — and make one end of it touch the outside and the other the knob at the top, see how the electricity passes! It has flashed instantaneously through the whole length of that wire. Is this not different from the travelling of heat along that copper bar, which has taken a quarter of an hour or more to reach the first ball?

[Figure 43: A tassel of paper strips on a glass rod at the top of a pole, joined to the machine by a wire. As the handle is turned the strips fly outwards towards the ceiling and the walls, each repelling the others.]

Here is another experiment to show that this power is conducted through some bodies and not through others. Why is this framework made of brass? [pointing to the brass work of the electrical machine, Figure 41.] Because brass conducts electricity. And why are these columns made of glass? Because glass obstructs the passage of electricity.

And why do I put that paper tassel (Figure 43) at the top of the pole, on a glass rod, and connect it to this machine with a wire? You see at once that as soon as the handle of the machine is turned, the electricity given off travels along the wire and up the rod to the tassel at the top; and you see the power of repulsion it has given these strips of paper, each spreading outward towards the ceiling and the walls of the room. The outside of that wire is covered with gutta-percha. It would not be enough to keep the force from you if you touched it with your hands, because it would burst through; but it answers our purpose for the present.

So you see how easily I can send this power of electricity from place to place, by choosing materials that can conduct it. Suppose I want to fire a quantity of gunpowder: I can readily do it with this transferable power. I take a Leyden jar, or any other arrangement that gives us the power, and arrange wires to carry it to the place I want; then, putting a little gunpowder at the ends of the wires, the moment I make the connection with this discharging rod I shall fire the gunpowder. [The connection was made and the gunpowder ignited.]

And if I showed you a stool like this and explained how it is made, you would easily understand that we use glass legs because they prevent the electricity from escaping to the earth. If, then, I stand on this stool and receive the electricity through this conductor, I can give it to anything I touch. [The lecturer stood on the insulating stool and put himself in connection with the conductor of the machine.]

Now I am electrified — I can feel my hair rising up, as the paper tassel did just now. Let us see whether I can manage to light the gas by touching the jet with my finger. [The lecturer brought his finger near a jet from which gas was issuing, and after one or two attempts the spark that came from his finger to the jet set fire to the gas.]

You now see how this power of electricity can be transferred out of the matter in which it is generated, conducted along wires and other bodies, and so made to serve new purposes altogether beyond the reach of the powers we have spoken of on previous days. And you will not now be at a loss to compare this power of electricity with those we have already examined. Tomorrow we shall be able to go further into the consideration of these transferable powers.
