Lecture Six: The Correlation of the Physical Forces

(Part 1 of 2)

We have often seen, in the course of these lectures, that one of those powers or forces of matter whose names I have written on that board has produced results which are really due to the action of some other force. You have seen the force of electricity acting in other ways than by attracting; you have seen it combine substances, or take them apart, by acting on the chemical force. In that case, then, you have an instance of two powers related to each other.

But we have other and deeper relations than those. We have not merely to see how one power affects another — how the force of heat affects chemical affinity, and so on — but we must try to understand what relation they bear to each other, and how these powers may be changed one into another. It will need all my care today, and all your care too, to make this clear to your minds. I shall have to confine myself to one or two instances, because to take in the whole extent of this mutual relation and conversion of forces would be beyond the human intellect.

In the first place, then, here is a piece of fine zinc foil; and if I cut it into narrow strips and apply heat to it, letting the air get at it at the same time, you will find that it burns. And seeing that it burns, you will be ready to say that chemical action is taking place. All I have to do is hold the piece of zinc at the side of the flame so that it gets heated, while the air flowing into the flame from all sides can reach it. There is the zinc burning, just like a piece of wood, only brighter. Part of the zinc is going up into the air as that white smoke, and part is falling down onto the table. This is the action of chemical affinity between the zinc and the oxygen of the air.

I will show you what a curious kind of affinity this is by an experiment which is rather striking when you see it for the first time. Here are some iron filings and some gunpowder, and I will mix them carefully together, handling them as gently as possible. Now we will compare the combustibility, so to speak, of the two. I will pour some spirits of wine into a basin and set it alight; and, having our flame, I will drop this mixture of iron filings and gunpowder through it, so that both sets of particles have an equal chance of burning.

Now tell me which of them burns. You see a plentiful burning of the iron filings. But I want you to notice that although they have had equal chances, we shall find that by far the greater part of the gunpowder is untouched. I have only to drain off the spirit and let the powder that has fallen through the flame dry, which it will do in a few minutes, and then I will test it with a lighted match. So ready is the iron to burn that in certain circumstances it takes even less time to catch fire than gunpowder does. [As soon as the gunpowder was dry, Mr. Anderson handed it to the lecturer, who put a lighted match to it; a sudden flash showed how large a proportion of the gunpowder had escaped burning as it fell through the flame of alcohol.]

These are all cases of chemical affinity, and I show them to make you understand that we are about to take up a strange kind of chemical affinity, and then to see how far we can turn this force of affinity into electricity, or magnetism, or any other of the forces we have discussed.

Here is some zinc — I keep to zinc, as it is very useful for our purpose — and I can produce hydrogen gas by putting zinc and sulphuric acid together, as they are in that retort. There you see the mixture giving us hydrogen: the zinc is pulling the water to pieces and setting hydrogen free.

Now, we have learned by experience that if a little mercury is spread over that zinc, it does not take away its power of decomposing the water, but modifies it most curiously. See how the mixture is boiling now; but when I add a little mercury to it, the gas stops coming off. We have now scarcely a bubble of hydrogen set free; the action is suspended for the time. We have not destroyed the power of chemical affinity, but modified it in a wonderful and beautiful way.

Here are some pieces of zinc covered with mercury, exactly like the zinc in that retort; and if I put this plate into sulphuric acid I get no gas. But this most extraordinary thing happens: if I introduce, along with the zinc, another metal which is not so combustible, then I bring back all the action. I am now going to put some pieces of copper wire into the retort with the amalgamated zinc — copper not being so combustible a metal as zinc — and see how I get hydrogen again. There are the bubbles coming over through the pneumatic trough, as at first, and rising faster and faster in the jar. The zinc is now acting because it is in contact with the copper.

Every step we take now brings us to a knowledge of new phenomena. The hydrogen you see coming off so abundantly does not come from the zinc, as it did before, but from the copper.

Here is a jar containing a solution of copper. If I put a piece of this amalgamated zinc into it and leave it there, it has scarcely any effect. And here is a plate of platinum, which I will put into the same solution; I might leave it there for hours, days, months, even years, and no action would take place. But by putting them both in together and letting them touch (Figure 44), you see what a coating of copper is immediately thrown down on the platinum.

Why is this? The platinum has no power of its own to bring that metal out of the fluid; but it has in some mysterious way received the power through its contact with the zinc. Here, then, you see a strange transfer of chemical force from one metal to another: the chemical force of the zinc is transferred and made over to the platinum by the mere association of the two metals.

I might take a piece of copper or of silver instead of the platinum, and it would have no action of its own on this solution; but the moment the zinc was put in and touched the other metal, the action would take place and it would become covered with copper. Now, is this not most wonderful and beautiful to see? We still have the identical chemical force of the particles of zinc acting, and yet in some strange manner we have the power to make that chemical force — or something it produces — travel from one place to another. For we do make the chemical force travel from the zinc to the platinum, by this curious experiment of using the two metals in the same fluid in contact with each other.

[Figure 44-45: On the left, the plate of amalgamated zinc and the plate of platinum standing in the solution of copper and touching each other; copper is at once thrown down on the platinum, which by itself would do nothing. On the right, the same arrangement drawn as a single cell — the acid liquid, the slips of zinc and platinum, and the wire joining them outside the vessel.]

Let us now look at these phenomena a little more closely. Here is a drawing (Figure 45) in which I have shown a vessel containing the acid liquid, with the slips of zinc and of platinum or copper, and I have shown them touching each other outside by means of a wire from each. (It does not matter whether they touch in the fluid or outside, by pieces of metal attached; either way, that communication between them transfers this power from the one to the other.)

Now, if instead of using only one vessel, as I have drawn there, I take another and another, and put in zinc and platinum, zinc and platinum, zinc and platinum, and connect the platinum of one vessel with the zinc of the next, and the platinum of that with the zinc of the next, and so on, we shall simply be using a series of these vessels instead of one. That is what we have done in the arrangement you see behind me.

I am using what we call a Grove's voltaic battery, in which one metal is zinc and the other platinum; and I have as many as forty pairs of these plates all exerting their force at once, sending the whole amount of chemical power evolved there along these wires under the floor and up to these two rods coming through the table. We need only bring the two ends into contact, and the spark shows us what power is present. What a strange thing it is to see that this force is brought away from the battery behind me and carried along through these wires.

I have here an apparatus (Figure 46) which Sir Humphry Davy made many years ago, to see whether this power from the voltaic battery made bodies attract each other in the same way that ordinary electricity did. He made it to experiment with his great voltaic battery, which was the most powerful then in existence. You see there are two leaves of gold in this glass jar, which I can move to and fro by this rackwork.

I will connect each of the gold leaves with a separate end of the battery; and if I have enough plates in the battery, I shall be able to show you that there is some attraction between the leaves even before they touch. If I bring them near enough while they are in communication with the ends of the battery, they will be drawn gently together; and you will know when this happens, because the power will burn the gold leaves away, which it could only do once they touched.

Now I am going to make these two leaves of gold approach gradually, and I have no doubt some of you will see that they approach before they burn; and those too far off to see them approach will know from their burning that they have come together. Now they are attracting each other, long before the connection is complete — and there they go, burnt up in that brilliant flash, so strong is the force. So you see, from the attractive force at the two ends of this battery, that these really and truly are electrical phenomena.

[Figure 46-47: On the left, Sir Humphry Davy's apparatus: two gold leaves in a glass jar, brought slowly together by rackwork until they attract each other and burn away in a flash. On the right, the vessel with two charcoal points, exhausted of air, in which the electric light burns without the charcoal being consumed at all.]

Now let us consider what this spark is. I take these two ends and bring them together, and there I get this glorious spark, like the sunlight in the heavens above us. What is it? It is the same thing you saw when I discharged the large electrical machine and you saw one bright flash. It is the same thing, only continued, because here we have a more effective arrangement. Instead of a machine we have to keep turning for a long time together, we have here a chemical power which sends the spark forth; and it is wonderful and beautiful to see how this spark is carried about through these wires.

I want you to see, if possible, that this spark and the heat it produces — for there is heat — are neither more nor less than the chemical force of the zinc: its very force, carried along the wires and conveyed to this place. I am going to take a portion of the zinc and burn it in oxygen gas, so as to show you the kind of light produced by the actual burning of this metal in oxygen. [A tassel of zinc foil was lit at a spirit lamp and put into a jar of oxygen, where it burnt with a brilliant light.]

That shows you what the affinity is when we look at it in its energy and power. The zinc is being burnt in the battery behind me at a much faster rate than you see in that jar — for the zinc there is dissolving and burning, and it produces this great electric light here. That very same power which you saw in the jar, evolved by the actual burning of the zinc in oxygen, is carried along these wires and made evident here. You may, if you like, consider that the zinc is burning in those cells and that this is the light of that burning [bringing the two poles into contact and showing the electric light]; and we might arrange our apparatus so as to show that the amounts of power evolved in the two cases are identical.

Having thus got power over the chemical force, how wonderfully we are able to carry it from place to place! When we use gunpowder for blasting, we can send chemical affinity down into the mine by means of this electricity: without having provided fire beforehand, we can send it in at the moment we want it.

Here (Figure 47) is a vessel containing two charcoal points, which I bring forward as an illustration of the wonderful power of carrying this force from place to place. I have only to connect them by wires to the opposite ends of the battery and bring the points together. See what a display of force we have! We have pumped the air out, so the charcoal cannot burn; and therefore the light you see is really the burning of the zinc in the cells behind me. There is no wasting away of the carbon, although we have that glorious electric light — and the moment I break the connection, it stops.

Here is a better instance still, to let some of you see the certainty with which we can convey this force to places where chemical affinity would not act under ordinary circumstances. We can take these two charcoal poles right down under water and get our electric light there. There they are in the water; and you see that when I bring them into connection we have the same light as we had in that glass vessel.
