Lighthouse Illumination: The Electric Light

(Part 2 of 2)

Let me now show you the properties of that light which make it useful for lighthouse illumination, and which have been brought into a practical state by the energy and persistence of Professor Holmes.

First of all I will show you the image of the carbon points on the screen, and draw your attention to the spot where the light is produced. There are the carbon points. The two carbons are brought within a certain distance of each other; the electricity is driven across by the voltaic battery, and the points are brought into an intense state of ignition.

You will notice that the light is essentially given by the carbons. You see that one of them is much more luminous than the other, and that is the end which chiefly forms the spark. The other does not shine so much; and there is a space between the two which, though not very luminous, is most important to the production of the light.

Dr. Tyndall will help me show you that a blast of wind will blow that light out. The electric light can in fact be blown out more easily than a candle. We have the power of getting our light where we please. If I make the electricity pass between carbon and mercury, I get a most intense and beautiful light, most of it coming from the part of the mercury between the liquid pole and the solid one. I can show you better with silver than with mercury that the light is sometimes produced by the vapour between the two poles. Here is the carbon pole, there is the silver, and there is the beautiful green light which comes from the space between them. Now, that light is more easily blown out than an ordinary lamp; the slightest puff of wind is enough to put it out, as you will see if Dr. Tyndall breathes on it.

You see, then, how by using this electric spark we can get the light, first of all, into a very small space. That oil lamp has a burner three and three-quarter inches across. Compare the size of that flame with the space this electric light occupies.

Next, compare the intensity of this light with any other. If I take this candle and hold it beside it, I seem actually to put the candle out. So we are able to get a light which, while it surpasses all others in brilliance, is at the same time not too large; for I might put this light into an apparatus no bigger than a hat, and still count on the rays being useful.

Moreover, when such large burners are used in a lantern, we have to consider whether the bars of the window will throw a shadow or otherwise interfere. But with this light there will be no difficulty of that kind, since a single small mirror no bigger than a hat will send it in whatever direction we please. It is wonderful what advantages its small bulk gives us in considering the different kinds of apparatus required, reflecting or refracting, quite apart from the other reasons for using the electric light. It is things of this kind that make us decide most earnestly and carefully in its favour.

[Figure 58: The great compound lens with the electric light in its focus. The tiny carbon point, set where the oil flame stood, throws a beam of parallel rays forward as wide as the lens itself.]

I am going to show you the effect we get with that large lens when we throw the oil lamp out of action and bring the electric light into use. It is astonishing to find how badly the eye compares the relative intensities of two lights. Look at that screen and try to remember the amount of light thrown on it by Fresnel's three-and-three-quarter-inch lamp. And now, when we shift the lens sideways, look at the glorious light coming from that small carbon point (Figure 58) — see how beautifully it shines in the focus of the lens and throws the rays forward.

At present the electric light is put at exactly the same distance as the oil light; and so, being in the focus of the lens, we have parallel rays thrown forward in a perfectly straight line, as you can see by comparing the size of the lens with the size of the light thrown on the screen. You will now see how far we can affect this beam by increasing or reducing the distance of the lamp. By a small adjustment we can get a beam of large or small angle. Observe what power I have over it now: with the oil lamp, if I want to increase the divergence I am limited by the power of the light, but with the electric light I can spread it over any width of the horizon by this simple adjustment. These, then, are some of the reasons which make it desirable to use the electric light.

[Figure 59: Professor Holmes's magneto-electric machine: magnets set radially on wheels, with coils between them, driven by an engine, so that the light is got by mechanical motion alone and no battery at all.]

By means of a magnet and of motion we can get the same kind of electricity as I have here from the battery; and under the authority of the Trinity House, Professor Holmes has been engaged in introducing the magneto-electric light in the lighthouse at the South Foreland. The voltaic battery has been tried under every conceivable circumstance, and I take the liberty of saying that it has so far proved a decided failure.

Here, however, is an instrument worked by mechanical motion alone. The moment we set this soft iron moving in front of the magnet, we get a spark. It is true that in this apparatus it is very small, but it is enough for you to judge its character. It is the magneto-electric light. An instrument has been built, shown here (Figure 59), consisting of a number of magnets set radially on a wheel — three wheels of magnets and two sets of coils. When the machine, which is driven by a two-horsepower engine, is properly set going, and the different currents are all brought together and thrown by Professor Holmes up into the lantern, we get a light equal to the one we have been using this evening.

For the last six months the South Foreland has been shining by this electric light — beyond all comparison better than its former light. It has shone into France and been seen and noticed there by the authorities, who work with us in beautiful accord in all these matters. Not once in six months has it failed to do its duty — not once, more than the inventor expected. It has shone out with its own peculiar character, and that with the old apparatus; for as yet no attempt has been made to build special reflectors or refractors for it, because it is not yet established.

I will not tell you that the problem of using the magneto-electric spark for lighthouse illumination is quite solved yet, although I most earnestly wish to see it established — for I regard this magnetic spark as one of my own offspring. The thing is not yet decidedly accomplished, and what the considerations of expense and other matters may be, I cannot say. I am only here to tell you, as a man of science, how far the results have been carried. But I do hope the authorities will find it a proper thing to carry out in full. If it cannot be introduced at all the lighthouses — if it can only be used at one — why, it will really be an honour to the nation that can originate such an improvement as this, one which other nations must of necessity follow.

You may ask what the use of this bright light is. It would be of no use to us were it not for the constant changes taking place in the atmosphere, which is never pure. Even when we can see the stars clearly on a bright night, the atmosphere is not pure. The light of a lighthouse, more than any other, is liable to be dimmed by vapours and fogs; and where we most want this great power is not in the finest state of the atmosphere but when the mariner is in danger — when the sleet and rain are falling, and the fogs rise, and the winds blow, and he is nearing coasts where the water is shallow and full of rocks. That is his time of danger, and that is when he most wants this light.

I am going to show you how, with a little steam, I can completely obscure this glorious sun, this electric light you see before you. The cloud now hiding the light on the screen is only such a cloud as you see when you are sitting in a train on a fine summer's day. You may notice that the vapour coming out of the funnel casts as deep a shadow on the ground as the black funnel itself does. The very sun is extinguished by the steam from the funnel, so that it cannot give any light; and the sun itself, if it were set in the lighthouse, would not be able to penetrate such a vapour.

Now, the haze of that cloud of steam is exactly what we have to overcome; and the electric light is, proportionally, put out by an obstruction of this kind just as soon as any other light. If we take two lights, one four times the intensity of the other, and extinguish half of the one by a vapour, we extinguish half of the other too — and that is a fact no arrangement can set aside.

But then we fall back on the sheer amount of light the electric spark gives us, to help it penetrate the fog. For the light of the electric spark shines so far at times that even before it has risen above the horizon, twenty-five miles away, it can be seen. This intense light, therefore, has the power we can take advantage of: of bearing a great deal of obstruction before it is entirely obscured by fog or anything else.

Taking care that we do not lead our authorities into error by the advice we give, we hope that we shall soon be able to recommend the Trinity House, on the strength of what has happened, to establish one or more good electric lights in this country.
