Oi/K ayaBuv TtoKvKoipaviri' us Koipavcs earoj, E~s PaaiKels.

[Minos sleejjwg: to him enter the I*hantasm o/'Euclid. Minos opens his eyes and regards him with a blank and stony gaze, without betrayivg the slightest surprise or even interest.']

J I. A priori reasons for retaining Euclid s Manual.

Euclid. Now what is it you really require in a Manual of Geometry ?

Minos. Excuse me, but—with all respect to a shade whose name I have reverenced from early boyhood—is not that rather an abrupt way of starting a conversation ? Remem- ber, we are twenty centuries apart in history, and con- sequently have never had a personal interview till now. Surely a few preliminary remarks—

Euclid. Centuries are long", my good sir, but mi/ time to-night is short: and I never was a man of many words. So kindly waive all ceremony and answer my question.

Minos. Well, so far as I can answer a question that comes upon me so suddenly, I should say—a book that will exer- cise the learner in habits of clear definite conception, and enable him to test the logical value of a scientific argument.

Euclid. You do not require, then, a complete repertory of Geometrical truth ?

Minos. Min. Certainly not. It is the evepy^ta rather than the €pyov that we need here.

Euclid. And yet many of my Modern Rivals have thus attempted to improve upon me—by filling up what they took to be my omissions.

Minos. I doubt if they are much nearer to completeness themselves.

Euclid. I doubt it too. It is, I think, a friend of yours who has amused himself by tabulating the various Theorems which might be enunciated in the single subject of Pairs of Lines. How many did he make them out to he?

Minos. About two hundred and fifty, I believe.

Euclid. At that rate, there would probably be, within the limits of my First Book, about how many ?

Minos. A thousand, at least.

Euclid. What a popular school-book it will be! How boys will bless the name of the writer who first brings out the complete thousand !

Minos. I think your Manual is fully long enough already for all possible purposes of teaching. It is not in the region of new matter that you need fear your ^Modern

Rivals: it is in quality^ not in quantity^ that they claim to supersede you. Your methods of proof, so they assert, are antiquated, and worthless as compared with the new lights.

Euclid. It is to that very point that I now propose to address myself: and, as we are to discuss this matter mainly with reference to the wants of beginners, we may as well limit our discussion to the subject-matter of Books I and II.

Minos. I am quite of that opinion.

Euclid. The first point to settle is whether, for purposes of teaching and examining, you desire to have one fixed logical sequence of Propositions, or would allow the use of conflicting sequences, so that one candidate in an ex- amination might use X to prove J, and another use Y to prove X—or even that the same candidate might offer hoik proofs, thus 'arguing in a circle.'

Minos. A very eminent Modern Rival of yours, Mr. Wilson, seems to think that no such fixed sequence is really neces- sary. He says (in his Preface, p. lo) ' Geometry when treated as a science, treated inartificially, falls into a certain order from which there can be no very wide departure; and the manuals of Geometry will not differ from one another nearly so widely as the manuals of algebra or chemistry; yet it is not difficult to examine in algebra and chemistry.'

Euclid. Books may differ very ' widely' without differing in logical sequence—the only kind of difference which could bring two text-books into such hopeless collision that the one or the other would have to be abandoned.

Let me give you a few instances of conflicting" logical sequences in Geometry. Legendre proves my Prop. 5 by Prop. 8, 18 by 19, 19 by 20, 27 by 28, 29 by 32. Cuth- bertson proves '>^'] by 41. Reynolds proves 5 by 20. When Mr. Wilson has produced similarly conflicting sequences in the manuals of algebra or chemistry, we may then compare the subjects : till then, his remark is quite irrelevant to the question.

Minos. I do not think he will be able to do so: indeed there are very few logical chains at all in those subjects— most of the Propositions being proved from first principles. I think I may grant at once that it is essential to have one definite logical sequence, however many manuals we employ: to use the words of another of your Rivals, Mr. Cuthbertson (Pref. p. viii.), ' enormous inconvenience would arise in conducting examinations with no recog- nised sequence of Propositions.' This however applies to logical sequences only, such as your Props. 13^ 15, 16^ i8_, 19, 20, 11, which form a continuous chain. There are many Propositions whose place in a manual would be partly arbitrary. Your Prop. 8, for instance, is not wanted till we come to Prop. 48, so that it might occupy any intermediate position, without involving risk of circular argument.

Euclid. Now, in order to secure this uniform logical sequence, we should require to know, as to any particular Proposition, what other Propositions were its logical de- scendants, so that we might avoid using any of these in proving it ?

Minos. Exactly so.

Euclid. We might of course give this information by attaching to each enunciation references to its logical descendants: but this would be a very cumbrous plan. A better way would be to give them in the form of a genealogy, but this would be very bulky if the enuncia- tions themselves were inserted: so that it would be de- sirable to have numbers to distinguish the enunciations. In that case (supposing my logical sequence to be adopted) the genealogy would stand thus :—{see Frontispiece).

Minos. Would it not be enough to publish an arranged list (which would be all the better if numbered also), and to enact that no Proposition should be used to prove any of its predecessors ?

Euclid. That would hamper the writers of manuals very much more than the genealogy would. Suppose, for instance, that you adopted, in the list, the order of Theorems in my First Book, and that a writer wished to prove Prop. 8 by Prop. 47 : this would not interfere with my logical sequence, and yet your list would bar him from doing so.

Minos. But we might place 8 close before 48, and he would then be free to do as you suggest.

Euclid. And suppose some other writer wished to prove 24 by 8 ?

Minos. I see now that any single list must necessarily prevent many possible arrangements which would not conflict with the agreed-on logical sequence. And yet this is what the Committee of the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching have approved of, namely, ' a standard sequence for examination purposes,' and ^^ hat the Association have published in their ' Sylla- bus of Plane Geometry.'

Euclid. I think they have overlooked the fact that they are enacting- many more sequences, as binding on writers, than the one logical sequence which they desire to secure. Their 'standard sequence' would be fitly replaced by a ^standard ' genealogy. But in any case we are agreed that it is desirable to have, besides a standard logical soquencCj a standard list of enunciations, numbered for reference ?

Minos. We are.

Euclid. The next point to settle is, what sequence and numbering to adopt. You will allow, I think, that there are strong a jiriori reasons for retaining m?/ numbers. The Propositions have been known by those numbers, for two thousand years; they have been referred to, probably, by hundreds of writers—in many cases by the numbers only, without the enunciations : and some of them, I. 5 and I. 47 for instance—^ the Asses' Bridge' and ' the Windmill'— are now historical characters, and their nicknames are ' familiar as household words.'

Minos. Even if no better sequence than yours could be found, it might still be urged that a new set of numbers must be adopted, in order to introduce, in their proper places, some important Theorems which have been added to the subject since your time.

Euclid. That want, if it were proved to exist, might, I think, be easily provided for without discarding my system of numbers. If you wished, for instance, to insert two new Propositions between I. 13 and I. 14, it would be far less inconvenient to call them 13 B and 13 C than to abandon the old numbers.

Minos. I give up the objection.

Euclid. You will allow then, I think, that my sequence and system of numbers should not be abandoned without good cause ?

Minos. Oh, certainly. And the onus probandi lies clearly on your Modern Rivals, and not on you.

Euclid. Unless, then, it should appear that one of my Modern Rivals,, whose logical sequence is incompatible with mine, is so decidedly better in his treatment of really important topics, as to make it worth while to suffer all the inconvenience of a change of numbers, you would not recognise his demand to supersede my Manual ?

Minos. On that point let me again quote Mr. Wilson. In his Preface, p. 15, he says, ' In a few years I hope that our leading mathematicians will have published, perhaps in concert, one or more text-books of Geometry, not inferior^ to say the least, to those of France, and that they will supersede Euclid by the sheer force of superior merit.^

Euclid. And I should be quite content to be so superseded. * A fair field and no favour Ms all I ask.

\ 2. Method of procedure in examining Modern Rivals.

Minos. You wish me then to compare your book with those of your Modern Rivals?

Euclid. Yes. But, in doing this, I must beg you to bear in mind that a Modern Rival will not have proved his case if he only succeeds in showing*

(i) that certain Propositions mig-ht w^ith advantage be omitted (for this a teacher would be free to do, so long- as he left the logical sequence complete); or (2) that certain proofs mig-ht with advantag'e be changed for others (for these might be interpolated as ' alternative proofs ^); or (3) that certain new Propositions are desirable (for these also might be interpolated, without altering the numbering of the existing Propositions).

All these matters will need to be fully considered here- after, if you should decide that my Manual ought to be retained: but they do not constitute the evidence on which that decision should be based.

Minos. That., I think, you have satisfactorily proved. But what would you consider to be sufficient grounds for abandoning your Manual in favour of another ?

Euclid. Many grave charges have been brought against my Manual; but, of all these, there are only two which I regard as crucial in this matter. The first concerns my arrangement of Problems and Theorems : the second my treatment of Parallels.

If it be agreed that Problems and Theorems ought to be treated separately, my system of numbering must of course be abandoned, and no reason will remain why my Manual should then be retained as a whole ; which is the only point I am concerned with. This question you can, of course, settle on its own merits, without examining any of the new Manuals.

If, again, it be agreed that, in treating Parallels, some other method, essentially different from mine, ought to be adopted, I feel that, after so vital a change as that, in- volving (as no doubt it would) the abandonment of my sequence and system of numbering, the remainder of my Manual would not be worth fighting for, though portions of it might be embodied in the new Manual. To settle this question, you must, of course, examine one by one the new methods that have been proposed.

Minos. You would not even ask to have your Manual retained as an alternative for the new one ?

Euclid. No. For I think it essential for purposes of teach- ing, that in treating this vital topic one uniform method should be adopted; and that this method should be the best possible (for it is almost inconceivable that two methods of treating it should be equally good). An alternative proof of a minor Proposition may fairly be inserted now and then as about equal in merit to the standard proof, and may make a desirable variety: but on this one vital point it seems essential that nothing but the best proof existing should be offered to the limited capacity of a learner. Vacuis committere venis nil nisi lent decet.

Minos. I agree with you that we ought to have one system only, and that the best, for treating the subject of Parallels. But would you have me limit my examina- tion of your ' Modern Rivals ' to this single topic ?

Euclid. No. There are several other matters of so great importance, and admitting of so much variety of treat- ment, that it would be well to examine any method of dealing with them which differs much from mine—not with a view of substituting* the new Manual for mine, but in order to make such changes in my proofs as may be thought desirable. There are other matters again, where changes have been suggested, which you ought to consider, but on general grounds, not by examining particular writers.

Let me enumerate what I conceive should be the sub- jects of your enquiry, arranged in order of importance.

(i) The combination, or separation, of Problems and Theorems.

(a) The treatment of Pairs of Lines, especially Parallels, for which various new methods have been suggested. These may be classified as involving—

(a) Infinite series : suggested by Legexuee.

(^) Angles made with transversals : Cooley.

(y) Equidistance: Cuthbertsox.

(6) Revolving Lines : Henrici.

(e) Direction: Wilson, Pierce, AVillock.

[Qj The substitution of ' Playfair's Axiom ' for my Axiom 12.

If your decision, on these two crucial questions, be given in my favour, we may take it as settled, I think, that my Manual ought to be retained as a whole : how far it should be modified to suit modern requirements will be matter for further consideration.

(3) The principle of superposition.

(4) The use of diagonals in Book II.

These two are general questions, and will not need the examination of particular authors.

Besides this, it will be well, in order that your enquiry into the claims of my Modern Rivals may be as complete as possible, to review them one by one, with reference to their treatment of matters not already dis- cussed, especially:—

(5) Right Lines.

(6) Angles, including right angles.

(7) Propositions of mine omitted.

(8) Propositions of mine treated by a new method.

(9) New Propositions.

(10) And you may as well conclude, in each case, with a general survey of the book, as to style, &c.

The following may be taken as a fairly complete cata- logue of the books to be examined :—

T. Leerendre. 8. Chauvenet.

2. Cooley. 9. Loomis.

3. Cuthbertson. 10. Morell.

4. Henrici. 11. Reynolds.

5. Wilson. 3 2. Wright.

6. Pierce. 13. Wilson's ' Syllabus'-

7. Willock. Manual.

You should also examine the Syllabus, published by the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teach- ing, on which the last-named Manual is based. Not that it can be considered as a 'Rival' in fact, it is not a text-book at all, but a mere list of enunciations—but because, first, it comes with an array of imposing names to recommend it, and secondly, it discards x:£iY system of numbers, so that its adoption, as a standard for exami- nations, would seriously interfere with the retention of my Manual as the standard text-book.

Now, of these questions, I shall be most happy to dis- cuss with you the general ones (I mean questions i, 2 (Q, 3, and 4) before we conclude this interview: but, when it comes to criticising" particular authors, I must leave you to yourself, to deal with them as best you can.

Minos. It will be weary work to do it all alone. And yet I suppose you cannot, even with your supernatural powers, fetch me the authors themselves ?

Euclid. I dare not. The living human race is so strangely prejudiced. There is nothing men object to so emphati- cally as being transferred by g-hosts from place to place. I cannot say they are consistent in this matter: they are for ever ^ raising' or ' laying' us poor ghosts—we cannot even haunt a garret without having the parish at our heels, bent on making us change our quarters : whereas if / were to venture to move one single small boy—say to lift him by the hair of his head over only two or three houses, and to set him down safe and sound in a neighbour's garden—why, I give you my word, it would be the talk of the town for the next month !

Minos. I can well believe it. But what can you do for me ? Are their Doppelg anger available ?

Euclid. I fear not. The best thing I can do is to send you the Phantasm of a German Professor, a great friend of mine. Pie has read all books, and is ready to defend any thesis, true or untrue.

Minos. A charming companion ! And his name ?

Euclid. Phantasms have no names—only numbers. You may call him ' Herr Niemand/ or, if you prefer it^, * Number one - hundred - and - twenty- three - million -four hundred-and-fifty-six-thousand-seven-hundred-and-eighty- nine.'

Minos. For constant use, I prefer ' Herr Niemand.' Let us now consider the question of the separation of Pro- blems and Theorems.

\ 3. The, combination, or separation, of Problems and Theorems.

Euclid. I shall be glad to hear, first, the reasons given for separating them, and will then tell you m?/ reasons for mixing them.

Minos. I understand that the Committee of the Associa- tion for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching, in their Report on the Syllabus of the Association, consider the separation as * equivalent to the assertion of the principle that, while Problems are from their very nature dependent for the form, and even the possibility, of their solution on the arbitrary limitation of the instruments allowed to be used, Theorems, being truths involving no arbitrary element, ought to be exhibited in a form and sequence independent of such limitations.' They add however that 'it is probable that most teachers would prefer to introduce Problems, not as a separate section of

Geometry, but rather in connection with the Theorems with which they are essentially related/

Euclid. It seems rather a strange proposal, to print the Propositions in one order and read them in another. But a stronger objection to the proposal is that several of the Problems are Theorems as well—such as I. 46, for instance.

Minos. How is that a Theorem ?

Euclid. It proves that there is such a thing as a Square. The definition, of course, does not assert real existence: it is merely provisional. Now, if you omit I. 46, what right would you have, in I. 47, to say c draw a Square'? How would you know it to be possible ?

Minos. AYe could easily deduce that from I. 34.

Euclid. No doubt a Theorem might be introduced for that purpose: but it would be very like the Problem : you would have to say ' '\f a figure were drawn under such and such conditions, it would be a Square.' Is it not quite as simple to draw it ?

Then again take I. 31, where it is required to draw a Parallel. Although it has been proved in I. 27 that such things as parallel Lines exist, that does not tell us that, for every Line and for every point without that Line, there exists a real Line, parallel to the given Line and passing through the given point. And yet that is a fact essential to the proof of I. 32.

Minos. I must allow that I. 31 and I. 46 have a good claim to be retained in their places : and if two are to be retained, we may as well retain all.

Euclid. Another argument, for retaining the Problems where they are, is the importance of keeping* the number- ing- unchanged—a matter we have already discussed.

But perhaps the strongest argument is that it saves you from ' hypothetical constructions,' the danger of which has been so clearly pointed out by Mr. Tod- hunter (see pp. 222, 241).

Minos. I think you have proved your case very satis- factorily. The next subject is ' the treatment of Pairs of Lines.' Would it not be well, before entering on this enquiry, to tabulate the Propositions that have been enunciated, whether as Axioms or Theorems, respecting them ?

Euclid. That will be an excellent plan. It will both give you a clear -view of the field of your enquiry, and enable you to recognise at once any doubtful Axioms which you may meet with.

Minos. Will you then favour me with your views on this matter -?

Euclid. Willingly. It is a subject which I need hardly say I considered very carefully before deciding what Definitions and A^xioms to adopt.

^ 4. Syllabus of propositions relating to Fairs of Lines.

Let us begin with the simplest possible case, a Pair of infinite Lines which have two common points, and which therefore coincide wholly, and let us consider how such a Pair may be defined, and what other properties it possesses.

After that we will take a Pair of Lines which have a common point and a separate point ('a separate point' being" one that lies on one of the Lines but not on the other), and which therefore have no other common point, and treat it in the same way.

And in the third place we will take a Pair of Lines which have no common point.

And let us understand, by ' the distance between two points,' the length of the right Line joining them ; and, by ' the distance of a point from a Line,' the length of the perpendicular drawn, from the point, to the Line.

Now the properties of a Pair of Lines may be ranged under four headings :—

(i) as to common or separate points ;

(2) as to the angles made with transversals ;

(3) as to the equidistance, or otherwise, of points on the one from the other ;

(4) as to direction.

We might distinguish the first two classes, which I hav-e mentioned, as ' coincident' and ' intersecting ': and these names would serve very well if we were going to consider only infinite Lines; but, as all the relations of infinite Lines, with regard to angles made with transversals, equidistance of points, and direction, are equally true of finite portions of them, it will be well to use names which will include them also. And the names I would suggest are ' coincidental' ' intersectional,' and ' separational.'

By ' coincidental Lines,' then, I shall mean Lines which either coincide or would do so if produced : and by ' inter- sectional Lines ' I shall mean Lines which either intersect or would do so if produced; and, by ' separational Lines,' Lines which have no common point, however far produced.

In the same way, when I speak of ' Lines having" a com- mon point,' or of ' Lines having two common points,' I shall mean Lines which either have such points or would have them if produced.

It will also save time and trouble to agree on the use of a certain conventional phrase respecting transversals.

It admits of easy proof that, if a Pair of Lines mnte, with a certain transversal, either [a) a pair of alternate angles equal, or (b) an exterior angle equal to the interior opposite angle on the same side of the transversal, or (c) a pair of interior angles on the same side of the trans- versal supplementary; they will make, with the same transversal, [d) each pair of alternate angles equal, and (e) every exterior angle equal to the interior opposite angle on the same side of the transversal, and (/") each pair of interior angles on the same side of the transversal sup- plementary.

You will accept that as a simple Theorem, though with a somewhat lengthy enunciation ?

Minos. Certainly.

Euclid. The phrase I propose is as follows. When I speak of a Pair of Lines as 'equally inclined to' a transversal, I wish it to be understood that they fulfil some one of the three conditions [a), (6), {c), and therefore all the three conditions (W)^ (e), (/).

Minos. A most convenient abridgment.

Euclid. Similarly, it admits of easy proof that, if a Pair of Lines make, with a certain transversal, either {11) a pair of alternate angles unequal, or {h) an exterior angle un- equal to the interior opposite angle on the same side of the transversal, or (c) a pair of interior angles on the same side of the transversal not supplementary ; they will make, with the same transversal, (il) each pair of alternate angles unequal, and (e) every exterior angle unequal to the in- terior opposite angle on the same side of the transversal, and (y) each j^air of interior angles on the same side of the transversal not supplementary.

And when I speak of a Pair of Lines as ' unequally inclined to' a transversal^ I wish it to be understood that they fulfil some one of the three conditions («), (b), (c), and therefore all the three conditions (^), (e)^ (/).

Minos. Very well.

Euclid. Now the Propositions relating to Pairs of Lines may be divided into two classes, the first covering the ground occupied by my Axiom 10 (' two straight Lines cannot en- close a space') and my Propositions I. 16, ij, 27, 28, 31 ; the second that occupied by my Axiom 12 and Propositions I. 29,30, 32. Those in the first class are logical deductions from Axioms which have never been disputed: the second class has furnished, through all ages, a battle-field for rival mathematicians. That some one of the Propositions in this class must be assumed as an Axiom is agreed on all hands, and each combatant in turn proclaims his own special favourite to be the one axiomatic truth of the series, insisting that all the rest ought to be proved as Theorems.

Let us now consider the properties of Pairs of Lines.

Such pairs may be arranged in three distinct classes. I will take them separately, and enumerate, for each class-, first th« ' subjects,' and secondly the ' predicates,' of Pro- positions concerning it.

Minos. Let us make sure that we understand each other as to those two words. I presume that a 'subject' will include just so much ' property' as is needed to indicate the Pair of Lines referred to, i.e. to serve as a sufficient Definition for them ?

Euclid. Exactly so. Now, if we are told that a certain Pair of Lines fulfil some one of the following conditions :—

(i) they have two common points ; or (2) they have a common point, and are equally inclined to a certain transversal; or (3) they have a common point, and one of them has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the other; or (4) they have a common point and identical directions; we may conclude that they fulfil all the following conditions: —

(i) they are coincidental;

(2) they are equally inclined to any transversal;

(3) they are ' equidistantial, i. e. any two points on one are equidistant from the other ;

(4) they have identical directions.

Minos. You mean, Ly ' conclude,'that we may prove our conclusion ?

Euclid. Yes, wherever proof is needed. Conclusions (1) and (4) need none, and are usually stated as Axioms.

Minos. In subject (4), instead of ^ identical directions,^ why not say ' the same direction' ?

Euclid. Because I want to keep clearly in view that there are t?vo Lines.

Minos. In predicate (2), you speak of ^ an^ transversal': a little while ago, you spoke of ' evety exterior angle.' Do you make any distinction between ' any' and ^every"?

Euclid. Where the things spoken of are limited in number, I use ^ every'; where infinite, I use 'any' in order to bring the idea within the grasp of our finite intellects. For instance, you may talk of ' every grain of sand in the world': there are, no doubt, what country-folk would call 'a good few' of them, but still the number is limited, and the mind can just grasp the idea. But if you tell me that ' every cubic inch of Space contains eight cubic half-inches,' my mind is unable to form a distinct con- ception of the subject of your Proposition : you would convey the same truth, and in a form I could grasp, by saying ' any cubic inch.''

Minos. The angles made with the transversal are a little bewildering when the Pair of Lines shrinks, as it does in this case, into one Line. For instance, what becomes of the pair of interior angles on the same side of the transversal ?

Euclid. A diagram would make it clear.

\

[Figure p65]

C H\ D

[Figure p65]

By examining' the second figure (in which, as you see, there are three points with double names) we find that the alternate angles AGF, EHD, have become vertical angles ; that the exterior and interior opposite angles EGB, EHD, have become the same angle; and that the two interior angles BGF^ DHE^ have become adjacent angles.

Minos. That is quite clear.

Euclid. Let us o-o on to the second class of Pairs of Lines.

If we are told that a certain Pair of Lines fulfil some one of the following conditions :—

(i) they have a common point and a separate point; or (2) they have a common point, and are unequally inclined to a certain transversal; or (3) they have a common point, and one of them has two points not-equidistant from the other; or (4) they have a common point but not coincidental directions ; we may conclude that they fulfil all the following con- ditions :—

(1) they are separational;

(2) they are unequally inclined to any transversal;

(3) any two points on one, which are on the same side of the other^ are not equidistant from it;

(4) a point may be found on each, whose distance from the other shall exceed any assigned length;

(5) they have different directions.

And thirdly, if we are told that a certain Pair of Lines fulfil some one of the following conditions :—

(1) they have a separate point, and are equally inclined to a certain transversal; or (2) they have a separate point, and one of them has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the other; we may conclude that they are separational.

Minos. AVh}^ not use your own word ' parallel' ?

Euclid. Because that word is not uniformly employed, by modern writers, in one and the same sense. I would advise you, in discussing the works of my Modern Rivals, to disallow the use of the word ' parallel' altogether, and to oblige each writer to adopt a word which shall express his own definition.

Minos. When you speak of two points on one Line, 2vhich are on the same side of the other, are equidistant from it,' do you include the case of their lying on the other Line ?

Euclid. Certainly. You may take them as lying on either side you like, and at zero -distances. The only case excluded is, where both points are outside the other Line, and on opposite sides of it.

Minos. I understand you.

Euclid. We shall find the Table of Propositions, which 1 now lay before you, very convenient to refer to. I have placed contra- nominal Propositions (i. e. Propositions of the form 'All X is IV' All not-Fis not-A^') in the same section.

Table I.

Containing tioenty Fro])ositions, of ivhicJi some are undisputed Axioms, and the rest real and. valid Theorems, deducihle from undisputed Axioms.

[N.B. Those marked ^ have been pro])osed as Axioms.]

■^1. A Pair of Lines, which have two common points_, are coincidental. or

■^. Two Lines cannot enclose a space. [Euc. Ax.]

2. {a) A Pair of Lines, which have a separate point, have not two common points.

{h) A Pair of Lines, w^hich have a common point and a separate point, are intersectional.

3. If there be given a Line and a point, it is possible to draw a Line, through the given point, intersectional with the given Line.

4. A Pair of intersectional Lines are unequally in- clined to any transversal.

Cor. I. In either pair of alternate angles, that, which is on the side, of the transversal, remote from the point of intersection, is the greater. [I. 16.]

Cor. 2. Every exterior angle, which is on the side, of the transversal, next to the point of intersection, is greater than the interior opposite angle on the same side. [I. 16.]

Cor. 3. The pair of interior angles^ which are on the side, of the transversal, next to the point of inter- section, are together less than two right angles. [I. 17.]

5. A Pair of Lines, which have a common point and are equally inclined to a certain transversal, are co- incidental.

6. A Pair of Lines, which have a separate point and are equally inclined to a certain transversal, are separa- tional. [I. 27, 28.]

7. If there be given a Line and a point without it, it is possible to draw a Line, through the given point, separational from the given Line. [I. 31.]

8. A Pair of intersectional Lines are such that any two points on one, which are on the same side of the other, are not equidistant from it.

Cor. That which is the more remote from the point of intersection has the greater distance.

9. A Pair of Lines, which have a common point and of which one has two points on the same side of and equidistant from the other, are coincidental.
