10. A Pair of Lines, which have a separate point and of which one has two points on the same side of and equidistant from the other, are separational.

11. Each of a Pair of intersectional Lines has, in each portion of it, a point whose distance from the other ex- ceeds any given length. or

A Pair of intersectional Lines diverge without limit.

12. A Pair of Lines, which have two common points, have identical directions.

^13. (a) A Pair of Lines, which have different direc- tions, have not two common points.

{li) A Pair of Lines, which have a common point and different directions, are intersectional.

■^14. A Pair of intersectional Lines have different directions.

■^15. A Pair of Lines, which have a common point and identical directions, are coincidental.

■^16. If there be given a Line and a point without it: it is possible to draw a Line, through the given point, having a direction different from that of the given Line.

17. A Line, which has a point in common with one of two coincidental Lines has a point in common with the other also.

18. A Line, which has a point in common with one of two separational Lines, has a point separate from the other.

"^19. A Line, which has a point in common with one of two separational Lines and also a point in common with the other, is intersectional with both.

^20. If there be three Lines; the first a right Line; the second, not assumed to be right, having a point separate from the first and being equidistantial from it; the third a right Line intersecting the first and diverging from it without limit on the side next to the second: the third is intersectional with the second.

Minos. I see that 2 (a) is the contranominal of 1. But where does 2 [h) come from ?

Euclid. It is o-ot from 2 (^) by adding", to each term, the property ' having- a common point'—;just as if we were to deduce, from ' all men are mortal,' ' all fat men are fat mortals.'

Minos. You mean 5 to be contranominal to 4, I suppose. But * coincidental ' is not equivalent to ' non-inter- sectional.'

Euclid. True: but I have added a new condition, viz. ' which have a common point,' to the subject. Non- intersectional Lines^ which have a common point, are coincidental, just as, in the next Proposition, non-inter- sectional Lines, which have a separate point, are sepa- ration al.

Minos. 20 is rather a difficult enunciation to grasp.

Euclid. A diagram will make it clear. As a matter of fact. No. 2 would be a right Line : but, as we have no right, at present, to assume this, I have drawn it as a wavy line.

Minos. I can suggest two Contranominals which you have omitted: one, deducible from 13 (/>), 'Two Lines, which are not intersectional and which have different directions, have no common point, i.e. are separational'; the other, deducible from 15, 'Two Lines, which have a separate point and identical directions, have no common point, i.e. are separational.'

Euclid. They are val'td deductions, but in neither case do we know the ^ subject' to be real.

Minos. The ^ oontranominality '—if such a fearful word be allowable—of 17, 18^ 19^ seems obscure.

Euclid. I will do what I can to make it less so.

Let us name the three Lines 'A, B, C

Then 17 may be read ^ A Line (C), which has a point in common with one [A) of two coincidental Lines (zf, B), has a point in common with the other [B) also.'

From this we may deduce two Contranominals.

The first is ' If A, C, have a common point; and B, C, are separational : A, B have a separate point.' That is, ' a Line (A), which has a point in common with one {C) of two separational Lines [B, C), hns a point separate from the other (i?)': and thus we ofet 18.

The other Contranominal is ' If A, C, have a common point; and A, B, have a common point; and B, C, are separational: A, B, are intersectional.' That is, 'A Line [A), which has a point in common with one (C) of two separational Lines (B, C), and also a point in common with the other [B), is intersectional with that other (5).'

But we may evidently interchange B and C without interfering with the argument, and thus prove that A is also intersectional with C. Hence A is intersectional with loth : and thus we get 19.

Minos. That is quite clear.

Euclid. We will now go a little further into the subject of separational Lines, as to which Table I. has furnished us with only three Propositions. There are, however, many other Propositions concerning them, which are fully ad- mitted to be true^ though no one of them has yet been proved from undisputed Axioms: and we shall find that they are so related to one another that, if any one be granted as an Axiom, all the rest may be proved; but, unless some one be so granted, none can be proved. Two thousand years of controversy have not yet settled the knotty question ivliicJi of them, if any, can be taken as axiomatic.

If we are told that a certain Pair of Lines fulfil some one of the following conditions:— (i) they are separational;

(2) they have a separate point and are equally inclined to a certain transversal;

(3) they have a separate point, and one of them has two points on the same side of and equidistant from the other; we may prove (though not without the help of some disputed Axiom) that they fulfil loth the following con- ditions:—

(1) they are equally inclined to any transversal;

(2) they are equidistantial from each other.

These Propositions, with the addition of my own I. 30, I. 32, and certain others, I will now arrange in a tabular form, placing Contranominals in the same section.

Table II.

Containing eighteen Propositions, of ivliich no one is an undisputed Axiom, hut all are real and valid Theorems, ivhich, though not deducible from, undisputed Axioms, are such that, if any one he admitted as an Axiom, the rest can he proved.

[N. B. Those marked ^ have been, or parts of them have been, proposed as Axioms.

1. A Pair of separational Lines are equally inclined to any transversal. [I. 29.]

■^2. A Pair of Lines, which are unequally inclined to a certain transversal, are intersectional. [Euc. Ax.]

3. Through a given Point, without a given Line, a Line may be drawn such that the two Lines are equally inclined to any transversal.

4. A Pair of Lines, which are equally inclined to a certain transversal, are so to any transversal.

5. A Pair of Lines, which are unequally inclined to a certain transversal, are so to any transversal.

6. A Pair of separational Lines are equidistantial from each other.

7. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and not equidistant from, the other, are intersectional.

^8. Through a given point, without a given Line, a Line may be drawn such that the two Lines are equidistantial from each other.

9. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the other, are equally inclined to any transversal.

10. A Pair of Lines, which are unequally inclined to a certain transversal, are such that any two points on one, which are on the same side of the other, are not equidistant from it.

11. A Pair of Lines, which are equally inclined to a certain transv^ersal, are equidistantial from each other.

12. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and not equidistant from, the other, are unequally inclined to any transversal.

13. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the other, are equidistantial from each other.

14. A Pair of Lines, of which one has two points on the same side of, and not equidistant from, the other, are such that any two points on one, which are on the same side of the other, are not equidistant from it.

15. (a) A Pair of Lines, which are separational from a third Line, are not intersectional with each other.

(Jj) A Pair of Lines, which have a common point and are separational from a third Line, are coincidental with each other. or.

If there he given a Line and a point without it, only one Line can be drawn, through the given point, separational from the given Line.

(c) A Pair of Lines, which have a separate point and are separational from a third Line, are separational from each other. [I. 30.]

^16. (a) A Pair of intersectional Lines cannot both be separational from the same Line.

{l}) A Line, which is intersectional with one of two separational Lines, is intersectional with the other also.

■^17. A Line cannot recede from and then approach another ; nor can one approach and then recede from another while on the same side of it.

18. {a) If a side of a Triangle be produced, the ex- terior angle is equal to each of the interior opposite angles. [I. 32.]

{h) The angles of a Triangle are together equal to two right angles. [I. 32.]

You will find it convenient to have the Propositions, that have been proposed as Axioms, repeated in a Table by themselves.

Table III.

Containing Jive Propositions, taken from Table II, ivJiich have been proposed as Aa^ioms.

Euclid's Axiom.

A Pair of Lines, which have a separate point and make, with a certain transversal, two interior angles on one side of it together less than two right angles, are intersectional on that side.

[This is one case of II. 2, with an additional statement as to the side of the transversal on which the Lines will meet.]

T. Simpson's Axiom. A Pair of Lines, which have a separate point and of which one has two points on the same side of, and not equidistant from_, the other, are intersectional. [This is 11. 7.]

Clavius^ Axiom.

Through a given Point, without a given Line, a Line may be drawn equidistantial from the given Line. [This is jmrt of 11, 8.]

Playfair's Axiom. A pair of intersectional Lines cannot both be separa- tional from the same Line.

[This is 11. 16 (a).]

E/. Simpson's Axioii. A Line cannot recede from and then approach another: nor can one approach and then recede from another while on the same side of it. \T]m is II. 17.]

Minos. In the predicate of 2, what right have yon to say ' are intersectional' ? The true contradictory of ' separa- tional^ would be 'have a common point.'

Euclid. True: but we may assume as an Axiom ' A Pair of coincidental Lines are equally inclined to any trans- versal.' This, combined with 1, gives ' A Pair of not- intersectional Lines are equally inclined to any trans- versal,' whose Contranominal is 2.

Similarly, we may combine^ with 6, the Axiom ' A Pair of coincidental Lines are equidistantial from each other,' and thus get a Theorem whose Contranominal is 7.

Minos. In classing 15 {a), (d), and (c) under one number, you mean, I suppose, that they are so related that, if any one of them be granted, the others may be deduced ?

Euclid. Certainly.

Minos. I see that if («) be given, (b) may be deduced by simply adding 'having a common point' to subject and predicate. And I see that [b) and (c) are Contranominals, so that, if either be given, the other follows. But I don't see how, if [b) only were given, you would prove (a).

Euclid. You can prove (c) from it, as you say: and then, from {b) and (c) combined, you can prove (a) thus :—

Any Pair of Lines, which are separational from a third Line, must belong to one or both of the two classes,' having a common point,' ' having" a separate point.' Hence if we take these two classes together, we include any Pair that can be proposed. Thus we get the Theorem ^ Any Pair of Lines, which are separational from a third Line, are either coincidental or separational'; the predicate of which is equivalent to 'are not intersectional.'

Minos. I see. And how are 16 [ci) and 16 {h) related to 15 ?

Euclid. Each of them is a Contranominai of 15 (a); and they are also contranominai to each other.

Minos. I should like to see that drawn out.

Euclid. Let ' A^ B, C be three Lines. Then 16 [a] may be written ' A Pair of Lines [A^ B)^ which are separational from a third Line (6'), are not intersectional with each other.'

This yields three Contranominais. The first is ' If A, B, are intersectional; it cannot be true that B^ (7, are separational, and also A^ C' i. e. ^ A Pair of intersectional Lines (^, B^ cannot both be separational from a third Line (Cy : the second is ' If ^^ C are separational, and A^ B in- tersectional; then Aj C are not separational.' i. e. ^A Line {A) which is intersectional with one (B) of two separa- tional Lines [B^ C), is not separational from the other (C)': and the third proves a similar Theorem for B.

Minos. Yes, but your conclusion no?v is ' A is not separa- tional from C^: whereas 16 (b) says ' is intersectional.'

Euclid. That is so : but since A is intersectional with a Line (B) which is separational from C, it is axiomatic that it has a point separate from C, and so cannot be coinci- dental with it. Hence, its being '^not separational from C" proves that it must be intersectional with it.

Minos. I suppose I must take it on trust that any one of these 18 is sufficient logical basis for the other 17 : I can hardly ask you to go through 306 demonstrations !

Euclid. I can do it with 11. You will grant me that, when two Propositions are contranominal, so that each can be proved from the other,, I may select either of the two for my series of proofs, but need not include both ?

Minos. Certainly.

Euclid. Here are the proofs, which you can read afterwards at your leisure. (See Appendix III.)

\ 5. Flay fair's Axiom.

Euclid. The next general question to be discussed is the proposed substitution of Playfair's Axiom for mine. With regard to mine, I am quite ready to admit that it is not axiomatic until Prop. 17 has been proved. What is an Axiom at one stage of our knowledge is often anything but an Axiom at an earlier stage.

Minos. The great question is whether it is axiomatic then.

Euclid. I am quite aware of that: and it is because this is not only the great question of the whole First Book, but also the crucial test by which my method, as compared with those of my ' Modern Rivals,' must stand or fall, that I entreat your patience in speaking of a matter which cannot possibly be dismissed in a few words.

Minos. Pray speak at whatever length you think necessary to so vital a point.

Euclid. Let me remark in the first place—it is a minor matter, but yet one that must come in somewhere, and I do not want to break the thread of my argument—that we need, in any complete geometrical treatise, some prac- tical geometrical test by which we can prove that two given finite Lines will meet if produced. My Axiom serves this purpose—a secondary purpose it is true—but it is incumbent on any one, who proposes to do away with it, to provide some sufficient substitute.

Minos. I admit all that.

Euclid. Now, if the test I propose—that the two Lines make with a certain transversal two interior angles on the same side of it together less than two right angles—be objected to as not sufficiently simple, the question arises, what simpler test can be proposed ?

Minos. The supporters of Playfair's Axiom would of course reply ' that one of the two Lines should cut a Line known to be parallel to the other.'

Euclid. Assuming that what is needed is a distinct con- ception of the geometrical relationship of the two Lines, whose future meeting we are asked to believe in, which picture, think you, is the more likely to yield us such a conception—two finite Lines, both intersected by a transversal, and having a known angular relation to that transversal and so to each other—or two Lines ' known to be parallel,' that is two Lines of whose geometrical re- lationship, so far as our field of vision extends, we know absolutely nothing, but can only say that, in the far-away region of infinity, they do 7iot meet ?

Minos. In clearness of conception, your picture seems to have the advantage. In fact, I could not form any mental picture at all of the relative position of two finite Lines, if all I knew about them was their never meeting however far produced: and it would be equally impossible to form any mental picture of the position which a Line, crossing one of them, would have relatively to the other. But, though your picture may be more easy to conceive, I doubt if it is enough so to constitute an axiom.

Euclid. Taken by itself, it may be, as you say, not entirely axiomatic. But I think I can put before you a few con- siderations which will make it more acceptable.

Minos. They will be well worth having. An absolute proof of it, from first principles, would be received, I can assure you, with absolute rajjtiire^ being an ignis fatuus that mathematicians have been chasing from your age down to our own.

Euclid. I know it. But I cannot help you. Some mysteri- ous flaw lies at the root of the subject. Probabilities are all I have to offer you.

Now suppose you were assured, with regard to two finite Lines placed before you, that, when produced in a certain direction, one of them approached the other, that is, contained two points, of which the second was nearer, to the other Line, than the first, would you not think it probable—if not absolutely certain—that they would meet at last ?

Minos. Utilising—as I suppose you will allow m^ to do— my knowledge of the properties of asymptotes^ I should say 'No. The mere fact oiapproach, granted as to two Lines, does not secure a future meeting.'

Euclid. But, if you look into the depths of your own con- sciousness—assuming such depths to exist—you will find, I believe, an eternal distinction maintained, in this respect, between straight and curved Lines: so that Lines of the one kind imist, if they approach, ultimately meet, whereas those of the other kind need not.

Minos. I will grant it, provisionally, if only to know what you are going to deduce from it.

Euclid. I will now ask you to consider this diagram.

[Figure 2]

Suppose it given that the Lines BJ), CE, make with BC two angles together less than two right angles. My object is to show that probably—if not certainly—they will meetj if produced towards B, E.

Let BE be so drawn that the angles FBC, BCE, may be together equal to two right angles.

Now, if any point in BB be nearer to CE than B is, what is required is proved, since BB ap/jroac/ies CE.

But, if this be not so, then F (which is obviously further from CE than some point in BB is) must also be further from CE than ^ is; i.e. EB must ajjj)roac/i EC; i.e. FB and EC must ultimately meet, below BC, and so form a Triangle^, whose angles at B and C will be (by my Prop. 17) less than two right angles. Hence the angles FBC, BCE, must be greater than two right angles, since the four angles are (by my Prop. 13) equal to four right angles. But this is absurdj since they were made equal to two right angles.

Hence I) is nearer to CU than i^ is ; i. e. JBI) approaches CU, and so will meet it if produced.

Minos. You certainly have made your Axiom a little more axiomatic. It is, I presume, an afterthought of yours: otherwise you would have made your Axiom deal with ap- proacliing Lines, and would then have proved your present Axiom as a Theorem.

Euclid. Excuse me. Whatever the habits of modern geo- metricians may be, in our day we always investigated a subject down to the very roots. No 'afterthought' was possible. You of the nineteenth century may 'look before and after,' if it so please you, so long as loe have liberty to look at what is at our feet: you may ^ sigh for what is not,' and welcome, so long as we may chuckle at what is!

Minos. Flippancy will not serve your turn. If you have no better reason than that—

Euclid. I have a better reason. How could I have dealt with approachi7ig Lines without first strictly defining ' the distance of a point from a Line ' ?

Minos. Nohow, I grant you.

Euclid. Which would have entailed a definition of ' the distance of a point from a point,' i. e. the length of the shortest path by which the one can pass to the other— which again would have entailed the comparison of all possible paths — which again would have entailed the estimation of the lengths of curved Lines—which again—

Minos. This is uncanny! It is whichcraft!

Euclid. [preserves a disgusted silence).

Minos. I beg your pardon. I grant that you have made out a very good case for your own Axiom, and but a bad one for Playfair's.

Euclid. I will make it worse yet, before I have done. My next remark will be best explained with the help of a diagram.

[Figure 3]

Let AB and CB make, with EF^ the tw^o interior angles BBF^ EFB, together less than two right angles. Now if through E we draw the Line GH such that the angles HEF, EFB may be equal to two right angles, it is easy to show (by Prop. 28) that GH and CB are ' separational.'

Minos. Certainly.

Euclid. We see, then, that any Lines which have the property (let us call it 'a') of making, with a certain transversal, two interior angles together less than two right angles, have also the property (let us call it ' /3 ^) that one of them intersects a Line which is separational from the other.

Minos. I grant it.

Euclid. Now suppose you decline to grant my 12th Axiom, but are ready to grant Playfair's Axiom, that two inter- sectional Lines cannot both be separational from the same Line : then you have in fact granted my Axiom.

Minos. Be good enough to prove that.

Euclid. Lines, which have property 'a/ have property

' /3.' Lines, which, have property ' ^,' meet if produced ; for, if not, there would be two Lines both separational from the same Line, which is absurd. Hence Lines_, which have property 'a,' meet if produced.

Minos. I see now that those who grant Playfair's Axiom have no right to object to yours: and yours is certainly the more simple one.

Euclid. To make assurance doubly sure, let me give you two additional reasons for preferring my Axiom.

In the first place, Playfair's Axiom (or rather the Contra- nominal of it which I have been using, that ' a Line which intersects one of two separational Lines will also meet the other') does not tell us which way we are to expect the Lines to meet. But this is a very important matter in constructing a diagram.

Minos. We might obviate that objection by re-wording it thus:—' If a Line intersect one of two separational Lines, that portion of it which falls between them will, if pro- duced, meet the other.'

Euclid. We might: and therefore I lay little stress on that objection.

Euclid. In the second place, Playfair's Axiom asserts more than mine does: and all the additional assertion is superfluous, and a needless strain on the faith of the learner.

Minos. I do not see that in the least.

Euclid. It is rather an obscure point, but I think I can make it clear. We know that all Pairs of Lines, which have property 'a,' have also property '/3'; but we do not know as yet (till we have proved I. 29) that all, which have property ' /3/ have also property 'a.'

Minos. That is so.

Euclid. Then, for anything we know to the contrary, class '^' may be larger than class ^a.' Hence, if you assert anything of class ' /3,' the logical effect is more extensive than if you assert it of class 'a': for you assert it, not only of that portion of class '/3' whitjh is known to be included in class ^a,' but also of the unknown (but possibly existing) portion which is not so included.

Minos. I see that now, and consider it a real and very strong reason for preferring j^our axiom.

But so far you have only answered Playfair. What do you say to the objection raised by Mr. Potts? ^A stronger objection appears to be that the converse of it forms Euc. I. 17 ; for both the assumed Axiom and its converse should be so obvious as not to require formal demonstration.'

Euclid. Why, I say that I deny the general law which he lays down. (It is, of course, the technical converse that he means, not the logical one. ' All X is Z' has for its technical converse 'All Y is A^'; for its logical, 'Some Y is X') Let him try his law on the Axiom 'All right angles are equal,' and its technical converse ^All equal angles are right'!

Minos. I withdraw the objection.

\ 6. The Principle of Superposition.

Minos. The next subject is the principle of ' superposition.^ You use it twice only (in Props. 4 and 8) in the First

Book : but the modern fancy is to use it on all possible occasions. The Syllabus indicates (to use the words of the Committee) ' the free use of this principle as desirable in many cases where Euclid prefers to keep it out of sight/

Euclid. Give me an instance of this modern method.

Minos. It is proposed to prove I. 5 by taking up the isosceles Triangle, turning it over^ and then laying it down again upon itself.

Euclid. Surely that has too much of the Irish Bull about it, and reminds one a little too vividly of the man who walked down his own throat, to deserve a place in a strictly philosophical treatise ?

Minos. I suppose its defenders would say that it is con- ceived to leave a trace of itself behind, and that the reversed Triangle is laid down upon the trace so left.

Euclid. That is, in fact, the same thing as conceiving that there are two coincident Triangles, and that one of them is taken up, turned over, and laid down upon the other. And what does their subsequent coincidence prove ? Merely this: that the right-hand angle of the first is equal to the left-hand angle of the second, and vice versa. To make the proof complete, it is necessary to point out that, owing to the original coincidence of the Triangles, this same ' left-hand angle of the second' is also equal to the le/lt-hsLud angle of the first: and then, and not till then, we may conclude that the base-angles of the first Triangle are equal. This is the full argument, strictly drawn out. The Modern books on Geometry often attain their much-vaunted brevity by the dangerous process of omitting links in the chain ; and some of the new proofs, which at first sight seem to be shorter than mine, are really longer when fully stated. In this particular case I think you will allow that I had good reason for not adopting the method of superposition ?

Minos. You had indeed.

Euclid. Mind, I do not object to that proof, if appended to mine as an alternative. It will do very well for more advanced students. But, for beginners, I think it much clearer to have two non-isosceles Triangles to deal with.

Minos. But your objection to laying a Triangle down upon itself dioe^ not apply to such a case as I. 24.

Euclid. It does not. Let us discuss that case also. The Moderns would, I suppose, take up the Triangle ABC, and apply it to BEF so that AB should coincide with BE?

Minos. Yes.

Euclid. Well, that w^ould oblige you to say ' and join C, in its new position, to E and F.' The words ' in its new position ■* would be necessary, because you would now have two points in your diagram, both called ^C' And you w^ould also be obliged to give the points B and E additional names, namely '^' and ' 5.' All which would be very confusing for a beginner. You will allow, I think, that I w^as right here in constructing a new Triangle instead of transferring the old one ?

Minos. Cuthbertson evades that difficulty by re-naming the point C, and calling it ' §.'

Euclid. And do the points A and B take their names with them ?

Minos. No. They adopt the names 'i)' and 'E'

Euclid. It is very like making a new Triangle !

Minos. It is indeed. I think you have quite disposed of the claims of ' superposition.' The only remaining subject for discussion is the omission of the diagonals in Book II.

^ 7. Tlie omission of diagonals in Euc. II.

Euclid. Let us test it on my II. 4. We will go through mi/ proof of it, and then the proof given by some writer who ignores the diagonal, supplying if necessary any of those gaps in argument which my Modern Rivals so often indulge in, and which give to their proofs a delusive air of neatness and brevity.

' If a Line be divided into any two parts, the square of the Line is equal to the squares of the two parts with twice their rectangle.

[Figure 4]

Let AB be divided at C. It is to be proved that square of AB is equal to squares of AC, CB, with twice rectangle o^AC, CB.

On AB describe Square ABEB; join BB; from C draw CF parallel to AI) or BF, cutting BI) at G-, and through G draw UK parallel to AB or BE.

-: BB cuts Parallels AB, CF,

.-. exterior angle C(?^ = interior opposite angle ABB.

[I. 29 also '.' AD = AB,

.-. angle ^D^^angle ABB ; [I. 5

.-. angle CG^5=:angle ^5i);

..CG=CB\ [1.6 but ^Z= C6^, and (^Z^ CT ; [I. 34

.-. C^is equilateral. also, •.' angle CBK is right,

•.• CZ is rectangular; [I. 46. Cor.

.-. CK is a Square.

Similarly KF is a Square and = square of AC, for JIG = AC. [I. 34

Also, •.• AG, (jjB'are equal, being complements, [I. 43

.'.AG 2.-^^ GE =t^\cQ AG',

= twice rectangle of AC, CB,

But these four figures make up AE.

Therefore the square of AB &c. Q. E. D.'

That is just 128 words^ counting from ' On AB describe ' down to the words 'rectangle of AC, CB^ What author shall we turn to for a rival proof?

Minos. I think Wilson will be best.

Euclid. Very well. Do the best you can for him. You may use all my references if you like, and if you can do so legitimately.

Minos. 'Describe Square ABEB on AB. Through C draw CjPparallel to AB, meeting '

Euclid. Yau must insert ' or BE^ to make the comparison fair.

Minos. Certainly. I will mark the necessary insertions by parentheses. ^Through C draw CF parallel to AJ) (or BE\ meeting BE in I!

Euclid. You may omit those four words, as they do not occur in my proof,

Minos. Very well. ' Cut off (from CF) CG= CB. Through G draw HK parallel to AB (or BE). It is easily shewn that CK, HE 2Lre squares of CB, AC-, and that AG, GE, are each of them rectangle of AC, CB.^

Euclid. We can't admit ' it is easily shewn'! He is bound to give the proof.

Minos. I will do it for him as briefly as I can. ^ •.• CG=z CB, and BK=CG, and GK=CB, .'. CKis equilateral. It is also rectangular, since angle CBK is right. .-. CK is a Square.' I'm afraid I mustn't say ' Similarly HE is a Square' ?

Euclid. Certainly not: it requires a different proof.

Minos. 'Because CE=AB = AB, and CG, CB, parts of them, are equal, .'. remainder G^i^= remainder AC, = HG. But IW= GF, and BE=HG; :. HE is equilateral. It is also rectangular, since angle IIBE is right. .-. HE is a Square, and = square of AC. Aiso AG is rectangle of AC, CB.^ I fear I can't assume GE to be equal to AG?

Euclid. I fear I cannot permit you to assume the truth of my I. 43.

Minos. 'Also GE is rectangle of AC, CB, since GF — AC, and GK — CB. .'. AG and GE= twice rectangle of AC, CB.'

Euclid. That will do. How many words do you make it ?

Minos. 145.

Euclid. Then the omission of the diagonal, instead of short- ening* the proof, has really lengthened it by seventeen words ! Well! Has it any advantage in the way of neat- ness to atone for its greater length ?

Minos. Certainly not. It is quite unsymmetrical. I very much prefer your method of appealing to the beautiful Theorem of the equality of complements.

Euclid. Then that concludes our present interview : we will meet again when you have reviewed my Modern Rivals one by one. If you had any slow music handy, I w'ould vanish to it: as it is

(Vanishes without slow music.)
