Treatment of Parallels by angles made with transversals.

COOLEY.

The verbal solemnity of a hollow logic/

CooLEY, Pre/, p. 20.

Niemand. I have now the honour to lay before you ' T/ie Elements of Geometry^ simplified and explained,^ by W. D. CooLEY, A.B., published in i860.

Minos. Please to hand me the book for a moment. I wish to read you a few passages from the Preface. It is always satisfactory—is it not?—to know that a writer, who attempts to ' simplify' Euclid, begins his task in a be- coming spirit of humility, and with some reverence for a name that the world has accepted as an authority for two thousand years.

Niemand. Truly.

Minos reads,

' The Elements of Plane Geometry . . . are here pre- sented in the reduced compass of '^d Propositions,, perfectly coherent, fully demonstrated, and reaching quite as far as the 173 Propositions contained in the first six books of Euclid.' Modest, is it not ?

Niemand. A little high-flown, perhaps. Still, you know, if they really are ' fully demonstrated '

Mm. If I In page 4 of the Preface he talks of ' Euclid^s circumlocutory shifts': in the same page he tells us that ' the doctrine of proportion, as propounded by Euclid, runs into prolixity though wanting in clearness': and again, in the same page, he states that most of Euclid's ex ahsurdo proofs 'though containing little,' yet 'generally puzzle the young student, who can hardly comprehend why gratuitous absurdities should be so formally and solemnly dealt with. These Propositions therefore are omitted from our Book of Elements, and the Problems also, for the science of Geometry lies wholly in the Theorems. Thus simplified and freed from obstructions, the truths of Geometry may, it is hoped, be easily learned, even by the youngest.' But perhaps the grandest sentence is at the end of the Preface. '^Then as to those Propositions (the first and last of the 6th Book), in which, according to the same authority'' (he is alluding to the Manual of Euclid by Galbraith and Haughton), ' Euclid so beautifully illustrates his celebrated Definition, they appear to our eyes to exhibit only the verbal solemnity of a hollow logic, and to exemplify nothing but the formal application of a nugatory principle.' Now let us see, mein Herr, whether Mr. Cooley has done anything worthy of the writer of such ' brave 'orts' (as Shakespeare has it): and first let me ask how you define Parallel Lines.

NiEMAND reads.

' Right Lines are said to be parallel when they are equally and similarly inclined to the same right Line, or make equal angles with it towards the same side.'

Minos. That is to say, if we see a Pair of Lines cut by a certain transversal, and are told that they make equal angles with it, we say 'these Lines are parallel''; and conversely, if we are told that a Pair of Lines are parallel, we say 'then there is a transversal, somewhere, which makes equal angles with them'?

Niemand. Surely, surely.

Minos. But we have no means of finding it? We have no right to draw a transversal at random and say c this is the one which makes equal angles with the Pair'?

Niemand. Ahem! Ahem ! Ahem!

Minos. You seem to have a bad cough.

Niemand. Let us go to the next subject.

Minos. Not till you have answered my question. Have we any means of finding the particular transversal which makes the equal angles ?

Niemand. I am sorry for my client, but, since you are so exigeant, I fear I must confess that we have no means of finding it.

Minos. Now for your proof of Euc. I. 32.

Niemand. You will allow us a preliminary Theorem ?

Minos. As many as you like.

Niemand. Well, here is our Theorem ii. ' When two parallel straight Lines AB^ CD, are cut hy a third straight Line EF, they make with it the alternate angles AGH, GHD, equal; and also the two internal angles at the same side BGH, GHD equal to two right angles.

For AGH ?iTLdi EGB are equal because vertically opposite, and EGB is also equal to GHD (Definition); therefore—'

Minos. There I must interrupt you. How do you know that EGB is equal to GRB^. I grant you that, by the Definition, AB and CB make equal angles with a certain transversal: but have you any ground for saying that EF is the transversal in question ?

Niemand. We have not. We surrender at discretion. You will permit us to march out with the honours of war ?

Minos. We grant it you of our royal grace. March him off the table, and bring on the next K/ival.

ACT 11.

Scene IV. Treatment of Parallels by equidistances.

CUTHBERTSON.

* Thou art so near, and yet so far.'

Modern Sonrj.

Niemand. I now lay before you ^'Euclidian Geometry^ by Francis Cuthbertson, M.A., late Fellow of C. C. C, Cam- bridge ; Head Mathematical Master of the City of London School; published in 1874.

Minos. It will not be necessary to discuss with you all the innovations of Mr. Cuthbertson^s book. The questions of the separation of Problems and Theorems, the use of super- position, and the omission of the diagonals in Book II, are general questions which I have considered by themselves. The only points, which you and I need consider, are the methods adopted in treating Right Lines, Angles, and Parallels, wherever those methods differ from Euclid's.

The first subject, then, is the Right Line. How do you define and test it ?

Niemand. As in Euclid. But we prove what Euclid has assumed as an Axiom, namely, that two right Lines cannot have a common segment.

Minos. I am glad to hear you assert that Euclid has assumed it ' as an Axiom/ for the interpolated and illogical corollary to Euc. I. ii has caused many to overlook the fact that he has assumed it as early as Prop. 4, if not in Prop. 1. What is your proof?

NiEMAND reads. ' Two straight Lines cannot have a common segment,''

' For if two straight Lines ABC, ABH could have a common segment AB ; then the straight Line ^^C might be turned about its extremity A, towards the side on which BHisj so as to cutBH; and thus two straight Lines would enclose a space, which is impossible.'

Minos. You assume that, be/ore C crosses BH, the portions coinciding along AB will diverge. But, if ABH is a right Line, this will not happen till C has passed H.

Niemand. But you would then have one portion of the re- volving Line in motion, and another portion at rest.

Minos. Well, why not ?

Niemand. We may assume that to be impossible; and that, if a Line revolves about its extremity, it all moves at once.

Minos. Which, I take the liberty to think, is quite as great an assumption as Euclid's. I think the Axiom quite plain enough without any proof.

Your treatment of angles, and right angles, is the same as Euclid's, I think ?

Niemand. Yes, except that we prove that ' all right angles are equal.'

Minos. Well, it u capable of proof, and therefore had better not be retained as an Axiom.

I must now ask you to give me your proof of Euc. I.

32.

Niemand. We prove as far as I. 28 as in Euclid. In order to prove I. 29, we first prove, as a Corollary to Euc. I. 20, that ' the shortest distance between two points is a straight Line.'

Minos. What is your next step ?

Niemand. A Problem (Pr. F. p. 52) in which we prove the Theorem that, of all right Lines drawn from a point to a Line, the perpendicular is the least.

Minos. We will take that as proved.

Niemand. We then deduce that the perpendicular is the shortest path from a point to a Line.

Next comes a Definition. ' By the distance of a point from a straight Line is meant the shortest path from the point to the Line.'

Minos. Have you anywhere defined the distance of one point from another?

Niemand. No.

Mhu We had better have that first.

Niemand. Very well. 'The distance of one point from another is the shortest path from one to the other.''

Minos. Might we not say ^ is the length of the right Line joining them ?'

Niemand. Yes, that is the same thing.

Minos. And similarly we may modify the Definition you gave just now.

Niemand. Certainly. ' The distance of a point from a right Line is the length of the perpendicular let fall upon it from the given point.'

Minos. What is your next step ?

NiEMAND reads.

P. '^'^. Bed. G. 'If points be taken along one of the arms of an angle farther and farther from the vertex, their dis- tances from the other arm will at length be greater than any given straight line.'

In proving this we assume as an Axiom that the lesser of two magnitudes of the same kind can be multiplied so as to exceed the greater.

Minos. I accept the Axiom and the proof.,

NiEMAND reads. P. 34. Ax. ' If one right Line be drawn in the same Plane as another, it cannot first recede from and then approach to the other, neither can it first approach to and then recede from the other on the same side of it.'

Minos. Here, then, you assume, as axiomatic, one of the Propositions of Table II. After this, you ought to have no further difficulty in proving Euc. I. 32 and all other properties of Parallels. How do you proceed ?

Niemand. We prove (p. 34. Lemma) that, if two Lines have a common perpendicular, each is equidistant from the other.

Minos. What then ?

Niemand. Next, that any Line intersecting one of these will intersect the other (p. 0^^.

Minos. That, I think, depends on Deduction G^ at p. o^'>^ ?

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. A short, but not very easy, Theorem; and one containing a somewhat intricate diagram. However, it proves the point. What is your next step ?

NiEMAND p. 34. Lemma. ^ Through a given point without a given straight Line one and only one straight Line can be drawn in the same Plane with the former, which shall never meet it. Also all the points in each of these straight Lines are equidistant from the other.'

Minos. I accept all that.

Niemand. We then introduce Euclid's definition of ^ Parallels. It is of course now obvious that parallel Lines are equi- distant, and that equidistant Lines are parallel.

Minos. Certainly.

Niemand. We can now, with the help of Euc. I. 27, prove I. 29, and thence I. 32.

Minos. No doubt. We see, then, that you propose^ as a substitute for Euclid's 12th Axiom, a new Definition, two new Axioms, and what virtually amounts to five new Theorems. In point of ' axiomaticity ' I do not think there is much to choose between the two methods. But in point of brevity, clearness, and suitability to a beginner, I give the preference altogether to Euclid's axiom.

The next subject to consider is your practical test, if any, for two given Lines meeting when produced.

Niemand. One test is that one of the Lines should meet a Line parallel to the other.

Minos. Certainly : and that will suffice in such a case as Euc. I. 44 (Pr. M. p. 60, in this book) though you omit to point out toliy the Lines may be assumed to meet. But what if the diagram does not contain ' a Line parallel to the other ' ? Look at Pr. (li) p. 69, where we are told to make, at the ends of a Line, two angles which are together less than two right angles, and where it is assumed that the Lines, so drawn, will meet. That is, you assume the truth of Euclid's liith Axiom. And you do the same thing at pp. 70, 123, 143, and 185.

Niemand. Euclid's 12th Axiom is easily proved from our Theorems.

Minos. No doubt: but you have not done it, and the omis- sion makes a very serious hiatus in your argument. It is not a thing that beginners are at all likely to be able to supply for themselves.

I have no adverse criticisms to make on the general style of the book, which seems clear and well written. Nor is it ^necessary to discuss the claims of the book to supersede Euclid, since the writer makes no such claim, but has been careful (as he states in his preface) to avoid any arrangement incompatible with Euclid's order. The chief novelty in the book is the introduction of the principle of ^equidistance/ which does not seem to me a desirable feature in a book meant for beginners : otherwise it is little else than a modified version of Euclid.

ACT 11.

Scene V. Treatment of Parallels hy revolving Lines.

Henrici.

' In order that an aggregate of elements may be called a spread, it is necessary that they follow continuously.'—Henrici's Art o/Blnvui, p. 12.

Niemand. I lay before you 'Elementary Geometnj: Congruent Figures' by Olaus Henkici, Ph.D., F.R.S., Professor of Pure Mathematics in University College, London, 1879.

Minos. What is your Definition of a Line ?

Niemand. ' The boundary of a surface or of part of a sur- face is called a Line or a curved (p. 5-)

Minos. Good—^ Line/ I presume, meaning ' right Line.' But that throws us back upon ' surface.' Of course that is defined correctly ?

Niemand. I will tell you in a moment. (Ee turns over a few ][mges) Yes, here it is. 'A surface is the—'' (Ke gives a perce'ptiljle start, stojjs reading, and turns a feio pages Jjack) Yes, it's all right. 'That w^hich bounds a solid and separates it from other parts of Space is called its surface.' (p. 4.)

Min. {aside) There is more here than meets the eye! {Aloud) You will be good enough to read that other De- finition of ' surface.'

Nie. (\,nnocently) What other Definition?

Minos. No evasions, Sir! Read it at once! You know the one I mean.

Nie. (desperately) It's only this — 'A surface is the path of a moving curve.' (p. 9.) Merely another way of looking at it, you know.

Min. (contemptuoiishj) Oh! Merely another way of looking at it, is it? Of course the curve preserves its shape as it moves?

Niemand. No doubt.

Minos. Now look here. Take this Jargonelle pear—

Niemand. Thank you very much. It is rather dry work—

Minos. Stop! Don't eat it yet! Look at it. Would you call its curvature regular ?

Niemand. Certainly not: it bulges here and there, in all sorts of queer ways.

Minos. Well, now take this bit of wire : bend it into any curve you like, and then move it so that its path may coincide with the surface of the pear.

Nie. (imeasily) I cannot do it.

Minos. Well, eat it, then. That is possible, at all events. So! We start with a Definition which is simply ridi- culous ! Now for the distinction between ' right Line' and ' curve '—

Niemand. Here my client's meaning is not very clear. The first Definition I can find is that of a curve. He says (p. 6) ' a point may be moved, and then it will describe a path. This path of a moving point is a curve.'

Minos. Surely he does not mean that a point can never move straight ? He must mean that there are two kinds of curves, ' curved curves,' and ' straight curves '—as the Irish talk of ' tay-tay' arid ' coffee-tay.' But, if so, he makes ' Line' and ^ curve'' synonymous.

Niemand. I have looked a little further on, and I find a description of a ' Line," which seems to limit the word to lent Lines. He says (p. 7) ' The notion of a Line may be obtained directly by considering a wire bent into any shape and abstracting all thickness from it.'

Minos. So then a ^ Line' must be bent, though a ^ curve' need not be so ? Your client has clearly one merit— great originality of style!

Niemand. Here is another definition of ' curve/ which may be more to your taste, 'A curve is a one-ivay sjyread, tvith jooints as elements.' (p. 10.)

Minos. Too much like a dinner a la Busse. I don't like ' spread' at all.

Niemand. He illustrates his use of ' spread' by applying it to other subjects. For instance, 'a musical tone allows of variations which form a two-way spread, with dif- ferent degrees of intensity and of pitch as elements.' (p. 12.)

Minos. That explains the phrase ' too-tooing on a flute.' How simple and intelligible all this must be to boys just beginning Geometry! But I am still waiting for a definition of 'right Line.'

Nie. [after turning over several pages) I have found it at last—after passing over a good deal about ' con- tinuity' and 'space' and 'congruence.' We say (p. 17) ' If we suspend a weight by a string, the string becomes stretched; and we say it is straight.'

Minos. That will serve very well to give a notion of ' straight.' For a 2Vorking definition we require of course some practical test, such as 'two straight Lines cannot enclose a space.'

Niemand. We have that. At p. 20 we give you ' Axiom IV. Through two points always one, and only one, Line can be drawn.' And at p. 18 w^e at last distinguish 'Line' and ' curve.' ^ A straight Line will in future be called a Line simply. All other Lines will be called curved Lines, or curves.^

Minos. Better late than never: thouo-h it makes wild work of your former theory — in which you got the notion of ' Line' from a bent wire, and of ' curve' from the path of a moving point. Now for the Definition of ' angle.'

Nie. {after turning the leaves hachwards and forwards for some time, begins to read in an unsteady voice) 'The part of a pencil of half-rays^ described by a half-ray on turning about its end point from one position to another, is called an angle.' (p. 47.)

Minos. So you reject the notion of 'inclination' (or rather ' declination') ? Well! This is an innovation ! We must investigate it thoroughly. You mean by 'half-ray,' I presume, what Euclid calls '^a Line termi- nated in one direction but not in the other'?

Niemand. Certainly.

Minos. Now what is a ' pencil' ?

Niemand. ' The aggregate of all Lines in a plane which pass through a given point.' (p. 38.)

Minos. Aha! And where will you get your angular

Sc. v.] ANGLES.

75 maornitude, I should like to know? "What kinds of magnitude is a Line capable of possessing*?

Niemand. Length only, of course.

Minos. Two Lines?

'Nie. [nneasilt/) Length only.

Minos. A million ?

Nie. [more imeasily) Length only.

Minos. A pencil ?

Nie, {^faintly) Spare me!

Minos. So much for the qualify of your angular mag- nitude ! Now for its qiiantiiy. What is the length of one of these half-rays?

Niemand. Infinite, of course.

Minos. And the aggregate length of all the half-rays in your ^ angle' cannot well be less. Thus we may deduce a truly delightful definition of angular magni- tude. 'As to quality, it is linear. As to quantity^ it is infinite'!

Nie, {ioritJies^ but says nothing).

Minos. Will you not throw up your brief?

Niemand. Not yet: I must fight it out.

Minos. Then we must review this marvellous book ' to the bitter end.' What have you to say about ' right angles' ?

Niemand. We have ' angles of rotation' and * angles of con- tinuation' (p. 48); and the axiom 'all angles of rotation are equal' (p. 49) as a substitute for ' all right angles are equal.'

Minos. It is a practicable method, but not so suitable for beginners as Euclid's. This matter I have already

76 ■ HENRICI. [Act II. discussed (see p. 74). And now for tlie subject of Parallels.

Niemand. We have Playfair's Axiom (or rather its equi- valent) ' Through a given point only one Line can be drawn parallel to a given Line' (p. 68), but this we do not simply lay down as an Axiom. We lead up to it by two or three pages of reasoning.

Minos. This is most interesting! Let us examine the argument minutely. A logical proof of that Axiom would be perhaps the greatest advance ever made in the subject since the days of Euclid.

Niemand. 'Two indefinite Lines in a Plane may intersect, as we have seen. We shall now consider the possibility of there being such Lines which do not intersect.' (p. 6^?^

Mill. That, of course, you can easily prove, without appealing to any disputable Axiom. It is simply Euc. I. 27. Do you prove it in Euclid's way ?

Niemand. Not exactly. Our argument is quite different from Euclid's: and we come to ttoo conclusions — one being the real existence of Parallels, the other the equi- valent of Playfair's Axiom.

Minos. I very much doubt your proving the first by any simpler method than Euclid's: and as to proving the second, by any method at all, without assuming some disputable Axiom, I defy you to do it! However, let us hear your argument.

Niemand. We take a Line, and a point without it: and from the point we draw two ' half-rays' intersecting the line. These half-rays we then turn about the point, in op- posite directions, until they cease to intersect the Line.

Sc. v.]

[Figure p116]

[Figure p116]

And then we proceed to consider where their ' produc- tions' have got to.

Minos. Like ' little Bo-peep,' you are anxious about their ^tails'' in fjict; taking their 'heads' to be the ends which at first intersected the given Line.

Niemand. We say that there are only three conceivable cases: one, where the tails fall next to the given Line; another, where the Jieads fall next to it; the third, where the tail of each coin- cides with the head of the other.

Minos. I admit all that.

Niemand. The first case we say is inadmissible because, if it were true, any Line through P, lying within the angle formed by the head of one ray and the tail of the other, would cut the given '— •

Line both ways.

Minos. A reductio ad ahsnrdum, no doubt; but it only holds good on the supposition that you can draw Lines through P, so as to lie within that angle. But this sup- position requires a finite angle. If we suppose that, the moment one ray begins to revolve so as to bring its head nearer to the given line, it instantly coincides with the other ray^ head with tail and tail with head, it will not then be possible to draw any such Line as you suggest: and then where is your reductio ad ahsurdum ?

Niemand. We do not seem to have noticed that case.

Minos. In point of fact, your three cases are really five.

Before going any further let us have them all clearly stated.

We assume, in all three figures, that the ray-heads, as drawn, do not intersect the given line; but that either of them would, if it began to revolve towards the given Line, instantly intersect it. In other words we assume that any half-ray, drawn from P in the dotted angular space, loould intersect the given Line: but that any half- ray, drawn from P in the undotted angular space, as well as the two ray-heads which limit that angular space, would not intersect it. And as to the ray-tails, it is obvious that in fig. i they do intersect the given Line, but in figs. 2, 3, they do twt do so.

Niemand. That is all clear enough.

Minos. Then these are the five cases:—

(a) Figure i. The head of each ray must revolve downwards through a finite angle before it can coincide with the tail of the other ray.

(j8) Same figure. The head of each ray, on beginning to revolve downwards, instantly coincides with the tail of the other ray.

(7) Figure 2. The head of each ray must revolve up- wards through 2i finite angle before it can coincide with the tail of the other ray.

(6) Same figure. The head of each ray, on beginning to revolve upwards, instantly coincides with the tail of the other ray.

(e) Figure 3.

These five cases suggest a few observations.

In case (a) a number of Lines may be drawn through

P, in the angular space contained between the head of one ray and the tail of the other : and all such Lines will intersect the given line both ways.

In case (/3) this absurdity does not arise: all Lines, through P, intersect the given Line one way or the other: there is no instance of a Line intersecting it botJi ways, nor of one wholly separate from it.

In case (y) a number of Lines may be drawn as in case (a) : and all such Lines will be wholly separate from the given Line.

In case (5) the tw^o rays themselves, as drawn in the figure, are wholly separate from the given Line: but no other such Line can be drawn through P.

In case (e) there is only one Line through P wholly separate from the given Line.

Now let us hear what you make of these five cases.

Niemand. We exclude case (a), as I told you just now, by a reductio ad aisurdum. Case (/3) we have failed to notice.

Minos. True: but it can be excluded by Euc. I. 27 : so that if you can manage, by pure reasoning, from ordinary Axioms, and without assuming any disputable Axiom, to exclude cases (y) and [h), you wdll have achieved what geometricians have been vainly trying to do for the last two thousand years!

Niemand. We go on thus. 'But our Axioms are not sufli- cient to decide which of the remaining two cases actually does occur.' (p. 67.)

Minos. Or rather ' the remaining three cases.'

Niemand. ' In looking at the figures the reader will at once feel that the third case' (we mean your 'case (e)') ^is the true one.'

Minos. An appeal to sentiment! What if the reader doesn't feel it ?

Niemand. 'But this cannot be considered decisive;'

Minos. It cannot.

Niemand. 'for the two Lines may include a very small angle —'

Min. Kje, or even a large one.

Niemand. 'that is, they may very nearly coincide without actually doing so. Or it may be that sometimes the one, sometimes the other, happens, according as we take the point P at a smaller or greater distance from the Line.'

Minos. That seems a fair statement of the difficulty. And now, how are you going to grapple with it ?

Niemand. ' The only way of settling this point is to make an assumption, and to see whether the consequences drawn from it do or do not agree with our experience.'

Minos. If you find a consequence 7iot agreeing with ex- perience, you may of course conclude that your assumption was false ; but, if it does agree, what then ?

Niemand. Nothing, I fear, unless you can prove that this is the case with one assumption only, and that all other possible assumptions lead to absurd results.

Minos. Exactly so. If, then, you want to prove case (e), your logical course is to assume case (y) as true, and from that assumption to deduce some consequence which is evidently contrary to experience. And then to exclude case (8) by a similar argument. Is that your method ?

Niemand. Well, hardly. We say 'The assumption to be made is, that the third case' (i.e. case (e)) only happens, and this will give us a new axiom.' (p. 6^].)

Minos. You may assume it as an axiom, if you like. Then you will merely he in the same boat with Playfair. But if you are going to discuss the consequences of its being true, and get anything out of that, look to your feet! There are pitfalls about!

Niemand. 'In the second case' (i.e. case (y)) 'we should have to—'

Minos. Oho! Tlien it is case (y), after all, that you are provisionally assuming as true ?

NiCi Apparently so.

Minos. Well, go on. You are on the right track now.

Niemand. In this case we should have to turn the ray 'through a finite angle' before its tail w^ould cut the given Line: ' or there would be an indefinite number of Lines through P which do not cut'' it. (p. 68.)

3/m. What do you mean by 'or'? That one result would follow, or the other, but not both ?

Niemand. We mean that the two results are equivalent.

Minos. Then you should say ' that is.' ' Or' is mislead- ing. However, I grant you that this consequence would follow^ if case (y) were true. What then ? Is there any obvious absurdity in such a consequence ?

Nie. That we do not assert. We merely make the remark—and we now proceed to case (e).

Minos. A weak and pointless remark : but let that pass. Do you omit case (8) ?

Niemand. We do. We proceed thus. ' But in the third case (i.e. in case (e)) there would be only one Line through

P which does not cut' the given Line. ' As soon as we turn this Line about P it would meet it to the right or to the left;

Minos. Certainly. And what then? Do you expect me to admit that, because case (e) would lead to a conse- quence not obviously absurd, therefore it is the case which always happens, to the exclusion of cases (y) and (a) ?

N'le. {JiesHatingly') Well, I think that is what we expect. But we first deduce the real existence of Parallels. ^ Thus we are led to the conclusion that there exist Lines in a Plane which, though both be unlimited, do not meet. Such Lines are called parallel!

Minos. Oh most lame and impotent conclusion! After all these magnificent Catherine-wheels of revolving half-rays, to deduce Euc. I. 27! And even tlih wretched result you have no right to. Just consider what your argument has been. There are five conceivable cases, (a), (/3), (y), (5), and (e). If (a) or (/3) were true, no Line could be drawn, through P, parallel to the given Line: if (y), many such Lines could be drawn: if (5), two such Lines: if (e), one such Line. Now what have you proved? Positively no- thing whatever but this—that case (a) would lead to an absurd result. You leave me perfectly free to range about among the other four cases, one of which, (^), denies the real existence of Parallels, which existence you tell me you have proved! And so, for the ' long course of logical reasoning' which you object to so much in Euclid, you substitute a sJiort course of z'/logical reasoning! But you deduce another conclusion, do you not ?
