Niemand. Yes, one other. ' The assumption mentioned in § 113' (the assumption that ease (e) is the only true one) ' may now be stated thus:—Axiom VI. Through a given point only one Line can he clraivn parallel to a given Line.^

Minos. May it indeed ? And why ' now' rather than three pages back ? Is there a single word, in all this argument, which tends to show that case (e) is—I will not say cer- tainly true, but— even fairly probable ?

Nie. (cautiouslij) I will not assert that there is.

Minos. In point of fact the odds are exactly three to one against it—since you have only excluded one of the five cases, and the other four are, for anything w^e know to the contrary, equally probable.

Niemand. I will not dispute it.

Minos. Well! Then it only remains to say that j^our attempted 'proof of Playfair's Axiom is an utter failure. Anything more hopelessly illogical I have never met with, not even in Cooley—and that is saying a great deal!

Niemand. I confess I do not see my way to defending this proof. But even if we abandon the whole of it, we are no worse off than any other writer who assumes Play- fair's Axiom.

Minos. That I quite admit.

Niemand. And then, my client instructs me to plead, this Manual {Itanding it to Minos) being so distinctly better than Euclid's in every other particular—

Minos. Gently, gently! You are anticipating. I have not yet had my general survey of the book.

Nie. (I'efiUing his pijoe) Well, let us have it then.

Minos. I will begin with the general remark that the first 151 pages of this book (the rest of it going beyond the limits of Euc. I, II) contain (excluding 7 pages on Logic and 22 pages of Exercises) 122 pages of text, which I presume the learner is expected to master.

Niemand. A great deal of that is merely explanatory.

Minos. True: but even omitting all that, we have, of Definitions, 80: and of Theorems, 145. And when the unfortunate learner has mastered all these—more than there are in Euclid's first six Books—he finds he has learned no more Euclid than Props, i to 34!

Niemand. But he will have learned a good deal that is not in Euclid.

Minos. Undoubtedly: and it would have been easy to crowd in twice as many Theorems as Mr. Henrici has done, without passing Prop. 34. I believe the subject to be practically inexhaustible. But fancy having to master 145 Theorems before even hearing of so important a one as Prop. 47 !

Niemand. If all the new matter is good^ it is a poor objection to raise that there is too much of it.

Minos. You think the quantlti/ unassailable? Well, let us test its quality a little, then.

The book begins with a page or two of very general considerations. Time and Force, Kinetics and Kinematics, Chemistry and Biology, cross the stage in a grand but shadowy procession. Then when the pupil has been suf- ficiently crushed by the spectacle of how much there is to know, we allow him, little by little, to contract his view: till at last we condescend to contemplate so trifling an entity as Infinite Space.

And here I notice a singular mental process. ' Two material bodies/ we are told, ' cannot occupy the same space. We are thus led to recognise a third property common to all bodies: every body has position.^ (p. 3.) The word ' thus^ is what I want to call your special at- tention to: for I confess I can see no such sequence of thought as it would seem to imply. Suppose bodies could occupy the same space: wouldn^t they have 'position' just as much as if they couldn't? Does an orange—to take the favourite logical entity—lose its position because another orange most uncivilly insists on permeating it and occupying the same portion of Space? But if not, what is the meaning of 'thus'? As Artemus Ward would say, ' why this thusness ?'

Niemand. I can't say.

Minos. A little further on I find a 'therefore' which is equally shadowy. The writer's logical ideas—in spite of his actually introducing a ' Digression on Logic'—are, I fear, a little vague. He says ' If we bring difierent points together into the same position, they will never give us anything but a point; w^e never obtain any ex- tension. We cannot, therefore, say that Space is made up of points' (p. 6). I venture to say that there is no such sequence as ' therefore' seems to imply: he has made the whole argument null and void by using the words Mnto the same position.'

Niemand. I do not understand you.

Minos. I w^ill put it in another way. The real reason why 3'ou cannot construct Space of points is that they have no size : if they /lad size you coicld do it. But, under the condition here laid down—of bringing them ' together into the same position'—you make the thing impossible, whether they have size or not.

I have often found it the best way for exhibiting the unsoundness of an argument, to make another exactly like it, but leading to an absurd conclusion. I will try it here. You grant that a cubic foot can be made up of cubic inches ?

Niemand. Certainly.

Minos. Well, I will prove to you that it cannot; and I will do so by an argument just as good as Mr. Henrici's. ' If we bring different cubic inches together into the same position they will never give us anything but a cubic inch ; w^e never obtain any extension—'

Niemand. That won't do! You have the ' extension' of one cubic inch.

Minos. Yes, but you had that to begin with. You don't 'obtain' any extension by squeezing in other cubic inches, do you ?

Niemand. No, I suppose not.

Minos. Then the argument is sound so far. And now comes my triumphant conclusion, a la Henrici. ' We cannot, therefore, say that a cubic foot is made up of cubic inches.'

Niemand. I see your meaning now. I give up the words ' into the same position.'

Minos. I haven^t quite done with points yet. I find an assertion that they never jump. Do you think that arises from their having ' position,^ which they feel might be compromised by such conduct?

Niemand. I cannot tell without hearing the passage read.

Minos. It is this:—' A point, in changing its position on a curve, passes, in moving from one position to another, through all intermediate positions. It does not move by jumps.' (p. I2.)

Niemand. That is quite true.

Minos. Tell me, then—is every centre of gravity a point?

Niemand. Certainly.

Minos. Let us now consider the centre of gravity of a flea. Does it—

'Nie. {indignantl?/) Another word^ and I shall vanish! I cannot waste a nig-ht on such trivialities.

Minos. Forgive me. I drop the flea. My next remark shall be serious. I wish to point out to you the il- logical ione of the book. I do not say that the in- stances I am o'oins: to ffive are crucial or fatal to the argument. But, however unimportant^ and however easily corrected, they will, I think, justify me in asking ' Is a text-book, which contains such loosely reasoned arguments as these, to be trusted ? '

My first selection is § 52, p. 23. For brevity's sake I shall omit superfluous w^ords. The passages in paren- theses are interpolations of my owm.

(see He7irici, p. 23.)

' If v\^e canceive a Plane (and a point A chosen any- where in Space; then, either the Plane already passes through A^ or) we may move it until a point on it comes to A, which has been chosen anywhere in Space. (If we now flx a second point B ; then, either the Plane already passes through B, or) if we keep A fixed we may turn the Plane about it, until the Plane comes to pass also through B, likewise chosen arbitrarily in Space. (If we now fix a third point C) then_, either the Plane already passes through C, or) we may still move the Plane, as onl}^ two points of it are fixed, by turning it about the Line joining them, until the Plane passes through C, chosen arbitrarily, like A and B. Thus it appears that we may place a Plane so as to pass through three points, A^ B, Cy chosen anywhere in Space.'

You accept that, interpolations and all ?

Niemand. Certainly.

Minos. Omit the interpolations, and what do you say of it then?

Niemand. It remains true. The three successive movings do no harm, but they are not always necessary.

Minos. Would this statement be correct ? ' Three " mov- ings " are generally necessary: but there are three ex- ceptions. If the Plane at first passes through A, the first " moving" is unnecessary; if, after being made to pass through A, it be found to pass through B also, the second "moving" is unnecessary; and if, after being made to pass through A and B, it be found to pass through C also, the tldrcl "^moving" is unnecessary'?

Niemand. Certainly.

Minos. You would not, on finding some one ' moving' unnecessary, call it ' an open question' whether the result were attainable? iVf^. What? When it is already attained? ^^ ^<^ means.

Minos. Now read this, at p. 23.

(hands the hook)

' But if C happens to lie on the Line joining* A and B, then a Plane through A and B, which did not pass through C, could never be made to pass through C by being rotated about A and B; for if it did contain C in one position, it would contain it in all positions, as this point would remain fixed during rotation/ What do you say to that?

Niemand. Well, it is his way of discussing your third ex- ception. Of course, when he talks of 'a Plane through A and B, which did not pass through C',' he is de- scribing a nonentity : but it is all logical as an argu- ment.

Minos. What kind of argument ?

Nie. (douhifully) I should call it a—kind of—Reductio ad Absurdum.

Minos. I don't wonder at your hesitation. A thoughtful boy might read it thus:—' then a Plane through A and B, which did not pass through C (but no such 'Plane can exist!), could never be made to pass through C by being rotated about A and B (why, it needs no ' making'!); for if it did contain C in one position (which it does!), it would contain it in all positions (which also it does !) '

You and I can recognise the Reductio ad Absurdum— though so abnormal and hideous—which the writer in- tends. But what do you think would be the effect, on a thoughtful boy, of a course of such arguments, where he is expected to accept as data what he knows to be absurd, and to recognise as an absurdity what be knows to be a necessary truth?

Niemand. At first, Mania: ultimately. Dementia.

Minos. Now read Mr. Henrici's deduction from this fearful argument, at p. 24.

' We ought, therefore, to limit the conclusion arrived at as follows:—Through three points which do not lie in a Line we may always pass a Plane. Whether a Plane may be drawn through three points which do lie in a Line^ remains for the moment an open question.'

Are you prepared to back that statement? Is it an ' open question ' ?

Niemand. I cannot say that it is.

Minos. Now here is a most curious bit of bad Logic, (reads)

' If two Planes have two points, A and B, in common, they must necessarily have more points in common. For, since each extends continuously without limit, a point moving in the one Plane through A or B will cross the other Plane at this point ;^ (p. 25-)

I pause to ask—will it necessarily do so? How if it moved along their Line of intersection?

Niemand. That is an exception, I grant.

Min. (reads) Mience one Plane will lie partly on the one and partly on the other side of the second Plane. They must therefore intersect.'

Now the conclusion—that the Planes intersect—is un- doubtedly true, so long as we assume that, by 'two planes/ the writer means 'two different Planes.' But does it follow from the p7'emisses? Have the words ' hence' and ' therefore' any logical value ?

Sc. v.]

Niemand. I fear not.

Minos. At p. 74 I observe ' If two Lines be each per- pendicular to a third, they will be parallel to one another.' This is not true. They might be coincidental. The same mistake is made in p. 75.

Now comes a wonderful specimen of slipshod wa-iting. ' We understand by the angles of a Polygon those angles of which the part near the vertex lies within the Polygon.' Does not this oblige us to contemplate an angle as consisting of two parts—one ' near the ver- tex,' the other further off?

Niemand. Undoubtedly.

Minos. And if either part were gone, the angle would be less?

Nie. {uneasily) It would seem so.

Minos. And this might be effected by shortening the Lines, so that they would not reach beyond the region ' near the vertex ' ?

Niemand. I fear you have got us into a corner. Be merciful!

Minos. You mean that I have driven you into ' that part of an angle which lies near the vertex.' Well, you may come out now. We will seek ' fresh fields and pastures new.'

At pages 91 to 96 I find no less than forty-six theorems on Symmetry, arranged in tw^o columns—one headed ' Axial Symmetry,' the other ' Central Symmetry.'' Here is a specimen pair, at p. 95.

' Corresponding Polygons are congruent but of oppo- site sense.'

' Corresponding Polygons are congruent and of like

I hardly know which to pity most—the master who has to teach these Theorems, or the boy who has to learn them! '

But I have neither the ' one-way spread with moments as elements' nor the 'three-way spread with points as elements' to—

Nle, (cjasping) What are you talking about ?

Minos. Excuse me. I fear I am getting demoralised. I meant to say—I have neither the time nor the space to criticise this book throughout.

I will, however, try to sum up its faults in a general description.

^ 011a Podrida' is perhaps the best name for it, its con- tents are so hopelessly jumbled together. Most of the Axioms, and all the Theorems, are without numbers, and, as there is no index, the difficulty of finding them when wanted is obvious: and none the less that they are imbedded in oceans of 'padding.' Dip into the book anywhere, and you find yourself in the midst of some discursive talk, which perhaps culminates in an Axiom. Then perhaps comes a Definition. Then comes a little more talk, which, after appealing to sentiment, or proba- bility, or some other motive degrading to Pure Mathe- matics, gradually becomes more and more logical, and at last warms into a regular proof—but of what ? The reader has no warning as to loliai is to be proved. Un- suspectingly he glides on with the stream, till with a crash he is landed on an enunciation, and finds himself committed to an entire Theorem. This singular writer always reserves the enunciation for the end of the Proposition. It may be prejudice, but I cannot help thinking that Euclid's plan—of first clearly stating what he is going to prove and then proving it—is to be preferred to this conjurer's trick of ' forcing a card.'

The book is, I think, very hard for beginners to master : the majority of the new Theorems are much more fitted for ' exercises,' than to be embodied in a text-book: and, to crown all, the ambitious attempt to construct a proof of Playfair's Axiom is, as we have seen, a lamentable failure.

I think I cannot better conclude my review of this book than by giving you, in two parallel columns, Euclid's Props. I. 18, 19, and Mr. Henrici's proposed substitute for them, at p. 107.

(turn over.)

Euclid.

The greater side of a Triangle is oi^posite to the greater angle.

[Figure p133]

Let ABC be a tri- angle having AC > AB: then shall the angle ABC he > the angle C.

From AC cut off Al) equal to AB-, and draw BJD.

T:\ien,'.'AB = AI), .'. the angle ABI) = the angle ABB; but the angle ABB is exterior to the Tri- angle BCB, and .*. < the angle C;

, •. the angle ABB also > the angle C; much more is the angle ABC > the angle C. Q. E. D.

Heneici.

[Figure p133]

Let us now suppose a Triangle ABC, in which the bisector of the angle BAC is not an axis of sym- metiy. Then the contra-positive form of the theorem of § 162 tells us that AB is not equal to AC, that the angle B is not equal to the angle C, and that the bisector AD of the angle A is not perpen- dicular to BC, and hence, that the two angles ABB and ABC are un- equal. Between these angles there exists the relation

' the angle ABC + the angle BBA = the angle C+ the angle CBA,' for each sum makes with half the angle A an angle of continua- tion. Hence it follows that, if the angle ABC > the angle C, the angle BBA < the angle CBA.

Sc. v.]

The greater angle of a Triangle is oppo- site to the greater side.

[Figure p134]

Let J^C be a Tri- angle having" the Z B > the angle C'. then shall AC hQ > AB.

For if not, it must be equal or less.

It is not equal, for then the angle B would = the angle C.

It is not less, for then the angle B would < the angle C.

.\AC> AB. Q.E.D.

If we now fold the figure along AJD, then AB will fall along AC; and B will fall between A and C if we suppose that AB is the shorter of the two unequal Lines AB and AC. The line BB therefore takes the position BB" within the angle ABC. But the angle AB'D, which = the angle ABC, is exterior to the triangle BCB\ and .-. > the angle C.

Conversely, if the angle ABB < the angle ABC, the line BB will fall within the angle ABC, and .'. B will fall between A and C; that is, AB will be less than AC. This always happens (see above) if the angle ABC > the angle C, for then the angle BBA < the angle ABC.

Theorem. In ever?/ Triangle the greater side is opposite to the greater angle, and conversely, the greater angle is opposite to the greater side.

Now, if you could get some schoolmaster—one who had no bias whatever in favour of Euclid or of Henrici—to teach these two columns (one containing 169, the other 282 words) to two ordinary boys of equal intelligence^ or rather of equal stupidity, what result would you expect ?

Nie. (ivHh a cunning smile) I don't think I could find such a schoolmaster.

Minos. Ah, crafty man! You evade the question! I can't resist giving you just one more tit-bit—the definition of a Square, at p. 123.

'A quadrilateral which is a kite, a symmetrical tra- pezium, and a parallelogram is a Square '!

And now, farewell, Henrici! ' Euclid, with all thy faults, I love thee still !' Indeed I might say ' with twice thy faults/ or 'with thrice thy faults,' if the alternative be Henrici! [returns the hook, ivhich Niemmid receives in solemn silence.)

ACT 11.

Scene YI. Treatment of Parallels by direction.

I. Wilson.

'There is moreover a logic besides that of mere reasoning.'

Wilson, Pr^. p. xiii.

Niemand. You have made but short work of four of the five methods of treating Parallels.

Minos. We shall have all the more time to give to the somewhat intricate subject of Direction.

Niemand. I lay on the table 'Elementary Geometry' by J. M. Wilson, M.A., late Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, late Mathematical Master of Rugby School, now Head Master of Clifton College. The second edition, 1869. And I warn you to be careful how you criticise it, as it is already adopted in several schools.

Min. Tant pis pour les ecoles. So you and your client deliberately propose to supersede Euclid as a text-book ?

Nie. ' I am of opinion that the time is come for making an effort to supplant Euclid in our schools and universities.' (Pref. p. xiv.)

Minos. It will be necessary, considering* how great a change you are advocating, to examine your book very minutely and critically.

Niemand. With all my heart. I hope you will show, in your review, 'the spirit without the prejudices of a geo- metrician.' (Pref. p. XV.)

Minos. We will begin with the Right Line. And first, let me ask, how do you define it ?

Niemand. As 'a Line which has the same direction at all parts of its length.' (p. 3)

Minos. You do not, I think, make any practical use of that as a test, any more than Euclid does of the property of lying evenly as to points on it ?

Niemand. No, we do not.

Minos. You construct and test it as in Euclid, I believe ? And you have his Axiom that ' two straight Lines cannot enclose a space ?'

Niemand. Yes, but we extend it. Euclid asserts, in effect, that two Lines, which coincide in two points, coincide between those points : we say they ' coincide wholly,' which includes coincidence heyoncl those points.

Minos. Euclid tacitly assumes that.

Niemand. Yes, but he has not expressed it.

Minos. I think the addition a good one. Have you any other Axioms about it ?

Niemand. Yes, 'that a straight Line marks the shortest distance between any two of its points.' (p. 5. Ax. i.)

Minos. That I have already fully discussed in reviewing* M. Legendre's book (see p. ^^.

Niemand. We have also ' A Line may be conceived as trans- ferred from any position to any other position, its magni- tude being unaltered.' (p. 5. Ax. 3.)

Minos. True of aiii/ geometrical magnitude: but hardly worth stating, I think. I have now to ask you how you define an Angle ?

Niemand. ' Two straight Lines that meet one another form an angle at the point where they meet.' (p. 5.)

Minos. Do you mean that they form it ^at the point' and nowhere else ?

Niemand. I suppose so.

Minos. I fear you allow your angle no magnitude, if you limit its existence to so small a locality!

Niemand. Well, we dont mean ' nowhere else.'

Min. (meditatively) You mean ' at the point—and some- where else.' Where else, if you please ?

Niemand. We mean—we don't quite know why we put in the words at all. Let us say ' Two straight Lines that meet one another form an angle.'

Minos. Very well. It hardly tells us what an angle «5, and, so far, it is inferior to Euclid's Definition : but it may pass. Do you put any limit to the size of an angle ?

Niemand. We have not named any, but the largest here treated of is what we call ' one revolution.''

Minos. You admit reentrant angles then ?

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. Then your Definition only states half the truth : you should have said 'form two angles.'

Niemand. That would be true, no doubt.

Minos. But this extension of limit will require several modifications in Euclid's language: for instance, what is your Definition of an obtuse angle ?

NiEMAND reads.

P. 8. Def. 13. 'An obtuse angle is one which is greater than a right angle.'

Minos. So you tumble headlong into the very first pitfall you come across! Why, that includes such angles as 180° and 360°. You would teach your pupil, I suppose, that one portion of a straight Line makes an obtuse angle with the other, and that every straight Line has an obtuse angle at each end of it!

Niemand. It is an oversight—of course we ought to have added ' but less than two right angles.'

Minos. A very palpable oversight. I fear we shall find more as we go on. What Axioms have you about angles ?

NiEMAND reads. P. 5. Ax. 4. ^ An angle may be conceived as transferred to any other position, its magnitude being unaltered.' Min. Hardly worth stating. Proceed.

NiEMAND reads.

P. 5. Ax. 5. 'Angles are equal when they could be placed on one another so that their vertices would coin- cide in position, and their arms in direction.^

Min. ^ Placed on one another'! Did you ever see the child's game, where a pile of four hands is made on the

Sc. VI. § I.] ANGLES. 101 table, and each player tries to have a hand at the top of the pile ?

Niemand. I know the game.

Minos. Well, did you ever see both players succeed at once ?

Niemand. No.

Minos. Whenever that feat is achieved, you may then expect to be able to place two angles ^ on one another'! You have hardly, I think, grasped the physical fact that, when one of two things is on the other, the second is underneath the first. But perhaps I am hypercritical. Let us try an example of 3'our Axiom : let us place an angle of 90° on one of 270°. I think I could get the vertices and arms to coincide in the w^ay you describe.

Niemand. But the one angle would not be on the other; one would extend round one-fourth of the circle, and the other round the remaining three-fourths.

Minos. Then, after all, the angle is a mysterious entity, which extends from one of the Lines to the other ? That is much the same as Euclid's Definition. Let us now take your definition of a Right Angle.

Niemand. We first define ' one revolution,' which is the angle described by a Line revolving, about one extremity, round into its original position.

Minos. That is clear enough.

Niemand. We then say (p. 7. Def. 9) ' When it coincides with what was initially its continuation, it has described half a revolution^ and the angle it has then described is called a straight angle.^

Minos. How do you know that it has described half a revolution'^.

Niemand. Well, it is not difficult to prove. Let that portion of the Plane, through which it has revolved, be rolled over, using* as an axis the arm (in its initial position) and its continuation, until it falls upon the other portion of the Plane. The two angular magnitudes will now together make up 'one revolution': therefore each is ' half a revo- lution.'

Minos. A proof, I grant: but you are very sanguine if you expect beginners in the subject to supply it for themselves.

Niemand. It is an omission, we admit.

Minos. And then ' a straight angle'! ' Straight' is neces- sarily unbending: while ' angle' is from ay/co?, a bend or hook'': so that your phrase is exactly equivalent to ' an unbending bend'! In ^ the Bairnslea Poaks' Al- manack ' I once read of' a mad chap' who spent six weeks ' a-trying to maak a straat hook ': but he failed. He ought to have studied your book. Have you Euclid's Axiom ' all right angles are equal' ?

Niemand. We deduce it from ' all straight angles are equal': and that we prove by applying one straight angle to another.

Minos. That is all very well, though I cannot think ' straight angles' a valuable contribution to the subject. I will now ask you to state your method of treating Pairs of Lines, as far as your proof of Euc. I. 32.

Niemand. To do that we shall of course require parallel Lines: and, as our definition of them is ' Lines having the same direction,' we must begin by discussing- direc- tion.

Minos. Undoubtedly. How do you define direction ?

Niemand. Well, we have not attempted that. The idea seemed to us to be too elementary for definition. But let me read you what we have said about it.

P. 1. Def. 2. ' K geometrical Line has position, and length, and at every point of it it has direction . . . .'

P. 3. Def. 4. ' A straight Line is a Line which has the same direction at all parts of its length. It has also the opposite direction .... A straight Line may be conceived as generated by a point moving always in the same direc- tion.'

I will next quote what we have said about two Lines having ' the same direction ' and ^ different directions.'

Minos. We will take that presently: I have a good deal to say first as to what you have read. I gather that you consider direction to be a property of a geometrical entity, but not itself an entity ?

Niemand. Just so.

Minos. And you ascribe this property to a Line, and also to the motion of a point ?

Niemand. We do.

Minos. For simplicity's sake, we will omit all notice of curved Lines, etc., and will confine ourselves to straight Lines and rectilinear motion, so that in future, when I use the word ^ Line/ I shall mean ' straight Line.' Now may we not give a notion of ^ direction' by saying—that a moving point must move in a certain ' direction'—that, if two points, starting from a state of coincidence, move along two equal straight Lines which do not coincide (so that their movements are alike in point of departure, and in magnitude), that quality of each movement, which makes it differ from the other, is its ' direction '—and similarly that, if two equal straight Lines are terminated at the same point, but do not coincide, that quality of \ each which makes it differ from the other, is its ' direc- tion ' from the common point ?

Niemand. It is all very true : but you are using ' straight Line ' to help you in defining ' direction.' We^ on the con- trary, consider ^ direction' as the more elementary idea of the two, and use it in defining ' straight Line.' But we clearly agree as to the meanings of both expressions.

Minos. I am satisfied with that admission. Now as to the phrase ^the same direction,' which you have used in reference to a single Line and the motion of a single point. May we not say that portions of the same Line have ' the same direction' as one another ? And that, if a point moves along a Line without turning back, its motion at one instant is in ' the same direction ' as its motion at another instant?

Niemand. Yes. That expresses our meaning in other lan- guage.

Minos. I have altered the language in order to bring out clearly the fact that, in using the phrase ' the same direction,' we are really contemplating two Lines, or two motions. We have now got (considering ' straight Line' as an understood phrase) accurate geometrical Definitions of at least two uses of the phrase. And to these we may add a third, viz. that two coincident Lines have ' the same direction.'
