Niemand. Certainly, for they are one and the same Line.

Minos. And you intend, I suppose^ to use the word ' dif- ferent ' as equivalent to ' not-same.'

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. So that if we have, for instance, two equal Lines terminated at the same point, but not coinciding, w^e say that they have ' different directions ' ?

Niemand. Yes, with one exception. If they are portions of one and the same infinite Line, we say that they have ' opposite directions.' Remember that we said, of a Line, ' it has also the opposite direction.'

Minos. You did so : but, since ' same' and ' different' are contradictory epithets, they must together comprise the whole genus of ' pairs of directions.' Under which heading will you put ' opposite directions ' ?

Niemand. No doubt, strictly speaking, ' opposite directions' are a particular kind of 'different directions.' But we shall have endless confusion if we include them in that class. We wish to avoid the use of the word ' opposite ' altogether, and to mean, by ' different directions/ all kinds of directions that are not the same, with the exception of ' opposite.'

Minos. It is a most desirable arrangement: but you have not clearly stated it in your book. Tell me whether you agree in this statement of the matter. Every Line has a pair of directions, opposite to each other. And if two Lines be said to have ' the same direction/ we must understand

' the same paw of directions '; and if they be said to have ' different directions,' we must understand ' different 'pairs of directions/ And even this is not enough: for suppose I draw, on the map of England, a straight Line joining London and York; I may say ' This Line has a pair of di- rections, the first being " London-to-York" and the second " York-to -London." ' I will now place another Line upon this, and its pair of directions shall be, first '^ York-to- London" and second " London-to-York/' Then it has a different first-direction from the former Line, and also a different second -direction : that is, it has a ' different pair of directions/ Clearly this is not intended : but, in order to exclude such a possibility, we must extend yet further the meaning of the phrase, and, if two Lines be said to have 'the same direction,' we must understand 'pairs of directions which can be arranged so as to be the same'; and if they be said to have ' different directions,' we must understand 'pairs of directions which cannot be arranged so as to be the same/

Niemand. Yes, that expresses our meaning.

Minos. You must admit, I think, that your theory of direction involves a good deal of obscurity at the very outset. However, we have cleared it up, and will not use the word 'opposite' again. Tell me now whether you accept this as a correct Definition of the phrases ' the same direction' and ^ different directions,' when used of a Pair of infinite Lines which have a common point:—

If two infinite Lines, having a common point, coincide, they have ' the same direction'; if not, they have ' different directions.'

Niemand. We accept it.

Minos. And, since a finite Line has the same direction as the infinite Line of which it is a portion, we may gene- ralise thus :—' Coincidental Lines have the same direction. Non-coincidental Lines, which have a common pointy have different directions.'

But it must be carefully borne in mind that we have as yet no geometrical meaning for these phrases, unless when applied to two Lines which have a common j)Oint.

Niemand. Allow me to remark that what you call ^ coinci- dental Lines' zee call 'the same Line' or 'parts of the same Line,' and that what you call ' non-coincidental Lines' we call 'different Lines.'

Minos. I understand you : but I cannot employ these terms, for two reasons: first, that your phrase ' the same Line' loses sight of a fact I wish to keep in view, that we are considering a Pair of Lines; secondly^, that your phrase ' different Lines' might be used, with strict truth, of two different portions of the same infinite Line, so that it is not definite enough for my purpose.

Let us now proceed ' to consider the relations of two or more straight Lines in one Plane in respect of direction.'

And first let me ask which of the propositions of Table II you wish me to grant you as an axiom ?

Nie. (proudly) Not one of them! We have got a new patent process, the ' direction' theory, w^hich will dispense with them all.

Minos. I am very curious to hear how you do it.

NiEMAND reads.

P. II. Ax. 6. ' Two different Lines may have either the same or different directions.'

Minos. That contains two assertions, which we will con- sider separately. First, you say that ' two different Lines (i. e. ' non-coincidental Lines,' or ' Lines having a separate point'') ' may have the same direction'. Now let us under- stand each other quite clearly. We will take a fixed Line to begin with, and a certain point on it: there is no doubt that we can draw, through that point, a second Line coin- cidino- with the first: the direction of this Line will of course be ' the same' as the direction of the first Line ; and it is equally obvious that if we draw the second Line in any other direction, so as not to coincide with the first, its direction will not be ^ the same' as that of the first: that is, they will have ^ different' directions. If we want a geometrical definition of the assertion that this second Line has ' the same direction' as the first Line, we may take the following:—' having such a direction as will cause the Lines to be the same Line.' If we want a geo- metrical construction for it, we may say 'take any other point on the fixed Line; join the two points, and produce the Line, so drawn, at both ends': this construction we know will produce a Line which will be ^ the same' as the first Line, and whose direction will therefore be 'the same' as that of the first Line. If, in a certain diagram, whose geometrical history we know, we want to test whether two Lines, passing through a common point, have, or have not, ' the same direction,'' we have simply to take any other point on one of the Lines, and observe whether the other Line does, or does not, pass through it. This relationship of direction, which you call ' having* the same direction,' and / ^ having identical directions,' we may express by the word ' co-directional/

Niemand. All very true. My only puzzle is, why you have explained it at such enormous length : my meerschaum has gone out while I have been listening to you!

Minos. Allow me to hand you a light. As to the ' enor- mous length' of my explanation, we are in troubled waters, my friend! There are breakers ahead, and we cannot ^ heave the lead' too often.

Niemand. It is ' lead' indeed !

Minos. Let us now return to our fixed Line: and this time we will take a point not on it^ and through this point we will draw a second Line. You say that we can, if we choose, draw it in ' the same direction' as that of the first Line?

Niemand. We do.

Minos. In that case let me remind you of the warning I gave you a few minutes ago^ that we have no geometrical meaning for the phrase ^ the same direction,' unless when med of Lines having a common point. What geometrical meaning do you attach to the phrase when used of other Lines ?

Nie. {after a pause) I fear we cannot give you a geome- trical definition of it at present.

Minos. No ? Can you construct such Lines ?

Niemand. No, but really that is not necessary. We allow of ' hypothetical constructions ' now-a-days.

Minos. Well then, can you test whether a given Pair of Lines have this property? I mean, if I give you a certain diagram, and tell you its geometrical history, can you pronounce^ on a certain Pair of finite Lines, which have no visible common point, as to whether they have this property ?

Niemand. We cannot undertake it.

Minos. You ask me^ then_, to believe in the reality of a class of ' Pairs of Lines' possessing a property which you can neither define, nor construct, nor test?

Niemand. We can do none of these things, we admit: but yet the. class is not quite so indefinite as you think. We can give you a geometrical description of it.

Minos. I shall be delighted to hear it.

Niemand. We have agreed that a Pair of coincidental finite Lines have a certain relationship of direction, which we call ' the same direction,' and which you allow to be an intelligible geometrical relation ?

Minos. Certainly.

Niemand. Well, all we assert of this new class is that their relationship of direction is identical with that which belongs to coincidental Lines.

Minos. It cannot be identical in all respects, for it cer- tainly differs in this, that we cannot reach the conception of it by the same route. I can form a conception of ' the same direction,' when the phrase is used of two Lines which have a common point, but it is only by considering that one ' falls on' the other—that they have all other points common—that they coincide. When you ask me to form a conception of this relationship of direction, when asserted of other Lines, you know that none of these considerations will help me, and you do not furnish me with any substitutes for them. To me the relationship does not seem to be identical: I should prefer saying that separational Lines have ' collateral,' or ' corresponding,' or ' separational' directions, to using the phrase ' the same direction' over again. It is, of course, true that ' col- lateral ' directions produce the same results, as to angles made with a transversal, as ' identical' directions ; but this seems to me to be a Theorem, not an Axiom.

Niemand. You say that the relationship does not seem to you to be identical. I should like to know where you think you perceive any difference ?

Minos. I will try to make my meaning clearer by an illus- tration.

Suppose that I and several companions are walking along a railway, which will take us to a place we wish to visit. Some amuse themselves by walking on one of the rails; some on another; others wander along the line, crossing and recrossing. Now as we are all bound for the same place, we may say, roughly speaking, that we are all moving ' in the same direction' : but that is speaking very roughly indeed. We make our language more exact, if we exclude the wanderers, and say that those who are walking along the rails are so moving. But it seems to me that our phrase becomes still more exact, if we limit it to those who are walking on one and the same rail.

As a second illustration, suppose two forces, acting on a certain body ; and let them be equal in amount and oppo- site in direction. Now, if they are acting along the same

Line, we know that they neutralise each other, and that the body remains at rest. But if one be shifted ever so little to one side^ so that they act along parallel Lines, then, though still equal in amount and (according to the ' direc- tion' theory) opposite in direction, they no longer neutralise each other, but form a ^ couple/

As a third illustration, take two points on a certain Plane. We may, first, draw a Line through them and cause them to move along that Line : they are then undoubtedly moving ' in the same direction.' We may, secondly^ draw two Lines through them, which meet or at least would meet if produced, and cause them to move along those Lines : they are then undoubtedly moving ' in different directions.' We may, thirdly, draw two parallel Lines through them, and cause them to move along those Lines. Surely this is a new relationship of motion, not absolutely identical with either of the former two ? But if this new relationship be not absolutely identical with that named ' in the same direction,' it must belong to the class named ' in different directions.'

Still, though this new relationship of direction is not identical with the former in all respects, it is in some: only, to prove this, we must use some disputed Axiom, as it will take us into Table II. For instance, they are identical as to angles made with transversals : this fact is embodied in Tab. IL 4. (See p. 34). Would you like to adopt that as your Axiom ?

Niemand. No. We are trying to dispense with Table II altogether.

Minos. It is a vain attempt.

There is another remark I wish to make, before con- sidering" your second assertion. In asserting that there is a real class of non-coincidental Lines that have 'the same direction,' are you not also asserting* that there is a real class of Lines that have no common point ? For, if they had a common point, they must have ' different directions/

Niemand. I suppose we are.

Minos. We will then, if you please, credit you with an Axiom you have not expressed, viz. ' It is possible for two Lines to have no common point.' And here I must ex- press an opinion that this ought to be proved^ not assumed. Euclid has proved it in I. 27, which rests on no disputed Axiom ; and I think it may be recorded as a distinct defect in your treatise, that you have assumed, as axiomatic, a truth which Euclid h^s proved.

My conclusion, as to this first assertion of yours, is that it is most decidedly not axiomatic.

Let us now consider your second assertion, that some non-coincidental Lines have ' different directions.' Here I must ask, as before, are you speaking of Lines which have a common point? If so, I am quite ready to grant the assertion.

Niemand. Not exactly. It is rather a difficult matter to explain. The Lines we refer to would, as a matter of fact, meet if produced, and yet we do not suppose that fact known in speaking of them. What we ask you to believe is that there is a real class of non-coincidental finite Lines, which we do not yet know to have a common point, but which have 'different directions.' We shall assert pre- sently, in another Axiom, that such Lines will meet if produced; but we ask you to believe their reality inde- pendently of that fact.

Minos. But the only geometrical meaning I know of, as yet J for the phrase ' different directions,' refers to Lines known to have a common point. What geometrical mean- ing do you attach to the phrase when used of other Lines ?

Niemand. We cannot define it.

Minos. Nor construct it ? Nor test it ?

Niemand. No.

Minos. You ask me^ then^ to believe in the reality of fAco classes of 'pairs of Lines,' each possessing a property that you can neither define, nor construct^ nor test ?

Niemand. That is true. But surely you admit the reality of the second class ? Why, intersectional Lines are a case in point.

Minos. Certainly. And so much I am willing to grant you. I allow that some non-coincidental Lines, viz. inter- sectional Lines, have *" different directions.' But as to ' the same direction,' you have given me no reason whatever for believing that there are any non-coincidental Lines which possess that property.

Niemand. But surely there are two real distinct classes -of non-coincidental Lines, 'intersectional^ and 'separationaF?

Minos. Yes. Thanks to Euc. I. 27, you may now assume the reality of both.

Niemand. And you will hardly assert that the relationship of direction, which belongs to a Pair of intersectional Lines, is identical with that which belongs to a Pair of separational Lines ?

Minos. I do not assert it.

Niemand. And you allow that intersectional Lines have ' dif- ferent directions' ?

Minos. Yes. Are you going* to argue, from that, that separational Lines must have ' the same direction ' ? Why may I not say that intersectional Lines have one kind of ' different directions' and that separational Lines have another kind ?

Niemand. But do you say it ?

Minos. Certainly not. There is no evidence^ at present, one way or the other. For anything we know^ Pairs of separational Lines may always have ^ the same direction,' or they may always have ' different directions,'' or there may be Pairs of each kind. I fear I must decline to grant the first part of your Axiom altogether^ and the second part in the sense of referring to Lines not known to have a common point. You may now proceed,

NiEMAND reach.

P. II. Ax. 7. 'Two different straight Lines which meet one another have different directions.''

Minos. That I grant you_, heartily. It is, in fact, a Definition for the phrase ' different directions,' when used of Lines w^hich have a common point.

NiEMAND reach. P. II. Ax. 8. 'Two straight Lines which have different directions would meet if prolonged indefinitely.'

Minos. Am I to understand that, if we have before us a Pair of finite Lines which are not known to have a common point, but of which we do know that they have different directions, you ask me to believe that they will meet if produced ?

Niemand. That is our meaning*.

Minos. We had better heave the lead once more, and return to our fixed Line, and a point not on it, through which we wish to draw a second Line. You ask me to grant that, if it be drawn so as to have a direction 'different' from that of the first Line, it will meet it if prolonged indefinitely ?

Niemand. That is our humble petition.

Minos. Will you be satisfied if I grant you that some Lines, so drawn, will meet the first Line? That I would grant you with pleasure. I could draw millions of Lines which would fulfil the conditions, by simply taking* points at random on the given Line, and joining them to the given point. Every Line, so constructed, would have a direction 'different' from that of the given Line, and would also meet it.

Niemand. We will not be satisfied, even with millions! We ask you to grant that every Line, draw^n through the given point w^th a direction ^different' from that of the given Line, will meet the given Line: and we ask you to grant this independently of, and antecedently to, any other information about the Lines except the fact that they have 'different' directions.

Minos. But what meaning am I to attach to the phrase 'different directions,^ independently of, and antecedently to, the fact that they have a common point?

Nie. [after a long silence") I fear we can suggest none.

Minos. Then I must decline to accept the Axiom.

Niemand. And yet this Axiom is the converse of the preced- ing, which you granted so readily.

Minos. The technical converse, my good sir, not the logical \ I will not suspect you of so gross a logical blunder as the attempt to convert a universal affirmative sinqdiciter instead of per accidens. The only converse, as you are no doubt aware, to which you have any logical right, is ^ Some Lines, which have "different directions," would meet if produced'; and that I grant you. It is true of intersectional Lines, and I would limit the Proposition to such Lines, so that it would be equivalent to ' Lines, which would meet if produced, would meet if produced '— an indisputable truth, but not remarkable for novelty ! You may proceed.

Niemand. I beg to hand in this diagram, and will read you our explanation of it:—

A

B

'Thus A and B in the figure have the same direction; and C and B, which meet, have different directions ; and E and F, which have different directions, would meet if pro- duced far enough.'

Minos. I grant the assertion about C and D; but I am wholly unable to guess on what grounds you expect me to grant that A and B ' have the same direction,' and that E and F ' have different directions.' Do you expect me to judge by eye? How if the lines were several yards apart ? Is this what Geometry is coming to ? Proceed.

NiEMAND reads.

Def. 19. ^Straight Lines, which are not parts of the same straight Line, but have the same direction, are called Parallels.''

Minos. A Definition is of course unobjectionable, since it does not assert the existence of the thing defined : in fact, it asserts nothing except the meaning which you intend to attach to the word ' parallel.' But, as this word is used in different senses, I will thank you to substitute for it, in what you have yet to say about this matter, the phrase ' having a separate point, but the same direction,' which you may condense into one compound word, if you like:— ' sepuncto-codirectional.'

Nie, (sighing) A terrible word! And I shall have to use it so often !

Minos. I will try to abridge it for you. Let us take ' sep-' and ' cod-' from the beginnings of the two words, and ' -al' for a termination. That will give us ^ sepcodal.'

Niemand. That sounds a little harsh.

Minos. 'What? Is it harder. Sirs, than Gordon, ColkittOj or Macdonald, or Galasp ?'

Nie. {doiibifully) I think I prefer it to Colkitto.' But it is from you Moderns I have learned to be so sensitive ■about long words. How I would have liked to take you to an Egyptian restaurant I used to frequent, centuries ago, in a phantasmic sort of way, if only to hear the names of some of the dishes! Why, one thought nothing of seeing a gentleman rush in, carpet-bag in hand, and shout out ' vareo !' (that was the way we addressed the attendant in those days) ' A plate of XmahoTeixayocreKaxoyakeoKpavio- \iLylfavohpiixvT:oTpiixixaTO(7ik(l)LO-napaoixiXLTOKaTaKeyv\xevoKiy\^7:L- KO(rav({)0(paTTOiT€pL(TT€pa\€KTpvoi'077TeyK€(pa\oKLyKko7:e\€Lo\ay(ju- oaipaiolSacprjTpayavoiTTepvycoi;, and look sharp about it! I'm in a hurry!'

Minos. If the gentleman wanted to catch his train by the way, had they trains in Egypt in ancient days ?

Niemand. Certainly. Read your ' Antony and Cleopatra,' Act I, Scene I. ^Exeunt Antonij and Cleopatra ivith their trahi^

311)1, In that case, wouldn't it be enough to say *'A plate of AeTraSo^?

Niemand. Most certainly not—at least not in a fashionable restaurant. But this is a digression. I am willing to adopt the word ' sepcodal.'

Minos. Now, before you read any more, let us get a clear idea of your Definition. We know of two real classes of Pairs of Lines, 'coincidental' and ' intersectional'; and to these we may (if we credit you with a Corollary to Euc. I. 27, ' It is possible for two Lines to have no common point') add a third class, which we ma}^ call ' separational.'

We also know that if a Pair of Lines has a common point, and no separate point, it belongs to the first class; if a common point, and a separate point, to the second. Hence all Pairs of Lines, having a common point, must belong to one or other of these classes. And since a Pair, which has no common point, belongs to the third class, we see that every conceivable Pair of Lines must belong to one of these three classes.

We also know that

Nie. (sighing deeply) You are heaving the lead again!

Minos. I am : but we shall be in calmer water soon.

We also know that the ' Coincidental' class possesses two properties—they are coincidental and have identical directions; and that the ' Intersectional' class also possesses two properties—they are intersectional and have different directions.

Now if you choose to frame a Definition by denying one property of each of these two classes, any Pair of Lines, so defined, is excluded from both of these classes, and must, if it exist at all, belong to the ' Separational' class. Remember, however, that you may have so framed your Definition as to exclude your Pair of Lines from existence. For instance,, if you choose to combine two con- tradictory conditions of direction, and to say that Lines, which have identical and intersectional directions, are to be called so-and-so, you are simj)ly describing a nonentity.

Niemand. That is all quite clear.

Minos. Your Definition, then, amounts to this:—Lines, which are not coincidental, but which have identical directions, are said to be ' sepcodab'

Niemand. It does.

Minos. Well, here is another Definition for Parallels, which will answer your purpose just as well:—' Lines, which are not inter- sectional, but which have different directions.'

Niemand. But I think I can prove to you that you have now done the very thing you cautioned me against: you have annihilated your Pair of Lines.

Minos. That is a matter which we need not consider at present. Proceed.

NiEMAND reads.

P. II. 'From this Definition, and the Axioms above given, the following results are immediately deduced:

(i) That parallel—I beg your pardon—that 'sepcodal' Lines would not meet however far they were produced. For if they met ''

Minos. You need not trouble yourself to prove it. I grant that, \f such Lines existed, they would not meet. Your assertion is simply the Contranominal of Ax. 7 (p. 115), and therefore is necessarily true if the subject be real.

But remember that, though I have granted to you that, if we are given a Line and a point not on it, we can draw, through the point, a certain Line separational from the given Line, we do not yet know that it is the only such Line. That w^ould take us into Table 11. With our present knowledge, w^e must allow for the possibility of drawing any number of Lines through the given point, all separational from the given Line: and all I grant you is, that your ideal ' sepcodal' Line will, if it exist at all^ be one of this group.

NiEMAND reads. (2) ' That Lines which are sepcodal with the same Line are sepcodal w^ith each other. For '

Minos. Wait a moment. I observe that you say that such Lines are sepcodal with each other. Might they not be ' co»?puncto-codirectional' ?

Niemand. Certainly they might: but w^e do not wish to include that case in our predicate.

122 WILSON. [Act II.

Minos. Then you must limit your subject, and say ^ dif- ferent Lines.'

Niemand. Very well.

Reads.

'That different Lines, which are sepcodal with the same Line, are sepcodal with each other. For they each have the same direction as that Line, and therefore the same direction as the other.'

Minos. I am willing to grant you, without any proof, that, if such Lines existed, they would have the same direction with regard to each other. The phrase ' they each have' is not remarkably good English. However, you may proceed.

NiEMAND reads.

P. 12. Ax. 9. ^ An angle may be conceived as transferred from one position to another, the direction of its arms remaining the same.'

Minos. Let us first consider the right arm by itself. You assert that it may be transferred to a new position, its direction remaining the same ?

Niemand. We do.

Minos. You might, in fact, have here inserted an Axiom ^ A Line may be conceived as transferred from one position to another, its direction remaining the same ' ?

Niemand. That would express our meaning.

Minos. And this is virtually identical with your Axiom ^ Two different Lines may have the same direction' ?

Niemand. Certainly. They embody the same truth. But the one contemplates a single Line in two positions, and the other contemplates two Lines: the difference is very slight.

Minos. Exactly so. Now let me ask you, do you mean, by the word 'angle,' a constant or a variable angle?

Niemand. I do not quite understand your question.

Minos. I will put it more fully. Do you mean that the arms of the angle are rigidly connected, so that it cannot change its magnitude, or that they are merely hinged loosely together, as it were, so that it depends entirely on the relative motions of the two arms whether the angle changes its magnitude or not?

Niemand. Why are we bound to settle the question at all ?

Minos. I will tell you why. Suppose we say that the arms are merely hinged together : in that case all you assert is that each arm may be transferred, its direction remaining the same; that is, you merely assert your 6th Axiom twice ov-er, once for the right arm and once for the left arm; and you do not assert that the angle will retain its magnitude. But in the Theorem w^hich follows, you clearly regard it as a constant angle, for you say ' the angle AOB would coincide with the angle EKH. There- fore the angle AOB = EKTL'' But the 'therefore' would have no force \i AOB could change its magnitude. Thus you would be deducing, from an Axiom where ' angle' is used in a peculiar sense, a conclusion in which it bears its ordinary sense. You have heard of the fallacy ' A dicto secundum Quid ad dictum SimjoUciter' ?

Nie. [hastily) We are not going to commit ourselves to that. You may assume that we mean, by ' angle,' a rigid angle, which cannot change its magnitude.

Minos. In that case you assert that, when a pair of Lines, terminated at a point, is transferred so that its vertex has a new position, these three conditions can be simulta- neously fulfilled:—

(i) the right arm has ' the same direction' as before;

(2) the left arm has ' the same direction' as before ;

(3) the magnitude of the angle is unchanged. Nie. We do not dispute it.

Minos. But any two of these conditions are sufficient, without the third, to determine the ne'»v state of things. For instance, taking (i) and (3), if we fix the position of the right arm, by giving it ' the same direction' as before, and also keep the magnitude of the angle un- changed, is not that enough to fix the position of the left arm, without mentioning (2) ?

Niemand. It certainly is.

Minos. Your Axiom asserts, then, that any two of these conditions lead to the third as a necessary result?

Niemand. It does.

Minos. Your Axiom then contains two distinct assertions : the data of the first being (i) and (3) [or (2) and (3), w^hich lead to a similar result], the data of the second being (i) and (2). These I will state as two separate Axioms:—
