Niemand. [after a long silence") I fear we can suggest none.

Minos. Then I must decline to accept the Axiom.

Niemand. And yet this Axiom is the converse of the preced- ing, which you granted so readily.

Minos. The technical converse, my good sir, not the logical \ I will not suspect you of so gross a logical blunder as the attempt to convert a universal affirmative sinqdiciter instead of per accidens. The only converse, as you are no doubt aware, to which you have any logical right, is ^ Some Lines, which have "different directions," would meet if produced'; and that I grant you. It is true of intersectional Lines, and I would limit the Proposition to such Lines, so that it would be equivalent to ' Lines, which would meet if produced, would meet if produced '— an indisputable truth, but not remarkable for novelty ! You may proceed.

Niemand. I beg to hand in this diagram, and will read you our explanation of it:—

A

B

'Thus A and B in the figure have the same direction; and C and B, which meet, have different directions ; and E and F, which have different directions, would meet if pro- duced far enough.'

Minos. I grant the assertion about C and D; but I am wholly unable to guess on what grounds you expect me to grant that A and B ' have the same direction,' and that E and F ' have different directions.' Do you expect me to judge by eye? How if the lines were several yards apart ? Is this what Geometry is coming to ? Proceed.

NiEMAND reads.

Def. 19. ^Straight Lines, which are not parts of the same straight Line, but have the same direction, are called Parallels.''

Minos. A Definition is of course unobjectionable, since it does not assert the existence of the thing defined : in fact, it asserts nothing except the meaning which you intend to attach to the word ' parallel.' But, as this word is used in different senses, I will thank you to substitute for it, in what you have yet to say about this matter, the phrase ' having a separate point, but the same direction,' which you may condense into one compound word, if you like:— ' sepuncto-codirectional.'

Niemand. (sighing) A terrible word! And I shall have to use it so often !

Minos. I will try to abridge it for you. Let us take ' sep-' and ' cod-' from the beginnings of the two words, and ' -al' for a termination. That will give us ^ sepcodal.'

Niemand. That sounds a little harsh.

Minos. 'What? Is it harder. Sirs, than Gordon, ColkittOj or Macdonald, or Galasp ?'

Niemand. {doiibifully) I think I prefer it to Colkitto.' But it is from you Moderns I have learned to be so sensitive ■about long words. How I would have liked to take you to an Egyptian restaurant I used to frequent, centuries ago, in a phantasmic sort of way, if only to hear the names of some of the dishes! Why, one thought nothing of seeing a gentleman rush in, carpet-bag in hand, and shout out ' vareo !' (that was the way we addressed the attendant in those days) ' A plate of XmahoTeixayocreKaxoyakeoKpavio- \iLylfavohpiixvT:oTpiixixaTO(7ik(l)LO-napaoixiXLTOKaTaKeyv\xevoKiy\^7:L- KO(rav({)0(paTTOiT€pL(TT€pa\€KTpvoi'077TeyK€(pa\oKLyKko7:e\€Lo\ay(ju- oaipaiolSacprjTpayavoiTTepvycoi;, and look sharp about it! I'm in a hurry!'

Minos. If the gentleman wanted to catch his train by the way, had they trains in Egypt in ancient days ?

Niemand. Certainly. Read your ' Antony and Cleopatra,' Act I, Scene I. ^Exeunt Antonij and Cleopatra ivith their trahi^

Minos. In that case, wouldn't it be enough to say *'A plate of AeTraSo^?

Niemand. Most certainly not—at least not in a fashionable restaurant. But this is a digression. I am willing to adopt the word ' sepcodal.'

Minos. Now, before you read any more, let us get a clear idea of your Definition. We know of two real classes of Pairs of Lines, 'coincidental' and ' intersectional'; and to these we may (if we credit you with a Corollary to Euc. I. 27, ' It is possible for two Lines to have no common point') add a third class, which we ma}^ call ' separational.'

We also know that if a Pair of Lines has a common point, and no separate point, it belongs to the first class; if a common point, and a separate point, to the second. Hence all Pairs of Lines, having a common point, must belong to one or other of these classes. And since a Pair, which has no common point, belongs to the third class, we see that every conceivable Pair of Lines must belong to one of these three classes.

We also know that

Niemand. Nie. (sighing deeply) You are heaving the lead again!

Minos. I am : but we shall be in calmer water soon.

We also know that the ' Coincidental' class possesses two properties—they are coincidental and have identical directions; and that the ' Intersectional' class also possesses two properties—they are intersectional and have different directions.

Now if you choose to frame a Definition by denying one property of each of these two classes, any Pair of Lines, so defined, is excluded from both of these classes, and must, if it exist at all, belong to the ' Separational' class. Remember, however, that you may have so framed your Definition as to exclude your Pair of Lines from existence. For instance,, if you choose to combine two con- tradictory conditions of direction, and to say that Lines, which have identical and intersectional directions, are to be called so-and-so, you are simj)ly describing a nonentity.

Niemand. That is all quite clear.

Minos. Your Definition, then, amounts to this:—Lines, which are not coincidental, but which have identical directions, are said to be ' sepcodab'

Niemand. It does.

Minos. Well, here is another Definition for Parallels, which will answer your purpose just as well:—' Lines, which are not inter- sectional, but which have different directions.'

Niemand. But I think I can prove to you that you have now done the very thing you cautioned me against: you have annihilated your Pair of Lines.

Minos. That is a matter which we need not consider at present. Proceed.

NiEMAND reads.

P. II. 'From this Definition, and the Axioms above given, the following results are immediately deduced:

(i) That parallel—I beg your pardon—that 'sepcodal' Lines would not meet however far they were produced. For if they met ''

Minos. You need not trouble yourself to prove it. I grant that, \f such Lines existed, they would not meet. Your assertion is simply the Contranominal of Ax. 7 (p. 115), and therefore is necessarily true if the subject be real.

But remember that, though I have granted to you that, if we are given a Line and a point not on it, we can draw, through the point, a certain Line separational from the given Line, we do not yet know that it is the only such Line. That w^ould take us into Table 11. With our present knowledge, w^e must allow for the possibility of drawing any number of Lines through the given point, all separational from the given Line: and all I grant you is, that your ideal ' sepcodal' Line will, if it exist at all^ be one of this group.

NiEMAND reads. (2) ' That Lines which are sepcodal with the same Line are sepcodal w^ith each other. For '

Minos. Wait a moment. I observe that you say that such Lines are sepcodal with each other. Might they not be ' co»?puncto-codirectional' ?

Niemand. Certainly they might: but w^e do not wish to include that case in our predicate.

Minos. Then you must limit your subject, and say ^ dif- ferent Lines.'

Niemand. Very well.

Reads.

'That different Lines, which are sepcodal with the same Line, are sepcodal with each other. For they each have the same direction as that Line, and therefore the same direction as the other.'

Minos. I am willing to grant you, without any proof, that, if such Lines existed, they would have the same direction with regard to each other. The phrase ' they each have' is not remarkably good English. However, you may proceed.

NiEMAND reads.

P. 12. Ax. 9. ^ An angle may be conceived as transferred from one position to another, the direction of its arms remaining the same.'

Minos. Let us first consider the right arm by itself. You assert that it may be transferred to a new position, its direction remaining the same ?

Niemand. We do.

Minos. You might, in fact, have here inserted an Axiom ^ A Line may be conceived as transferred from one position to another, its direction remaining the same ' ?

Niemand. That would express our meaning.

Minos. And this is virtually identical with your Axiom ^ Two different Lines may have the same direction' ?

Niemand. Certainly. They embody the same truth. But the one contemplates a single Line in two positions, and the other contemplates two Lines: the difference is very slight.

Minos. Exactly so. Now let me ask you, do you mean, by the word 'angle,' a constant or a variable angle?

Niemand. I do not quite understand your question.

Minos. I will put it more fully. Do you mean that the arms of the angle are rigidly connected, so that it cannot change its magnitude, or that they are merely hinged loosely together, as it were, so that it depends entirely on the relative motions of the two arms whether the angle changes its magnitude or not?

Niemand. Why are we bound to settle the question at all ?

Minos. I will tell you why. Suppose we say that the arms are merely hinged together : in that case all you assert is that each arm may be transferred, its direction remaining the same; that is, you merely assert your 6th Axiom twice ov-er, once for the right arm and once for the left arm; and you do not assert that the angle will retain its magnitude. But in the Theorem w^hich follows, you clearly regard it as a constant angle, for you say ' the angle AOB would coincide with the angle EKH. There- fore the angle AOB = EKTL'' But the 'therefore' would have no force \i AOB could change its magnitude. Thus you would be deducing, from an Axiom where ' angle' is used in a peculiar sense, a conclusion in which it bears its ordinary sense. You have heard of the fallacy ' A dicto secundum Quid ad dictum SimjoUciter' ?

Niemand. [hastily) We are not going to commit ourselves to that. You may assume that we mean, by ' angle,' a rigid angle, which cannot change its magnitude.

Minos. In that case you assert that, when a pair of Lines, terminated at a point, is transferred so that its vertex has a new position, these three conditions can be simulta- neously fulfilled:—

(i) the right arm has ' the same direction' as before;

(2) the left arm has ' the same direction' as before ;

(3) the magnitude of the angle is unchanged.

Niemand. We do not dispute it.

Minos. But any two of these conditions are sufficient, without the third, to determine the ne'»v state of things. For instance, taking (i) and (3), if we fix the position of the right arm, by giving it ' the same direction' as before, and also keep the magnitude of the angle un- changed, is not that enough to fix the position of the left arm, without mentioning (2) ?

Niemand. It certainly is.

Minos. Your Axiom asserts, then, that any two of these conditions lead to the third as a necessary result?

Niemand. It does.

Minos. Your Axiom then contains two distinct assertions : the data of the first being (i) and (3) [or (2) and (3), w^hich lead to a similar result], the data of the second being (i) and (2). These I will state as two separate Axioms:—

9 (a). If a Pair of Lines, terminated at a point, be transferred to a new position, so that the direction of one of the Lines, and the magnitude of the included angle, remain the same; the direction of the other Line will remain the same.

9 (/3). If a Pair of Lines, terminated at a point, be trans- ferred to a new position, so that their directions remain the same; the magnitude of the included angle will remain the same.

Have I represented your meaning correctly ?

Niemand. We have no objection to make.

Minos. "VYe will return to this subject directly. I must now ask you to read the enunciation of Th. 4, omitting, for ^simplicity's sake, all about supplementary angles, and assuming the Lines to be taken ' the same way.'

NiEMAND reads.

P. 12. Th. 4. 'If two Lines are respectively sepcodal with tw^o other Lines, the angle made by the first Pair will be equal to the angle made by the second Pair.'

Minos. The ' sep' is of course superfluous, for if the Lines are ' C(9»2puncto-codirectional,' it is equally true. May I re- word it thus ?—

' If two Pairs of Lines, each terminated at a point, be such that the directions of one Pair are respectively the same as those of the other; the included angles are equal.'

Niemand. Yes, if you like.

Minos. But surely the only difference, between Ax. 9 (/3) and this, is that in the Axiom we contemplated a single Pair of Lines transferred, while here we contemplate two Pairs ?

Niemand. That is the only difference, we admit.

Minos. Then I must say that it is anything but good logic to take two Propositions, distinguished only by a trivial difference in form, and to call one an Axiom and the other a Theorem deduced from it! A very gross case of ' Petitio principal I fear !

Niemand. {after a long pause) Well! We admit that it is not exactly a Theorem : it is only a new form of the Axiom.

Minos. Quite so : and as it is a more convenient form for my purpose, I will with your permission adopt it as a sub- stitute for the Axiom. Now as to the corollary of this Theorem: tliat^ I think, is merely a particular case of Ax. 9 (/3), one of the arms being slid along the infinite Line of which it forms a part, and thus of course having ' the same direction ' as before ?

Niemand. It is so.

Minos. And, as this is a more convenient form still, I will restate your assertions^, limiting them to this par- ticular case:—

Ax. 9 (a). Lines, which make equal corresponding angles with a certain transversal, have the same direction.

Ax. 9 (/3). Lines, which have the same direction, make equal corresponding angles with any transversal.

Am I right in saying that these two assertions are virtually involved in your Axiom ?

Niemand. We cannot deny it.

Minos. Now in 9 (a) you ask me to believe that Lines possessing a certain geometrical property, w^hich can be defined, constructed, and tested, possess also a property which, in the case of different Lines, we can neither define, nor construct, nor test. There is nothing axiomatic in this. It is much more like a Definition of ' codirectional' when asserted of different Lines, for which we have as yet no Definition at all. Will you not permit me to insert it, as a Definition, before Ax. 6 (p. 108)? We might word it thus :—

* If two different Lines make equal angles with a cer- tain transversal, they are said to have the same direction: if unequal, different directions.'

This interpolation would have the advantage of making Ax. 6 (which I have hitherto declined to grant) indis- putably true.

Niemand. [after a pause) No. We cannot adopt it as a Defini- tion so early in the subject.

Minos. You are right. You probably saw the pitfall which I had ready for you, that this same Definition would make your 8th Axiom (p. 115) exactly equivalent to Euclid's 12th! From this catastrophe you have hitherto been saved solely by the absence of geometrical meaning in your phrase 'the same direction,' when applied to different Lines. Once define it, and you are lost!

Niemand. TYe are aware of that_, and prefer all the incon* venience which results from the absence of a Definition.

Minos. The ' inconvenience,' so far, has consisted of the ruin of Ax. 6 and Ax. 8. Let us now return to Ax. 9.

As to 9 (/3), it is of course obviously true with regard to coincidental Lines: with regard to different ' Lines, which have the same direction,' I grant you that, if such Lines existed, they would make equal corresponding angles with any transversal; for they would then have a relationship of direction identical with that which belongs to coincidental Lines. But all this rests on an ' if—?/'they existed.

Now let us combine 9 (/3) with Axiom 6, and see what it is you ask me to grant. It is as follows:—

' There can be a Pair of different Lines that make equal angles with any transversal.*

I am not misrepresenting you, I think, if I say that you propound this as axiomatic truth—which, I need hardly remark^ is a corollary deducible from the fourth Proposition in Table II. (see p. 34).

Niemand. We accept the responsibility of the two Axioms separately, but not of a logical deduction from the two. '

Minos. There are certainly some logical deductions from Axioms (Contranominals for instance) that are not so axiomatic as the Axioms from which they come: but surely if you tell me 'it is axiomatic that X is Z' and ' it is axiomatic that Y is ^,' it is much the same as saying ' it is axiomatic that X is ^'?

Niemand. It is very like it, we admit.

Minos. Now take one more combination. Take 9 (a) and 9 (/3). We thus eliminate the mysterious property alto- gether, and get a Proposition whose subject and predicate are perfectly definite geometrical conceptions—a Proposi- tion which you assert to be, if not perfectly axiomatic, yet so nearly so as to be easily deducible from two Axioms— a Proposition which again lands us in Table II, and which, I will venture to say, is less axiomatic than any Pro- position in that Table that has yet been proposed as an Axiom. We get tins :—

' Lines which make equal corresponding angles with a certain transversal do so with any transversal,' which is Tab. II. 4 (see p. 34).

Here we have, condensed into one appalling sentence, the whole substance of Euclid I. 27, 28, and 29 (for the fact that the lines are ' separational ^ may be regarded as merely a go-between). Here we have the whole difficulty of Parallels swallowed at one gulp. Why, Euclid's much- abused 12th Axiom is nothing to it! If we had (what I fear has yet to be discovered) a unit of ' axiomaticity/ I should expect to find that Euclid's 12th Axiom (which you call in your Preface, at p. xiii^ ' not axiomatic') was twenty or thirty times as axiomatic as this! I need not ask you for any further proof of Euc. I. 32. This won- drous Axiom, or quasi-Axiom, is quite sufficient machinery for your purpose, along with Euc. I. 13, w^hich of course we grant you. Have you thought it necessary to provide any other machinery ?

Niemand. No.

Minos. Euclid requires, besides I. 13, the following ma- chinery:—Props. 4, 5, 7, 8, 15, 16, Ax. 12, Props. 27, 28, and 29. And for all this you offer, as a sufficient substitute, one single Axiom!

Niemand. Two, if you please. You are forgetting Ax. 6.

Minos. No, I repeat it—one single Axiom. Ax. 6 is con- tained in Ax. 9 (a): when the subject is known to be real, the Proposition necessarily asserts the reality of the pre- dicate.

Niemand. That we must admit to be true.

Minos. I need hardly say that I must decline to grant this so-called ^ Axiom,' even though its collapse should involve that of your entire system of ' Parallels.' And now that we have fully discussed the subject of direction, I wish to ask you one question which will, I think, sum up the whole difficulty in a few words. It is, in fact, t/ie crucial test as to whether ' direction' is, or is not, a logical method of proving the properties of Parallels.

You assert, as axiomatic, that different Lines exist, whose relationship of direction is identical with that which exists between coincidental Lines.

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. Now^ does the phrase ' the same direction/ when used of two Lines not known to have a common point, convey to your mind a clear geometrical conception ?

Niemand. Yes, we can form a clear idea of it, though we cannot define it.

Minos. And is that idea (this is the crucial question) in- dependent of all subsequent knowledge of the properties of Parallels ?

Niemand. We believe so.

Minos. Let us make sure that there is no self-deception in this. You feel certain you are not unconsciously picturing the Lines to yourself as being equidistant, for instance ?

Niemand. No, they suggest no such idea to us. We introduce the idea of equidistance later on in the book, but we do not feel that our first conception of ' the same direction' in- cludes it at all.

Minos. I think you are right, though Mr. Cuthbertson, in his ' Euclidian Geometry,' says (Pref. p. vi.) ' the concep- tion of a parallelogram is not that of a figure whose oppo- site sides will never meet . . . . , but rather that of a figure whose opposite sides are equidistant.' But do you feel equally certain that you are not unconsciously using your subsequent knowledge that Lines exist which make equal angles with all transversals ?

Niemand. We are not so clear about that. It is, of course, extremely difficult to divest one's mind of all later knowledge, and to place oneself in the mental attitude of one who is totally ignorant of the subject.

Minos. Very difficult, no doubt, but absolutely essential, if you mean to write a book adapted to the use of beginners. My own belief as to the course of thought needed to grasp the theory of ' direction' is this :—first you grasp the idea of ^ the same direction' as regards Lines which have a common point; next, you convince yourself, by some other means, that different Lines exist which make equal angles with all transversals; thirdly, you go back, armed with this new piece of knowledge, and use it unconsciously, in forming an idea of ' the same direction ' as regards different Lines. And I believe that the course of thought in the mind of a beginner is simply this :—he grasps, easily enough, the idea of ' the same direction * as regards Lines which have a common point; but when you put before him the idea of different Lines, and ask him to realise the meaning of the phrase, when applied to such Lines, he, finding that the former geometrical conception of ' coincidence' is not applicable in this case, and knowing nothing of the idea, which is latent in i/02ir mind_, of Lines which make equal angles with all transversals, simply fails to attach any idea at all to the phrase, and accepts it blindly, from faith in his teacher, and is from that moment, until he reaches the Theorem about trans versals, walking in the dark.

Niemand. If this be true, of course the theory of ' direction,' however beautiful in itself, is not adapted for purposes of teaching.

Minos. That is my own firm conviction. But I fear I may have wearied you by discussing this matter at such great length. Let us turn to another subject. What is your practical test for knowing whether two finite Lines will meet if produced ?

Niemand. You have already heard our 8th Axiom (p. ii). ' Two straight lines which have different directions would meet if produced.'

Minos. But, even if that were axiomatic (which I deny), it would be no practical test^ for you have admitted that you have no means of knowing whether two Lines, not known to have a common pointy have or have not different directions.

Niemand. We must refer you to p. 14. Th. 5. Cor. 2, where we prove that Lines, which make equal angles with a certain transversal, have the same direction.

Minos. Which you had already asserted, if you remember, in Ax. 9.

Niemand. Well then, we refer you to Ax. 9 as containing the same truth.

Minos. And having got that truth, whether lawfully or not, what do you do with it ?

Niemand. Why, surely it is almost the same as saying that, if they make ?^^?equal angles, they have different directions.

Minos. And what then ?

Niemand. Then, combining this with the Axiom you refused to grant, namely, that Lines having different directions will meet, we get a practical test, such as you were asking for.

Minos. [dreamily) I see ! You get rid of the ' different directions' altogether, and the result is that ' Lines, which BQake unequal angles with a certain transversal, will meet if produced,' which is Tab. II. 2 (see p. 34). And this you assert as axiomatic truth ?

Niemand. {^uneasily) Yes.

Minos. Surely I have read something like it before? Could it have been Euclid's 12th Axiom ? And have I not some- where read words like these :—' Euclid's treatment of paral- lels distinctly breaks down in Logic. It rests on an Axiom which is not axiomatic' ?

Niemand. We have nowhere stated this Axiom which you put into our mouth.

Minos. No ? Then how, may I ask, do you prove that particular Lines will meet ? You must have to prove it sometimes, you know.

Niemand. We have not had to prove it anywhere, that we are aware of.

Minos. Then there must be some gaps in your arguments. Let us see. Please to turn to p. 46. Prob. 7. Here you make, at the ends of a Line Ci>, angles equal to two given angles (which, as you tell us below^_, 'must be together less than two right angles '), and you then say ' let their sides meet in 0.' How do you know that they will meet ?

Niemand. You have found one hiatus, we grant. Can you point out another in the whole book ?

Minos. I can. At p. 70 I find the words 'Join §(?, and produce it to meet FlI produced in /S'.' And again at p. 88. ' Hence the centre must be at 0, the point of inter- section of these perpendiculars.' In both these cases I would ask, as before, how do you know that the Lines in question will meet ?

Niemand. We had not observed the omissions before, and we must admit that they constitute a serious hiatus.

Minos. A most serious one. A student, who had been taught such proofs as these, would be almost sure to try the plan in cases where the Lines would not really meet, and his assumption would lead him to results more remark- able for novelty than truth.

Let us now take a general survey of your book. And First, as to the Propositions of Euclid which you omit—

Niemand. You are alluding to Prop. 7,1 suppose. Surely its only use is to prove Prop. 8, which we have done very well without it.

Minos. That is quite a venial omission. The others that I miss are 27, 28, 29, 30, '>,'>,, 34, '>,^, ofi, 37, 38, 39, 40,41, and 43 : rather a formidable list.

Niemand. You are much mistaken! Nearly all of those are in our book, or could be deduced in a moment from theorems in it.

Minos. Let us take I. 34 as an instance.

Niemand. That we give you, almost in the words of Euclid, at p. 37.

Heads.

Th. 22. 'The opposite angles and sides of a Parallelo- gram will be equal, and the diagonal, or the Line which joins its opposite angles, will bisect it.'

Minos. Well, but your Parallelogram is not what Euclid contemplates. He means by the word that the opposite sides are separational—a property whose reality he has demonstrated in I. 27 ; whereas^oz^ mean that they have the same direction—a property whose reality, when asserted of different Lines, has nowhere been satisfactorily proved.

Niemand. We have proved it at p. 14. Th. 5. Cor. 2.

Minos. Which, if traced back, will be seen to depend ultimately on your 6th Axiom, where you assume the reality of such Lines. But, even if your Theorem had been shown to refer to a real figure, how would that prove Euc. I. 34 ?

Niemand. You only need the link that separational Lines have the same direction.

Minos. Have you supplied that link ?

Niemand. No : but the reader can easily make it for himself. It is the ' Contranominal' (as you call it) of our 8th Axiom, ^ two straight Lines which have different directions would meet if prolonged indefinitely.'

Minos. Your pupils must be remarkably clever at drawing deductions and filling up gaps in an argument,, if they usually supply that link, as well as the proof that separa- tional Lines exist at all, for themselves. But, as 1/021 do not supply these things, it seems fair to say that your book omits all the Propositions which I have enumerated.

I will now take a general survey of your book, and select a few points which seem to call for remark.

Minos reads.

P. 14. Th. 5. Cor. I. ' Hence if two straight Lines which are not parallel are intersected by a third, the alternate angles will be not equal, and the interior angles on the same side of the intersecting Line will be not supplemen- tary."' Excuse the apparent incivility of the remark^ but this Corollary is false.

Niemand. You amaze me !

Minos. You have simply to take, as an instance, a Pair of coincidental Lines, which most certainly answer to your description of ^ not parallel.'

Niemand. It is an oversight.

Minos. So I suppose: it is a species of literary pheno- menon in which your Manual is rich.

Your proof of Cor. a. is a delicious collection of nega- tives.

Reads. c

Cor. 1. Hence also if the corresponding angles are equal, or the alternate angles equal, or the interior angles supple mentary, the Lines will he parallel.

' For they o&&not be not parallel, for then the cor- responding and alternate angles would be unequal by Cor. I.'

Should I be justified in calling this a somewhat knotty passage ?

Niemand. You have no right to make such a remark. It is a mere jest!

Minos. Well, we will be serious again.

At p. 9, you stated more than the data authorised : we now come to a set-off against this^ since we shall find you asserting less than you ought to do. I will read the passage:—
