P. 26. Th. 15. 'If two Triangles are equiangular to one another and have a side of the one equal to the correspond- ing side of the other, the Triangles will be equal in all respects.'

This contains a superfluous datum: it would have been enough to say ' if two Triangles have two angles of the one equal to two angles of the other &c/

Niemand. Well, it is at worst a superfluity : the enunciation is really identical with Euclid's.

Minos. By no means. The logical effect of a superfluous datum is to limit the extent of a Proposition : and, if the Proposition be ' universal,' it reduces it to ' particular'; i.e. it changes 'all ^ is B' into 'some A is B' For suppose we take the Proposition 'all A is ^,' and sub- stitute for it ' all that is both A and Z is ^,' we may be accidentally making an assertion of the same extent as before, for it may happen that the w^hole class 'A' pos- sesses the property 'X'; but, so far as logical/(?;m is concerned; we have reduced the Proposition to ' some things that are A (viz. those w^hich are also X) are -5.'

I turn now to p. 27, where I observe a new proof for Euc. I. 24.

Niemand. New and, we hope, neat and short.

Minos. Charmingly neat and short, as it stands: but this method really requires the discussion of five cases, each with its own figure.

Niemand. How do you make that out ?

Minos. The five cases are :—

(i) Vertical angles together less than two right angles, and adjacent base angles acute (the case you give).

(2) Adjacent base-angles right.

(3) Adjacent base-angles obtuse.

These two cases are proved along with the first.

(4) Vertical angles together equal to two right angles. This requires a new proof, as we must substitute for the words ' the bisector of the angle FAC^ the words ' the perpendicular to FC drawn through A^

(5) Vertical angles together greater than two right angles.

This also requires a new proof, as we must insert, after the words ' the bisector of the angle FAC^' the words 'produced through A, and must then prove (by your Th. i) that the angles OAC, OAF, are equal.

On the whole, I take this to be the most cumbrous proof yet suggested for this Theorem.

"We now come to what is probably the most extra- ordinary Corollary ever yet propounded in a geometrical treatise. Turn to pages 30 and 31.

Th. %o. ' If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the other, and the angle opposite that which is not the less of the two sides of the one equal to the corresponding angle of the other, the triangles shall be equal in all respects.

' Cor. I. If the side opposite the given angle were less than the side adjacent, there would be two triangles, as in the figure ; and the proof given above is inapplicable.

' This is called the ambiguous case.'

The whole Proposition is a grand specimen of obscure writing and bad English, ^ is' and ' are,' ^ could,"* and *■ would,' alternating throughout with the most charming impartiality: but what impresses me most is the probable effect of this wondrous Corollary on the brain of a simple reader, coming breathless and exhausted from a death- struggle with the preceding theorem. I can imagine him saying wildly to himself ^ If two Triangles fulfil such and such conditions, such and such things follow: but, if one of the conditions were to fail, there would le two Triangles ! I must be dreaming! Let me dip my head in cold water, and read it all again. If two Triangles . . . there would be two Triangles. Oh, my poor brains ! '

Niemand. You are pleased to be satirical: it is rather obscure writing, we confess.

Minos. It is indeed ! You do well in calling it the am- higiious case.

At p. '^'^^ I see the heading 'Theorems of equality"': but you only give two of them, the second being ' the bisectors of the three angles of a triangle meet in one point,' which, as a specimen of ' Theorems of equality,' is probably unique in the literature of Geometry. I cannot wonder at your not attempting to extend the collection.

At p. 40 I read, ' It is assumed here that if a circle has one point inside another circle, the circumferences will intersect one another.' This I believe to be the boldest assumption yet made in Modern Geometry.

At pp. 40, 42 you assume a length 'greater than half a given Line, without having shewn how to bisect Lines. Two cases of ' Petitio Frincijni.'* (See p. 58.)

P. 69. Here we have a Problem (which you call ' the quadrature of a rectilineal area"*) occupying three pages and a half. It is ' approached ' by four ' stages,"* which is a euphemism for saying that this fearful Proposition con- tains four of Euclid's Problems, viz. I. 42, 44, 45, and II. 14.

P. 73. 2. ' Find a point equally distant from three given straight lines.' Is it fair to give this without any limita- tion ? What if the given lines were parallel ?

P. 84. 'If Aj JBy C . . .as conditions involve D as a. result, and the failure of C involves a failure of D; then A, £, D . . . as conditions involve C as a result.' If not-C proves not- J, then D proves C. A and B are irrelevant and obscure the statement. I observe, in passing, the subtle distinction which you suggest between ' ike failure of C' and ' a failure of D.' D is a habitual bankrupt, who has often passed through the court, and is well used to failures: but, when C fails, his collapse is final, and ^ leaves not a wrack behind^!

P. 90. ' Given a curve, to ascertain whether it is an arc of a circle or not.' What does ' given a curve ' mean ? If it means a line drawn with ink on paper, we may safely say at once ' it is not a circle.'

P. 96. Def. 15. 'When one of the points in which a secant cuts a circle is made to move up to, and ultimately coincide with, the other, the ultimate position of the secant is called t/ie tangent at that point.' (The idea of the position of a Line being itself a Line is queer enough: I suppose you would say ' the ultimate position of Whitting- ton was the Lord IMayor of London.' But this is by the way: of course you mean ' the secant in its ultimate position.') Now let us take three points on a circle, the middle one fixed, the others movable; and through the middle one let us draw two secants, each passing through one of the other points; and then let us make the other points 'move up to, and ultimately coincide with,' the middle one. We have no ground for saying that these two secants, in their ultimate positions, will coincide. Hence the phrase ' the tangent' assumes, w^ithout proof, Th. 7. Cor. I, viz. 'there can be only one tangent to a circle at a given point.' This is a ^Petitio Princijni.^

P. 97. Th. 6. The secant consists of two portions^ each terminated at the fixed point. All that you prove here is that the portion which has hitherto cut the circle is ultimately outside: and you jump, without a shadow of proof, to the conclusion that the same thing is true of the other portion! "Why should not the second portion begin to cut the circle at the precise moment when the first ceases to do so? This is another ^Petitio Princijni.^

P. 129, line 3 from end. 'Abstract quantities are the means that we use to express the concrete.' Excluding such physical ' means' as pen and ink or the human voice (to w^hich you do not seem to allude), I presume that the ' means' referred to in this mysterious sentence are ' pure numbers.' At any rate the only instances given are ' seven, five, three.' Now take P. 130, 1. 5, ' Abstract quantities and ratios are precisely the same things.' Hence all ratios are numbers. But in the middle of the same page we read that ' all numbers are ratios, but all ratios are not numbers.' I leave this without further remark.

I will now sum up the conclusions I have come to with respect to your Manual.

(1) As to * straight Lines' you suggest a useful ex- tension of Euclid's Axiom.

(2) As to angles and right angles, your extension of the limit of size is, in my opinion, objectionable. In other respects your language^ though hazy, agrees on the whole with Euclid.

(3) As to ' Parallels,' there is a good deal to be said^ and that not very flattering, I fear.

In Ax. 6, you assert the reality of different Lines having the same direction—a property you can neither define, nor construct, nor test.

You also assert (by implication) the reality of separa- tional Lines, which Euclid ^roi;^5.

You also assert the reality of Lines, not known to have a common pointy but having different directions—a pro- perty you can neither define, nor construct, nor test.

In Ax. 8, you assert that the undefined Lines last men- tioned would meet if produced.

These Axioms, therefore, are not axiomatic.

In proving result (2), you are guilty of the fallacy ' Petitio Princijoii.^

In Ax. 9 and Th. 4 taken together,, if the word ' angle' in Ax. 9 means ' variable angle/ you are guilty of the fallacy 'A clicto secundum Quid ad dictum Sim^pliciter^'^ if ' constant angle,' of the fallacy ' Petitio Principii.^

In Ax. 9 [a), you assert that Lines possessing a certain real geometrical property, viz. making equal angles with a certain transversal, possess also the before-mentioned undefined property. This is not axiomatic.

In Ax. 9 (/3) combined with Ax. 6, you assert the reality of Lines which make equal angles with all transversals. This is not more axiomatic than Euc. Ax. 12.

In Ax. 9 (a) combined with Ax. 9 (/3), yon assert that Lines, which make equal angles with a certain transversal, do so with all transversals. This I believe to be the most unaxiomatic Axiom ever yet proposed.

(4) You furnish no practical test for the meeting of finite Lines, and consequently you never prove (however necessary for the matter in hand) that any particular Lines will meet. And when we come to examine what practical test can possibly be extracted from your Axioms, the only result is an imperfect edition of Euclid's 12th Axiom!

The sum total of the chief defects which I have noticed is as follows :— fourteen of Euclid's Theorems in Book I. omitted; seven unaxiomatic Axioms; six instances of ' Petitio Principii.^

The abundant specimens of logical inaccuracy, and of loose writing generally, which I have here collected would, I feel sure, in a mere popular treatise be discreditable— in a scientific treatise, however modestly put forth, de- plorable—but in a treatise avowedly put forth as a model of logical precision, and intended to supersede Euclid, they are simply monstrous.

My ultimate conclusion on your Manual is that it has no claim whatever to be adopted as the Manual for pur- poses of teaching and examination.

§ 2. Pierce.

' dum brevis esse laboro, Obscurus fio.'

Niemand. I lay before you ' An Elementary Treatise on lane and Solid Geometry^ by Benjamin Pierce, A.M., Perkins Professor of Astronomy and Mathematics in Harvard University, published in 1872.

Minos. As I have already considered, at great length, the subject of direction as treated by Mr. Wilson, I need not trouble you as to any matters where Mr. Pierce's treat- ment does not materially differ from his. Is there any material difference in the treatment of a straight line ?

Niemand. He has a Definition of direction which will, I think, be new to you:—

Beads.

P. 5. § II, Def. 'The Direction of a Line in any part is the direction of a point at that part from the next pre- ceding point of the Line.'

Minos. That sounds mysterious. Which way along- a Line are ^ preceding ' points to be found ?

Niemand. Both ways. He adds, directly afterwards^ ' a Line has two different directions,' etc.

Minos. So your Definition needs a postscript ? That is rather clumsy writing. But there is yet another diffi- culty. How far from a point is the ' next' point ?

Niemand. At an infinitely small distance, of course. You will find the matter fully discussed in any work on the Infinitesimal Calculus.

Minos. A most satisfactory answer for a teacher to make to a pupil just beginning Geometry! I see nothing else to remark on in your treatment of the Line, except that you state, as an Axiom, that 'a straight Line is the shortest way from one point to another.' I have already given, in my review of M. Legendre, my reasons for think- ing that this is not a fair Axiom^ and ought to be a Theorem (see p. ^^,

There is nothing particular to notice in your treat- ment of angles and right angles. Let us go on to Paral- lels. How do you prove Euc. I. 32 ?

NiEMAXD reads,

P. 9. § 27, Def. 'Parallell^mes are straight Lines which have the same Direction.'

Minos. I presume you do not mean to include coinci- dental Lines ?

Niemand. Certainly not. We see the omission. Allow us to insert the word ' different.'

Minos. Very well. Then your Definition combines the two properties 'different' and ^having" the same direction.' Bear in mind that you have yet to prove the reality of such Lines. And may I request you in future to call such Lines ' sepcodal' ? But if you wish to assert any thing of them which is also true of coincidental Lines, you had better drop the ' sep-' and simply call them ' Lines which have the same direction.' so as to include both classes.

Niemand. Very well.

NiEMAND reads.

P. 9. § 28. Th. ' Sepcodal Lines cannot meet, how^ever far they are produced.'

Minos. Or rather ' could not meet, if they existed.' Pro- ceed.

NiEMAND reads.

P. 9. § 29. Th. ^ Two angles are equal, when their sides have the same direction.'

Minos. How do you define 'same direction' for different Lines ?

Niemand. We cannot define it.

Minos. Then I cannot admit that such Lines exist. But even if I did admit their reality, why should the angles be equal?

Niemand. Because ' the difference of direction' is the same in each case.

Minos. But how would that prove the angles equal? Do you define ' angle' as the ' difference of direction' of two lines ?

Niemand. Not exactly. We have stated (p. 6, § 19} 'The magnitude of the angle depends solely upon the difference of direction of its sides at the vertex.'

Minos. But the difference of direction also possesses 'mag- nitude.' Is that magnitude a wholly «;«dependent entity ? Or does it, in its turn, depend to some extent upon the angle ? Seriously, all these subtleties must be very trying to a beginner. But we had better proceed to the next Theorem. I am anxious to see where, in this system, these creatures of the imagination, these sepcodal Lines, are to appear as actually existent.

Niemand. We next prove (p. 9. § 30) that Lines, which have the same direction, make equal angles with all transversals.

Minos. That is merely a particular case of your last Theorem.

Niemand. And then that two Lines, which make equal angles with a transversal, have the same direction.

Minos. Ah, that would bring them into existence at once! Let us hear the proof of that.

Niemand. The proof is that if, through the point where the first Line is cut by the transversal, a Line be drawn having the same direction as the second, it makes equal angles with the transversal, and therefore coincides with the first Line.

Minos. You assume, then, that a Line can be drawn through that point, having the same direction as the second Line ?

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. That is, you assume, without proof, that different Lines can have the same direction. On the whole, then, though Mr. Pierce's system differs slightly from Mr.

Wilson's, both rest on the same vicious Axiom, that different Lines can exist, which possess a property called 'the same direction'—a phrase which is intelligible enough when used of two Lines which have a common point, but which, when applied to two Lines not known to have a common point, can neither be defined, nor constructed. We need not pursue the subject further. Have you provided any test for knowing whether two given finite Lines will meet if produced ?

Niemand. We have not thought it necessary.

Minos. Then the only other remark I have to make on this singularly compendious treatise is that, of the 35 Theorems which Euclid gives us in his First Book, it reproduces just sixteen : the omissions being 16, 17, 25, 26 (2), 27 and 28, 29, 30, 0^^, 34, 'i,^, 0,6, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41,43, 47, and 48.

Niemand. Most of those are in the book. For example, § 30 answers to Euc. I. 29.

Minos. Only by proving that separational Lines have the same direction : which you have not done.

Niemand. At any rate we have Euc. I. 47 in our § 256.

Minos. Oh, no doubt! Long after going through ratios, which necessarily include incommensurables; and long after the Axiom (§ 99) ' Infinitely small quantities may be neglected'! No, no : so far as beginners are concerned, there is no Euc. I. 47 in this book !

My conclusion is that, however useful this Manual may be to an advanced student, it is not adapted to the wants of a beginner.

§ 3. WiLLOCK.

' This work .... no doubt, has its faults.'

WiLLocK, Pre/, p. I.

Niemand. I lay before you ' The Mementary Geometry of the Right Line and Circle' by W. A. Willock, D.D., formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, published in

1875-

Minos. I have gone through the subject of ' direction' so minutely in reviewing Mr. Wilson's book^ that I need not discuss with you any points in which your client essentially agrees with him. AVe may, I think, pass over the subject of the Right Line altogether?

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. And as to Angles and Right Angles, I see na novelty in Dr. AVillock's book, except that he defines an Angle as ' the divergence of two directions,' which is virtually the same as Euclid's Definition.

Niemand. That I think is all.

Minos. Then we can proceed at once to the subject of Parallels. Will you kindly give rae your proof of Euc. I. 32 from the beginning ?

NiEMAND reads.

P. TO. Th. I. ^ Two Directives can intersect in only one point.^

Minos. By ' Directive ' • you mean an ' infinite Line ' ?

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. Well, I need hardly trouble you to prove it as a Theorem, being quite willing to grant it as an Axiom. What is the next Theorem ?

NiEMAND reads.

P. II. Th. 5. c Parallel Directives cannot meet.'^

Minos. AVe will call them ^ sepcodal/ if you please. I grant it, provisionally. If such Lines exist, they cannot meet.

NiEMAND reads.

P. II. Th. 7. c Only one Line, sepcodal to a Directive, can be drawn through a points

Minos. Does that assert that one can be drawn? Or does it simply deny the possibility of drawing two ?

Niemand. The proof only applies to the denial: but the assertion is certainly involved in the enunciation. At all events, if not assumed here, it is assumed later on.

Minos. Then I will at this point credit you with one un- warrantable Axiom, namely^ that different Lines can have the same direction. The Theorem itself I grant.

NiEMAND reads.

P. 12. Th. 8. ^ The angles cf intersection of a Transversal with tioo c sD* -related Directives are equal:

Minos. Do you prove that by Mr. Wilson's method ?

Niemand. Not quite. He does it by transferring* an angle : 2ce do it by divergence of directions.

Minos. I prefer your method. All it needs to make it complete is the proof of the reality of such Lines: but that 'is unattainable, and its absence is fatal to the whole system. Nay, more: the fact, that the reality of such Lines leads by a logical necessity to the reality of Lines which make equal angles with any transversal, reacts upon that unfortunate Axiom, and destroys the little hope it ever had of being granted without proof. In point of fact, in asking" to have the Axiom granted, you were virtually asking to have this other reality granted as axiomatic—but all this I have already explained (p. 125).

NiEMA^'D reads.

P. 13. Th. 10. ^ If a Transversal cut two Directives and make the angles of intersection with them equal, the Directives are sepcodai:

Minos. The subject of your Proposition is indisputably real. If then you can prove this Theorem, you will thereby prove the reality of sepcodai Lines. But I fear you have assumed it already in Th. 7. There is still, however, a gleam of hope : perhaps you do not need Th. 7 in proving this ?

Niemand. We do not: but I fear tliat will not mend matters, as we assume, in the course of this Theorem, that a Line can be drawn through a given point_, so as to have the same direction as a given Line.

Minos. Then we need not examine it further: it must perish with the faulty Axiom on which it rests. What is your next Theorem ?

Niemand. It answers to Euc. I, i6, 17, and is proved by the Theorem you have just rejected.

Minos. Then I must reject its proof ^ but I will grant you the Theorem itself, if you like, as we know it can be proved from undisputed Axioms. What comes next?

NiEMAND reads.

P. 14. Th. 13. ''If a Transversal meet Uoo Directives, and make angles with them, the External greater than the Internal, or the sum of the two Internal angles less than two rigid angles, the two directives must meet^

Minos. A proof for Euclid's Axiom ? That is interesting.

NiEMAND reads.

' For, suppose they do not meet. Then, they should be sepcodal '

Minos. {interrupting) ^Should be sepcodal'? Does that mean that they are sepcodal ?

Niemand. Yes, I think so.

Minos. That is, you assume that separational Lines have the same direction ?

Niemand. We do.

Minos. A fearful assumption! {A long silence) Well ?

Niemand. I am waiting* to know whether you grant it.

Minos. Unquestionably not! I must mark it against you as an Axiom of the most monstrous character ! Mr. Wilson himself does not assume this, though he does assume its Contranominal, that Lines having different directions will meet (see p. 115). And what I said then I say now—unaxiomatic ! But supposing it granted, how would you prove the Theorem ?

NiEMAXD reach.

' Then^ they should be sepcodal; and the external angle should be equal (Th. 8) to the internal; which is contrary to the supposition.'

Minos. Quite so. But Th. 8, which you quote, itself depends on the reality of sepcodal Lines. Your Theorem rests on two legs, and hoth, I fear, are rotten!

Niemand. The next Theorem is equivalent to Euc. I. 32. Do you wish to hear it?

Minos. It is unnecessary : it follows easily from Th. 8.

And I need not ask you what practical test you provide for the meeting of two Lines, seeing that you have Euclid's 12th Axiom itself.

Niemand. Proved as a Theorem.

Minos. Attempted to be proved as a Theorem. I will now take a hasty general survey of your client's book.

The first point calling for remark is the arrangement. You begin b}^ dragging the unfortunate beginner straight into the most difficult part of the subject. Your first chapter positively bristles with difficulties about 'direction.' Then comes a long chapter on circles, including some very complicated figures, and a theory of tangents which de- pends upon moving lines and vanishing chords—all most disheartening to a beginner. What do you suppose he is likely to make of such a sentence as ^ the direction of the motion of the generating point of any curve is that of the tangent to the curve at that point' ? (p. 29.) Or this again^ ^it is also evident that, the circle being a simple curve, there can be only one tangent to it at any point' ? (p. 29.) What u ' a simple curve ' ?

Niemand. I do not know,

Minos. Then comes a chapter of Problems, and then — when your pupil has succeeded in mastering thirty-four pages of your book, and has become tolerably familiar with tangents and segments, with diametral lines and reentrant angles, with ' oval forms' and ' forms semi- convex, semi-concave,'—you at last confront him with that abstruse and much dreaded Theorem, Euc. I. 4! True, he has the ' Asses' Bridge ' to help him in proving it, that in its turn being proved, apparently, by properties of the circle; but, even with all these assistances, it is an arduous task !

Niemand. You are hard on my client.

Minos. Well, jesting apart, let me say in all seriousness that I think it would require very great ingenuity to make a worse arrangement of the subject of Geometry, for purposes of teaching, than is to be found in this little book.

I do not think it necessary to criticise the book through- out : but I will mention one or two passages which have caught my eye in glancing through it.

Here, for instance, is something" about ' Directives,' which seem to be a curious kind of Loci—quite different from Right Lines, I should say.

Niemand. Oh no ! They are exactly the same thing !

Minos. Well, I find, at p. 4, ' Directives are either diver- gent or parallel' : and again, at p. 11, ' Parallel Directives cannot meet.' Clearly, then, Directives can never by any possibility coincide : but ordinary Eight Lines occasionally do so, do they not ?

Niemand. It is a curious lajisus joennae.

Minos. At p. 7, I observe an article headed ' The principle of double conversion,' which I will quote entire.

Beads.

' If four magnitudes, a, d, A, B, are so related, that when a is greater than b, A is greater than B ; and when a is equal to h, A is equal to B: then, conversely^ when A is greater than B, a is greater than h; and, when A is equal to B, a is equal to b.

' The truth of this principle, which extends to every kind of magnitude, is thus made evident:—If, when A is greater than B, a is not greater than b, it must be either less than or equal to b. But it cannot be less ; for, if it were, A should, by the antecedent part of the proposition, be less than B, w^hich is contrary to the supposition made. Nor can it be equal to b ; for, in that case, A should be equal to B^ also contrary to supposition. Since, therefore, a is neither less than nor equal to ^, it remains that it must be greater than b:

Now let a and A be variables and represent the ordinates to two curves, mnr and MNB^ for the same abscissa ; and let h and B be constants and represent their intercepts on the I -axis; i.e. let On — b, and ON = B.

[Figure p195]

Does not this diagram fairly represent the data of the proposition ? You see, when we take a negative abscissa, so as to make a greater than ^, we are on the left-hand branch of the curve, and A is also greater than B; and again, when a is equal to h, we are crossing the I r -axis, where A is also equal to B.

Niemand. It seems fair enough.

Minos. But the conclusion does not follow ? With a posi- tive abscissa, A is greater than B, but a less than b.

Niemand. We cannot deny it.

Minos. What then do you suppose would be the effect on a simple-minded student who should wrestle with this terrible theorem, firm in the conviction that, being in a printed book, it must some&ow be true ?

Niemand. [gravely) Insomnia, certainly; followed by acute Cephalalgia; and, in all probability, Epistaosis. Mm.

Minos. Ah, those terrible names! AVho would suppose that a man could have all those three maladies, and sur- vive ? And yet the thing is possible !

Let me now read you a statement (at p. T12) about incommensurables :—

' When one of the magnitudes can be represented only by an interminable decimal, while the other is a finite whole number, or finite decimal, no finite common sub- multiple can exist; for, though a unit be selected in the last place of the whole number or finite decimal, j^et the decimal represented by all the figures which follow the corresponding place in the interminable decimal, being less than that unit in that place and unknown in quantity, cannot be a common measure of the two magnitudes, and is only a remainder.'

Now can you lay your hand upon your heart and declare, on the word of an honest man, that you understand this sentence—beginning at the words ' yet the decimal' ?

Niemand. ? Nie. (vehemently) I cannot!

Minos. Of the two reasons which are mentioned, to ex- plain why it ' cannot be a common measure of the two magnitudes,' does the first—that it is ' less than that unit in that place '—carry conviction to your mind ? And does the second—that it is 'unknown in quantity' ripen that conviction into certainty ?

Niemand. Nie. (wildly) Not in the least!

Minos. Well, I will not 'slay the slain' any longer. You may consider Dr. Willock's book as rejected. And I think we may say that the whole theory of 'direction' has collapsed under our examination.

Niemand. I greatly fear so.
