§ I. The other Modern Rivals.

' But mice, and rats, and such small deer, Have been Tom's food for seven long year.'

Minos. I consider the question, as to whether Euclid's system and numeration should be abandoned or retained^ to be now set at rest: the subject of Parallels being dis- posed of, no minor points of difference can possibly justify the abandonment of our old friend in favour of any Modern Rival. Still it will be worth while to examine the other writers, whose works you have brought with you^ as they may furnish some valuable suggestions for the improve- ment of Euclid's Manual.

Niemand. The other writers are Chauvenet, Loomis, Morell, Reynolds, and Wright.

Minos. There are a few matters, as to which we may con- sider them all at once. How do they define a straight Line?

Niemand. All but Mr. Reynolds define it as the shortest dis- tance between two points, or more accurately, to use the words of Mr. Chauvenet, ' a Line of which every portion is the shortest Line between the points limiting that portion.

Minos. We discussed that Definition in M. Legendre's book. Plow does Mr. Reynolds define it ?

Niemand. Not at all.

Minos. Very cautious. What of angles ?

Niemand. Some of them allow larger limits than Euclid does. Mr. Wright talks about c angles of continuation' and 'angles of rotation.'

Minos. Good for Trigonometry: not so suitable to early Geometry. How do they define Parallels ?

Niemand. As in Euclid, all of them.

Minos. And which Proposition of Tab. II. do they assume?

Niemand. Nie. Play fair's, or else its equivalent, 'only one Line can be drawn, parallel to a given Line, through a given point outside it.'

Minos. Now let us take them one by one.

§ 2. Chauvenet.

Where Washington hath left His awful memory A light for after times !'

Niemand. I lay before you ^A Treatise on Elementary Geometry^ by W. Chauveket, LL.D., Professor of Mathematics and Astronomy in Washington University, published in 1876.

Minos. I read in the Preface (p. 4) ' I have endeavoured to set forth the elements with all the rigour and complete- ness demanded by the present state of the general science, without seriously departing from the established order of the propositions.' So there would be little difficulty, I fancy, in introducing into Euclid's own Manual all the improve- ments which Mr. Chauvenet can sug-gest.

P. 14. Pr. I, and p. 18. Pr. v, taken together, tell us that only one perpendicular can be drawn to a Line from a point. And various additions, about obliques, are made in subsequent Propositions. All these may well be embodied in a new Proposition, which we might interpolate as Euc. I. 12. B.

P. 26. Pr. liv; asserts the equidistance of Parallels. This might be interpolated as Eue. I. 34. B.

Another new Theorem, that angles whose sides are parallel, each to each^ are equal (which I observe is a great favourite with the Modern Rivals), seems to me a rather clumsy and uninteresting extension of Euc. I. 29.

I see several Propositions which might well be inserted as exercises on Euclid (e.g. Pr. xxxix, 'Every point in the bisector of an angle is equally distant from the sides '), but which are hardly of sufficient importance to be in- cluded as Propositions: and others (e.g. Pr. XL, 'The bi- sectors of the three angles of a Triangle meet in the same point) which seem to belong more properly to Euc. Ill or IV. I have no other remarks to make on this book, which seems well and clearly written.

§ 3. LOOMIS.

• Like—but oh ! how different! *

Niemand. I lay before you 'Elements of Geometry^ by Elias LooMis, LL.D., Professor of Natural Philosophy and Astronomy in Yale College^ a revised edition, 1876.

Minos. I read in the Preface (p. 10) 'The present volume follows substantially the order of Blanchet's Legendre, while the form of the demonstrations is modeled after the more logical method of Euclid/ He has not, however, adopted the method of infinite series, which constitutes the crucial distinction between that writer and Euclid.

The Propositions are pretty nearly in Euclid's order: with a few changes in order and numeration, the book would be a modernised Euclid, the only important differ- ences being the adoption of Play fair's Axiom and the omission of the diagonals in Euc. II. I have no hostile criticisms to offer. Our American cousins set us an ex- cellent example in the art of brief, and yet lucid, mathe- matical writing.

§ 4. MORELL.

' Quis custodiet ipsos custodes ? Quis inspiciet ipsos inspectores ?'

Niemand. I lay before you 'Euclid Simplified, compiled from the most important French works, approved ly the

University 0/Paris and the Minister of Public Instruction,' by Mr. J. R. Morell, formerly H. M. Inspector of Schools, published in 1875.

Minos. What have you about Lines, to begin with ?

Niemand. Here is a Definition. ' The place where two sur- faces meet is called a Line.'

Minos. Really! Let us take two touching spheres, for instance ?

Niemand. Ahem ! "We abandon the Definition.

Minos. Perhaps we shall be more fortunate with the Defi- nition of a straight Line.

Niemand. It is 'an indefinite Line, which is the shortest between any two of its points.'

Minos. An ' indefinite' Line ! What in the world do you mean? Is a curved Line more definite than a straight Line?

Niemand. I don't know.

Minos. Nor I. The rest of the sentence is slightly ellip- tical. Of course you mean 'the shortest which can be drawn'?

Niemand. (eagerly) Yes, yes !

Minos. Well, we have discussed that matter already. Go on.

Niemand. Next we have an Axiom, ' that from one point to another only one straight Line can be drawn, and that if two portions of a straight Line coincide, these Lines coincide throughout their whole extent.'

Minos. You bewilder me. How can one portion of a straight Line coincide with another?

Niemand. [after a pause) It can't, of course, in situ : but why not take up one portion and lay it on another ?

Minos. By all means, if you like. Let us take a certain straight Line, cut out an inch of it, and lay it along another inch of the Line. What follows ?

Niemand. Then 'these Lines coincide throughout their whole extent.'

Minos. Do they indeed ? And pray who are ' these Lines' ? The two inches?

Niemand. [gloomily) I suppose so.

Minos. Then the Axiom is simple tautology.

Niemand. Well then, we mean the whole straight Line and— and—

Minos. And what else? You can't talk of 'one straight Line' as ' these Lines,^ you know.

Niemand. We abandon the Axiom.

Minos. Better luck next time! Try another Definition.

Niemand. 'A broken Line is a Line composed of straight Lines.'

Minos. But a straight Line also is ' a Line composed of straight Lines,' isn't it?

Niemand. Well, we abandon the Definition.

Minos. This is quite a new process in our navigation. Instead of heaving the lead, we seem to be throwing over- board the whole of our cargo! Let us hear something about Angles.

Niemand. ^The figure formed by two Lines that intersect is called an Angle.'

Minos. What do you mean by 'figure'? Do you define it anywhere ?

Niemand. Yes. ' The name of figure is given to volumes, surfaces, and lines.'

Minos. Under which category do you put ' Angle '?

Niemand. I don't know.

Minos. Anything new about the Definition, or equality, of right angles ?

Niemand. No, except that we prove that all right angles are equal.

Minos. That we have discussed already (see p. 57). Let us go on to Pairs of Lines, and j^our proof of Euc. L

NiEMAND reach.

'Th. 19. Two Lines perpendicular to the same Line are parallel.'

Minos. Do you mean ' separational'?

Niemand. Yes.

Minos. Have you defined ' parallel' anywhere ?

Niemand. [after a search) I can't find it.

Minos. A careless omission. Moreover, your assertion isn't always true. Suppose your two Lines were drawn from the same point ?

Niemand. We beg* to correct the sentence. 'Two different Lines.'

Minos. Very well. Then you assert Table I. 6. (See p. 29.) I grant it.

NiEMAND reads.

' Th. 20. Through a point situated outside a straight Line a Parallel, and only one, can be drawn to that Line.'

Minos. ^A Parallel,' I grant at once: it is Table I. 9. But ^ oiili/ one^l That takes us into Table II. What axiom do you assume ?

Niemand. ' It may be admitted that only one Parallel can be drawn to it.'

Minos. That is Table II. 15 (b)—a contranominal of Playfair's Axiom. We need not pursue the subject: all is easy after that. Now hand me the book, if you please : I wish to make a general survey of style, &c.

At p. 4 I read:—' Two Theorems are reciprocal when the hypothesis and the conclusion of one are the conclusion and the hypothesis of the other.' (They are usually called ' converse'—the technicalj not the logical^ converse, as was mentioned some time ago (p. 47); but let that pass.)

' Thus the Theorem—if two angles are right angles^ they are equal—has for its reciprocal—if tioo angles are equals they are right angles^

(This, by the way, is a capital instance of the distinction between ' technical' and 'logical.' Here the technical con- verse is wild nonsense, while the logical converse is of course as true as the Theorem itself: it is ^some cases of two angles being equal are cases of their being right.')

' All Propositions are direct, reciprocal, or contrary—all so closely connected that either of the two latter' ([ presume he means ' the latter two') ' is a consequence of the other two.'

A ' consequence'! Can he mean a logical consequence ? Would he let us make a syllogism of the three, using the ' direct' and ' reciprocal' (for instance) as premisses, and the 'contrary' as the conclusion?

However, let us first see what he means by a ' con- trary' Proposition.

'It is a direct Proposition to prove that all points in a circle enjoy a certain property, e.g. the same distance from the centre.'

(This notion of sentient points, by the way, is very charming. I like to think of all the points in a circle really feeling a placid satisfaction in the thought that they are equidistant from the centre! They are infinite in number, and so can well afford to despise the arrogance of a point within, and to ignore the envious murmurs of a point without!)

'The contrary Proposition shows that all points taken outside or inside the figure do not enjoy this property.'

So then this is his trio :—

1. Direct. ' All Z are Y!

2. Reciprocal. 'All Fare X'

3. Contrary. ' All not-Xare not-T.'

Here of course No. 2 and No. 3, being Contranominals, are logically deducible from each other, No. i having no logical connection with either of them.

And yet he calls the three ^so closely connected that either of the two latter is a consequence of the other two'! Shade of Aldrich ! Have we come to this ? You say nothing, mein Herr?

Niemand. I say that, if you grant what you call the 'pre- misses,' you cannot deny the conclusion.

Minos. True. It reminds me of an answer given some years ago in the Schools at Oxford, when the Examiner asked for an example of a syllogism. After much patient thought, the candidate handed in

' All men are dogs; All dogs are men : There/ore, All men are dogs.'

This certainly has the form of a syllogism. Also it avoids, with marked success, the dangerous fallacy of ' four terms.^ And it has the great merit of Mr. Morell's syllo- gism, that, if you grant the premisses, you cannot deny the conclusion. Nevertheless I feel bound to add that it was not commended by the Examiner.

Niemand. I can well believe it.

Minos. I proceed. ^ The direct and the reciprocal proofs are generally the simpler, and do not require a fresh con- struction.' Why ' fresh ' ? The ' direct' comes frst, apparently; so that, if it requires a construction at all, it must be a ' fresh ' one.

Niemand. Be not hypercritical.

Minos. Min. Well, it is rather ' small deer,' I confess: let us change the subject.

Here is a pretty proof in Th. 4.

' Then 7n-\-o = m-\- x. But m = m. Therefore 0 — x!

Isn't that ' but m = m' a delightfully cautious paren- thesis ? Your client seems to be nearly as much at home in Algebra as in Logic^ which is saying a great deal!

At p. 9, I read ' The base of an isosceles Triangle is the unequal side.'

' The unequal side'! Is an equilateral Triangle isosceles, or is it not ? Answer, mein Herr!

Niemand. Proceed.

Minos. At p. 17, I read ^ From one and the same point three equal straight Lines cannot be drawn to another straight Line ; for if that were the case, there would le on the same side of a perpendicular two equal obliques, which is impossible.'

Kindly prove the italicised assertion on this diagram, in which I assume FB, FC, FE, to be equal Lines, and

[Figure p208]

have made the middle one of the three a perpendicular to the ' other straight Line.'

Niemand. {furiously) I will not!

Minos. Look at p. 0^6. ^A circumference is general!}^ described in language by one of its radii.' Let us hope that the language is complimentary—at least if the cir- cumference is within hearing! Can't you imagine the radius gracefully rising to his feet, rubbing his lips with his table-napkin ? ' Gentlemen! The toast I have the honour to propose is &c. &c. Gentlemen, I give you the Circumference!' And then the chorus of excited Lines, ' For he's a jolly good felloe !'

Niemand. (rajjiturombj) Ha, ha! (checking himself) You are insulting my client.

Minos. Only filling in his suggestive outlines. Try p. 48. 'Th. 13. If two circumferences are interior,' &c. Can your imagination, or mine, grasp the idea of two cir- cumferences, each of them inside the other ? No! We are mere prosaic mortals: it is beyond us!

In p. 49 I see some strange remarks about ratios. First look at Def. 44. ' When a magnitude is contained an exact number of times in two magnitudes of its kind, it is said to be their common measure.' (The wording is awkward, and suggests the idea of their having only one ' common measure''; but let that pass.) ' The ratio of two magnitudes of the same kind is the number which would express the measure of the first, if the second were taken as unity.'

' The measure of the first'! Do you understand that ? Is it a 'measure' such as you have just defined? or some other kind ?

Niemand. Some other kind, I think. But there is a slight obscurity somewhere.

Minos. Perhaps this next enunciation will clear it up. ' If two magnitudes of the same kind, A and B, are mutually commensurable' (by the way, ' mutually' is tautology), ' their ratio is a whole or fractional number, which is obtained by dividing the two numbers one by the other, and which expresses how many times these magnitudes contain their common measure M! Do you understand that*! Nie.

Niemand. Well, no!

Minos. Let us take an instance—^3 and los. A shilling is a common measure of these two sums: will you accept it as ' their common measure' ?

Niemand. We will do it, provisionally.

Minos. Now the number, ' obtained by dividing the two numbers' (I presume you mean 'the two magnitudes') ^one by the other,' is ' 6,' is it not?

Niemand. It would seem so.

Minos. Well, does this number ' express how many times these magnitudes contain their common measure,' viz. a shilling ?

Niemand. Hardly.

Minos. Did you ever meet with any one number that could ' express ' two distinct facts ?

Niemand. We would rather change the subject.

Minos. Very well, though there is plenty more about it, and the obscurity deepens as you go on. We will ' vary the verse' with a little bit of classical criticism. Look at p. 81. ^Homologous, from the Greek ofio'Los, like or similar, \6yos, word or reason.' Do you think this school- inspector ever heard of the great Church controversy, where all turned on the difference between o^o? and ojuoios?

Niemand. (tmeasily) I think not. But this is not a mathe- matical slip, you know.

Minos. You are right. Revenons a nos moiitons. Turn to p. 145, art. 6^. *To measure areas, it is usual to take a square as unity.' To me, who have always been accus- tomed to regard ' a square' as a concrete magnitude and 'unity' as a pure number, the assertion comes rather as a shock. But I acquit the author of any intentional rough- ness. Nothing could surpass the delicacy of the next few words :—' It has been already stated that surfaces are measured indirectly' ! Lines, of course, may be measured anyhow : they have no sensibilities to wound : but there is an open-handedness—a breadth of feeling—about a surface, which tells of noble birth—' every (square) inch a King ! ' —and so we measure it with averted eyes, and whisper its area with bated breath !

Niemand. Beturn to other muttons.

Minos. Well, take p. 156. Here is a 'scholium' on a theorem about the area of a sector of a circle. The ' scholium ' begins thus :—' If a is the number of degrees in the arc of a sector, we shall have to find the length of this arc .' I pause to ask ' If /3 were the number, should we have to find it then ? '

Niemand. {^solemnly) We should !

Minos. ' For the two Lines which are multiplied in all rules for the measuring of areas must be referred to the same linear unity.' That^ I take it, is fairly obscure : but it is luminous when compared with the note which follows it. ' If the linear unit and angular unit are left arbitrary, any angle has for measure the ratio of the numbers of linear units contained in the arcs which the angle in ques- tion and the irregular unit intercept in any circumference described from their summit as common centres.' Is not that a useful note ? ' The irregular unit'! Linear, or angular, I wonder ? And then ' common centres '! How many centres does a circumference usually require ? I will only trouble you with one more extract, as a hoiwe louche to wind up with.

' Th. 9. (P. 126.) Everi/ convex closed Line ABCD enve- loped ty any other closed Line PQRST is less than it.

[Figure p212]

'AH the infinite Lines ABCD, PQRST, &c.' by the way, these are curious instances of ' infinite Lines' ?

Niemand. {hastily) We mean 'infinite' in number, not in kmgth.

Minos. Well, you express yourself oddly, at any rate

' which enclose the plane surface ABCD, cannot be equal. For drawing the straight Line MBj which does not cut ABCD, MB will be less than MPqB; and adding to both members the part MTSRQI), the result will be MBQRSTM less than MPQRSm: Is that result proved?

Niemand. No.

Minos. Is it true ? iVe^. Not necessarily so.

Minos. Perhaps it is a lapsus jpennce. Try to amend it.

[Figure p213]

Niemand. If we add to MB the part MTSRQD, we do get MBQRSTM, it is true: but, if we add it to MPQI), we get QB twice over; that is, we get MPQRST3I together with twice QB.

Minos. How does that addition suit the rest of the proof?

Niemand. It ruins it: all depends on our proving the peri- meter 3IBQRSTM less than the perimeter MPQRSTM, which this method has failed to do—as of course all methods must, the thing not being capable of proof.

Minos. Then the whole proof breaks down entirely ?

Niemand. We cannot deny it.

Minos. Let us turn to the next author.

§ 5. Reynolds.

' Though this be madness, jet there's method in 't.' Nie.

Niemand. I lay before you ' Modern Methods i?i Elementary Geometry^ by E. M. Reynolds, M.A., Mathematical Master in Clifton College, Modern Side; published in 1868.

Minos. The first remark I have to make on it is, that the Definitions and Axioms are scattered through the book, instead of being placed together at the beginning, and that there is no index to them,, so that the reader only comes on them by chance: it is quite impossible to refer to them.

Niemand. I cannot defend the innovation.

Minos. In Th. i (p. 3), I read ' the angles CBA, CJDB are together equal to two right angles. For they fill ex- actly the same space' Do you mean finite or infinite space ? If ' finite,' we increase the angle by lengthening its sides : if ' infinite,' the idea is unsuited for elementary teaching. You had better abandon the idea of an angle 'filling space,' which is no improvement on Euclid's method.

P. 61. Th. IT (of Book III) it is stated that Paral- lelograms, on equal bases and between the same Parallels, ' may always be placed so that their equal bases coincide^' and it is clearly assumed that they will still be ' between the same Parallels.' And ag-ain, in p. 6^^^ the altitude of a Parallelogram is defined as * the perpendicular distance of the opposite side from the base,' clearly assuming that there is only one such distance. In both these passages the Theorem is assumed ' Parallels are equidistant from each other/ of which no proof has been given, though of course it might have been easily deduced from Th. xvi (p. 19).

The Theorems in Euc. II are here proved algebraically, which I hold to be emphatically a change for the worse, chiefly because it brings in the difficult subject of incom- mensurable magnitudes, which should certainly be avoided in a book meant for beginners.

I have little else to remark on in this book. Several of the new Theorems in it seem to me to be premature, e. g. Th. XIX, &c. on ' Loci': but the sins of omission are more serious. He actually leaves out Euc. I. 7, 17, 21 (2nd part), 24, 25, 26 (2nd part), 48, and II. I, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13. Moreover he separates Problems and Theorems, which I hold to be a mistake. I will not trouble you with any further remarks.

§ 6. Weight.

' Defects of execution unquestionably exist.'

Wright, Pr^f. p. lo

Niemand. I lay before you ' The Elements of Plane Geometrij^ l)y E. P. Wright, Teacher of Mathematics in University College School, London; the second edition, 1871.

Minos. Some of the changes in Euclid's method, made in this book, are defended in the Preface.

First, he claims credit for having more Axioms than Euclid, whom he blames for having demonstrated 'much that is obvious.' I need hardly pause to remind you that ' obviousness' is not an invariable property: to a perfect intellect the whole of Euclid, to the end of Book XII, would be ^obvious' as soon as the Definitions had been mastered: but Geometricians must write for imperfect in- tellects, and it cannot be settled on general principles where Axioms should end and Theorems begin. Let us look at a few of these new Axioms. In p. viii of the Prefiice, I read ^with the conception of straightness in a Line we naturally associate that of the utmost possible shortness of path between any two of its points; allow this to be assumed, &c.' This I consider a most objectionable Axiom, obliging" us, as it does_, to contemplate the lengths of curved lines. This matter I have already discussed with M. Legendre (p. 56).

Secondly^ for the host of new Axioms with which we are threatened in the Preface, I have searched the book in vain: possibly I have overlooked some, as he never uses the heading ' Axiom,' but really I can only find one new one, at p. 5. 'Every angle has one, and only one bisector,' which is hardly worth stating. Perhaps the writer means that his proofs are not so full as those in Euclid, but take more for granted. I do not think this any improvement in a book meant for beginners.

Another change, claimed in the Preface as an improve- ment, is the more constant use of superposition. I have considered that point already (p. 47) and have come to the conclusion that Euclid's method of constructing a new figure has all the advantages, without the obscurity, of the method of superposition.

I see little to remark on in the general style of the book. At p. 21 I read ^ the straight Line Al satisfies the four fol- lowing conditions : it passes through the vertex A^ through the middle point I of the base, is a perpendicular on that base, and is the bisector of the vertical angle. Now, two of these four conditions suffice to determine the straight Line Al^ . . . Hence a straight Line fulfilling any two of these four conditions necessarily fulfils the other two.' All this is strangely inaccurate : the fourth condition is sufficient by itself to determine the line AI.

At p. 40 I notice the startling announcement that ' the simplest of all Polygons is the Triangle'! This is surely a new use for ' many ' ? I wonder if the writer is prepared to accept the statement that ' many people have swum across the Bosphorus' on the strength of Byron's

*As once (a feat on which ourselves we prided) Leander, Mr. Ekenhead, and I did.'

As a specimen of the wordy and unscientific style of the writer, take the following:—

^ From any point 0, one^ and only one^ ', perpendicular can le drawn to a given straight Line AB.

' Let Cf be the point on which 0 would fall if, the paper being folded along AB^ the upper portion of the figure were turned down upon the lower portion. If from the points 0, Of straight Lines be drawn to any point w^hatever / on the line AB^ the adjacent angles OIB^ (JIB will be equal; for folding the paper again along AB and turning the upper portion down upon the lower, 0 falls on (/, I remains fixed, and the angle OIB exactly coincides with (JIB. Now in order that the Line 01 may be perpendicular to AB^ or, in other words, that OIB may be a right angle^ the sum of the two adjacent angles OIB^ C/IB must be equal to two right angles, and consequently their sides JO, I(y in the same straight Line. But since we can always draw one, and only one, straight Line between two points

0 and 0\ it follows that from a point 0 we can always draw one, and only one, perpendicular to the line AB.^

Do you think you could make a more awkward or more obscure proof of this almost axiomatic Theorem ?

Niemand. {cautiously) I would not undertake it.

Minos. All that about folding and re-folding the paper is more like a child's book of puzzles than a scientific treatise.

1 should be very sorry to be the school-boy who is expected to learn this precious demonstration 1 In such a case, I could not better express my feelings than by quoting three words of this very Theorem :—'7 remains fixed^ !

In conclusion, I may say as to all five of these authors,, that they do not seem to me to contain any desirable novelty w^hich could not easily be introduced into an amended edition of Euclid.

Niemand. It is a position I cannot dispute.
