§ I. Syllabus of the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching. 1878.

' Nos nuniems sumus.'

Niemand. The last book to be examined is Mr. Wilson's nev/ Manual, founded on the Syllabus of the Geometrical Asso- ciation.

Minos. We had better begin by examining the Syllabus itself. I own that I could have wished to do this in the presence of some member of the Committee, who might have supplied a few details for what is at present little more than a skeleton, but that I fear is out of the question.

Niemand. Nay, you shall not have far to seek. / am a mem- ber of the Committee.

Minos. {astonished) You ! A German professor ! No such member is included in the final list of the Committee^ which a friend showed me the other day.

Niemand. The final list, was it ? Well, ask your friend whe- ther, since the drawing- up of that list, any addition has been made : he will say ' Nobody has been added.'

Minos. Quite so.

Niemand. You do not understand. Nobody Niemand see you not ?

Minos. What ? You mean—

Niemand. (solemnly) I do, my friend. / have been added to it!

Minos. (hoiving) The Committee are highly honoured, I am sure.

Niemand. So they ought to be, considering that I am a more distinguished mathematician than Newton himself, and that my Manual is better known than Euclid's ! Excuse my self-glorification, but any moralist will tell you that I—I alone among men—ought to praise myself.

Minos. Mm. (thoughtfully) True, true. But all this is word- juggling—a most misleading analogy. However, as you now appear in a new character, you must at least have a new name!

Niemand. (proudly) Call me Nostradamus !

\_Even as he utters the mystic name^ the air grows dense around him, and gradually crystallizes into living forms. Enter a -pliant asmic procession., grouped about a banner, on which is emblazoned in letters of gold the title ' Association FOR THE Improvement of Things in General.' Foremost in the line marches Nero, carrying his unfinished ^ Scheme for lighting and warming Borne ^; while among the crowd which follow him ?nay be noticed—Guy Fawkes, President of the ' Association for raising the position of Members of FarliamenV—the Marchioness de Brinvilliers, Inventress of the ^Aj)iMcation of Alteratives to the Digestive Faculty/'— and the Rev. F. Gustrell {the being who cut cloivn Shak- Sjoeare's mulberry-tree), leader of the ^ Association for the Refinement of Literary Tasted Afterwards enter^ on the other side, Sir Isaac Newton's little dog ^Diamond/ carrying in his mouth a half-burnt roll of manuscript. He pointedly avoids the procession and the banner, and marches past alone, serene in the consciousness that he, single-pawed, conceived and carried out his great ^ Scheme for throwing fresh light on Mathematical Research,^ without the aid of any Association whatever.']

Minos. Nostra, the plural of nostrum, 'a quack remedy'; and damns, ' we give.' It is a sug-gestive name.

Nostradamus. And, trust me, it is a suggestive book that I now lay before you. ' Syllabus—'.

Minos. {interrupting) You mean ' a Syllabus \ or ' the Syllabus'?

Nostradamus. No, no ! In this railroad-age, we have no time for superfluous words ! ' Syllabus of Plane Geometry, pre- pared by the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching^ Fourth Edition, 1877.

Minos. How do you define a Right Line?

Nostradamus reads.

P. 7. Def. 5. ' A straight line is such that any part will, however placed, lie wholly on any other part, if its ex- tremities are made to fall on that other part.'

Minos. That looks more like a property of a Right Line than its essence. Euclid makes an Axiom of that property. Of course you omit his Axiom ?

Nostradamus. No. We have the Axiom (p. lo, Ax. i) ' Two straight lines that have two points in common lie wholly in the same straight line.'

Minos. Well! That is certainly the strangest Axiom I ever heard of! The idea of asserting, as an Axiom, that Right Lines answer to their Definition!

Nostradamus. {bashfully) Well, you see there were several of us at work drawing up this Syllabus: and we \e got it a little mixed: we don't quite know which are Definitions and which are Axioms.

Minos. So it appears: not that it matters much: the practical test is the only thing of importance. Do you adopt Euc. I. 14 ?

Nostradamus. Yes.

Minos. Then w^e may go on to the next subject. Be good enough to define ' Angle.'

Nostradamus reads,

P. 8. Def. II. ' When two straight lines are drawn from the same point, they are said to contain, or to make with each other, 2i plane angled

Minos. Humph ! You are very particular about drawing themy)'o;w a point. Suppose they were drawn to the same point, what would they make then?

Nostradamus. An angle, undoubtedly.

Minos. Then why omit that case ? However, it matters little. You say ' a plane angle/ I observe. You limit an angle, then, to a magnitude less than the sum of two right angles.

Nostradamus. No, I can't say we do. A little further down w^e assert that ' two angles are formed by two straight lines drawn from a point.'

Minos. Why, these are like Falstaff's c rogues in buckram suits'! Are there more coming ?

Nostradamus. No, we do not go beyond the sum of four right angles. These two we call conjugate angles. ' The greater of the two is called the major conjugate^ and the smaller the minor conjugate, angle.'

Minos. These Definitions are wondrous ! This is the first time I ever heard ' major ' and ' minor' defined. One feels inclined to say, like that Judge in the story, when a certain barrister, talking against time,, insisted on quoting authorities for the most elementary principles of law, ^ Really^ brother, there are some things the Court may be assumed to know !'' Any more definitions ?

Nostradamus. We define ' a straight angle.'

Minos. That I have discussed already (see p. 102).

Nostradamus. But tliis^ I think, is new :—

Reads.

P. 9. Def 12. 'When three straight Lines are drawn from a point, if one of them be regarded as lying between the other two, the angles which this one (the mean) makes with the other two (the extremes) are said to be adjacent angles.'

Minos. That is new indeed. Let us try a figure :—

Now let us regard OA ' as lying between the other two.' Which are 'the angles which it makes with the other two'? For this line OA (which you rightly call ' the mean '— lying is always mean) makes, be pleased to observe, four angles altogether—two with OB, and two with OC.

Nostradamus. I cannot answer your question. You confuse me.

Minos. I need not have troubled you. I see that I can obtain an answer from the Syllabus itself. It says (at the end of Def. ii) 'when the angle contained hy two lines is spoken of without qualification, the minor conjugate angle is to be understood.' Here we have a case in point, as these angles are spoken of ' without qualification.' So that the angles alluded to are both of them ^ minor conjugate ' angles, and lie on the same side of OA. And these we are told to call ^ adjacent ^ angles !

How do you define a Right Angle ?

Nostradamus. As in Euclid.

Minos. Let me hear it, if you please. You know Euclid has no major or minor conjugate angles.

Nostradamus reads.

P. 9. Def. 14. 'When one straight line stands upon another straight line and makes the adjacent angles equal, each of the angles is called a right angled

Minos. Allow me to present you with a figure, as I see the Syllabus does not supply one. c

Here AB ^ stands upon' BC and makes the adjacent angles equal. How do you like these ' right angles' ?

Nostradamus. Not at all.

Minos. These same ^ conjugate angles' will get you into many difficulties.

Have you Euclid's Axiom ' all right angles are equal' ?

Nostradamus. Yes; only we propose to prove it as a Theorem.

Minos. I have no objection to that: nor do I think that your treatment of angles, as a whole, is actually illogical. What I chiefly object to is the general ' slipshoddity ' (if I may coin a word) of the language of your Syllabus.

Does your proof of Euc. I. 32 differ from his?

Nostradamus. No, except that we propose Playfair's Axiom^' two straight Lines that intersect one another cannot both be parallel to the same straight Line,' as a substitute for Euc. Ax. 12.

Minos. Is this your only test for the meeting of two Lines, or do you provide any other ?

Nostradamus. This is the only one.

Minos. But there are cases where this is of no use. For instance, if you wish to make a Triangle, having, as data, a side and the two adjacent angles. Have you such a Problem ?

Nostradamus. Yes, it is Pr. 10, at p. 19.

Minos. And how do you prove that the Lines will meet ?

Nostradamus. [smiling) We don't. prove it: that is the reader's business : we only provide enunciations.

Minos. You are like the gourmand who would eat so many oysters at supper that at last his friend could not help saying ' They are sure to disagree with you in the nig^ht." 'That is .their affair,' the other gaily replied. 'I shall be asleep !'

YoLii- Syllabus has the same hiatus as the other writers who have rejected Euclid's 13th Axiom. If you will not have it as an Axiom, you ought to prove it as a Theorem. Your treatise is incom- plete without it.

The Theorems contained in the first 26

Propositions of Euclid are thus rearranged in the Syllabus. The only advantage that

I can see in the new arrangement is that it places first the three which relate to

Lines, thus getting all those which relate to Triangles into a consecutive series. All the other changes seem to be for the worse, and specially the separation of Theorems from their converses, e.g. Props. 5, 6, and

24, 25.

The third part of Prop. 29 is put after Prop. 32 : and

Props. '7^'>^, 34 are transposed. I can see no reason for either change.

Prop. 47 is put next before Prop. 12 in Book II. This would be a good arrangement (if it were ever proved to be worth while to abandon Euclid's order), as the Theorems are so similar; and the placing Prop. 48 next after II. 13 is a necessary result.

In Book II, Props. 9, 10 are placed after Props. \2, 13. I see no reason for it.

It does not appear to me that the new arrangements, for the sake of which it is proposed to abandon the numer- ation of Euclid, have anything worth mentioning to offer as an advantage.

[Figure 15]

I will now g-o through a few pages of '^this many-headed monster,' and make some general remarks on its style.

P. 4. 'A Theorem is the formal statement of a Proposi- tion that may be demonstrated from known Propositions. These known Propositions may themselves be Theorems or Axioms.'

This is a truly delightful jumble. Clearly, ' a Propo- sition that may be demonstrated from known Propositions ' is itself a Theorem. Hence a Theorem is ' the formal statement' of a Theorem. The question now arises—of itself, or of some other Theorem? That a Theorem should be ^ the formal statement' of itself.^ has a com- fortable domestic sound, something like ' every man his own washerwoman/ but at the same time it involves a fearful metaphysical subtlety. That one Theorem should be ' the formal statement' of another Theorem, is, I think, degrading to the former, unless the second will consent to act on the ' claw me, claw thee' principle, and to be ' the formal statement' of the first.

Nostradamus. You bewilder me.

Minos. Perhaps, however, it is intended that the teacher who uses this Manual should, on reaching the words 'a Proposition that may be demonstrated,' recognise the fact that this is itself ' a Theorem,' and at once go back to the beginning of the sentence. He will thus obtain a Defi- nition closely resembling a Continued Fraction, and may go on repeating, as long as his breath holds out, or until his pupil declares himself satisfied, ' a Theorem is the formal statement of the formal statement of the formal statement of the '

Nostradamus. (w\lclly) Say no more ! My brain reels !

Minos. I spare yon. Let us go on to p. 5, where I find the following":—

^ Rule of Conversion. If of the hypotheses of a group of demonstrated Theorems it can be said that one must be true, and of the conclusions that no two can be true at the same time, then the converse of every Theorem of the group will necessarily be true.'

Let us take an instance:—

If 5 > 4, then S>?,- If 5 < 2, then 5 < 3.

Those will do for ' demonstrated Theorems,' I suppose ?

Nostradamus. I suppose so.

Minos. And the ' hypothesis' of the first ' must be true,' simply because it is true.

Nostradamus. It would seem so.

Minos. And it is quite clear that ' of the conclusions no two can be true at the same time/ for they contradict each other.

Nostradamus. Clearly.

Minos. Then it ought to follow that ' the converse of every Theorem of the group will necessarily be true.' Take the converse of the second, i.e.

If 5 < 3, then 5< 2.

Is this 'necessarily true' ? Is every thing which is less than 3 necessarily less than 2 ?

Nostradamus. Certainly not. I think you have misinterpreted the phrase ' it can be said that one must be true,' when used of the hypotheses. It does not mean ' it can be said, from a knowledge of the subject-matter of some one hypothesis, that it /*, and therefore must be, true,' but ' it can be said, from a knowledge of the mutual logical relation of all the hypotheses, as a question of form alone, and without any knowledge of their subject-matter, that one must be true, though we do not know which it is.'

Minos. Your power of uttering long sentences is one that does equal honour to your head and your—lungs. And most sincerely do I pity the unfortunate learner who has to make out all that for himself! Let us proceed.

P. 9. Def. 13. 'The bisector of an angle is the straight Line that divides it into two equal angles.'

This assumes that ' an angle has one and only one bisector,' which appears as Ax. 4, at the foot of p. 10.

P. 10. Def. 21. ' The opposite angles made by two straight Lines that intersect &c.'

This seems to imply that 'two Lines that intersect' always do make ' opposite angles.'

Nostradamus. Surely they do ?

Minos. By no means. Look at p. 12^ Def. 32, where, in speaking of a Triangle, you say ' the intersection of the other two sides is called the vertex.'

Nostradamus. A slip, I confess.

Minos. One of many.

P. 12, Def. 31. 'AH other Triangles are called acute- angled Triangles.' What ? If a Triangle had two right angles, for instance?

Nostradamus. But there is no such Triangle.

Minos. That is a point you do not prove till we come to Th. 18, Cor. I, two pages further on. The same remark applies to jowx Def. 33, in the same page. ' The side . . . which is opposite to the right angle/ where you clearly assume that it cannot have more than one.

P. 12, Def. 32. ^ When two of the sides have been men- tioned, the remaining side is often called the base.^ Well, but how if two of the sides have not been mentioned ?

Nostradamus. In that case we do not use the word.

Minos. Do you not? Turn to p. 22, Th. 2, Cor. i, 'Tri- angles on the same or equal bases and of equal altitude are equal.'

Nostradamus. We abandon the point.

Minos. You had better abandon the Definition.

P. 12, Def. 34. Is not 'identically equal"' tautology? Things that are 'identical' must surely be 'equal'' also. Again, '' every part of one being equal,' &c. What do you mean by ' every part' of a rectilineal figure ?

Nostradamus. Its sides and angles, of course.

Minos. Then what do you mean .by Ax {I) in p. 3. ' The whole is equal to the sum of its parts'? This time, I think I need not ' pause for a reply '!

P. 15, Def. 38. ' When a straight Line intersects two other straight Lines it makes with them eight angles etc'

Let us count the angles at G. They are, the ' major and ' minor' angles which bear the name EGA ; do. for EGB\ do. for AGE-, and do. for BGIL That is, eight angles at G alone. There are sixteen altogether.

P. 17, Th. 30. ' If a quadrilateral has two opposite sides equal and parallel, it is a Parallelogram.'

This re-asserts part of its own data.

P. 17, Th. 31. ' Straight Lines that are equal and parallel have equal projections on any other straight Line; con- versely, parallel straight Lines that have equal projections on another straight Line are equal.'

The first clause omits the case of Lines that are equal and in one and the same straight Line. The second clause is not true: if the parallel Lines are at right angles to the other Line, their projections are equal, both being zero, whether the Lines are equal or not.

P. 18, Th. 32. ' If there are three parallel straight Lines, and the intercepts made by them on any straight Line that cuts them are equal, then etc'

The subject of this Proposition is inconceivable: there are three intercepts^ and by no possibility can these three be equal.

P. 25, Prob. 5. ' To construct a rectilineal Figure equal to a given rectilineal Figure and having the number of its sides one less than that of the g-iven Fig-ure.'

May I ask you to furnish me with the solution of this

Problem, taking, as your ' given rectilineal Figure/ a Triangle ?

Nostradamus. {indignantly) I decline to attempt it!

Minos. I will now sum up the conclusions I have come to with respect to your Syllabus.

In the subjects of Lines, Angles, and Parallels, the changes you propose are as follows :—

You give a very unsatisfactory Definition of a ' Right Line,^ and then most illogically re-state it as an Axiom.

You extend the Definition of Angle—a most disastrous innovation.

Your Definition of' Right Angle ' is a failure.

You substitute Playfair's axiom for Euclid's 12th.

All these things are very poor compensation indeed for the vital changes you propose — the separation of Problems and Theorems, and the abandonment of Euclid's order and numeration. Restore the Problems (which are also Theorems) to their proper places, keep to Euclid's numbering (interpolating your new Propositions where you please), and your Syllabus may yet prove to be a valuable addition to the literature of Elementary Geometry.

6 2. Wilson's ' Syllabus '-Manual.

' No followers allowed.'

Times' advertisement-sheet, passim.

Niemand. I lay before you ^Elemental-?/ Geometry^folloiolng the Syllabus ^prepared hj the Geometrical Association^ by J. M. Wilson, M.A., 1878.'

Minos. In what respects is this book a ' Rival' of Euclid ?

Niemand. Well, it separates Problems from Theorems

Minos. Already discussed (see p. 18).

Niemand. It adopts Playfair^s Axiom

Minos. Discussed (see p. 40).

Niemand. It abandons diagonals in Book II

Minos. Discussed (see p. 50).

Niemand. And it adopts a new sequence and numeration.

Minos. That^ of course, prevents us from taking" it as merely a new edition of Euclid. It will need very strong evidence indeed to justify its claim to set aside the sequence and numeration of our old friend. We must now examine the book seriatim. When we come to matters that have been already condemned, either in Mr. Wilson's book, or in the ' Syllabus,' I shall simply note the fact. We need have no new discussion, except as to new matter.

Niemand. Quite so.

Minos. In the 'Introduction,' at p. 2, I read ^A Theorem is the formal statement of a Proposition* &c. Discussed at p. 189.

At p. 3 we have the ' Rule of Conversion,' which I have already endeavoured to understand (see p. 190).

At p. 6 is a really remarkable assertion. ' Every Theorem may he shewn to he a means of indirectly measuring some 7nagnitucle.^ Kindly illustrate this on Euc. I. 14.

Niemand. [hastily) Oh, if you pick out one single accidental escep Min.

Minos. Well, then, take 16, if you like: or 17, or 18 •

Niemand. Enough, enough!

Minos. [raising his voice)—or 19, or 20, or 21, or 24, or 25, or 27, or 28, or 30!

Niemand. We abandon ' every^

Minos. Good. At p. 8 we have the Definitions of ' major conjugate^ 2i\\di ^ minor conjugate' (discussed at p. 185).

At p. 9 is our old friend the * straight angle' (see p. 101).

In the same page we have that w^onderful triad of Lines, one of which is ^regarded as lying between the other two'' (see p. 185).

And also the extraordinary result that follows when one straight Line 'stands upon another^ (see p. 186).

At p. 27, Theorem 14, is a new proof of Euc. I. 24, apparently an amended version of Mr. Wilson's five-case proof, which I discussed at p. 137. He has now reduced it to three cases, but I still think the ' bisector of the angle' a superfluity.

At p. '^'j we have those curious specimens of' Theorems of Equality^ which I discussed at p. 139.

At p. 53 is the Theorem which asserts, in its conclusion, part of its own data (see p. 192).

At p. 54 we are told that ^parallel Lines, lohich have equal projections on another Line^ are eqnaV (see p. 193).

At p. ^^ we have the inconceivable triad of ^ equal intercepts^ made by a Line cutting* three Parallels (see p. 193).

At p. 161 I am surprised to see him fall into a trap in which I have often seen unwary students caught, while trying to say Euc. III. 30 ('To bisect a given arc') After proving two chords equal, they at once conclude that certain arcs, cut off by them, are equal; forgetting to prove that the arcs in question are both minor arcs.

But I must go no further: I have already wandered beyond the limits of Euc. I, II. The one great merit of this book

Niemand. You have mentioned all ih^ faults, then ?

Minos. By no means. You are too impatient. The one great merit, as I was saying, of Mr. Wilson's new book (and a most blessed change it is!) is that it ignores the whole theory of ' direction.' That he has finally abandoned that night-mare of Elementary Geometry, I dare not hope: so all I have said about it had better stand, lest in some future fit of inspiration he should bring out a yet more agonising* version of it.

But it has the usual hiatus of a system which replaces Euclid's Axiom by Playfair's: it provides no means of proving that the Lines contemplated by Euclid will meet if produced. (This I have discussed at p. 187.)

Its proposed changes in the sequence of Euclid I have discussed at p. 188.

It has a few other faults, which I have already discussed in Mr. Wilson's own book, 'and a few peculiar to the Syllabus; but I spare you such minute criticisms.

But what I have now to ask you is simply this. What possible pretext have you left for suggesting that Euclid's Manual, and specially his sequence and numeration, should be abandoned in favour of this far from satisfactory infant?

Niemand. There are some new Theorems

Minos. Those constitute no reason: you might easily inter- polate them.

Niemand. I fear there are no other grounds to urge. But I should like to consult the doppelg finger of the Asso- ciation before I throw up my brief.

Minos. By all means.

\For a minute or two there is heard a rustling and a whispering^ as of ghosts. Then Niemand speaks again^

Niemand. They think that, considering that this book is but just published, and that it is definitely put forward as the Manual to supersede Euclid, it ought to be ex- amined more in detail, with reference to what is new in it —that is, new proofs of Euclid's Propositions, and new- Propositions.

Minos. {^with a weary sigh) Very well. It will perhaps be more satisfactory to do this, if only to ascertain exactly how much this new Manual contains that is really new and really worthy of adoption. But I shall limit my examination to the subject-matter of Euc. I, II.

Niemand. That is all we ask.

Minos. We begin, then^ at p. 12.

Theorem i. ^ All right angles are equals This is proved by their being halves of a ^ straight angle/ a phrase which I have already criticised. There is a rather important omission in the proof, no distinction being drawn between the ' straight angle' on one side of a Line, and the other (of course named by the same letters) which lies on the other side and completes the four right angles. This Theorem, if proved without ' straight angles,' might be worth adding to a new edition of Euclid.

Th. 2 (p. 13) is Euc. I. 13, proved as in Euclid.

Th. 3 (p. 14) is Euc. I. 14, where, unfortunately, a new proof is attempted, which involves a fallacy. It is deduced from an ' Observation' in p. 9, that ^ a straight Line makes with its continuation at any point an angle of two right angles/ which deduction can be effected only by the pro- cess of converting a universal affirmative simjpliciter y in- stead of 'per aecidens.'

Th. 4 (p. 14) is Euc. I. 15, proved as in Euclid.

At p. 17 I find a 'Question.' 'State the fact that ''all geese have two legs " in the form of a Theorem^ This I would not mind attempting; but, when I read the additional request, to ' write down its converse theorem^ it is so power- fully borne in upon me that the writer of the Question is probably himself a biped, that I feel I must^ however reluctantly, decline the task.

Th. 5 (p. 18) is Euc. I. 4, proved as in Euclid.

Th. 6 (p. %o) is Euc. I. 5, proved by supposing the vertical angle to be bisected, thus introducing a 'hypo- thetical construction' (see p. 20).

Th. 7 (p. 21) is Euc. I. 26 (ist part), proved by super- position. Euclid's proof, by making a new Triangle, is quite as good, I think. The areas are here proved to be equal, a point omitted by Euclid: I think it a desirable addition to the Theorem.

Th. 8 (p. 22) is Euc. I. 5, proved by reversing the Triangle and then placing it on itself {oy on the trace it has left behind), a most objectionable method (see p. 48).

Theorems 9 to 13 (pp. 22 to 26) are Euc. I. i6_, 18, 19, 20, 21, with Euclid's proofs.

Th. 14 (p. 27) is Euc. I. 24, proved by supposing an angle to be bisected : another ' hypothetical construction.'

Th. 15 (p. 28) is Euc. I. 8, for which two proofs are offered:—one by Euc. I. 24 (which seems to be reversing the natural order)—the other by an application of Euc. I. 5, a method involving three cases, of which only one is given. All this is to save the introduction of Euc. I. 7, a Theorem which I think should by no means be omitted. (See p. 220.) Here, as in Th. 7, the equality of the areas is, I think, a desirable addition to Euclid's Theorem.

Th. 16 (p. 29) is Euc. I. 25, with old proof.

Th. 17 (p. 30) is Euc. I. 26 (2nd part) proved by super- position instead of Euclid's method (which I prefer) of constructing a new Triangle.

Th. 18 (p. 32) is Euc. I. 17, with old proof.

Th. 19 (p. '^'^) is new. ' Of all the straight Lines that can le drawn from a given point to meet a given straight Line, the perpendicular is the shortest; and of the others^ those making equal angles with the perpendicular are equal; and that which makes a greater angle with the perpendicular is greater than that which makes a less^ This I think deserves to be interpolated.

Th. 20 (p. 34) is new. ' If two Triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the other, each to each, and the angles opposite to two equal sides equal, the angles oppo- site to the other two equal sides are either equal or supple- mentary, and in the former case the Triangles are equal in all respects^ I do not think it worth while to trouble a beginner with this rather obscure Theorem, which is of no practical use till he enters on Trigonometry.

Th. 21 (p. 43) is Euc. I. 27 : old proof.

Th. 22 (p. 44) is Euc. I. 29 (ist part), proved by Euc. I. 27 and Playfair's Axiom (see p. 40).

Th. 23 (p. 45) is new. ^ If a straight Line intersects two other straight Lines and snakes either a pair of alternate angles equals or a pair of corresponding angles equal, or a pair of interior angles on the same side supplementary; then, in each case, the two pairs of alternate angles are equal, and the four pairs of corresponding angles are equal, and the two pairs of interior angles on the same side are supplementary.' This most formidable enunciation melts down into the mildest proportions when superfluities are omitted, and only so much of it proved as is really neces- sary to include the whole. Euclid proves all that is valuable in it in the course of I. 29, and I do not see any sufficient reason for stating* and proving it as a sepa- rate Theorem.

Th. 23, Cor. (p. 46) is the rest of Euc. I. 29 : old proof.

Th. 24 (p. 46) is Euc. I. 30, proved as a Contranominal of Play fair's Axiom.

Th. 25, 26, and Cor. (pp. 47, 48) are Euc. I. 32 and Corollaries: old proof.

Th. 27, 1st part (p. 50), is a needless repetition of part of the Corollary to Th. 23.

Th. 27, 2nd part (p. 50), is part of Euc. I. 34: old proof.

Th. 28 (p. 51) is the rest of Euc. I. 34, proved as in Euclid.

Th. 29 (p. 52) is new. ' // two Parallelograms have two adjacent titles of the one respectively equal to two adjacent sides of the other^ and likewise an angle of the one equal to an angle of the other; the Parallelograms are identically equal! This might be a useful exercise to set; but really it does not seem of sufficient importance to be selected for a Manual.

Th. 30 (p. ^'>^) is Euc. I. o^'>,: old proof

Th. 31 (p. 54) is new. [ Straight Lines which are equal and parallel have equal projections on any other straight Line; conversely, parallel straight Lines which have equal 'projections on another straight Line are equal; and equal straight Lines^ which have equal projections on another straight Line J are equally inclined to that Line! The first and third clauses might be interpolated, though I think their value doubtful. The second is false. (See p. 193.)

Th. 32 (p. ^^) is new. ^ If there are three parallel straight Lines, and the intercepts made by them on any straight Line that cuts them are equal, then the intercepts on any other straight Line that cuts them are equal' This is awkwardly worded (in fact, as it stands, its subject, as I pointed out in p. 193, is inconceivable), and does not seem at all worth- stating as a Theorem.

At p. 57 I see an ^Exercise' (No. 5). c Skew that the angles of an equiangular Triangle are equal to two-thirds of a right angle.' In this attempt I feel sure I should fail. In early life I was taught to believe them equal to two right angles—an antiquated prejudice^ no doubt; but it is difficult to eradicate these childish instincts.

Problem i (p. 61) is Euc. I. 9 : old proof. It provides no means of finding a radius ' greater than half AB,' which would seem to require the previous bisection oi AB. Thus the proof involves the fallacy ^Petitio PrincijniJ

Pr. 2 (p. 62) is Euc. L II, proved nearly as in Euclid.

Pr. 3 (p. 62) is Euc. I. 12, proved nearly as in Euclid. It omits to say how a ' sufficient radius' can be secured, a point not neglected by Euclid.

Pr. 4 (p. 6^) is Euc. I. 10, proved nearly as in Euclid. This also, like Pr. i, involves the fallacy ^Petitio Principii.'

Pr. 5 (p. 64) is Euc. I. 32, proved nearly as in Euclid, but claims to use compasses to transfer distances, a Postu- late which Euclid has (properly, I think) treated as a Pro- blem. (See p. 212.)

Pr. 6, 7 (pp. 6^, 66) are Eue. I. 23, 31 : old proofs.

Problems 8 to 11 (pp. 66 to 69) are new. Their object is to construct Triangles with various data: viz. A^ B, and <?; Aj B, and a; a, h, and C\ a, h, and A. They are g-ood exercises, I think, but hardly worth interpolating- as Theorems. The first of them is remarkable as one of the instances where Mr. Wilson assumes Euc. Ax. 12, without giving, or even suggesting, any proof. If he intends to assume it as an Axiom, he makes Playfair's Axiom super- fluous. No Manual ought to assume both of them.

Theorem i (p. 82) is Euc. I. '^^, proved as in Euclid, but incompletely, as it only treats of one out of three possible cases.

Th. 2 (p. 83) is new. ' The area of a Triangle is half the area of a rectangle whose base and altitude are equal to those of the Triangle^ This is merely a particular ease of Euc. I. 41, and may fairly be reserved till we enter on Trigono- metry, where it first begins to have any practical value.

Th. 2, Cor. I (p. 84) is Euc. I. o^"], 38 : old proofs.

Th. 2, Cor. 2 (p. 84) is new. * Equal Triangles on the same or equal bases have equal altitudes! No proof is offered. It is an easy deduction, of questionable value.

Th. 2, Cor. 3 (p. 84) is Euc. I. 39, 40. No proof given.

Th. 3 (p. 84) is new. ' The area of a trapezium [by which Mr. Wilson means ' a quadrilateral that has only one pair of opposite sides parallel '] is equal to the area of a rectangle whose base is half the sum of the two parallel sides, and whose altitude is the perpendicular distance between them.' I have no hesitation in pronouncing this to be a mere ' fancy' Proposition, of no practical value whatever.

Th. 4 (p. 86) is Euc. I. 43 : old proof.

Th. 5 (p. 87) is Euc. II. I : old proof.

Th. 6, 7, 8 (p. 88, &c.) are Euc. II. 4, 7, 5. The sequence of Euc. II. 5, and its Corollary^ is here inverted. Also the diagonals are omitted, and nearly every detail is left unproved, thus attaining a charming- brevity—of appearance !

Th. 9 (p. 91) is Euc. I. 47 : old proof.

Th. 10, II (pp. 94, 95) are Euc. 12, 13 : old proof.

Th. 12 (p. 95) is new. ' The sum of the squares on two sides of a Triangle is double the sum of the squares on half the base and on the line joining the vertex to the middle point of the base' This, Mr. Wilson tells us, is 'Apollonius' Theorem': but, even with that mighty name to recom- mend it, I cannot help thinking it rather more curious than useful.

Th. 13 (p. 96) is Euc. II. 9, 10. Proved algebraically, and thus degraded from the position of a (fairly useful) geometrical Theorem to a mere addition-sum, of no more value than millions of others like it.

In the next proposition we suddenly transfer our alle- giance, for no obvious reason, from Arabic to Latin numerals.

Problem i (p. 99) is Euc. I. 42 : old proof.

Pr. II. (p. 100) is Euc. I. 44: proved nearly as in Euclid, but labours under the same defect as Pr. 8 (p. 66) in that it assumes, without proof, Euc. Ax. 12.

Pr. Ill (p. 100) is Euc. I. 45 : old proof.

Pr. IV (p. loi) is Euc. II. 14 : old proof.

Pr. V (p. 103) is new. ' To construct a rectilineal Figure equal to a given rectilineal Figure and having the number of Us sides one less than that of the given figure ; and thence to construct a Triangle equal to a given rectilineal Figured This I have already noticed (see p. 193). It really is not worth interpolating as a new Proposition. And its con- cluding clause is, if I may venture on so harsh an expres- sion, childish : it reminds me of nothing so much as the Irish patent process for making cheap shoes—by taking boots and cutting off the tops !

Pr. VI (p. 103) is ""To divide a straight Line, either inter- nally or externally, into two segments such that the rectangle contained hy the given Line and one of the segments may he eq2ial to the square on the other segment.^ The case of internal section is Euc. II. 11, with the old proof. The other case is new, and worth interpolating.

I have now discussed, with as much care and patience as the lateness of the hour will permit^ so much of this new Manual as corresponds to Euc. I, II, and I hope your friends are satisfied.

\A gentle cooing, as of satisfied ghosts, is heard in the air.^

I will now give you in a few words the net result of it all, and will show you how miserably small is the basis on which Mr. Wilson and his coadjutors of the 'Asso- ciation' rest their claim to supersede the Manual of Euclid.

[An angry ?7ioaning, as of ghosts suffering from neuralgia, surges round the room, till it dies away in the chimney.~\

By breaking" up certain of the Propositions of Eac. I, IT, and including some of the Corollaries, we get 73 Proposi- tions in all—57 Theorems and 16 Problems. Of these 73, this Manual om.its 14 (10 Theorems and 4 Problems); it proves 43 (32 Theorems and 11 Problems) by methods almost identical with Euclid^s; for 10 of them (9 Theorems and a Problem) it offers new proofs, against which I have recorded taj protest, one being illogical, 1 (needlessly) employing ' superposition,' 1 deserting Geometry for Algebra, and the remaining 4 omitting the diagonals in Euc. II ; and finally it offers 6 new proofs^ which I think may fairly be introduced as alternatives for those of Euclid.

In all this, and in all the matters previously discussed, I fail to see one atom of reason for abandoning Euclid. Have you any yet-unconsidered objections to urge against my proposal ' that the sequence and numeration of Euclid be kept unaltered^?

\Peacl silence is the only reply."]

Carried, nemine contragemente I And now^ Prisoner at the Bar (I beg your pardon, I should say ' Professor on the Sofa ')j have you, and your attendant phantoms, any other reasons to urge for regarding this Manual as in any sense a substitute for Euclid's—as in any sense any- thing else than a revised edition of Euclid ?

Niemand. We have nothing more to say.

Minos. Then I can but repeat with regard to this new- bom ' follower' of the Syllabus, what I said of the

Syllabus itself. Restore the Problems (which are also Theorems) to their proper places; keep to Euclid's num- bering (interpolating your new Propositions where you please); and your new book may yet prove a valuable addition to the literature of Elementary Geometry.

[^ tremulous movement is seen amid the ghostly throng. They waver fitfully to and fro, and finally drift off in the direction of one corner of the ceiling. When the procession has got well under way, Niemand himself becomes hazy, and floats off to join them. The whole procession gradually melts away into vacancy. Diamond going last, nibbling at the heels of Nero, for which a pair of gorgeous Roman sandals seem to afford but scanty protection^
