Chapter 4: First Visit to Boston

Sir William Keith, the governor of the province, was at Newcastle just then, and Captain Holmes happened to be in his company when my letter arrived. Holmes mentioned me and showed him the letter. The governor read it, and seemed surprised when he was told my age. A young man of such promising parts, he said, ought to be encouraged. The printers in Philadelphia were wretched ones, and if I would set up shop there, he had no doubt I'd succeed; for his part, he would get me the public printing business and do me every other service in his power. My brother-in-law told me all this later, in Boston — at the time I knew nothing about it. Then one day, while Keimer and I were working together near the window, we saw the governor and another gentleman (who turned out to be Colonel French, of Newcastle), both finely dressed, come straight across the street to our house, and heard them at the door.

Keimer ran downstairs at once, assuming the visit was for him. But the governor asked for me, came up, and — with a graciousness and politeness I was entirely unused to — paid me a stack of compliments, said he wished to be acquainted with me, chided me in a kindly way for not introducing myself when I first came to town, and insisted on carrying me off to the tavern, where he was headed with Colonel French to taste, as he said, some excellent Madeira. I was more than a little surprised, and Keimer stared like a pig poisoned. I went, though, with the governor and Colonel French to a tavern at the corner of Third Street, and over the Madeira he proposed that I set up in business for myself. He laid out my chances of success, and both he and Colonel French assured me I would have their interest and influence in landing the public printing of both governments. When I doubted whether my father would back me in it, Sir William said he would give me a letter to him, laying out the advantages, and he had no doubt of winning him over. So it was settled that I would return to Boston on the first ship, carrying the governor's letter of recommendation to my father. In the meantime the plan was to be kept secret, and I went on working for Keimer as usual — the governor sending for me now and then to dine with him (a very great honor, I thought), and conversing with me in the most affable, familiar, and friendly manner imaginable.

Toward the end of April 1724, a little vessel offered passage to Boston. I took leave of Keimer as if I were only going to see my friends. The governor gave me a generous letter, saying many flattering things about me to my father, and strongly recommending the project of my setting up in Philadelphia as a thing that was bound to make my fortune. Going down the bay we struck a shoal and sprang a leak; we had blustering weather at sea and had to pump almost constantly, and I took my turn at it. Still, we arrived safe in Boston in about two weeks. I had been gone seven months, and my friends had heard nothing of me, for my brother-in-law Holmes had not yet returned and hadn't written about me. My unexpected appearance surprised the family; all of them, though, were very glad to see me and made me welcome — except my brother. I went to see him at his printing house. I was better dressed than I had ever been while in his service: a smart new suit from head to foot, a watch, and my pockets lined with nearly five pounds sterling in silver. He received me none too warmly, looked me over from head to toe, and turned back to his work.

The journeymen were full of questions: where had I been, what sort of country was it, how did I like it? I praised it highly, described the happy life I led there, and made it very plain that I meant to go back. When one of them asked what kind of money we had there, I produced a handful of silver and spread it out before them — a kind of sideshow they weren't used to, paper being the money of Boston. Then I found an occasion to let them see my watch; and finally (my brother still glum and sullen), I gave them a piece of eight to buy a round of drinks, and took my leave. This visit of mine offended him deeply. When my mother spoke to him some time later about a reconciliation — she wished to see us on good terms, so that we might live for the future as brothers — he said I had insulted him so thoroughly in front of his men that he could never forget or forgive it. In that, however, he was mistaken.

My father received the governor's letter with some apparent surprise, but said little about it to me for several days. When Captain Holmes returned, he showed it to him, and asked whether he knew Keith, and what kind of man he was — adding his own opinion that the man must have precious little judgment to think of setting up in business a boy who was still three years short of manhood. Holmes said what he could in favor of the project, but my father was firm that the whole thing was improper, and at last gave it a flat no. Then he wrote a civil letter to Sir William, thanking him for the patronage he had so kindly offered me, but declining to help set me up for the present: I was, in his opinion, too young to be trusted with the management of a business so important, and so expensive to prepare for.

My friend and companion Collins, who was a clerk in the post office, was so pleased with my account of my new home that he resolved to go there too. While I waited for my father's decision, Collins set out ahead of me by land for Rhode Island, leaving his books — a fine little collection of mathematics and natural philosophy — to come along with mine and me to New York, where he proposed to wait for me.

My father, though he didn't approve of Sir William's proposal, was still pleased that I had managed to earn such a glowing character from a person of such standing in the place where I'd been living, and that I had been industrious and careful enough to outfit myself so handsomely in so short a time. So, seeing no prospect of patching things up between my brother and me, he consented to my returning to Philadelphia. He advised me to behave respectfully to the people there, to work at earning their general esteem, and to steer clear of lampooning and libeling — habits he thought I leaned toward far too much. He told me that by steady industry and prudent frugality I could save enough by the time I was twenty-one to set myself up, and that if I came close to the amount, he would help me out with the rest. That was all I could get from him, apart from some small gifts as tokens of his and my mother's love, when I sailed again for New York — this time with their approval and their blessing.

The sloop put in at Newport, Rhode Island, where I visited my brother John, who had married and settled there some years before. He received me very affectionately, for he had always loved me. A friend of his, one Vernon, had some money owed to him in Pennsylvania — about thirty-five pounds in local currency — and asked me to collect it for him and keep it until I had his directions for what to remit it in. He gave me a written order for it accordingly. This business would later cause me a good deal of uneasiness.

At Newport we took on a number of passengers for New York, among them two young women traveling together, and a grave, sensible, motherly Quaker woman with her attendants. I had shown a ready willingness to do her some little services, which I suppose earned me a degree of goodwill; so when she saw a daily growing familiarity between me and the two young women — which they seemed to encourage — she took me aside and said, "Young man, I am concerned for thee, as thou hast no friend with thee, and seems not to know much of the world, or of the snares youth is exposed to. Depend upon it: those are very bad women. I can see it in all their actions, and if thee art not upon thy guard, they will draw thee into some danger. They are strangers to thee, and I advise thee, in a friendly concern for thy welfare, to have no acquaintance with them." Since at first I didn't seem to think as badly of them as she did, she mentioned some things she had observed and heard that had escaped my notice — but that now convinced me she was right. I thanked her for her kind advice and promised to follow it. When we arrived at New York, the women told me where they lived and invited me to come see them; but I avoided it, and it was well I did. The next day the captain missed a silver spoon and some other things that had been taken from his cabin, and knowing these two for a pair of prostitutes, he got a warrant to search their lodgings, found the stolen goods, and had the thieves punished. So although we had escaped a sunken rock, which we scraped in passing, I considered this escape the more important of the two.

At New York I found my friend Collins, who had arrived some time before me. We had been close since childhood and had read the same books together; but he had enjoyed more time for reading and study, and he had a wonderful genius for mathematics, in which he left me far behind. While I lived in Boston, most of my spare hours of conversation were spent with him, and he had continued a sober and industrious lad — well respected for his learning by several of the clergy and other gentlemen, and seemingly on his way to making a good figure in life. But during my absence he had acquired a habit of getting drunk on brandy, and I found — both from his own account and from what I heard from others — that he had been drunk every day since arriving in New York, and behaving very oddly. He had gambled, too, and lost his money, so that I was obliged to pay off his lodgings and cover his expenses to Philadelphia and after we got there — which proved extremely inconvenient for me.

The governor of New York at that time was Burnet — son of Bishop Burnet — and hearing from the captain that one of his young passengers had a great many books with him, he asked the captain to bring me by. I waited on him accordingly, and would have taken Collins along, except that he wasn't sober. The governor treated me with great civility, showed me his library, which was a very large one, and we had a good deal of conversation about books and authors. This was now the second governor who had done me the honor of taking notice of me — and to a poor boy like me, it was very pleasing.

We went on to Philadelphia. On the way I collected Vernon's money, without which we could hardly have finished the journey. Collins wanted a position in some countinghouse; but whether they detected his drinking by his breath or by his behavior, he had no success in any application, though he carried some recommendations, and he went on lodging and boarding at the same house with me — at my expense. Knowing I had Vernon's money, he was constantly borrowing from me, always promising repayment as soon as he found work. At last he had gotten so much of it that I was distressed to think what I would do if I were called on to remit it.

His drinking continued, and we sometimes quarreled about it, for when he was a little drunk he was very touchy. Once, in a boat on the Delaware with some other young men, he refused to take his turn rowing. "I will be rowed home," he said. "We won't row you," I said. "You must, or stay all night on the water," he said, "just as you please." The others said, "Let's just row — what does it matter?" But my mind was already soured by his conduct in general, and I kept refusing. So he swore he would make me row or throw me overboard, and came stepping along the thwarts toward me. When he got close and took a swing at me, I clapped my hand under his crotch and, rising, pitched him headfirst into the river. I knew he was a good swimmer, so I wasn't much worried about him; but before he could come around and lay hold of the boat, a few strokes had pulled her out of his reach. Every time he drew near, we asked whether he would row, and gave a few more strokes to slide her away from him. He was ready to die with vexation, and stubbornly refused to promise to row; but seeing him at last beginning to tire, we lifted him in and brought him home dripping wet in the evening. We hardly exchanged a civil word afterward. Eventually a West India captain, who had a commission to find a tutor for the sons of a gentleman in Barbados, happened to meet him and agreed to carry him there. He left me then, promising to remit me the first money he got his hands on, toward paying off the debt — but I never heard from him again.

Breaking into Vernon's money was one of the first great errata of my life; and the whole affair showed that my father had not been far off in judging me too young to manage business of any importance. But Sir William, on reading my father's letter, said he was being too prudent. People differed, he said; discretion didn't always come with years, and youth wasn't always without it. "And since he will not set you up," he said, "I will do it myself. Give me an inventory of the things you'd need from England, and I will send for them. You shall repay me when you are able; I am resolved to have a good printer here, and I am sure you must succeed." This was said with such an appearance of warmth that I didn't doubt for a moment he meant it. I had so far kept the whole scheme of my setting up a secret in Philadelphia, and I kept it still. Had it been known that I was depending on the governor, some friend who knew him better would probably have advised me not to count on him — for, as I heard afterward, it was his known character to be generous with promises he never meant to keep. But he was offering all this unasked; how could I imagine his generous offers were insincere? I believed him one of the best men in the world.

I presented him with an inventory for a small print shop, which by my reckoning came to about one hundred pounds sterling. He liked it, but asked whether it might not be some advantage for me to be in England myself, on the spot, to choose the type and see that everything was of good quality. "And then," he said, "while you're there, you can make acquaintances and establish connections in the bookselling and stationery line." I agreed that this might be advantageous. "Then," said he, "get yourself ready to go with the Annis" — the annual ship, and the only one at that time making regular passage between London and Philadelphia. But it would be some months before the Annis sailed, so I went on working with Keimer, fretting over the money Collins had gotten out of me, and in daily dread of Vernon calling for his — which, however, didn't happen for some years afterward.

I believe I've forgotten to mention that on my first voyage from Boston, becalmed off Block Island, our crew set about catching cod, and hauled up a great many. Until then I had stuck to my resolution not to eat animal food, and on this occasion I held, with my teacher Tryon, that taking any fish was a kind of unprovoked murder, since none of them had done us, or ever could do us, any injury that might justify the slaughter. All of this seemed very reasonable. But I had formerly been a great lover of fish, and when the cod came hot out of the frying pan, it smelled admirably good. I wavered for a while between principle and inclination, until I remembered that when the fish were opened, I had seen smaller fish taken out of their stomachs. Then, thought I, "If you eat one another, I don't see why we can't eat you." So I dined on cod very heartily, and continued to eat what other people ate, returning only now and then to a vegetable diet. So convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable creature, since it enables one to find or make a reason for everything one has a mind to do.
