Chapter 6: First Visit to London

The governor seemed to enjoy my company, and had me over to his house often, and my being set up in business was always spoken of as a settled thing. I was to carry letters of recommendation to a number of his friends, plus the all-important letter of credit that would supply the money for the press, the type, the paper, and everything else. He named times for me to call and collect these letters, and each time I called, they weren't quite ready — a new date was set. This went on until the ship, whose own departure had been postponed several times, was finally about to sail. Then, when I called to say goodbye and pick up the letters, his secretary, Dr. Bard, came out and told me the governor was extremely busy writing, but would be at Newcastle before the ship got there, and the letters would be delivered to me then.

Ralph, though married and with one child, had decided to make the voyage with me. Everyone assumed he meant to establish trade contacts and get goods to sell on commission; I found out later that, being on bad terms with his wife's relations, he intended to leave her on their hands and never come back at all. Having said my goodbyes and exchanged some promises with Miss Read, I left Philadelphia on the ship, which anchored at Newcastle. The governor was there — but when I went to his lodging, the secretary came out with the most courteous message in the world: the governor couldn't see me just now, being engaged in business of the utmost importance, but he would send the letters to me on board, and he wished me heartily a good voyage and a speedy return, and so on. I went back on board a little puzzled, but still not doubting him.

Mr. Andrew Hamilton, a famous Philadelphia lawyer, had booked passage on the same ship for himself and his son, and along with Mr. Denham, a Quaker merchant, and Messrs. Onion and Russel, owners of an ironworks in Maryland, had taken the great cabin — so Ralph and I had to make do with a berth in steerage, and since nobody on board knew us, we were treated as nobodies. But Mr. Hamilton and his son (this was James, later governor himself) turned back from Newcastle to Philadelphia, the father having been recalled by a very large fee to argue the case of a seized ship. And just before we sailed, Colonel French came on board and showed me great respect, which raised my stock considerably; the other gentlemen invited me, along with my friend Ralph, to move into the cabin, there now being room. So we did.

Knowing that Colonel French had brought the governor's dispatches on board, I asked the captain for the letters that were supposed to be in my care. He said they'd all been put into the mailbag together and he couldn't get at them just then, but before we landed in England I'd have a chance to pick them out. I was satisfied with that for the moment, and we went on with our voyage. We had good company in the cabin and lived uncommonly well, since we had the run of all Mr. Hamilton's provisions, and he had stocked up generously. On this passage Mr. Denham took a liking to me that lasted the rest of his life. Otherwise the voyage was not a pleasant one; we had a great deal of bad weather.

When we came into the Channel, the captain kept his word and let me go through the bag for the governor's letters. I found not one with my name on it as being in my care. I picked out six or seven that, judging by the handwriting, might be the promised ones — especially since one was addressed to Basket, the king's printer, and another to a stationer. We arrived in London on December 24, 1724. I called on the stationer, who was first on my route, and presented the letter as coming from Governor Keith. "I don't know any such person," he said; but on opening the letter: "Oh! This is from Riddlesden. I've lately found him to be a complete scoundrel, and I'll have nothing to do with him or any letters from him." And putting the letter back in my hand, he turned on his heel and left me to go serve a customer. I was stunned to find these weren't the governor's letters at all; and after thinking back and putting the pieces together, I began to doubt his sincerity. I found my friend Denham and laid the whole business before him. He filled me in on Keith's character: there wasn't the slightest chance he had written any letters for me; nobody who knew him relied on him for anything; and as for the governor giving me a letter of credit — Denham laughed out loud. The man had no credit to give. When I confessed some worry about what I should do now, he advised me to try to get work in my own trade. "Among the printers here," he said, "you'll improve yourself, and when you go back to America, you'll set up with that much more advantage."

We both happened to know, as the stationer did, that Riddlesden the attorney was a thorough crook. He had half ruined Miss Read's father by talking him into cosigning his debts. From this letter it appeared there was a secret scheme afoot against Hamilton's interests (he was assumed to be crossing over with us), and that Keith was in on it with Riddlesden. Denham, who was a friend of Hamilton's, thought he ought to know about it. So when Hamilton arrived in England, which was soon afterward, I called on him and gave him the letter — partly out of resentment toward Keith and Riddlesden, and partly out of goodwill toward him. He thanked me warmly, the information being genuinely valuable to him, and from that time on he was my friend, which proved greatly to my advantage on many later occasions.

But what are we to make of a governor playing such shabby tricks, and imposing so grossly on a poor ignorant boy? It was simply a habit he'd acquired. He wanted to please everybody; and having little to give, he gave expectations. He was otherwise a clever, sensible man, a pretty good writer, and a good governor for the people — though not for his constituents, the proprietaries, whose instructions he sometimes ignored. Several of our best laws were of his devising and passed under his administration.

Ralph and I were inseparable. We took lodgings together in Little Britain at three shillings and sixpence a week — as much as we could then afford. He looked up some relations, but they were poor and couldn't help him. Now he let me in on his real intention: he was staying in London and never going back to Philadelphia. He had brought no money with him — everything he could scrape together had gone to pay his passage. I had fifteen pistoles, so he borrowed from me now and then to live on while he looked for work. First he tried to get into the theater, believing himself cut out to be an actor; but Wilkes, the actor he applied to, candidly advised him not to think of it, since he couldn't possibly succeed. Then he proposed to Roberts, a publisher in Paternoster Row, that he write him a weekly paper along the lines of the Spectator, on certain terms Roberts didn't care for. Then he tried to find work as a copyist, transcribing for the stationers and lawyers around the Temple, but there were no openings.

I, meanwhile, got work immediately at Palmer's, then a famous printing house in Bartholomew Close, and I stayed there nearly a year. I worked hard enough, but spent a good share of my earnings with Ralph on plays and other amusements. Between us we went through all my pistoles, and after that we just scraped along hand to mouth. He seemed to forget his wife and child entirely, and I, by degrees, forgot my engagements with Miss Read — I never wrote her more than one letter, and that was only to say I wasn't likely to return anytime soon. This was another of the great errata of my life, one I'd wish to correct if I were living it over again. In fact, what with our spending, I was never able to save up my passage home.

At Palmer's I was set to composing the type for the second edition of Wollaston's Religion of Nature. Some of his arguments didn't strike me as well founded, and I wrote a little metaphysical piece commenting on them, titled "A Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain." I dedicated it to my friend Ralph and printed a small run. It got Mr. Palmer to regard me as a young man of some ingenuity — though he lectured me seriously about the principles of the pamphlet, which struck him as abominable. Printing that pamphlet was another erratum.

While I lodged in Little Britain I got acquainted with one Wilcox, a bookseller whose shop was next door. He had an immense stock of secondhand books. Circulating libraries didn't exist yet, but we agreed that on certain reasonable terms — which I've now forgotten — I could take out, read, and return any of his books. I considered this a great advantage, and I made all the use of it I could.

My pamphlet somehow found its way into the hands of one Lyons, a surgeon and the author of a book called The Infallibility of Human Judgment, and it led to an acquaintance between us. He paid me a great deal of attention, called on me often to talk over those subjects, took me to the Horns, a pale-ale house in ⸻ Lane, Cheapside, and introduced me to Dr. Mandeville, author of the Fable of the Bees, who had a club there of which he was the life and soul — a most witty, entertaining companion. Lyons also introduced me to Dr. Pemberton at Batson's Coffeehouse, who promised to arrange, sometime or other, for me to see Sir Isaac Newton — something I wanted extremely. But it never happened.

I had brought over a few curiosities, the chief of which was a purse made of asbestos, which fire cleans instead of burning. Sir Hans Sloane heard about it, came to see me, and invited me to his house in Bloomsbury Square, where he showed me all his own curiosities and persuaded me to let him add mine to the collection — for which he paid me handsomely.

In our house there lodged a young woman, a milliner, who I think had a shop in the Cloisters. She had been genteelly raised, was sensible and lively, and was most pleasant company in conversation. Ralph read plays to her in the evenings; they grew intimate; she took other lodgings, and he followed her. They lived together for a while, but he was still out of work, and her income wasn't enough to support them along with her child, so he resolved to leave London and try for a country school. He thought himself well qualified for it, since he wrote an excellent hand and was a master of arithmetic and bookkeeping. But he considered the work beneath him, and — confident of grander fortunes to come, when he wouldn't want it known he had ever been so humbly employed — he changed his name, and did me the honor of assuming mine. For soon afterward I had a letter from him saying he was settled in a small village (in Berkshire, I think it was, where he taught reading and writing to ten or a dozen boys at sixpence a week each), commending Mrs. T⸺ to my care, and asking me to write to him addressed to Mr. Franklin, schoolmaster, at such-and-such a place.

He kept writing frequently, sending me long stretches of an epic poem he was composing and asking for my remarks and corrections. I gave them from time to time, but tried mostly to discourage him from going on. One of Young's Satires had just been published; I copied out a large part of it and sent it to him — it put in a strong light the folly of chasing the Muses with any hope of getting ahead by them. All in vain: sheets of the poem kept arriving by every post. Meanwhile Mrs. T⸺, having lost her friends and her business on his account, was often in difficulties, and would send for me and borrow what I could spare to get her out of them. I grew fond of her company, and being at that time under no religious restraint, and presuming on my importance to her, I attempted familiarities (another erratum), which she repulsed with proper indignation, and she told him how I'd behaved. This made a breach between us, and when he came back to London he informed me that he considered all his obligations to me canceled. So I learned I was never to expect repayment of anything I'd lent him or laid out for him. Not that it mattered much just then — he was flat broke anyway — and in losing his friendship I found myself relieved of a burden. I now began to think about getting a little money ahead, and expecting better work, I left Palmer's for Watts's, near Lincoln's Inn Fields, an even bigger printing house. There I stayed for the rest of my time in London.

On first joining this house I chose to work at the press, imagining I missed the physical exercise I'd been used to in America, where presswork is mixed in with composing. I drank only water; the other workmen, nearly fifty of them, were mighty guzzlers of beer. On occasion I carried a large form of type up and down the stairs in each hand, while the others carried one with both hands. They were amazed to see, from this and other instances, that the "Water-American," as they called me, was stronger than they were — and they drank strong beer! We had an alehouse boy who was always on hand in the house to keep the workmen supplied. My companion at the press drank a pint every day before breakfast, a pint at breakfast with his bread and cheese, a pint between breakfast and dinner, a pint at dinner, a pint in the afternoon around six o'clock, and another when his day's work was done. I thought it a detestable custom; but he supposed it was necessary to drink strong beer in order to be strong for labor. I tried to convince him that the bodily strength beer could give was only in proportion to the grain or barley flour dissolved in the water it was made from; that there was more flour in a pennyworth of bread; and that if he'd eat that with a pint of water, it would give him more strength than a quart of beer. He drank on regardless, and had four or five shillings to pay out of his wages every Saturday night for that muddling liquor — an expense I was free of. And that is how these poor devils keep themselves always down.

After some weeks Watts wanted me in the composing room, so I left the pressmen. The compositors then demanded a new bien venu from me — an initiation fee for drink money, five shillings. I thought it was extortion, since I'd already paid downstairs; the master thought so too, and forbade me to pay it. I held out for two or three weeks, was accordingly treated as an excommunicate, and had so many little pieces of private mischief done to me — my type cases scrambled, my pages transposed, my set matter broken up, and so on, and so on, whenever I stepped out of the room for a moment, all of it blamed on the chapel ghost, which they said always haunted those not properly admitted — that despite the master's protection I found myself obliged to give in and pay the money, convinced of the folly of being on bad terms with people you have to live with every day.

I was now on a fair footing with them, and soon acquired considerable influence. I proposed some sensible changes to their chapel laws — their shop rules — and carried them against all opposition. Following my example, a good number of them gave up their muddling breakfast of beer, bread, and cheese, finding that they could join me in getting, from a house nearby, a big porringer of hot water-gruel, sprinkled with pepper, crumbled with bread, and with a bit of butter in it — all for the price of a pint of beer, that is, three halfpence. It was a more comfortable as well as a cheaper breakfast, and it kept their heads clearer. The ones who went on soaking in beer all day were often out of credit at the alehouse for not paying, and would come courting me to stand them their beer — their "light," as they put it, "being out." I kept watch at the pay table on Saturday nights and collected whatever I'd guaranteed for them, sometimes having to cover nearly thirty shillings a week on their accounts. This, plus my reputation as a pretty good riggite — that is, a joking verbal satirist — kept up my standing in the society. My steady attendance (I never took a "St. Monday" off) recommended me to the master, and my unusual speed at composing got me put on all the rush work, which generally paid better. So things now went along very agreeably.

My lodging in Little Britain being too far from work, I found another in Duke Street, opposite the Roman Catholic chapel — two flights up at the back, over an Italian goods warehouse. A widow lady kept the house; she had a daughter, a maidservant, and a journeyman who tended the warehouse but lodged elsewhere. After sending to my previous lodging to inquire about my character, she agreed to take me in at the same rate, three shillings and sixpence a week — cheaper, she said, on account of the protection she expected from having a man in the house. She was an elderly widow, raised a Protestant — a clergyman's daughter — but converted to the Catholic religion by her husband, whose memory she deeply revered. She had moved in distinguished circles and knew a thousand anecdotes about notable people going back as far as the days of Charles the Second. She was lame in the knees with gout and so rarely stirred from her room, and sometimes wanted company; and hers was so entertaining to me that I made sure to spend an evening with her whenever she asked. Our supper was only half an anchovy apiece on a little strip of bread and butter, with half a pint of ale between us; but the entertainment was in her conversation. My keeping good hours and giving the household so little trouble made her reluctant to lose me; so when I mentioned a lodging I'd heard of nearer my work, at two shillings a week — which, intent as I now was on saving money, made a real difference — she told me not to think of it, for she'd knock two shillings off my rent going forward. So I stayed with her at one shilling and sixpence for as long as I remained in London.

In a garret of her house there lived a maiden lady of seventy, in the most secluded way imaginable. My landlady gave me this account of her: she was a Roman Catholic who had been sent abroad when young and lodged in a nunnery, intending to become a nun; but the country didn't agree with her, so she returned to England, where, there being no nunnery, she had vowed to live the life of a nun as nearly as circumstances allowed. Accordingly she had given her whole estate to charity, keeping only twelve pounds a year to live on — and even out of that she still gave a great deal away, living on nothing but water-gruel herself, and using no fire except to boil it. She had lived many years in that garret, allowed to stay rent-free by one Catholic tenant after another in the rooms below, since they counted it a blessing to have her there. A priest visited her every day to hear her confession. "I once asked her," said my landlady, "how she, living as she did, could possibly find so much employment for a confessor." "Oh," she replied, "it is impossible to avoid vain thoughts." I was permitted to visit her once. She was cheerful and polite, and conversed pleasantly. The room was clean, but its only furnishings were a mattress, a table with a crucifix and a book, a stool she gave me to sit on, and, over the fireplace, a picture of Saint Veronica displaying her handkerchief with the miraculous image of Christ's bleeding face on it, which she explained to me with great seriousness. She looked pale, but was never sick; and I set it down as one more instance of how small an income can support life and health.

At Watts's printing house I struck up an acquaintance with a clever young man named Wygate, who, having wealthy relations, had been better educated than most printers: he was a decent Latinist, spoke French, and loved to read. I taught him and a friend of his to swim in just two trips to the river, and they soon became good swimmers. They introduced me to some gentlemen from the country who were going by water to Chelsea to see the College and Don Saltero's curiosities. On the way back, at the company's request — Wygate having whetted their curiosity — I stripped and leaped into the river, and swam from near Chelsea all the way to Blackfriars, performing along the way plenty of feats, on the water and under it, that surprised and delighted people to whom they were novelties.

I had loved this exercise since childhood, had studied and practiced all of Thevenot's strokes and positions, and had added some of my own, aiming at the graceful and easy as well as the useful. All of these I took this occasion to show off to the company, and I was much flattered by their admiration. Wygate, who wanted to become a real master of it, grew more and more attached to me on that account, as well as from the similarity of our interests. He eventually proposed that the two of us travel all over Europe together, supporting ourselves everywhere by working at our trade. I was inclined to it for a while; but when I mentioned it to my good friend Mr. Denham, with whom I often spent an hour when I had free time, he talked me out of it, advising me to think only of returning to Pennsylvania, which he himself was now about to do.

I must record one trait of this good man's character. He had once been in business in Bristol, but failed owing money to a number of people, settled with them for partial payment, and went to America. There, by close application to business as a merchant, he made a handsome fortune in a few years. Returning to England on the same ship with me, he invited his old creditors to a dinner, at which he thanked them for the easy terms they had once granted him; and when they expected nothing beyond the meal itself, every man, as the first course was cleared, found under his plate a bank draft for the full amount of the unpaid balance — with interest.

He now told me he was about to return to Philadelphia and would be carrying over a great quantity of goods to open a store there. He proposed to take me along as his clerk — to keep his books (which he would teach me), copy his letters, and mind the store. He added that as soon as I'd learned the mercantile business, he would advance me by sending me with a cargo of flour and bread and so on to the West Indies, and would get me profitable commissions from others; and if I managed well, he would set me up handsomely. The offer pleased me, for I had grown tired of London, remembered with pleasure my happy months in Pennsylvania, and wanted to see it again. So I agreed at once, at fifty pounds a year, Pennsylvania money — less, it's true, than I was currently earning as a compositor, but with far better prospects.

I now took leave of printing, as I thought, forever, and was busy every day at my new trade, going around with Mr. Denham among the tradesmen to buy various goods, seeing them packed, running errands, calling on workmen to hurry things along, and so on; and when everything was aboard, I had a few days of leisure. On one of those days I was, to my surprise, sent for by a great man I knew only by name: Sir William Wyndham. I waited on him. He had heard, one way or another, of my swimming from Chelsea to Blackfriars, and of my teaching Wygate and another young man to swim in a matter of hours. He had two sons about to set out on their travels; he wanted them taught swimming first, and offered to reward me handsomely if I would do it. They hadn't yet come to town, and my own stay was uncertain, so I couldn't take it on. But the incident made me think that if I stayed in England and opened a swimming school, I might make good money — and it struck me so forcibly that if the offer had come sooner, I probably wouldn't have returned to America so soon. Many years later, you and I had business of far greater importance with one of these sons of Sir William Wyndham, by then Earl of Egremont — which I'll tell in its place.

So passed about eighteen months in London. Most of the time I worked hard at my trade and spent little on myself except for plays and books. My friend Ralph had kept me poor: he owed me about twenty-seven pounds, which I was now never likely to see — a great sum out of my small earnings! I loved him all the same, for he had many likable qualities. I had by no means improved my fortune; but I had picked up some very clever acquaintances whose conversation did me a great deal of good, and I had read considerably.
