Chapter 9: Plan for Attaining Moral Perfection

It was around this time that I conceived the bold and arduous project of arriving at moral perfection. I wanted to live without committing any fault at any time; I would conquer everything that natural inclination, habit, or company might lead me into. Since I knew — or thought I knew — what was right and what was wrong, I didn't see why I couldn't simply always do the one and avoid the other. But I soon found I had taken on a much harder job than I'd imagined. While my attention was busy guarding against one fault, another would catch me by surprise. Habit took advantage of inattention; inclination was sometimes too strong for reason. I concluded at last that merely being convinced, in the abstract, that complete virtue is in our interest isn't enough to keep us from slipping; the old bad habits have to be broken, and good ones acquired and established, before we can count on any steady, uniform rightness of conduct. So I worked out the following method.

In the various lists of the moral virtues I had run across in my reading, I found the catalog longer or shorter depending on how many ideas each writer packed under a single name. Temperance, for example, was confined by some to eating and drinking, while others stretched it to mean moderating every other pleasure, appetite, inclination, or passion, bodily or mental, all the way to our greed and ambition. For the sake of clarity, I decided to use more names with fewer ideas attached to each, rather than a few names with more ideas; and I included under thirteen names of virtues everything that seemed to me at the time necessary or desirable, attaching to each a short precept that expressed the full extent I gave to its meaning.

These names of virtues, with their precepts, were:

  Temperance.
  Eat not to dullness; drink not to elevation.
  Silence.
  Speak not but what may benefit others or yourself; avoid trifling conversation.
  Order.
  Let all your things have their places; let each part of your business have its time.
  Resolution.
  Resolve to perform what you ought; perform without fail what you resolve.
  Frugality.
  Make no expense but to do good to others or yourself; i.e., waste nothing.
  Industry.
  Lose no time; be always employed in something useful; cut off all unnecessary actions.
  Sincerity.
  Use no hurtful deceit; think innocently and justly; and, if you speak, speak accordingly.
  Justice.
  Wrong none by doing injuries, or omitting the benefits that are your duty.
  Moderation.
  Avoid extremes; forbear resenting injuries so much as you think they deserve.
  Cleanliness.
  Tolerate no uncleanliness in body, clothes, or habitation.
  Tranquillity.
  Be not disturbed at trifles, or at accidents common or unavoidable.
  Chastity.
  Humility.
  Imitate Jesus and Socrates.

My intention being to acquire the habit of all these virtues, I judged it best not to scatter my attention by attempting the whole list at once, but to fix on one virtue at a time; and when I had mastered that one, to move on to the next, and so on until I had gone through all thirteen. And since acquiring some of them first might make acquiring certain others easier, I arranged them with that in mind, in the order they stand above. Temperance came first, because it produces the cool, clear head that is so necessary when constant vigilance has to be kept up and a guard maintained against the relentless pull of old habits and the force of endless temptations. Once that was acquired and settled, Silence would be easier. And since I wanted to gain knowledge at the same time I improved in virtue, and considering that in conversation knowledge comes in through the ears rather than out through the tongue — and wishing, besides, to break a habit I was falling into of prattling, punning, and joking, which only made me welcome in trifling company — I gave Silence the second place. This and the next, Order, I expected would give me more time for attending to my project and my studies. Resolution, once it became habitual, would keep me firm in my efforts to obtain all the virtues that followed; Frugality and Industry, by freeing me from my remaining debt and producing prosperity and independence, would make it easier to practice Sincerity and Justice, and so on, and so on. And figuring that, following the advice of Pythagoras in his Golden Verses, a daily examination would be necessary, I devised the following method for conducting that examination.

I made a little book, in which I gave a page to each of the virtues. I ruled each page with red ink into seven columns, one for each day of the week, marking each column with a letter for the day. I crossed these columns with thirteen red lines, marking the beginning of each line with the first letter of one of the virtues; and on that line, in its proper column, I could mark with a little black spot every fault I found, upon examination, to have been committed against that virtue on that day.

Form of the pages.

  Temperance
  Eat not to dullness Drink not to elevation
  S. | M. | T. | W. | T. | F. | S.
  T.
  S. | • | • | • | •
  O. | • • | • | • | • | • | •
  R. | • | •
  F. | • | •
  I. | •
  S.
  J.
  M.
  C.
  T.
  C.
  H.

I decided to give a week's strict attention to each of the virtues in turn. So in the first week my great concern was to avoid even the smallest offense against Temperance, leaving the other virtues to their ordinary luck, only marking every evening the faults of the day. If in that first week I could keep my first line — the one marked T — clear of spots, I figured the habit of that virtue was so far strengthened, and its opposite so far weakened, that I could risk extending my attention to include the next, and for the following week keep both lines clear. Proceeding this way to the last, I could complete a full course in thirteen weeks, and four courses in a year. And like a man with a garden to weed, who doesn't try to pull up all the bad weeds at once — which would exceed his reach and his strength — but works on one bed at a time, and having finished the first, moves on to the second, I would have, I hoped, the encouraging pleasure of seeing my progress in virtue on my pages, clearing my lines of their spots one after another, until in the end, after a number of courses, I should have the happiness of looking at a clean book after thirteen weeks' daily examination.

My little book had for its motto these lines from Addison's Cato:

  "Here will I hold. If there's a power above us
  (And that there is, all nature cries aloud
  Through all her works), He must delight in virtue;
  And that which he delights in must be happy."

Another from Cicero, in his Latin:

  "O vitae Philosophia dux! O virtutum indagatrix expultrixque vitiorum! Unus dies, bene et ex praeceptis tuis actus, peccanti immortalitati est anteponendus."

Another from the Proverbs of Solomon, speaking of wisdom or virtue:

  "Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honour. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace."
  Proverbs 3:16, 17.

And since I conceived of God as the fountain of wisdom, I thought it right and necessary to ask his help in obtaining it. To this end I composed the following little prayer, which I placed at the front of my tables of examination, for daily use:

  "O powerful Goodness! bountiful Father! merciful Guide! Increase in me that wisdom which discovers my truest interest. Strengthen my resolutions to perform what that wisdom dictates. Accept my kind offices to thy other children as the only return in my power for thy continual favours to me."

I also sometimes used a little prayer I took from Thomson's Poems:

  "Father of light and life, thou Good Supreme!
  O teach me what is good; teach me Thyself!
  Save me from folly, vanity, and vice,
  From every low pursuit; and fill my soul
  With knowledge, conscious peace, and virtue pure;
  Sacred, substantial, never-fading bliss!"

Since the precept of Order required that every part of my business should have its allotted time, one page in my little book contained the following scheme for the twenty-four hours of a natural day.

  The Morning. Question. What good shall I do this day? | 5 | Rise, wash, and address Powerful Goodness! Plan the day's business and take the resolution of the day; pursue the current study, and breakfast.
  6
  7
  8 | Work.
  9
  10
  11
  Noon. | 12 | Read, or look over my accounts, and dine.
  1
  2 | Work.
  3
  4
  5
  Evening. Question. What good have I done today? | 6 | Put things in their places. Supper. Music or diversion, or conversation. Examination of the day.
  7
  8
  9
  Night. | 10 | Sleep.
  11
  12
  1
  2
  3
  4

I set about executing this plan of self-examination, and kept it up, with occasional lapses, for some time. I was surprised to find myself so much fuller of faults than I had imagined; but I had the satisfaction of watching them diminish. To spare myself the trouble of renewing my little book now and then — for scraping out the old marks on the paper to make room for new ones in a new course left it full of holes — I transferred my tables and precepts to the ivory leaves of a memorandum book, on which the lines were drawn in red ink, which made a durable stain, and on those lines I marked my faults with a black-lead pencil, marks I could easily wipe away with a wet sponge. After a while I went through only one course in a year, and later only one in several years, until at last I dropped them entirely, being taken up with voyages and business abroad and a multiplicity of affairs that interfered; but I always carried my little book with me.

My scheme of Order gave me the most trouble. I found that, while it might be workable for a man whose business left him in command of his own time — a journeyman printer, for instance — it could not be exactly observed by a master, who has to mix with the world and often receive people of business at whatever hours suit them. Order with regard to places for things, papers, and so on, I also found extremely difficult to acquire. I had not been trained to it early; and having an exceedingly good memory, I didn't feel the inconvenience of being unmethodical as sharply as I might have. This article, therefore, cost me so much painful attention, and my faults in it vexed me so much, and I made so little progress in mending them, and relapsed so often, that I was nearly ready to give up the attempt and content myself with a faulty character in that respect — like the man who, in buying an ax from a smith, my neighbor, wanted the whole of its surface as bright as the edge. The smith agreed to grind it bright for him if he would turn the wheel. He turned, while the smith pressed the broad face of the ax hard and heavily against the stone, which made the turning very fatiguing. Every now and then the man came away from the wheel to see how the work was going, and at last said he would take his ax as it was, without further grinding. "No," said the smith, "turn on, turn on; we shall have it bright by and by; as yet, it is only speckled." "Yes," says the man, "but I think I like a speckled ax best." And I believe this may have been the case with many who, lacking some such method as mine, have found how hard it is to acquire good habits and break bad ones in other points of vice and virtue, have given up the struggle, and concluded that "a speckled ax was best." For something that pretended to be reason kept suggesting to me, every now and then, that such extreme fussiness as I demanded of myself might be a kind of foppery in morals which, if it were known, would make me ridiculous; that a perfect character might come with the inconvenience of being envied and hated; and that a benevolent man should allow himself a few faults, to keep his friends in countenance.

In truth, I found myself incorrigible with respect to Order; and now that I am grown old, and my memory bad, I feel the want of it very keenly. But on the whole, though I never arrived at the perfection I had been so ambitious of obtaining, and fell far short of it, still I was, by the attempt, a better and a happier man than I would otherwise have been if I had never made it — just as those who aim at perfect handwriting by imitating the engraved copybooks, though they never reach the wished-for excellence of the copies, find their hand improved by the effort, and tolerably fair and legible.

It may be worth my descendants' knowing that to this little artifice, with the blessing of God, their ancestor owed the constant happiness of his life, down to his seventy-ninth year, in which this is written. What reverses may attend the remainder is in the hand of Providence; but if they come, the reflection on past happiness enjoyed ought to help him bear them with more resignation. To Temperance he ascribes his long-continued health, and what is still left to him of a good constitution; to Industry and Frugality, the early easing of his circumstances and the acquisition of his fortune, along with all the knowledge that enabled him to be a useful citizen and earned him some degree of reputation among the learned; to Sincerity and Justice, the confidence of his country and the honorable offices it conferred upon him; and to the joint influence of the whole mass of the virtues, even in the imperfect state in which he managed to acquire them, all that evenness of temper and cheerfulness in conversation which makes his company still sought after, and agreeable even to his younger acquaintances. I hope, therefore, that some of my descendants may follow the example and reap the benefit.

It will be noticed that, though my scheme was not wholly without religion, there was in it no mark of any of the distinguishing tenets of any particular sect. I had purposely avoided them; for, being fully persuaded of the usefulness and excellence of my method, and that it might serve people of all religions, and intending at some point to publish it, I would not have anything in it that might prejudice anyone, of any sect, against it. I intended to write a little commentary on each virtue, showing the advantages of possessing it and the harms attending its opposite vice; and I would have called my book The Art of Virtue, because it would have shown the means and manner of obtaining virtue — which would have distinguished it from mere exhortation to be good, the kind that doesn't instruct or point out the means, and is like the apostle's man of verbal charity, who, without showing the naked and hungry how or where they might get clothes or food, merely exhorted them to be fed and clothed. — James 2:15, 16.

But as it happened, my intention of writing and publishing this commentary was never fulfilled. I did, from time to time, jot down short hints of the sentiments and reasonings to be used in it, some of which I still have by me; but the close attention required by private business in the earlier part of my life, and by public business since, has kept me postponing it. For it was connected in my mind with a great and extensive project that required the whole man to execute, and an unforeseen succession of employments prevented my attending to it; so it has remained unfinished to this day.

In this piece it was my design to explain and drive home this doctrine: that vicious actions are not harmful because they are forbidden, but forbidden because they are harmful — the nature of man alone considered; and that it is therefore in everyone's interest to be virtuous who wishes to be happy even in this world. And from this circumstance — there being always in the world a number of rich merchants, nobility, states, and princes who need honest instruments for the management of their affairs, and such being so rare — I would have tried to convince young people that no qualities are so likely to make a poor man's fortune as probity and integrity.

My list of virtues contained at first only twelve; but a Quaker friend kindly informed me that I was generally thought proud; that my pride showed itself frequently in conversation; that I was not content with being in the right when discussing any point, but was overbearing and rather insolent — of which he convinced me by mentioning several instances. I determined to try to cure myself, if I could, of this vice or folly along with the rest, and I added Humility to my list, giving the word an extensive meaning.

I cannot boast of much success in acquiring the reality of this virtue, but I had a good deal with regard to the appearance of it. I made it a rule to forbear all direct contradiction of other people's opinions, and all positive assertion of my own. I even forbade myself, in keeping with the old laws of our Junto, the use of every word or expression in the language that implied a fixed opinion, such as "certainly," "undoubtedly," and the like; and I adopted instead "I conceive," "I apprehend," or "I imagine" a thing to be so; or it "so appears to me at present." When someone asserted something I thought an error, I denied myself the pleasure of contradicting him abruptly and of immediately exposing some absurdity in his proposition; and in answering I began by observing that in certain cases or circumstances his opinion would be right, but that in the present case there appeared or seemed to me to be some difference, and so on. I soon found the advantage of this change in my manner: the conversations I engaged in went more pleasantly. The modest way in which I proposed my opinions got them a readier reception and less contradiction; I was less mortified when I turned out to be in the wrong; and I more easily prevailed on others to give up their mistakes and join me when I happened to be in the right.

And this manner, which I at first put on with some violence to my natural inclination, became at length so easy and so habitual to me that perhaps for these fifty years past no one has ever heard a dogmatical expression escape me. And to this habit (after my character for integrity) I think it chiefly owing that I had so much weight with my fellow citizens early on, when I proposed new institutions or alterations in the old, and so much influence in public councils when I became a member; for I was a poor speaker, never eloquent, subject to much hesitation in my choice of words, hardly correct in language — and yet I generally carried my points.

In reality, there is perhaps no one of our natural passions so hard to subdue as pride. Disguise it, struggle with it, beat it down, stifle it, mortify it as much as you please, it is still alive, and will every now and then peep out and show itself; you will see it, perhaps, often in this history; for, even if I could conceive that I had completely overcome it, I should probably be proud of my humility.

[Thus far written at Passy, 1784.]

["I am now about to write at home, August, 1788, but cannot have the help expected from my papers, many of them being lost in the war. I have, however, found the following."]

Having mentioned a great and extensive project which I had conceived, it seems proper to give some account here of that project and its object. Its first rise in my mind appears in the following little paper, accidentally preserved:

  "That the great affairs of the world, the wars, revolutions, etc., are carried on and effected by parties.
  "That the view of these parties is their present general interest, or what they take to be such.
  "That the different views of these different parties occasion all confusion.
  "That while a party is carrying on a general design, each man has his particular private interest in view.
  "That as soon as a party has gained its general point, each member becomes intent upon his particular interest; which, thwarting others, breaks that party into divisions, and occasions more confusion.
  "That few in public affairs act from a mere view of the good of their country, whatever they may pretend; and, though their actings bring real good to their country, yet men primarily considered that their own and their country's interest was united, and did not act from a principle of benevolence.
  "That fewer still, in public affairs, act with a view to the good of mankind.
  "There seems to me at present to be great occasion for raising a United Party for Virtue, by forming the virtuous and good men of all nations into a regular body, to be governed by suitable good and wise rules, which good and wise men may probably be more unanimous in their obedience to, than common people are to common laws.
  "I at present think that whoever attempts this aright, and is well qualified, cannot fail of pleasing God, and of meeting with success.
  "B. F."

Turning this project over in my mind, as something to be undertaken later, when my circumstances would give me the necessary leisure, I put down from time to time, on scraps of paper, such thoughts as occurred to me about it. Most of these are lost; but I find one that claims to be the substance of an intended creed, containing, as I thought, the essentials of every known religion, and free of anything that might shock the followers of any of them. It is expressed in these words:

  "That there is one God, who made all things.
  "That he governs the world by his providence.
  "That he ought to be worshiped by adoration, prayer, and thanksgiving.
  "But that the most acceptable service of God is doing good to man.
  "That the soul is immortal.
  "And that God will certainly reward virtue and punish vice, either here or hereafter."

My ideas at the time were these: that the sect should be started and spread at first among young single men only; that each candidate for initiation should not only declare his assent to this creed, but should have put himself through the thirteen weeks' examination and practice of the virtues, on the model described above; that the existence of such a society should be kept secret until it had grown considerable, to prevent applications from unsuitable people; but that the members should each search among their acquaintance for open-minded, well-disposed young men, to whom the scheme should be gradually communicated with prudent caution; that the members should pledge to give their advice, assistance, and support to one another in promoting each other's interests, business, and advancement in life; and that, for distinction, we should be called "The Society of the Free and Easy" — free, as being, by the general practice and habit of the virtues, free from the dominion of vice; and particularly, by the practice of industry and frugality, free from debt, which exposes a man to confinement and a species of slavery to his creditors.

This is as much as I can now recall of the project, except that I communicated it in part to two young men, who took it up with some enthusiasm; but my then narrow circumstances, and the necessity of sticking close to my business, made me postpone pursuing it further at the time; and my many occupations since, public and private, kept me postponing it, until it has now been left undone so long that I no longer have strength or energy enough for such an enterprise. Yet I am still of the opinion that it was a practicable scheme, and might have been very useful, by forming a great number of good citizens; and I was never discouraged by the apparent size of the undertaking, for I have always thought that one man of tolerable abilities may work great changes and accomplish great affairs among mankind, if he first forms a good plan and then, cutting off all amusements and other employments that would divert his attention, makes the execution of that plan his sole study and business.
