Chapter 12: Defense of the Province

On the whole, I had every reason to be pleased with how I'd established myself in Pennsylvania. Two things bothered me, though: the province made no provision for defense and none for a complete education of its young people — no militia and no college. So in 1743 I drew up a proposal for founding an academy. The Reverend Mr. Peters was out of work at the time, and thinking him the right man to run such an institution, I shared the project with him; but he had more profitable prospects in the service of the proprietaries — which panned out for him — and he declined the undertaking. Not knowing anyone else just then who was suited to such a trust, I let the scheme lie dormant for a while. I had better luck the next year, 1744, in proposing and establishing a Philosophical Society. The paper I wrote for that purpose will be found among my writings, when they're collected.

As for defense: Spain had been at war with Great Britain for several years, and when France finally joined her, we were in real danger. Our governor, Thomas, had labored long and hard to persuade our Quaker Assembly to pass a militia law and make other provisions for the security of the province, and had gotten nowhere. So I decided to see what might be done by a voluntary association of the people. To get it moving, I first wrote and published a pamphlet called "Plain Truth," in which I laid out our defenseless situation in the strongest light, argued the necessity of union and discipline for our defense, and promised to propose, within a few days, an association that everyone could sign for that purpose. The pamphlet had a sudden and surprising effect. People demanded the association paper at once; I settled the draft of it with a few friends and called a meeting of the citizens in the large building I've mentioned before. The house was pretty full. I had printed up a stack of copies and set out pens and ink all over the room. I gave them a short speech on the subject, read the paper, explained it, and then handed out the copies — which were eagerly signed, without a single objection.

When the company broke up and the papers were collected, we found more than twelve hundred signatures; and once other copies had circulated through the countryside, the signers eventually numbered upward of ten thousand. All of them equipped themselves with arms as soon as they could, formed themselves into companies and regiments, elected their own officers, and met every week to be drilled in the manual exercise and the other parts of military discipline. The women, raising money by subscriptions among themselves, provided silk colors for the companies — flags painted with various devices and mottoes, which I supplied.

The officers of the companies making up the Philadelphia regiment met and chose me for their colonel; but thinking myself unfit for it, I declined the post and recommended Mr. Lawrence, a fine figure of a man with real influence, who was duly appointed. I then proposed a lottery to cover the cost of building a battery below the town and furnishing it with cannon. It filled quickly, and the battery soon went up, its merlons — the solid stretches of parapet — framed of logs and filled with earth. We bought some old cannon from Boston, but these weren't enough, so we wrote to England for more, at the same time asking our proprietaries for some assistance — without much expectation of getting it.

Meanwhile Colonel Lawrence, William Allen, Abram Taylor, Esq., and I were sent to New York by the associators, commissioned to borrow some cannon from Governor Clinton. At first he refused us flatly; but at dinner with his council, where a great deal of Madeira was drunk, as the custom of that place then was, he softened by degrees and said he would lend us six. A few more glasses later he advanced to ten; and at length he very good-naturedly conceded eighteen. They were fine cannon — eighteen-pounders, carriages and all — which we soon transported and mounted on our battery, where the associators kept a nightly guard as long as the war lasted; and among the rest, I regularly took my turn of duty there as a common soldier.

My activity in these operations pleased the governor and council; they took me into their confidence, and I was consulted on every measure where their support might be useful to the association. Calling in the aid of religion, I proposed that they proclaim a fast day, to promote reformation and implore the blessing of Heaven on our undertaking. They embraced the idea; but since it was the first fast ever thought of in the province, the secretary had no precedent to draw the proclamation from. Here my New England upbringing proved an advantage — a fast is proclaimed there every year — and I drafted it in the accustomed style. It was translated into German, printed in both languages, and spread through the province. This gave the clergy of the different sects an opportunity to urge their congregations to join the association, and it probably would have become general among everyone but the Quakers if peace hadn't soon intervened.

Some of my friends thought that my activity in these affairs would offend that sect, and cost me my standing in the provincial Assembly, where Quakers held a great majority. A young gentleman who had friends of his own in the House, and who wanted to succeed me as its clerk, informed me that it had been decided to remove me at the next election; and out of goodwill, he advised me to resign — more consistent with my honor, he said, than being turned out. My answer was that I had read or heard of some public man who made it a rule never to ask for an office, and never to refuse one when it was offered to him. "I approve of his rule," I said, "and will practice it with a small addition: I shall never ask, never refuse, nor ever resign an office. If they want my office of clerk to give to somebody else, they'll have to take it from me. I won't hand it over and give up my right of someday making reprisals on my adversaries." I heard no more of it; I was chosen again unanimously, as usual, at the next election. Possibly they disliked my recent closeness with the members of the council, who had sided with the governors in all the disputes about military preparations that had long harassed the House, and they might have been pleased if I'd left them voluntarily; but they weren't willing to throw me out merely on account of my zeal for the association, and they couldn't very well give any other reason.

In fact I had some cause to believe that the defense of the country wasn't actually disagreeable to any of them — provided they weren't required to assist in it. And I found that a much greater number of them than I could have imagined, though against offensive war, were clearly for the defensive kind. Many pamphlets pro and con were published on the subject, some by good Quakers arguing in favor of defense, and I believe these convinced most of their younger people.

A piece of business in our fire company gave me some insight into their prevailing sentiments. It had been proposed that we support the battery scheme by spending our present stock — then about sixty pounds — on lottery tickets. By our rules, no money could be spent until the next meeting after the proposal. The company had thirty members: twenty-two Quakers, and only eight of other persuasions. We eight attended the meeting punctually; and though we thought some of the Quakers would join us, we were by no means sure of a majority. Only one Quaker, Mr. James Morris, appeared to oppose the measure. He expressed much sorrow that it had ever been proposed, saying that Friends were all against it, and that it would create such discord as might break up the company. We told him we saw no reason for that: we were the minority, and if Friends were against the measure and outvoted us, we must and would submit, as the usage of all societies requires. When the hour for business arrived, it was moved to put the vote. He allowed that by the rules we could; but since he could assure us that a number of members intended to be present for the purpose of opposing it, it would only be fair to allow a little time for them to appear.

While we were disputing the point, a waiter came to tell me that two gentlemen downstairs wished to speak with me. I went down and found two of our Quaker members. They told me there were eight of them gathered at a tavern close by; that they were determined to come and vote with us if there should be occasion, which they hoped there wouldn't be; and that they'd rather we didn't call for their assistance unless we couldn't do without it, since voting for such a measure might embroil them with their elders and friends. Being thus secure of a majority, I went back up, and after a little show of hesitation agreed to a delay of another hour. This Mr. Morris allowed to be extremely fair. Not one of his opposing friends appeared, which surprised him greatly; and when the hour was up, we carried the resolution eight to one. And since eight of the twenty-two Quakers had been ready to vote with us, while thirteen, by their absence, showed they had no inclination to oppose the measure, I afterward reckoned the proportion of Quakers sincerely against defense at only one in twenty-one — for all these were regular members of that society, in good reputation among them, and had due notice of what was to be proposed at that meeting.

The honorable and learned Mr. Logan, who had always been of that sect, was one who wrote an address to them declaring his approval of defensive war, and supporting his opinion with many strong arguments. He put sixty pounds into my hands to be spent on lottery tickets for the battery, with directions to apply whatever prizes it drew entirely to that service. And he told me the following anecdote about his old master, William Penn, on the subject of defense. Logan had come over from England as a young man with that proprietary, as his secretary. It was wartime, and their ship was chased by an armed vessel supposed to be an enemy. The captain prepared to defend the ship, but told William Penn and his company of Quakers that he didn't expect their assistance, and they were free to retire to the cabin — which they did, all except James Logan, who chose to stay on deck and was assigned to a gun. The supposed enemy proved a friend, so there was no fighting; but when the secretary went down to deliver the news, William Penn rebuked him severely for staying on deck and presuming to help defend the vessel, contrary to the principles of Friends — especially since the captain hadn't required it. This reproof, delivered in front of the whole company, stung the secretary, who answered, "I being thy servant, why did thee not order me to come down? But thee was willing enough that I should stay and help to fight the ship when thee thought there was danger."

My many years in the Assembly, whose majority was always Quaker, gave me frequent opportunities to see the embarrassment their principle against war caused them whenever the crown ordered them to grant aids for military purposes. They were unwilling to offend the government, on the one hand, by a direct refusal; and unwilling, on the other, to offend their friends, the body of the Quakers, by complying against their principles — hence a variety of evasions to avoid complying, and ways of disguising the compliance when it became unavoidable. The common method, at last, was to grant money under the phrase of its being "for the king's use," and never to inquire how it was applied.

But if the demand didn't come directly from the crown, that phrase wouldn't quite serve, and some other had to be invented. Once, when gunpowder was wanted — for the garrison at Louisburg, I think — and the government of New England asked Pennsylvania for a grant of some, which Governor Thomas pressed hard on the House, they couldn't grant money to buy powder, because powder is an ingredient of war. Instead they voted an aid to New England of three thousand pounds, to be put into the governor's hands and appropriated for the purchase of bread, flour, wheat, "or other grain." Some of the council, wanting to embarrass the House still further, advised the governor not to accept provisions, since that wasn't what he had demanded; but he replied, "I shall take the money, for I understand very well their meaning; other grain is gunpowder" — which he bought accordingly, and they never objected to it.

It was in allusion to this that, when we in our fire company feared our lottery proposal would fail, I said to my friend Mr. Syng, one of our members, "If we lose, let's move to spend the money on a fire engine; the Quakers can have no objection to that. Then, if you nominate me and I nominate you as the committee for the purchase, we'll buy a great gun — which is certainly a fire engine." "I see," says he, "you've improved by being so long in the Assembly; your equivocal project would be just a match for their wheat or other grain."

These embarrassments the Quakers suffered from having established and published, as one of their principles, that no kind of war was lawful — a principle which, once published, they couldn't easily get rid of, however much they might change their minds — remind me of what I think the more prudent conduct of another sect among us, the Dunkers. I was acquainted with one of its founders, Michael Welfare, soon after the sect appeared. He complained to me that they were being grievously slandered by the zealots of other persuasions, and charged with abominable principles and practices they were utter strangers to. I told him this had always been the case with new sects, and that to put a stop to such abuse, I imagined it might be well to publish their articles of belief and the rules of their discipline. He said it had been proposed among them, but not agreed to, and for this reason: "When we were first drawn together as a society," he said, "it had pleased God to enlighten our minds so far as to see that some doctrines, which we once esteemed truths, were errors; and that others, which we had esteemed errors, were real truths. From time to time He has been pleased to afford us further light, and our principles have been improving, and our errors diminishing. Now, we are not sure that we have arrived at the end of this progression, and at the perfection of spiritual or theological knowledge; and we fear that if we should once print our confession of faith, we should feel ourselves as if bound and confined by it, and perhaps be unwilling to receive further improvement — and our successors still more so, taking what we their elders and founders had done for something sacred, never to be departed from."

This modesty in a sect is perhaps a singular instance in the history of mankind, since every other sect supposes itself in possession of all truth, and that those who differ are just that far in the wrong. It's like a man traveling in foggy weather: those at some distance ahead of him on the road he sees wrapped in fog, and those behind him too, and the people in the fields on either side; but near him everything appears clear — though in truth he's as deep in the fog as any of them. To avoid this kind of embarrassment, the Quakers have in recent years been gradually withdrawing from public service in the Assembly and the magistracy, choosing rather to give up their power than their principle.

In order of time, I should have mentioned earlier that in 1742 I invented an open stove for warming rooms better while saving fuel, since the fresh air it admitted was warmed as it entered. I made a present of the model to Mr. Robert Grace, one of my early friends, who owned an iron furnace and found the casting of the plates for these stoves a profitable business, as they were growing in demand. To promote that demand, I wrote and published a pamphlet titled "An Account of the New-Invented Pennsylvania Fireplaces; Wherein Their Construction and Manner of Operation Is Particularly Explained; Their Advantages Above Every Other Method of Warming Rooms Demonstrated; and All Objections That Have Been Raised Against the Use of Them Answered and Obviated," etc. The pamphlet had a good effect. Governor Thomas was so pleased with the construction of this stove, as described in it, that he offered to give me a patent for the sole right of selling them for a term of years; but I declined it, on a principle that has always weighed with me on such occasions: that as we enjoy great advantages from the inventions of others, we should be glad of an opportunity to serve others by any invention of ours — and this we should do freely and generously.

An ironmonger in London, however, lifted a good deal of my pamphlet, worked it up into his own, made some small changes in the machine — which actually hurt its operation — and got a patent for it there, making, as I was told, a little fortune by it. Nor is this the only instance of patents taken out on my inventions by others, though not always with the same success. I never contested them, having no desire to profit by patents myself, and hating disputes. The use of these fireplaces in a great many houses, both in this colony and the neighboring ones, has been, and is, a great saving of wood to the inhabitants.
