Chapter 14: Albany Plan of Union

In 1754, with war against France again looking likely, the Lords of Trade ordered a congress of commissioners from the different colonies to assemble at Albany and confer with the chiefs of the Six Nations about the means of defending both their country and ours. When Governor Hamilton received this order he laid it before the House, asking them to furnish suitable presents for the Indians on the occasion, and naming the speaker, Mr. Norris, and myself to join Mr. Thomas Penn and Secretary Peters as commissioners for Pennsylvania. The House approved the nominations and provided the goods for the present — though they never much liked holding treaty talks outside the province — and we met the other commissioners at Albany about the middle of June.

On the way there, I worked out and drew up a plan for the union of all the colonies under one government, so far as might be necessary for defense and other important general purposes. Passing through New York, I showed my project to Mr. James Alexander and Mr. Kennedy, two gentlemen deeply versed in public affairs, and, fortified by their approval, I ventured to lay it before the Congress. It turned out that several of the commissioners had drawn up plans of the same kind. A preliminary question was put first — should a union be established at all? — and it passed unanimously. A committee was then appointed, one member from each colony, to consider the various plans and report. Mine happened to be preferred, and with a few amendments it was reported out accordingly.

Under this plan, the general government was to be administered by a president-general, appointed and supported by the crown, and a grand council chosen by the representatives of the people in the several colonial assemblies. The debates on it went on in Congress daily, hand in hand with the Indian business. Many objections and difficulties were raised, but in the end every one was overcome, the plan was unanimously agreed to, and copies were ordered sent to the Board of Trade and to the assemblies of the several provinces.

Its fate was a strange one. The assemblies would not adopt it, all thinking it had too much prerogative — too much crown power — in it; and in England it was judged to be too democratic. So the Board of Trade did not approve it, or recommend it for the king's approval. Instead another scheme was formed, supposed to answer the same purpose better: the governors of the provinces, with some members of their respective councils, would meet and order the raising of troops, the building of forts, and so on, drawing on the treasury of Great Britain for the expense — which was afterward to be repaid by an act of Parliament laying a tax on America. My plan, with my reasons in support of it, can be found among my political papers that have been printed.

Being in Boston the following winter, I had many conversations with Governor Shirley about both plans. Part of what passed between us on the occasion may also be seen among those papers. The objections to my plan were so different — indeed so contrary — on the two sides that I suspect it was really the true middle course; and I am still of the opinion that it would have been a happy thing for both sides of the water if it had been adopted. The colonies, so united, would have been strong enough to defend themselves. There would then have been no need of troops from England — and so the later pretext for taxing America, and the bloody contest it brought on, would have been avoided. But such mistakes are nothing new; history is full of the errors of states and princes.

  "Look round the habitable world, how few
  Know their own good, or, knowing it, pursue!"

Those who govern, having a great deal of business on their hands, generally don't care to take the trouble of considering and carrying out new projects. The best public measures are therefore seldom adopted from previous wisdom; they are forced by the occasion.

The Governor of Pennsylvania, in sending the plan down to the Assembly, expressed his approval of it, "as appearing to him to be drawn up with great clearness and strength of judgment, and therefore recommended it as well worthy of their closest and most serious attention." The House, however, through the management of a certain member, took it up while I happened to be absent — which I thought not very fair — and rejected it without giving it any consideration at all, to my no small mortification.
