Chapter 15: Quarrels with the Proprietary Governors

On my trip to Boston that year, I met our new governor, Mr. Morris, at New York — just arrived from England, and a man I had known well for years. He carried a commission to replace Mr. Hamilton, who, worn out by the disputes his proprietary instructions kept dragging him into, had resigned. Mr. Morris asked me whether I thought he had to expect an equally uncomfortable administration. "No," I said. "On the contrary, you may have a very comfortable one — if you'll just take care not to get into any dispute with the Assembly." "My dear friend," he said pleasantly, "how can you advise me to avoid disputes? You know I love disputing; it's one of my greatest pleasures. Still, to show you how much I value your counsel, I promise you I'll avoid them — if I possibly can." He had some reason to love disputing: he was eloquent, a sharp and slippery arguer, and therefore generally successful in argumentative conversation. He had been raised to it from boyhood — his father, as I've heard, used to set his children disputing with one another for his own entertainment while they sat at the table after dinner. But I don't think the practice was wise, because in the course of my observation, these disputing, contradicting, and confuting people generally do badly in their affairs. They get victory sometimes, but they never get goodwill, which would be of more use to them. We parted, he heading for Philadelphia and I for Boston.

On my way back, I met at New York with the printed votes of the Assembly, from which it appeared that, despite his promise to me, he and the House were already locked in high contention — and it was a continual battle between them for as long as he held the government. I had my share of it. As soon as I got back to my seat in the Assembly, I was put on every committee for answering his speeches and messages, and the committees always asked me to make the drafts. Our answers, like his messages, were often tart, and sometimes indecently abusive; and since he knew I wrote for the Assembly, you might have imagined that when we met, we could hardly keep from cutting each other's throats. But he was so good-natured a man that the contest never caused any personal quarrel between him and me, and we often dined together.

One afternoon, at the very height of this public feud, we met in the street. "Franklin," he said, "you must come home with me and spend the evening; I'm having some company you'll like" — and taking me by the arm, he led me to his house. In the merry conversation over our wine after supper, he told us, jokingly, that he much admired the idea of Sancho Panza, who, when it was proposed to give him a government, requested it be a government of blacks, because then, if he couldn't agree with his people, he could sell them. One of his friends, sitting next to me, said, "Franklin, why do you keep siding with these damned Quakers? Hadn't you better sell them? The proprietor would give you a good price." "The governor," I said, "has not yet blacked them enough." He had indeed labored hard to blacken the Assembly in all his messages, but they wiped off his coloring as fast as he laid it on, and slapped it back, thick, on his own face — so that, finding he was likely to be negrofied himself, he, like Mr. Hamilton before him, grew tired of the contest and quit the government.

These public quarrels were all, at bottom, the fault of the proprietaries, our hereditary governors. Whenever any expense had to be incurred for the defense of their own province, they instructed their deputies, with unbelievable meanness, to pass no act levying the necessary taxes unless the same act expressly excused their vast estates — and they had even taken bonds from these deputies to obey such instructions. For three years the Assemblies held out against this injustice, though they were forced to bend at last. Eventually Captain Denny, Governor Morris's successor, ventured to disobey those instructions; how that came about, I'll show later.

But I'm getting ahead of my story. There are still some transactions to mention that happened during Governor Morris's administration.

War with France having in effect begun, the government of Massachusetts Bay planned an attack on Crown Point, and sent Mr. Quincy to Pennsylvania — and Mr. Pownall, afterward Governor Pownall, to New York — to ask for assistance. Since I was in the Assembly, knew its temper, and was Mr. Quincy's fellow New Englander, he came to me for my influence and help. I dictated his address to the House, which was well received. They voted an aid of ten thousand pounds, to be spent on provisions. But the governor refused his assent to their bill (which bundled this with other sums granted for the use of the Crown) unless a clause were inserted exempting the proprietary estate from bearing any part of the tax that would be necessary; and the Assembly, though very eager to make their grant to New England effective, were at a loss how to accomplish it. Mr. Quincy labored hard with the governor to obtain his assent, but he was obstinate.

I then suggested a way of doing the business without the governor: orders drawn on the trustees of the Loan Office, which the Assembly had the legal right to draw. There was, it's true, little or no money in the office at the time, so I proposed that the orders be made payable in a year and carry interest at five percent. With these orders, I figured, the provisions could easily be purchased. The Assembly adopted the proposal with very little hesitation. The orders were printed immediately, and I was one of the committee appointed to sign and issue them. The fund for paying them was the interest on all the paper currency then out on loan in the province, together with the revenue from the excise — which, being known to be more than sufficient, gave them instant credit. They were not only accepted in payment for the provisions; many moneyed people who had cash lying idle invested it in these orders, finding them a good deal, since they earned interest while on hand and could be used as money on any occasion. So they were all eagerly bought up, and in a few weeks not one of them was to be seen. Thus this important affair was completed by my means. Mr. Quincy thanked the Assembly in a handsome memorial, went home highly pleased with the success of his mission, and ever after bore me the most cordial and affectionate friendship.
