Chapter 16: Braddock’s Expedition

The British government didn't care to permit the union of the colonies proposed at Albany, or to trust that union with their own defense — the colonies might grow too military and start to feel their own strength, and there was already a good deal of suspicion and jealousy of us in those days. So instead they sent over General Braddock with two regiments of regular English troops to do the job. He landed at Alexandria, in Virginia, and marched from there to Frederictown, in Maryland, where he halted to wait for wagons. Our Assembly had gotten word that he'd conceived violent prejudices against them, as if they were opposed to the war effort, and they wanted me to go call on him — not officially on their behalf, but in my character as postmaster-general, under the cover of arranging with him how to carry dispatches between him and the governors of the several provinces with the most speed and certainty, since he'd need to be in constant correspondence with them, and the Assembly proposed to pay the cost. My son came with me on the journey.

We found the general at Frederictown, waiting impatiently for the return of the men he'd sent through the back country of Maryland and Virginia to collect wagons. I stayed with him several days, dined with him daily, and had every opportunity to clear away his prejudices by telling him what the Assembly had actually done before his arrival, and what it stood ready to do, to help his operations along. Just as I was about to leave, the wagon returns came in — and they amounted to only twenty-five, not all of those in working condition. The general and all his officers were stunned. They declared the expedition was finished, impossible, and cursed the ministers for ignorantly landing them in a country that had no means of hauling their stores and baggage, when no fewer than a hundred and fifty wagons would be needed.

I happened to remark that it was a pity they hadn't landed in Pennsylvania instead, since in that country almost every farmer had his own wagon. The general seized eagerly on my words: “Then you, sir, who are a man of interest there, can probably procure them for us; and I beg you will undertake it.” I asked what terms would be offered to the owners of the wagons, and was told to put on paper whatever terms seemed necessary to me. I did; they were agreed to, and a commission and instructions were drawn up on the spot. What those terms were will appear in the advertisement I published as soon as I reached Lancaster. Given the great and sudden effect it produced, it's a piece of some curiosity, so I'll insert it here in full:

  “Whereas one hundred and fifty wagons, with four horses to each wagon, and fifteen hundred saddle or pack horses, are wanted for the service of His Majesty's forces now about to assemble at Will's Creek, and His Excellency General Braddock has been pleased to empower me to contract for the hire of the same, I hereby give notice that I shall attend for that purpose at Lancaster from this day until next Wednesday evening, and at York from next Thursday morning until Friday evening, where I shall be ready to agree for wagons and teams, or single horses, on the following terms, namely: 1. That there shall be paid for each wagon, with four good horses and a driver, fifteen shillings per day; and for each able horse with a packsaddle, or other saddle and gear, two shillings per day; and for each able horse without a saddle, eighteen pence per day. 2. That the pay begins from the time they join the forces at Will's Creek, which must be on or before the 20th of May next, and that a reasonable allowance will be paid over and above for the time needed to travel to Will's Creek and home again after their discharge. 3. Each wagon and team, and every saddle or pack horse, is to be valued by impartial persons chosen between me and the owner; and in case any wagon, team, or other horse is lost in the service, the price according to that valuation is to be allowed and paid. 4. Seven days' pay is to be advanced and paid in hand by me to the owner of each wagon and team, or horse, at the time of contracting, if required, and the remainder to be paid by General Braddock, or by the paymaster of the army, at the time of their discharge, or from time to time as it shall be demanded. 5. No drivers of wagons, or persons taking care of the hired horses, are on any account to be called on to do the duty of soldiers, or be employed in anything other than driving or taking care of their wagons and horses. 6. All oats, Indian corn, or other forage that the wagons or horses bring to camp beyond what the horses themselves need is to be taken for the use of the army, and a reasonable price paid for it.
  “Note: My son, William Franklin, is empowered to enter into like contracts with any person in Cumberland County.
  “B. Franklin.”
  “Friends and Countrymen,
  “Happening to be at the camp at Frederic a few days ago, I found the general and his officers extremely exasperated that they had not been supplied with horses and wagons, which had been expected from this province as the one best able to furnish them; but through the disputes between our governor and Assembly, no money had been provided, nor any steps taken for the purpose.
  “It was proposed to send an armed force into these counties at once, to seize as many of the best wagons and horses as might be wanted, and to compel into the service as many persons as would be needed to drive and care for them.
  “I feared that the march of British soldiers through these counties on such an errand — especially considering the temper they are in, and their resentment against us — would bring many great hardships on the inhabitants, and so I was the more willing to take the trouble of first trying what might be done by fair and equitable means. The people of these back counties have lately complained to the Assembly that there is not enough currency in circulation; you now have an opportunity to receive and divide among yourselves a very considerable sum. For if the service of this expedition continues, as it more than probably will, for a hundred and twenty days, the hire of these wagons and horses will come to upward of thirty thousand pounds, which will be paid you in the silver and gold of the king's money.
  “The service will be light and easy, for the army will scarcely march more than twelve miles a day; and the wagons and baggage horses, since they carry the things absolutely necessary to the welfare of the army, must march with the army and no faster, and are, for the army's own sake, always placed where they will be most secure, whether on the march or in camp.
  “If you are really, as I believe you are, good and loyal subjects to His Majesty, you may now do a most acceptable service and make it easy for yourselves; for three or four of those who cannot separately spare a wagon and four horses and a driver from the business of their farms may do it together — one furnishing the wagon, another one or two horses, and another the driver — and divide the pay proportionately among you. But if you will not do this service to your king and country voluntarily, when such good pay and reasonable terms are offered you, your loyalty will be strongly suspected. The king's business must be done; so many brave troops, come so far for your defense, must not stand idle because of your reluctance to do what may reasonably be expected of you; wagons and horses must be had; violent measures will probably be used, and you will be left to seek your compensation where you can find it, and your case, perhaps, little pitied or regarded.
  “I have no particular interest in this affair; apart from the satisfaction of trying to do good, I shall have nothing for my pains but my labor. If this method of obtaining the wagons and horses is not likely to succeed, I am obliged to send word to the general within fourteen days; and I suppose Sir John St. Clair, the hussar, with a body of soldiers, will immediately enter the province for the purpose — which I shall be sorry to hear, because I am very sincerely and truly your friend and well-wisher,
  “B. Franklin.”

I received from the general about eight hundred pounds to be paid out as advance money to the wagon owners and the rest; but that sum proved insufficient, and I advanced upward of two hundred pounds more of my own. In two weeks the hundred and fifty wagons, with two hundred and fifty-nine pack horses, were on their march to the camp. The advertisement had promised payment according to the valuation if any wagon or horse were lost. The owners, however, saying they didn't know General Braddock or how far his promise could be depended on, insisted on my personal bond for the performance — which I accordingly gave them.

While I was at the camp, having supper one evening with the officers of Colonel Dunbar's regiment, he told me of his concern for the junior officers, who, he said, were generally men of little money and could ill afford, in this expensive country, to lay in the supplies they'd need for so long a march through a wilderness where nothing could be bought. I felt for them, and resolved to try to get them some relief. I said nothing to him of my intention, though; instead I wrote the next morning to the committee of the Assembly that had the handling of some public money, warmly recommending the case of these officers and proposing that a present of necessities and refreshments be sent to them. My son, who had some experience of camp life and its wants, drew up a list for me, which I enclosed in my letter. The committee approved, and moved so quickly that the stores — conducted by my son — arrived at the camp as soon as the wagons did. They consisted of twenty parcels, each containing

  6 lbs. loaf sugar. | 1 Gloucester cheese.
  6 lbs. good Muscovado sugar. | 1 keg containing 20 lbs. good butter.
  1 lb. good green tea. | 2 doz. old Madeira wine.
  1 lb. good bohea tea. | 2 gallons Jamaica spirits.
  6 lbs. good ground coffee. | 1 bottle flour of mustard.
  6 lbs. chocolate. | 2 well-cured hams.
  1–2 cwt. best white biscuit. | 1–2 dozen dried tongues.
  1–2 lb. pepper. | 6 lbs. rice.
  1 quart best white wine | 6 lbs. raisins.
  1 quart best white wine vinegar.

These twenty parcels, well packed, were loaded onto as many horses, each parcel with its horse being intended as a present for one officer. They were very thankfully received, and the kindness acknowledged in the most grateful terms by letters to me from the colonels of both regiments. The general, too, was highly pleased with my conduct in procuring him the wagons and the rest, and readily paid my account of expenses, thanking me repeatedly and asking my further assistance in sending provisions after him. I undertook that as well, and was busy at it until we heard of his defeat — advancing for the service, out of my own pocket, upward of a thousand pounds sterling, of which I sent him an account. It reached his hands, luckily for me, a few days before the battle, and he immediately sent back an order on the paymaster for the round sum of a thousand pounds, leaving the remainder to the next account. I count that payment as good luck, since I was never able to obtain the remainder — of which more later.

This general was, I think, a brave man, and might probably have made a figure as a good officer in some European war. But he had too much self-confidence, too high an opinion of the worth of regular troops, and too low a one of both Americans and Indians. George Croghan, our Indian interpreter, joined him on his march with a hundred of those people, who could have been of great use to his army as guides and scouts if he had treated them kindly; but he slighted and neglected them, and by degrees they left him.

In conversation with him one day, he was giving me some account of his intended progress. “After taking Fort Duquesne,” he said, “I am to proceed to Niagara; and, having taken that, to Frontenac, if the season will allow time; and I suppose it will, for Duquesne can hardly detain me above three or four days; and then I see nothing that can obstruct my march to Niagara.” I had been turning over in my mind the long line his army would have to make on its march, along a very narrow road that would have to be cut for them through the woods and brush, and I had also read of an earlier defeat of fifteen hundred French troops who invaded the Iroquois country; so I had conceived some doubts and some fears for how the campaign would turn out. But all I ventured to say was, “To be sure, sir, if you arrive well before Duquesne with these fine troops, so well provided with artillery, that place — not yet completely fortified, and, as we hear, with no very strong garrison — can probably make only a short resistance. The only danger I see of obstruction to your march is from ambushes of Indians, who by constant practice are expert at laying and springing them; and the slender line your army must make, near four miles long, may expose it to be attacked by surprise on its flanks, and to be cut like a thread into several pieces, which, being so far apart, cannot come up in time to support each other.”

He smiled at my ignorance, and replied, “These savages may, indeed, be a formidable enemy to your raw American militia, but upon the king's regular and disciplined troops, sir, it is impossible they should make any impression.” I was conscious that there was something improper in my disputing with a military man about matters of his own profession, and I said no more. As it happened, the enemy did not take the advantage of his army that I had feared its long line of march would give them, but let it advance without interruption until it was within nine miles of the place. Then — when the troops were more bunched together (they had just crossed a river, where the front had halted until everyone was over) and in a more open stretch of woods than any they had passed — the enemy attacked the advance guard with heavy fire from behind trees and bushes. That was the first news the general had that any enemy was near him. The guard fell into disorder; the general hurried the troops up to their assistance, which was done in great confusion, through wagons, baggage, and cattle; and presently the fire came on their flank. The officers, being on horseback, were the more easily distinguished, picked out as targets, and fell very fast; and the soldiers were crowded together in a huddle, having or hearing no orders, standing to be shot at until two-thirds of them were killed; and then, seized with panic, the whole force fled headlong.

The wagon drivers each took a horse out of his team and bolted; their example was immediately followed by others; and so all the wagons, provisions, artillery, and stores were left to the enemy. The general, being wounded, was brought off with difficulty; his secretary, Mr. Shirley, was killed by his side; and out of eighty-six officers, sixty-three were killed or wounded, and seven hundred and fourteen men killed out of eleven hundred. Those eleven hundred had been picked men from the whole army; the rest had been left behind with Colonel Dunbar, who was to follow with the heavier stores, provisions, and baggage. The fugitives, who were not pursued, arrived at Dunbar's camp, and the panic they brought with them instantly seized him and all his people. Though he now had above a thousand men, and the enemy who had beaten Braddock numbered at most four hundred Indians and French together, instead of pressing forward and trying to recover some of the lost honor, he ordered all the stores, ammunition, and the rest destroyed — so that he might have more horses to assist his flight toward the settlements, and less baggage to move. He was met there with requests from the governors of Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania that he post his troops on the frontier, to give some protection to the inhabitants; but he continued his hasty march through the whole country, not thinking himself safe until he arrived at Philadelphia, where the inhabitants could protect him. This whole transaction gave us Americans the first suspicion that our exalted ideas of the prowess of British regulars had not been well founded.

In their first march, too, from their landing until they got beyond the settlements, they had plundered and stripped the inhabitants, totally ruining some poor families, besides insulting, abusing, and locking up people who protested. That alone was enough to sour us on such defenders, if we had really wanted any. How different was the conduct of our French friends in 1781, who, during a march through the most settled part of our country, from Rhode Island to Virginia — near seven hundred miles — occasioned not the smallest complaint for the loss of a pig, a chicken, or even an apple.

Captain Orme, one of the general's aides-de-camp, who was grievously wounded and brought off with him, and stayed with him until his death a few days later, told me that the general was totally silent all the first day, and at night said only, “Who would have thought it?” — that he was silent again the following day, saying at last only, “We shall better know how to deal with them another time,” and died a few minutes after.

The secretary's papers, with all the general's orders, instructions, and correspondence, fell into the enemy's hands, and from them they selected a number of items, translated them into French, and printed them, to prove the hostile intentions of the British court before war had been declared. Among these I saw some letters from the general to the ministry speaking highly of the great service I had rendered the army, and recommending me to their notice. David Hume, too, who some years later was secretary to Lord Hertford when he was minister in France, and afterward to General Conway when he was secretary of state, told me he had seen among the papers in that office letters from Braddock recommending me highly. But the expedition having been unfortunate, my service, it seems, was not thought of much value — for those recommendations were never of any use to me.

As for rewards from Braddock himself, I asked only one: that he would give orders to his officers not to enlist any more of our bought servants — indentured men whose time their masters had purchased — and to discharge those already enlisted. This he readily granted, and several were returned to their masters on my application. Dunbar, when the command fell to him, was not so generous. While he was at Philadelphia on his retreat — or rather his flight — I applied to him for the discharge of the servants of three poor Lancaster County farmers whom he had enlisted, reminding him of the late general's orders on that point. He promised me that if the masters would come to him at Trenton, where he would be in a few days on his march to New York, he would deliver their men to them there. They went to the expense and trouble of traveling to Trenton, and there he refused to keep his promise, to their great loss and disappointment.

As soon as the loss of the wagons and horses became generally known, all the owners came down on me for the valuations I had given my bond to pay. Their demands gave me a great deal of trouble. I told them the money was ready in the paymaster's hands, but that orders for paying it out had to be obtained first from General Shirley; I assured them I had applied to that general by letter, but that he was at a distance, an answer could not come soon, and they must have patience. None of it was enough to satisfy them, and some began to sue me. General Shirley at length rescued me from this terrible situation by appointing commissioners to examine the claims and ordering payment. The claims came to near twenty thousand pounds — which to pay would have ruined me.

Before we had news of the defeat, the two Doctors Bond came to me with a subscription paper for raising money to pay for a grand firework display, which was to be exhibited at a celebration when word arrived that we had taken Fort Duquesne. I looked grave, and said I thought it would be time enough to prepare for the rejoicing when we knew we had occasion to rejoice. They seemed surprised that I didn't sign on at once. “Why the d⸺l!” says one of them, “you surely don't suppose that the fort will not be taken?” “I don't know that it will not be taken, but I know that the events of war are subject to great uncertainty.” I gave them my reasons for doubting; the subscription was dropped, and the projectors were thereby spared the mortification they would have suffered if the fireworks had been prepared. Dr. Bond, on some other occasion afterward, said that he did not like Franklin's forebodings.

Governor Morris, who before Braddock's defeat had continually pestered the Assembly with message after message, trying to beat them into passing acts to raise money for the defense of the province without taxing, among other property, the proprietary estates — and who had rejected all their bills for lacking such an exempting clause — now redoubled his attacks with better hope of success, the danger and the need being greater. The Assembly, however, stood firm, believing they had justice on their side, and that it would be surrendering an essential right if they let the governor amend their money bills. In one of the last of these, a bill granting fifty thousand pounds, his proposed amendment was of a single word. The bill said “that all estates, real and personal, were to be taxed, those of the proprietaries not excepted.” His amendment: for not, read only — a small but very material alteration. However, when news of this disaster reached England, our friends there, whom we had taken care to supply with all the Assembly's answers to the governor's messages, raised a clamor against the proprietaries for their meanness and injustice in giving their governor such instructions, some going so far as to say that by obstructing the defense of their province they forfeited their right to it. The proprietaries were intimidated by this, and sent orders to their receiver-general to add five thousand pounds of their own money to whatever sum the Assembly might grant for that purpose.

This, being reported to the House, was accepted in place of their share of a general tax, and a new bill was drawn with an exempting clause, which passed accordingly. By this act I was appointed one of the commissioners for disposing of the money — sixty thousand pounds. I had been active in shaping the bill and getting it passed, and had at the same time drawn up a bill for establishing and disciplining a voluntary militia, which I carried through the House without much difficulty, since care was taken in it to leave the Quakers at their liberty. To promote the association needed to form the militia, I wrote a dialogue stating and answering every objection I could think of to such a militia; it was printed, and had, I thought, great effect.
