Book Six: Storms, Earthquakes, Magnets, and the Plague at Athens
(Part 1 of 3)

Athens, that famous name, was the first city to hand out crops to
suffering mortals long ago. Athens made life over again, and drew up
laws, and Athens was the first to give life its sweet comforts, when
she produced a man with a heart like that found in him, a man who
once poured out everything from a mouth that told the truth. He is
dead now, and still, because of the godlike things he discovered, the
fame that was spread abroad in the old days is carried up to the sky.

For he saw that almost everything which our needs demand for staying
alive had already been provided for mortals, and that their life
stood about as safe as it could be made; he saw men powerful in
riches, in public office and in reputation, well off, holding their
heads high over the good name of their sons; and he saw that all the
same, in his own home, not one of them had a heart any less full of
anxiety, that their minds harried their lives without a pause and
with no thanks for it, and were driven to rage with bitter
complaints. So he understood that the fault was in the jar
itself, and that everything gathered from outside and brought into
it, however good it was, was spoiled inside by the jar's own
defect. Partly because he could see that the thing was leaky and full
of holes, so that there was no way in the world it could ever be
filled; and partly because he could see that it fouled everything it
took in, as if with a disgusting taste.

So he cleaned out people's hearts with words that told the truth. He
set a limit to craving and to fear. He laid out what the highest good
is, the thing all of us are making for, and he showed the road, a
short track by which we could drive at it in a straight run. He
showed what evil there is in mortal affairs, everywhere, coming about
in the course of nature and flying at us in one form or another,
whether by chance or by force, because that is the way nature has
arranged things; and out of which gates a man should go to meet each
of them. And he proved that for the most part the human race rolls
the grim waves of care about in its chest for nothing.

For just as children shake and are afraid of everything in the blind
dark, so we, sometimes, are afraid in broad daylight of things no
more to be feared than the things children go pale over in the dark
and invent for themselves as about to happen.

So this terror of the mind and this darkness have to be scattered.
Not by the rays of the sun and the bright arrows of daylight, but by
looking at nature and working out how it runs.

That is all the more reason to go on and finish weaving what I have
begun.

And since I have taught you that the great spaces of the world are
mortal, and that the sky is made of a body that had a birth, and that
most of what happens in it, and must happen, has to be broken up
again, take in the rest as well. Once I have climbed into that famous
chariot, then you, clever Muse Calliope, rest of men and delight of
the gods, mark out the ground in front of me as I run to the white
line drawn at the end of the course, so that with you leading I may
take the crown with famous praise.

The winds get up, and then everything is calmed down again, and all
that was raging is turned about and quiet. As for the rest of what
mortals see happening on the earth and in the sky, they often hang on
it with frightened minds, and it makes them humble in their souls
with dread of the gods and presses them down and holds them flat
against the ground, because being ignorant of causes forces them to
hand everything over to the command of the gods and to grant them the
kingship.

For even the men who have learned properly that the gods spend their
lives free of care, if they still keep wondering meanwhile by what
plan things can be managed, and above all the things seen overhead
along the shores of the upper air, are carried back again into the
old religions and take on harsh masters, whom in their misery they
believe to be capable of anything, because they do not know what can
exist and what cannot, and on what principle each thing has its power
limited and a boundary stone driven deep. That is all the more reason
why they go wandering, carried along by blind reasoning.

Unless you spit all this out of your mind and send it a long way off,
unless you stop thinking things unworthy of the gods and foreign to
their peace, the holy powers of the gods will often do you harm,
belittled by you. Not that the highest force of the gods can be
violated so that in anger it takes a sharp revenge, but because you
yourself will imagine that beings who are quiet in a settled peace
are rolling great waves of anger about; and you will not go up to the
shrines of the gods with a settled heart, and you will not have the
strength to take in, with the mind's tranquil peace, the images
carried from their holy bodies into the minds of men as messengers of
a divine shape. And from that you can see what sort of life follows.

If the truest reasoning is going to drive that life far away from us,
then although a great deal has already come out of me, a great deal
still remains and has to be dressed in polished verse. The law and
the look of the sky have to be grasped, and the storms and the bright
lightnings have to be sung: what they do, and from what cause each of
them is carried along, so that you do not go out of your mind with
fear, dividing the sky into its regions to see which of them the
flying fire came from, or which of the two halves it turned into from
there, or how it worked its way into shut places, or how it took
charge and then got itself out again. People cannot see the causes of
these performances by any reasoning at all, and so they think they
are done by a god's will.

To begin with, then. The blue deeps of the sky are shaken with
thunder because the clouds of the upper air, flying high, run
together against each other when the winds are fighting. No sound
ever comes out of a clear part of the sky; but wherever the clouds
are in a thicker column, that is where a rumbling comes with a great
roar, and it comes more often. Besides, clouds cannot be of such
close-packed body as stones and timbers are, nor as thin as mists and
flying smoke are. If they were, they would either have to fall,
pressed down by their dead weight like stones, or, like smoke, they
would not be able to hold themselves together, or to keep icy snow
and showers of hail inside them.

They also give out a sound over the levels of the wide-open world,
the way an awning stretched over a big theatre sometimes gives out a
crack as it is tossed about between the poles and the crossbeams. And
sometimes, torn right through by rowdy gusts, it goes wild and copies
the brittle sound of sheets of paper. You can recognise that sort of
noise in thunder too, or when the lashings of the wind spin hanging
clothes and flying papers about and beat them through the air.

And it happens sometimes, too, that the clouds cannot run together
front to front, but travel sideways instead, with contrary motions,
scraping their bodies along each other slowly; and that is where the
dry sound comes from that rubs at our ears and is drawn out a long
time, until they have got clear of the tight quarters.

Here is another way in which everything often seems to shake at a
heavy clap of thunder, and the huge walls of the roomy world seem to
be torn apart and to have suddenly sprung open. A gathered squall of
strong wind twists its way all at once into a mass of cloud, and,
shut up inside it there, with its whirl spinning round and round, it
forces the cloud more and more, on every side, to become hollow with
a thickened body round the outside. Then, when the wind's force and
its sharp charge have worn that shell down, the cloud is split and
gives out a crash with a sound that terrifies. And no wonder: a small
bladder full of air, when it is suddenly burst, often gives out no
small sound either.

There is also this way of accounting for it, that the clouds make a
sound when the winds blow right through them. We often see clouds
carried along branched and rough in many different shapes; and it is
the same as when a north-west gale blows right through a thick wood
and the leaves sough and the branches crash.

It happens sometimes, too, that the roused force of a strong wind
rips a cloud right open, breaking through it with a straight charge.
What a blast can do up there is plainly taught by what happens down
here, where the wind is gentler and even so tears tall trees out of
the ground and drags them up by their deepest roots.

There are waves running through the clouds as well, which give out a
sort of rumble as they break heavily; and the same thing happens in
deep rivers and in the great sea when the surf breaks.

It happens as well when the burning force of a thunderbolt falls out
of one cloud into another. If the second cloud happens to have taken
in a lot of moisture, it kills the fire on the spot with a great
outcry, in the way that iron white-hot out of a fiery furnace hisses
when we have dropped it straight into cold water. If the cloud that
takes the fire is drier, then it is set alight all at once and burns
with an enormous sound, as if a flame were wandering over
laurel-covered mountains and burning them up with a great charge in a
whirl of winds. There is nothing that burns with a more terrifying
noise, with the flame crackling, than the Delphic laurel of Apollo.

And finally, the great cracking of ice and the collapse of hail often
gives out a sound high up in the great clouds. For when the wind
packs them tight, the mountains of storm cloud, frozen together and
mixed with hail, are broken up into a small compass.

It lightens, likewise, when the clouds have struck many seeds of fire
out of each other by their collision, in the way that if a stone
strikes a stone, or iron does, light leaps out too and fire scatters
bright sparks. But it works out that we take in the thunder with our
ears after our eyes have seen the flash, because things always arrive
at the ears more slowly than the things that set our sight going. You
can understand this from an example as well. If you see somebody a
long way off cutting down a great tree with a two-edged axe, it works
out that you see the stroke before the blow gives a sound in your
ears. So we see the flash as well before we take in the thunder,
although the thunder is sent off at the same moment as the fire, from
a like cause, and born of the same collision.

Here is another way in which the clouds stain the country with a
flying light and the storm flashes with a trembling charge. When wind
has got into a cloud and spun about in there and made the cloud
hollow with a thickened shell round it, in the way I taught you
above, it grows hot with its own speed. You see how everything gets
thoroughly heated by motion and catches fire; a lead bullet, in fact,
even melts when it has to travel a long course. So when this
red-hot wind has ripped the black cloud apart, it scatters the seeds
of burning, pressed out all at once as if by force, and those are
what make the blinking flashes of flame. After that comes the sound,
which reaches our ears more slowly than the things that arrive at the
light of our eyes. This happens, you should know, in dense clouds,
and where they are piled high, one on another, with a marvellous
upward thrust.

Do not be taken in by the fact that we look at them from below and
see how broad they are rather than how far up they are built. Watch
them instead when the winds are carrying clouds shaped like mountains
sideways through the air, or when you see them heaped along great
mountain ranges, one on another and above, pressing down from over
your head, anchored in position with the winds buried on every side.
Then you will be able to make out the great masses of them, and to
see caverns in them apparently built out of overhanging rock. When a
storm has got up and the winds have filled those caverns, they are
shut in there and roar around indignantly with a great rumbling and
make threats in their cloud cages the way wild animals do. Now from
here, now from there, they send growls through the clouds; hunting
for a way out they spin round and round, and they roll the seeds of
fire together out of the clouds, and gather a great many of them, and
wheel flame about in the hollow furnaces inside, until they have torn
the cloud open and flashed out glittering.

Here is another reason why that flying golden colour of liquid fire
comes down to the earth. The clouds themselves must have a great many
seeds of fire in them; for when they are without any moisture at all
their colour is mostly flaming and shining. Naturally they must take
a great deal from the light of the sun, so that they redden, as you
would expect, and pour fires out. So when a wind has driven these
clouds and packed them into one place and crushed them together and
forced them, they pour out seeds squeezed from them, and those are
what make the colours of flame flash.

It lightens likewise when the clouds of the sky are thinning out. For
when the wind pulls them lightly apart as they travel and dissolves
them, those seeds which make the flash have to fall, whether they
will or not. Then it lightens without the foul terror and the noise,
and with no uproar at all.

Now for what is left. What sort of nature thunderbolts are furnished
with is declared by the strikes, by the branded marks of heat, and by
the scars that breathe out the heavy fumes of sulphur. Those are the
marks of fire, not of wind and not of rain. Besides, they often set
the roofs of houses alight, too, and take charge inside the rooms
themselves with a quick flame. Nature has put this fire together for
you out of small and mobile bodies, and it is the most delicate of
all fires: nothing whatever can stand in its way. The strong
thunderbolt goes through the walls of houses, as shouting and voices
do; it goes through stone, through bronze, and it turns bronze and
gold to liquid in a moment. It also arranges for the wine to vanish
suddenly out of jars that are still whole, because of course the heat
of it, coming in, easily loosens everything around and makes the
earthenware sides of the jar porous, and, once it has worked its way
inside, it quickly breaks up the atoms of the wine and disperses
them. And that is what the sun's heat is plainly unable to manage in
a lifetime, powerful as it is with its glittering fever. So much
quicker and more overpowering is this force.

Now, how these things come to be born, and how they come to be made
with such a charge that with one stroke they can split towers open,
knock houses to pieces, tear away rafters and beams, and heave up the
monuments of great men and throw them about; how they can take the
breath out of people and lay cattle flat all over the place; by what
force they can do all the rest of this kind of thing: I shall set it
out, and I shall not keep you waiting any longer with promises.

Thunderbolts have to be thought of as born in the thick clouds piled
high up. None are ever sent out of a clear sky, or out of clouds of
slight density. Beyond doubt this is so, and the plain facts teach
it. At such a time the clouds thicken through the whole air, so that
we suppose all the darkness has left Acheron and filled the great
caverns of the sky. That is how far it goes: once the foul night of
the storm clouds has got up, faces of black dread hang over us from
above, at the moment when the storm begins to forge its thunderbolts.

Besides, very often a black thundercloud out at sea falls into the
waves like a river of pitch let down out of the sky, stuffed with
darkness far off, and drags along a black storm heavy with
thunderbolts and squalls, itself crammed above all with fires and
winds, so that even the people on land shiver and go looking for a
roof. So the storm has to be thought of as standing high above our
heads in the way I have said. The clouds would not bury the lands
under so much gloom unless there were many of them built up above,
one on another, with the sun shut out; nor could they, as they come,
crush us with so much rain, and make the rivers overflow and the
fields swim, if the upper air were not built high with clouds.

Here, then, everything is full of winds and fires, and that is why
there are roars and flashes all over the place. I taught you above
that hollow clouds hold a great many seeds of heat, and they must
take in many from the sun's rays and their burning. So when the same
wind that drives these clouds into one place, whichever place it
happens to be, has squeezed many seeds of heat out of them and mixed
itself in with that fire at the same time, a whirlwind works its way
in and spins about there in the narrow space and sharpens the
thunderbolt in hot furnaces inside. For the wind is set alight in two
ways: it warms up by its own speed, and it warms up from the touch of
the fire. Then, when the force of the wind has been thoroughly heated
and the heavy charge of the fire has driven in, the thunderbolt, ripe
by now, so to speak, suddenly splits the cloud right open, and the
roused blaze is carried out lighting up every place around with its
glittering. A heavy sound follows it, so that the vaults of the sky
seem to have burst apart all at once and to be coming down on us from
above. Then a shudder takes hold of the lands and runs deep, and
rumblings run along the high sky, because at such a moment nearly the
whole storm is shaken and trembles and the roarings are set going. Out
of that shock comes heavy and abundant rain, so that the whole upper
air seems to be turning into rain, and, as it comes down headlong,
calling the world back to a flood. That is how great a downpour is
sent out when the cloud is torn open and the wind squalls, once the
sound has flown out on a burning stroke.

There are also times when the roused force of a wind from outside
falls on a cloud that is strong and carrying a ripe bolt. When it has
split that cloud open, that fiery whirl drops out on the spot, the
thing we call, in our fathers' own word, a thunderbolt. The same
thing happens in other directions too, wherever the force has carried
it.

It also happens sometimes that the force of a wind sent off without
any fire in it catches fire all the same over the distance of its
long journey, losing on the way certain large bodies which cannot get
through the air as well as the others can, and scraping together
other tiny ones out of the air itself and carrying them along, and
these mix as they fly and make fire. It is much the same way as a
lead bullet often grows hot on its course, when it drops many bodies
of stiff cold and takes fire into itself in the air.

It happens as well that the force of the blow itself rouses the fire,
when the cold force of a wind has struck out, sent off with no fire
in it. Naturally so, because when it has hit with a violent stroke
the atoms of heat can flow together out of the wind itself and at
the same time out of the thing that takes the stroke at that moment.
It is like the fire that flies out when we cut a stone with iron: the
seeds of hot brightness rush together at the stroke no less for the
fact that the force of the iron is cold. So a thing must be set
alight by a thunderbolt in the same way, if it happens to be
convenient and suited to flames. And the cold force of the wind
cannot be entirely and completely cold, not when it has been sent
with such force from above: even if it is not set alight by fire on
its course, all the same it arrives warmed and mixed with heat.

Now, the speed of a thunderbolt and its heavy stroke, and the fact
that thunderbolts usually run their course with a quick glide, come
about because the roused force always gathers itself first inside the
clouds and takes up a great effort to be gone. Then, when the cloud
has not been able to hold the growth of its charge, the force is
squeezed out and so flies with a marvellous charge, like the shots
sent from strong catapults.

Add to this that it is made of small and smooth atoms, and it is
not easy for anything to stand up to a nature like that. It escapes
between things and works its way through their gaps, and so it does
not stick fast, held up by many collisions, and that is why it flies
gliding along with a quick charge.

Then, because by nature all weights press downwards, when a blow is
added on top of that the speed is doubled and the charge grows
heavier, so that it knocks whatever gets in its way apart with its
blows, more violently and more quickly, and keeps on its road.

And finally, because it comes on with a long charge, it must gather
speed again and again, and that speed grows as it goes and increases
its strong powers and toughens the stroke. It makes all its seeds,
whatever they are, be carried in a straight line as if into one
place, throwing them all together as they roll into that course. It
may be that as it comes it drags certain bodies out of the air
itself, and these fire up its speed with their blows.

It comes through many things and leaves them unhurt and passes
through them whole, because the liquid fire travels through their
holes. But it breaks a great many things too, when the bodies of the
thunderbolt themselves have fallen on the bodies of things exactly
where the weave is held together. And it easily undoes bronze and
makes gold run in an instant, because its force is made of tiny small
bodies and smooth atoms, which work their way in easily and, once
they are in, quickly break all the knots apart and loosen the bonds.

The high house of the sky, glittering with stars, and the whole earth
with it, are shaken most in autumn, and again when the flowering
season of spring is opening out. For in the cold the fires are
missing, and in the heat the winds fail, and the clouds are not of so
dense a body. But when the seasons of the sky stand between the two,
then all the different causes of a thunderbolt come together at once.
The crossing-place of the year itself mixes cold with heat, and the
cloud needs both of them for manufacturing thunderbolts, so that
there is a quarrel among things and the air billows in a great uproar,
raging with fires and winds.

For the first part of the heat is the last part of the cold, and that
is springtime; so unlike things must fight each other and make a
disturbance when they are mixed. And when the last of the heat comes
round mixed with the first of the cold, the season that goes by the
name of autumn, here too the sharp winters clash with the summers.
That is why these should be called the crossing-straits of the year,
and it is no wonder if at that season a very great number of
thunderbolts happen and a turbulent storm is roused in the sky, since
on both sides there is a doubtful war making a disturbance, on one
side with flames, on the other with winds and water mixed in.

This, this is what it is to see through to the very nature of the
fire-bearing thunderbolt, and to see by what force it does each
thing: not to unroll Etruscan chants and hunt through them for signs
of the hidden mind of the gods, for nothing, asking which quarter the
flying fire came from, or which of the two halves it turned into from
there, or how it worked its way into shut places, or how it took
charge and then got itself out again, or what harm the stroke of the
thunderbolt out of the sky can do.

And if Jupiter and the other gods shake the shining vaults of heaven
with a terrifying noise, and throw the fire wherever each of them
feels like it, why do they not arrange that people who have some
loathsome crime on their consciences are struck and breathe out
flames of lightning from a pierced chest, a sharp lesson to mortals?
Why is it rather a man who knows of nothing shameful about himself
who is rolled about in flames, innocent, and caught up and tangled in
a heavenly whirl and in fire, all at once?

And why do they aim at empty places and work for nothing? Are they
practising their arms then, and building up their muscles? And why do
they allow the Father's weapon to be blunted on the ground? Why does
he himself put up with that, instead of keeping it for his enemies?

And in the end, why does Jupiter never throw a thunderbolt to the
earth and pour out claps of thunder when the sky is clear on every
side? Or does he come down in person into the clouds as soon as they
have moved in underneath, so that he can decide the stroke of his
weapon from close up?

And what is his reason for throwing into the sea? What has he got
against the waves and the liquid mass and the swimming plains?

Besides, if he wants us to look out for the stroke of the bolt, why
does he hesitate to make it possible for us to see it thrown? And if
he wants to crush us with fire when we are not expecting it, why does
he thunder from that quarter, so that we can dodge it? Why does he
rouse darkness first, and roars and rumbling?

And how can you believe that he shoots into many different quarters
at once? Or would you dare to argue that it never happens that
several strokes fall at one and the same time? It has happened again
and again, and it must happen, that just as it rains in many regions
and the showers fall, so many thunderbolts come at one and the same
time.

And last of all, why does he knock the holy shrines of the gods apart
with a hostile thunderbolt, and their own splendid seats? Why does he
break up the well-made images of the gods, and take the honour away
from his own likenesses with a violent wound? And why does he mostly
aim at high places, and why do we see most of the tracks of that fire
of his on the mountain tops?
