Chapter One: An Opinion That Has Never Been Put on Trial

(Part 2 of 2)

All causes, social and natural, combine to make it unlikely that women should be collectively rebellious against the power of men. They are so far in a different position from all other subject classes that their masters require something more from them than actual service. Men do not want only the obedience of women; they want their feelings. All men except the most brutish want the woman most closely connected with them to be not a forced slave but a willing one — not merely a slave, but a favourite. So they have put everything into practice to enslave her mind. The masters of all other slaves rely on fear to maintain obedience, whether fear of themselves or religious fear. The masters of women wanted more than simple obedience, and they turned the whole force of upbringing to achieving it. All women are brought up from their earliest years in the belief that their ideal of character is the exact opposite of men's: not self-will and government by self-control, but submission and yielding to the control of others. All the moralities tell them that it is women's duty, and all the current sentimentalities that it is their nature, to live for others — to renounce themselves completely and have no life except in their affections. And by their affections are meant the only ones they are allowed to have: those for the men they are attached to, or for the children who make an additional and indissoluble tie between them and a man.

Put three things together — first, the natural attraction between opposite sexes; second, the wife's entire dependence on her husband, every privilege or pleasure she has being either his gift or entirely dependent on his will; and last, that the chief object of human pursuit, standing, and every object of social ambition can in general only be sought or obtained by her through him — and it would be a miracle if being attractive to men had not become the pole star of a girl's education and formation of character. And once this great means of influence over women's minds had been acquired, an instinct of selfishness made men use it to the utmost as a way of holding women in subjection, by representing meekness, submissiveness and the surrender of all individual will into a man's hands as an essential part of sexual attractiveness. Can it be doubted that any of the other yokes mankind has managed to break would have lasted until now if the same means had existed and had been as diligently used to bow men's minds under them? Suppose it had been made the object of every young plebeian's life to find personal favour in the eyes of some patrician, of every young serf to find it with some lord; suppose living in his household and having a share of his personal affection had been held out as the prize they should all look for, the most gifted and aspiring being able to count on the most desirable prizes; and suppose that once that prize was obtained they had been shut off by a wall of brass from every interest not centring on him, from every feeling and desire but the ones he shared or instilled. Would serfs and lords, plebeians and patricians, not be as sharply distinguished today as men and women are? And would not everyone, apart from a thinker here and there, have believed the distinction to be a fundamental and unalterable fact of human nature?

The considerations above are quite enough to show that custom, however universal, creates no presumption in this case and ought to create no prejudice in favour of the arrangements that place women in social and political subjection to men. But I can go further, and maintain that the course of history and the tendencies of progressive human society give not merely no presumption in favour of this system of unequal rights but a strong one against it — and that so far as the whole course of human improvement up to now, the whole stream of modern tendency, warrants any inference on the subject, the inference is that this relic of the past is out of keeping with the future and must necessarily disappear.

For what is the peculiar character of the modern world — the difference that chiefly distinguishes modern institutions, modern social ideas, modern life itself, from those of long ago? It is that human beings are no longer born to their place in life and chained to it by an inflexible bond, but are free to use their faculties, and whatever favourable chances come their way, to achieve the lot that seems to them most desirable. Human society in the old days was constituted on a very different principle. Everyone was born to a fixed social position and was mostly kept in it by law, or barred from any means of getting out of it. As some men are born white and others black, so some were born slaves and others free men and citizens; some were born patricians, others plebeians; some were born feudal nobles, others commoners. A slave or a serf could never make himself free, nor become free except by his master's will. In most European countries it was not until towards the close of the Middle Ages, and as a consequence of the growth of royal power, that commoners could be ennobled. Even among nobles, the eldest son was born the exclusive heir to his father's possessions, and a long time passed before it was fully established that the father could disinherit him. Among the working classes, only those born members of a guild, or admitted to it by its members, could lawfully practise their trade within its local limits; and nobody could practise any trade thought important except in the legal manner, by processes laid down by authority. Manufacturers have stood in the pillory for presuming to carry on their business by new and improved methods.

In modern Europe, and most of all in the parts of it that have shared most fully in every other modern improvement, diametrically opposite doctrines now prevail. Law and government do not undertake to prescribe who shall or shall not conduct any social or industrial operation, or what ways of conducting it shall be lawful. These things are left to the unfettered choice of individuals. Even the laws requiring workmen to serve an apprenticeship have been repealed in this country, there being ample assurance that wherever an apprenticeship is necessary, its necessity will be enough to enforce it. The old theory was that as little as possible should be left to the choice of the individual agent, and that everything he had to do should as far as possible be laid down for him by superior wisdom. Left to himself he was sure to go wrong. The modern conviction, the fruit of a thousand years of experience, is that things in which the individual is the person directly concerned never go right except as they are left to his own discretion, and that regulating them by authority, except to protect the rights of others, is sure to do harm. This conclusion, slowly arrived at and not adopted until almost every possible application of the opposite theory had been tried with disastrous results, now prevails universally in industrial matters in the most advanced countries, and almost universally in all countries with any pretension to advancement. It is not that all processes are supposed to be equally good, or all people equally qualified for everything, but that freedom of individual choice is now known to be the only thing that procures the adoption of the best processes and throws each operation into the hands of those best qualified for it. Nobody thinks it necessary to make a law that only a strong-armed man may be a blacksmith. Freedom and competition are enough to make blacksmiths strong-armed men, because the weak-armed can earn more in occupations they are better fitted for. In keeping with this doctrine, it is felt to be a trespass beyond the proper bounds of authority to lay down in advance, on some general presumption, that certain people are unfit to do certain things. It is now thoroughly known and admitted that even where such presumptions exist, none of them is infallible. Even if a presumption is well grounded in most cases — which it is very likely not to be — there will be a minority of exceptional cases where it does not hold, and in those it is both an injustice to the individuals and a loss to society to put barriers in the way of their using their faculties for their own benefit and other people's. And in the cases where the unfitness is real, the ordinary motives of human conduct will on the whole be enough to prevent the incompetent person from making the attempt, or from persisting in it.

If this general principle of social and economic science is not true; if individuals, with such help as they can get from the opinion of those who know them, are not better judges of their own capacities and vocation than the law and the government are, then the world cannot too soon abandon the principle and go back to the old system of regulations and legal bars. But if the principle is true, we ought to act as though we believed it, and not lay it down that being born a girl instead of a boy — any more than being born black instead of white, or a commoner instead of a nobleman — shall settle a person's position for life, and shut them out from all the more elevated social positions and from every respectable occupation but a few. Even if we granted the utmost that is ever claimed about men's superior fitness for all the functions now reserved to them, the same argument applies that forbids a property qualification for members of Parliament. If only once in a dozen years the conditions of eligibility exclude a fit person, there is a real loss, while excluding thousands of unfit people is no gain — for if the make-up of the electorate inclines it to choose unfit people, there are always plenty of unfit people to choose from. In everything of any difficulty and importance, those who can do it well are fewer than the need, even with the most unrestricted freedom of choice; and any narrowing of the field of selection deprives society of some chance of being served by the competent without ever saving it from the incompetent.

At present, in the more improved countries, the legal disabilities of women are the only case but one in which laws and institutions take people at birth and decree that they shall never in all their lives be allowed to compete for certain things. The one exception is royalty. People are still born to the throne; nobody outside the reigning family can ever occupy it, and nobody even inside that family can attain it by any means but the course of hereditary succession. All other dignities and social advantages are open to the whole male sex. Many, indeed, are only attainable by wealth; but wealth may be striven for by anyone, and is in fact obtained by many men of the very humblest origin. The difficulties are indeed insuperable for most of them without the help of lucky accidents; but no male human being is under any legal ban, and neither law nor opinion adds artificial obstacles to the natural ones. Royalty, as I said, is excepted; but there everyone feels it to be an exception — an anomaly in the modern world, in marked opposition to its customs and principles, justifiable only by extraordinary special reasons which, though individuals and nations differ about their weight, unquestionably do exist. And even in this exceptional case, where a high social function is bestowed on birth instead of being thrown open to competition, all free nations contrive to stick in substance to the principle they nominally depart from: they hedge the high function about with conditions avowedly intended to prevent the person it ostensibly belongs to from really performing it, while the person who does perform it, the responsible minister, obtains the post by a competition from which no adult male citizen is legally excluded. The disabilities women are subject to from the mere fact of their birth are therefore the solitary examples of the kind in modern legislation. In no case but this one — which takes in half the human race — are the higher social functions closed to anybody by an accident of birth that no effort and no change of circumstances can overcome. Even religious disabilities, besides having practically almost ceased to exist in England and in Europe, do not close any career to the disqualified person if he converts.

The social subordination of women thus stands out as an isolated fact among modern social institutions, a solitary breach of what has become their fundamental law, a single relic of an old world of thought and practice exploded in everything else but retained in the one thing of most universal concern — as though a gigantic dolmen, or a vast temple of Olympian Jupiter, stood on the site of St Paul's and received daily worship, while the Christian churches around it were only visited on fasts and festivals. This complete discrepancy between one social fact and all the facts that accompany it, and the radical opposition between its nature and the progressive movement the modern world boasts of, which has swept away everything else of a similar character one after another, surely gives a conscientious observer of human tendencies serious matter for thought. It raises an initial presumption on the unfavourable side far outweighing anything custom and usage could create on the favourable side in such circumstances, and should at least be enough to make this, like the choice between republic and monarchy, an open question.

The least that can be asked is that the question should not be treated as prejudged by existing fact and existing opinion, but should be open to discussion on its merits as a question of justice and expediency, the decision resting, as with any other of mankind's social arrangements, on what an enlightened estimate of tendencies and consequences shows to be most advantageous to humanity in general without distinction of sex. And the discussion must be a real one, going down to foundations and not resting content with vague general assertions. It will not do, for instance, to assert in general terms that the experience of mankind has pronounced in favour of the existing system. Experience cannot possibly have decided between two courses when there has only been experience of one. If it is said that the doctrine of the equality of the sexes rests only on theory, it must be remembered that the opposite doctrine has only theory to rest on too. All that direct experience proves in its favour is that mankind has been able to exist under it and to reach the degree of improvement and prosperity we now see; but whether that prosperity was reached sooner, or is now greater, than it would have been under the other system, experience does not say. On the other hand, experience does say that every step forward has been so invariably accompanied by a step taken in raising the social position of women that historians and philosophers have come to adopt women's elevation or debasement as on the whole the surest test and truest measure of the civilisation of a people or an age. Through the whole progressive period of human history the condition of women has been coming nearer to equality with men. That does not by itself prove that the approach must go on to complete equality, but it certainly gives some presumption that it will.

Nor is it any use to say that the *nature* of the two sexes fits them for their present functions and position and makes those appropriate to them. Standing on the ground of common sense and the constitution of the human mind, I deny that anybody knows, or can know, the nature of the two sexes as long as they have only been seen in their present relation to one another. If men had ever been found in society without women, or women without men, or if there had been a society of men and women in which the women were not under the control of the men, something might have been positively known about the mental and moral differences that may be inherent in the nature of each. What is now called the nature of women is an eminently artificial thing — the result of forced repression in some directions and unnatural stimulation in others. It can be asserted without hesitation that no other class of dependants has had its character so entirely distorted out of its natural proportions by its relation with its masters. For if conquered peoples and enslaved races have in some respects been more forcibly repressed, whatever in them was not crushed down under an iron heel has generally been left alone, and if left with any liberty of development has developed according to its own laws. But in the case of women, a hothouse cultivation has always been carried on of some of the capabilities of their nature, for the benefit and pleasure of their masters. And then, because certain products of the general vital force sprout luxuriantly and grow to a great size in this heated atmosphere, under this active feeding and watering, while other shoots from the same root, left outside in the wintry air with ice heaped round them on purpose, grow stunted, and some are burnt off and disappear altogether, men — with that inability to recognise their own handiwork which marks the unanalytic mind — lazily believe that the tree grows of itself in the shape they have made it grow, and that it would die if one half of it were not kept in a steam bath and the other half in the snow.

Of all the difficulties that impede the progress of thought and the forming of well-grounded opinions about life and social arrangements, the greatest at present is mankind's unspeakable ignorance of and inattention to the influences that form human character. Whatever any portion of the human species now is, or seems to be, it is supposed to have a natural tendency to be — even when the most elementary knowledge of the circumstances they have been placed in points clearly to the causes that made them what they are. Because a tenant farmer deep in arrears to his landlord is not industrious, there are people who think the Irish are naturally idle. Because constitutions can be overthrown when the authorities appointed to carry them out turn their weapons against them, there are people who think the French incapable of free government. Because the Greeks cheated the Turks, and the Turks only robbed the Greeks, there are people who think the Turks are naturally the more sincere. And because women, as is often said, care nothing about politics except the personalities, it is supposed that the general good is naturally less interesting to women than to men. History, which is now so much better understood than it used to be, teaches a different lesson, if only by showing how extraordinarily susceptible human nature is to external influences, and how extremely variable are precisely those of its manifestations that are supposed to be most universal and uniform. But in history, as in travelling, men usually see only what they already had in their own minds; and few learn much from history who do not bring much to the study of it.

So on that most difficult question, what the natural differences between the two sexes are — a subject on which it is impossible in the present state of society to obtain complete and correct knowledge — almost everybody lays down the law, while almost everybody neglects and makes light of the only means by which any partial insight into it can be got. That means is an analytic study of the most important department of psychology, the laws of the influence of circumstances on character. For however great and apparently ineradicable the moral and intellectual differences between men and women might be, the evidence that they are natural differences could only be negative. Only those could be inferred to be natural that could not possibly be artificial — the residue, after deducting every characteristic of either sex that can be explained by upbringing or external circumstances. The deepest knowledge of the laws by which character is formed is indispensable to entitle anybody even to affirm that there is any difference, let alone what the difference is, between the two sexes considered as moral and rational beings. And since nobody as yet has that knowledge — for there is hardly any subject that has been so little studied in proportion to its importance — nobody is so far entitled to any positive opinion on the subject. Conjectures are all that can be made at present: conjectures more or less probable according as they are more or less warranted by such knowledge as we have of the laws of psychology applied to the formation of character.

Even the preliminary knowledge of what the differences between the sexes now are, quite apart from how they came to be what they are, is still in the crudest and most incomplete state. Doctors and physiologists have to some extent established the differences in bodily constitution, and that is an important element for the psychologist; but hardly any doctor is a psychologist. On the mental characteristics of women their observations are worth no more than an ordinary man's. It is a subject on which nothing final can be known so long as the only people who can really know it, women themselves, have given so little testimony, and that little mostly bribed. It is easy to know stupid women. Stupidity is much the same all the world over. A stupid person's notions and feelings can confidently be inferred from those prevailing in the circle around them. Not so with people whose opinions and feelings come out of their own nature and faculties. It is only a man here and there who has any tolerable knowledge of the character even of the women of his own family. I do not mean their capabilities — nobody knows those, not even they themselves, because most of them have never been called out. I mean their actual existing thoughts and feelings. Many a man thinks he understands women perfectly because he has had love affairs with several, perhaps with many. If he is a good observer, and his experience extends to quality as well as quantity, he may have learned something about one narrow department of their nature — an important department, no doubt. But about all the rest of it few people are more ignorant, because there are few from whom it is so carefully hidden.

The most favourable case a man can generally have for studying a woman's character is that of his own wife, since the opportunities are greater and cases of complete sympathy are not quite so unspeakably rare. And in fact that is the source from which any knowledge worth having on the subject has, I believe, generally come. But most men have not had the opportunity of studying more than a single case this way; so one can infer, to an almost laughable degree, what a man's wife is like from his opinions about women in general. And for even this one case to yield any result, the woman must be worth knowing and the man must be not only a competent judge but of a character so sympathetic in itself, and so well suited to hers, that he can either read her mind by sympathetic intuition or has nothing in himself that makes her shy of disclosing it. Hardly anything, I believe, can be rarer than that conjunction. It often happens that there is the most complete unity of feeling and community of interest about all external things, and yet the one has as little admission to the inner life of the other as if they were ordinary acquaintances. Even with true affection, authority on the one side and subordination on the other prevent perfect confidence. Though nothing may be intentionally withheld, much is not shown. In the parallel relation of parent and child the corresponding thing must have come under everybody's observation. Between father and son, how many are the cases in which the father, in spite of real affection on both sides, obviously to all the world does not know, and does not suspect, parts of his son's character that are familiar to his companions and equals. The truth is that being in the position of looking up to somebody is extremely unfavourable to complete sincerity and openness with him. The fear of losing ground in his opinion or his feelings is so strong that even in an upright character there is an unconscious tendency to show only the best side, or the side that, though not the best, is the one he most likes to see. And it can confidently be said that thorough knowledge of one another hardly ever exists except between people who, besides being intimates, are equals.

How much more true all this must be when the one is not only under the other's authority but has it drummed into her as a duty to count everything else subordinate to his comfort and pleasure, and to let him neither see nor feel anything from her but what is agreeable to him. All these difficulties stand in the way of a man's getting any thorough knowledge even of the one woman he generally has sufficient opportunity to study. When we further consider that understanding one woman is not necessarily understanding any other; that even if he could study many women of one rank or one country he would not thereby understand women of other ranks or countries; and that even if he did, they are still only the women of a single period of history — we may safely say that the knowledge men can acquire of women, even as they have been and are, without reference to what they might be, is wretchedly imperfect and superficial, and always will be until women themselves have told all they have to tell.

And that time has not come, nor will it come otherwise than gradually. It is only since yesterday that women have been either qualified by literary accomplishment or permitted by society to tell the general public anything. As yet very few of them dare say anything that men, on whom their literary success depends, are unwilling to hear. Let us remember how the expression of uncustomary opinions, or of what are considered eccentric feelings, was received until very recently even from a male author, and to some extent still is; and we may form some faint idea of the obstacles in the way of a woman, brought up to think custom and opinion her sovereign rule, when she tries to express in a book anything drawn from the depths of her own nature. The greatest woman who has left writings behind her enough to give her an eminent rank in her country's literature thought it necessary to put as a motto on her boldest work: "*Un homme peut braver l'opinion; une femme doit s'y soumettre*" — a man may defy opinion; a woman must submit to it. The greater part of what women write about women is mere flattery of men. In the case of unmarried women, much of it seems intended only to improve their chance of a husband. Many, married and unmarried, overshoot the mark and preach a servility beyond anything wanted or relished by any man but the coarsest. But this is not so often the case as it still was quite lately. Literary women are becoming more outspoken and more willing to express their real feelings. Unfortunately, in this country especially, they are themselves such artificial products that their feelings are compounded of a small element of individual observation and awareness and a very large one of acquired associations. This will be less and less true, but it will remain true to a great extent as long as social institutions do not allow women the same free development of originality that is possible for men. When that time comes, and not before, we shall see, and not merely hear, as much as it is necessary to know of the nature of women and of what other things are suited to it.

Footnote: Title page of Madame de Staël's *Delphine*.

I have dwelt so much on the difficulties that at present obstruct any real knowledge by men of the true nature of women because here, as in so many other things, "*opinio copiae inter maximas causas inopiae est*" — the belief that we have plenty is among the greatest causes of want. There is little chance of reasonable thinking on the matter while people flatter themselves that they perfectly understand a subject of which most men know absolutely nothing, and of which it is at present impossible that any man, or all men together, should have knowledge qualifying them to lay down the law to women about what is or is not their vocation. Happily no such knowledge is necessary for any practical purpose connected with the position of women in relation to society and life. For, by all the principles involved in modern society, the question rests with women themselves, to be decided by their own experience and by the use of their own faculties. There is no way of finding out what one person, or many, can do except by trying — and no way by which anybody else can discover for them what it will make them happy to do or leave undone.

One thing we may be certain of: that what it is contrary to women's nature to do, they will never be made to do by simply giving their nature free play. Mankind's anxiety to intervene on nature's behalf, for fear nature should fail to achieve its purpose, is an entirely unnecessary worry. What women by nature cannot do, it is quite superfluous to forbid them to do. What they can do, but not so well as the men who compete with them, competition is enough to exclude them from — since nobody is asking for protective duties and subsidies in favour of women; all that is asked is that the present subsidies and protective duties in favour of men should be withdrawn. If women have a greater natural inclination for some things than for others, there is no need of laws or social preaching to make most of them do the first in preference to the second. Whatever women's services are most wanted for, the free play of competition will hold out the strongest inducements to them to undertake. And, as the words imply, they are most wanted for the things they are most fit for — and by assigning those things to them, the collective faculties of the two sexes can be applied on the whole with the greatest sum of valuable result.

The general opinion of men is supposed to be that the natural vocation of a woman is that of a wife and mother. I say supposed to be, because judging by their acts — by the whole present constitution of society — one might infer that their opinion was the direct opposite. They might be supposed to think that women's alleged natural vocation was of all things the most repugnant to their nature, since if they are free to do anything else, if any other means of living or of occupying their time and faculties is open that has any chance of looking desirable to them, there will not be enough of them willing to accept the condition said to be natural to them. If this is really men's general opinion, it would be as well if it were said out loud. I should like to hear somebody openly stating the doctrine, which is already implied in much that is written on the subject: "It is necessary to society that women should marry and produce children. They will not do so unless they are compelled. Therefore it is necessary to compel them." The merits of the case would then be clearly defined. It would be exactly the case of the slaveholders of South Carolina and Louisiana: "It is necessary that cotton and sugar should be grown. White men cannot produce them. Negroes will not, for any wages which we choose to give. Ergo they must be compelled." An illustration still closer to the point is impressment. Sailors must absolutely be had to defend the country. It often happens that they will not enlist voluntarily. Therefore there must be a power of forcing them. How often has this logic been used! And but for one flaw in it, it would no doubt have been successful to this day. But it is open to the retort: first pay the sailors the honest value of their labour. When you have made it as much worth their while to serve you as to work for other employers, you will have no more difficulty than anyone else in obtaining their services. To this there is no logical answer except "I will not" — and since people are now not only ashamed but genuinely unwilling to rob the labourer of his hire, impressment is no longer advocated.

Those who try to force women into marriage by closing every other door against them lay themselves open to a similar retort. If they mean what they say, their opinion must evidently be that men do not make the married condition desirable enough to induce women to accept it on its own recommendations. It is not a sign that you think the offer you are making very attractive when you allow only Hobson's choice, that or nothing. And here, I believe, is the clue to the feelings of the men who have a real antipathy to equal freedom for women. I believe they are afraid — not that women would be unwilling to marry, for I do not think anybody really has that fear, but that women would insist on marriage being on equal conditions; that every woman of spirit and capacity would prefer to do almost anything else not degrading in her own eyes rather than marry, when marrying means giving herself a master, and a master over all her earthly possessions too. And truly, if that consequence were a necessary part of marriage, I think the fear would be very well founded. I agree that few women capable of anything else would choose such a lot, unless under an irresistible *entraînement* that made them for the time insensible to everything but itself, when any other means were open to them of filling a conventionally honourable place in life. And if men are determined that the law of marriage shall be a law of despotism, they are quite right, as a matter of mere policy, to leave women only Hobson's choice. But in that case, everything that has been done in the modern world to loosen the chain on women's minds has been a mistake. They should never have been allowed a literary education. Women who read, and much more women who write, are, as things are now constituted, a contradiction and a disturbing element; and it was wrong to bring women up with any accomplishments but those of an odalisque, a woman of the harem, or of a domestic servant.
