Chapter Two: What the Law Makes of a Wife

(Part 1 of 2)

It will be as well to begin the detailed discussion of the subject with the particular branch of it our observations have led us to: the conditions that the laws of this and every other country attach to the marriage contract. Marriage being the destination society appoints for women, the prospect they are brought up to, and the object all of them are meant to seek — except those too little attractive to be chosen by any man as his companion — one might have supposed that everything would have been done to make this condition as desirable to them as possible, so that they should have no cause to regret being denied the option of any other. Society, however, in this as at first in every other case, has preferred to gain its object by foul means rather than fair; but this is the only case in which it has substantially persisted in them right down to the present day.

Originally women were taken by force, or regularly sold by their father to the husband. Until a late period in European history the father had the power to dispose of his daughter in marriage at his own will and pleasure, with no regard to hers. The Church was indeed faithful enough to a better morality to require a formal "yes" from the woman at the marriage ceremony; but there was nothing to show that the consent was anything other than forced, and it was practically impossible for the girl to refuse if the father persisted, except perhaps where she could obtain the protection of religion by a determined resolution to take monastic vows. After marriage, in ancient times — though this was before Christianity — the man had the power of life and death over his wife. She could invoke no law against him; he was her sole court and her sole law. For a long time he could repudiate her, and she had no corresponding power over him. Under the old laws of England the husband was called the *lord* of the wife; he was literally regarded as her sovereign, so much so that the murder of a man by his wife was called treason — *petty* treason, as distinguished from *high* treason — and was avenged more cruelly than high treason usually was, the penalty being burning to death. Because these various enormities have fallen out of use (most of them were never formally abolished, or not until long after they had ceased to be practised) men suppose that everything is now as it should be with the marriage contract, and we are continually told that civilisation and Christianity have restored to women their just rights.

Meanwhile the wife is the actual bondservant of her husband: no less so, as far as legal obligation goes, than those commonly called slaves. She vows lifelong obedience to him at the altar and is held to it all her life by law. Casuists may say that the obligation of obedience stops short of taking part in a crime, but it certainly extends to everything else. She can do no act whatever except by his permission, at least tacitly. She can acquire no property except for him; the instant it becomes hers, even by inheritance, it becomes his automatically. In this respect the wife's position under the common law of England is worse than that of slaves under the laws of many countries: under Roman law, for instance, a slave might have his own peculium, which to a certain extent the law guaranteed to him for his exclusive use. The higher classes in this country have given a similar advantage to their women through special contracts setting the law aside, by conditions of pin money and the like — since parental feeling is stronger with fathers than the class feeling of their own sex, and a father generally prefers his own daughter to a son-in-law who is a stranger to him. By means of settlements the rich usually contrive to withdraw the whole or part of a wife's inherited property from the absolute control of the husband; but they do not succeed in keeping it under her control. The utmost they can do merely prevents the husband from squandering it, while at the same time barring the rightful owner from using it. The property itself is beyond the reach of both. As for the income from it, the form of settlement most favourable to the wife — the one called "to her separate use" — only prevents the husband from receiving it instead of her. It has to pass through her hands; but if he takes it from her by personal violence the moment she receives it, he can neither be punished nor compelled to give it back. This is the extent of the protection that, under the laws of this country, the most powerful nobleman can give his own daughter as against her husband.

In the immense majority of cases there is no settlement, and the absorption of all rights, all property and all freedom of action is complete. The two are called "one person in law" for the purpose of inferring that whatever is hers is his; but the parallel inference is never drawn that whatever is his is hers. The maxim is never applied against the man, except to make him answerable to third parties for her acts, as a master is for the acts of his slaves or his cattle. I am far from pretending that wives are in general treated no better than slaves; but no slave is a slave to the same lengths, and in so full a sense of the word, as a wife is. Hardly any slave, except one attached to the master's own person, is a slave at every hour and every minute. In general he has, like a soldier, his fixed task, and when it is done, or when he is off duty, he disposes within certain limits of his own time and has a family life the master rarely intrudes into. Uncle Tom, under his first master, had his own life in his cabin almost as much as any man whose work takes him away from home is able to have in his own family. But it cannot be so with the wife.

Above all, a female slave has, in Christian countries, an acknowledged right, and is considered to be under a moral obligation, to refuse her master the last familiarity. Not so the wife. However brutal a tyrant she may unfortunately be chained to — though she may know he hates her, though it may be his daily pleasure to torture her, and though she may find it impossible not to loathe him — he can demand from her, and enforce, the lowest degradation of a human being: that of being made the instrument of a bodily function against her own will.

While she is held in this worst kind of slavery as regards her own person, what is her position with regard to the children she and her master have a joint interest in? By law they are *his* children. He alone has any legal rights over them. She can do no act towards them or in relation to them except by delegation from him. Even after he is dead she is not their legal guardian, unless he has made her so by will. He could even send them away from her and deprive her of any means of seeing them or writing to them, until this power was to some degree restricted by Serjeant Talfourd's Act. This is her legal state; and from this state she has no means of withdrawing. If she leaves her husband she can take nothing with her, neither her children nor anything rightfully her own. If he chooses he can compel her to return, by law or by physical force; or he may content himself with seizing for his own use anything she may earn, or anything her relations may give her. Only legal separation by a decree of a court entitles her to live apart without being forced back into the custody of an exasperated jailer, or empowers her to put any earnings to her own use without the fear that a man she may not have seen for twenty years will pounce on her one day and carry the lot off. Until recently the courts would only grant this legal separation at an expense that put it out of reach of anyone below the higher ranks. Even now it is granted only in cases of desertion or of extreme cruelty — and yet complaints are made every day that it is granted too easily.

Surely, if a woman is denied any lot in life but that of being the personal body servant of a despot, and depends for everything on the chance of finding one who may be inclined to make a favourite of her instead of merely a drudge, it is a very cruel aggravation of her fate that she should be allowed to try that chance only once. The natural sequel and corollary of this state of things would be that, since her whole life depends on getting a good master, she should be allowed to change again and again until she finds one. I am not saying she ought to be allowed this. That is an entirely separate question. The question of divorce, in the sense that involves liberty to remarry, is one it is no part of my purpose to enter into. All I say now is that for those who are allowed nothing but servitude, free choice of servitude is the only alleviation, insufficient though it is. Refusing it completes the assimilation of the wife to the slave — and to the slave under not the mildest form of slavery, for under some slave codes a slave could, in certain circumstances of ill usage, legally compel his master to sell him. But no amount of ill usage, without adultery added to it, will in England free a wife from her tormentor.

I have no wish to exaggerate, and the case has no need of exaggeration. I have described the wife's legal position, not her actual treatment. The laws of most countries are far worse than the people who administer them, and many of them are only able to remain laws by being seldom or never carried into effect. If married life were everything the laws alone would lead one to expect, society would be a hell on earth. Happily there are both feelings and interests that in many men exclude, and in most greatly temper, the impulses and tendencies that lead to tyranny; and of those feelings, the tie connecting a man to his wife gives, in a normal state of things, incomparably the strongest example. The only tie that comes anywhere near it, the tie between him and his children, tends in all but exceptional cases to strengthen the first rather than to conflict with it. Because this is true — because men in general do not inflict, and women do not suffer, all the misery that could be inflicted and suffered if the full power of tyranny the man is legally invested with were acted on — the defenders of the institution in its existing form think all its iniquity is justified, and that any complaint is merely quarrelling with the evil that is the price paid for every great good. But mitigations in practice, which are perfectly compatible with keeping this or any other kind of tyranny in full legal force, are no apology for despotism. They only serve to prove what power human nature has of reacting against the vilest institutions, and with what vitality the seeds of good, as well as those of evil, spread and propagate themselves in human character.

Not a word can be said for despotism in the family that cannot be said for political despotism. Not every absolute king sits at his window to enjoy the groans of his tortured subjects, or strips them of their last rag and turns them out to shiver in the road. The despotism of Louis XVI was not the despotism of Philip the Fair, or of Nadir Shah, or of Caligula; but it was bad enough to justify the French Revolution, and to excuse even its horrors. If an appeal is made to the intense attachments that exist between wives and their husbands, exactly as much can be said of domestic slavery. It was quite an ordinary thing in Greece and Rome for slaves to submit to death by torture rather than betray their masters. In the proscriptions of the Roman civil wars it was noticed that wives and slaves were heroically faithful and sons very commonly treacherous. Yet we know how cruelly many Romans treated their slaves. But in truth these intense individual feelings nowhere rise to such a luxuriant height as under the most atrocious institutions. It is part of the irony of life that the strongest feelings of devoted gratitude human nature seems capable of are called out in people towards those who, having the power to crush their earthly existence entirely, voluntarily refrain from using it. How large a place this feeling fills in most men, even in religious devotion, it would be cruel to inquire. We see every day how much their gratitude to Heaven seems to be stimulated by contemplating fellow creatures to whom God has not been as merciful as he has to themselves.

Whether the institution to be defended is slavery, political absolutism or the absolutism of the head of a family, we are always expected to judge it by its best instances. We are shown pictures of loving exercise of authority on the one side and loving submission to it on the other, superior wisdom arranging everything for the greatest good of the dependants and surrounded by their smiles and blessings. All this would be very much to the purpose if anyone were claiming that there is no such thing as a good man. Who doubts that there can be great goodness, great happiness and great affection under the absolute government of a good man? Meanwhile, laws and institutions have to be adapted not to good men but to bad ones. Marriage is not an institution designed for a select few. Men are not required, as a preliminary to the marriage ceremony, to prove by testimonials that they are fit to be trusted with the exercise of absolute power. The tie of affection and obligation to a wife and children is very strong in those whose social feelings are strong in general, and in many who are hardly sensitive to any other social tie; but there are all degrees of sensitivity and insensitivity to it, as there are all grades of goodness and wickedness in men, right down to those whom no tie will bind and on whom society has no hold except through its last resort, the penalties of the law. At every grade of this descending scale there are men entrusted with all the legal powers of a husband. The vilest criminal has some wretched woman tied to him, against whom he can commit any atrocity except killing her — and, if he is reasonably careful, he can do that too without much danger of the legal penalty.

And how many thousands are there among the lowest classes in every country who, without being criminals in a legal sense in any other respect, because everywhere else their aggressions meet with resistance, indulge in the most extreme habitual bodily violence towards their unhappy wives — who alone, of grown people at least, can neither repel them nor escape from them, and whose very dependence inspires these mean and savage natures not with a generous forbearance, not with a point of honour about behaving well to someone whose whole lot in life is entrusted to their kindness, but on the contrary with a notion that the law has delivered her to them as their thing, to be used at their pleasure, and that they are not expected to show her the consideration required of them towards everybody else. The law, which until lately left even these atrocious extremes of domestic oppression practically unpunished, has within the last few years made some feeble attempts to repress them. But its attempts have done little, and cannot be expected to do much, because it is contrary to reason and experience to suppose there can be any real check on brutality while the victim is still left in the executioner's power. Until a conviction for personal violence — or at any rate a repetition of it after a first conviction — automatically entitles the woman to a divorce, or at least to a judicial separation, the attempt to repress these "aggravated assaults" by legal penalties will break down for want of a prosecutor, or for want of a witness.

When we consider how vast the number of men is, in any great country, who are little higher than brutes, and that this never prevents them from being able, through the law of marriage, to obtain a victim, the breadth and depth of human misery caused in this one form alone by the abuse of the institution swells to something appalling. Yet these are only the extreme cases. They are the lowest abysses, but there is a sad succession of depth after depth before reaching them. In domestic as in political tyranny, the case of absolute monsters chiefly illustrates the institution by showing that there is hardly any horror that cannot happen under it if the despot pleases, and so throwing a strong light on how terribly frequent things only a little less atrocious must be. Absolute fiends are as rare as angels, perhaps rarer; but ferocious savages with occasional touches of humanity are very frequent indeed. And in the wide interval that separates these from any worthy representative of the human species, how many forms and gradations there are of brutishness and selfishness, often under an outward varnish of civilisation and even of cultivation — living at peace with the law, keeping up a creditable appearance to everyone not in their power, and yet quite enough, often, to make the lives of all who are in their power a torment and a burden.

It would be tiresome to repeat the commonplaces about the general unfitness of men for power, which after centuries of political discussion everyone knows by heart, were it not that hardly anyone thinks of applying these maxims to the case where they apply above all others: power that is not placed in the hands of a man here and there but offered to every adult male, down to the basest and most ferocious. It is not because a man is not known to have broken any of the Ten Commandments, or because he keeps up a respectable character in his dealings with people he cannot compel to have anything to do with him, or because he does not fly into violent bursts of temper against those who are not obliged to put up with him, that we can guess what sort his conduct will be in the unrestraint of home. Even the commonest men reserve the violent, the sulky, the undisguisedly selfish side of their character for those who have no power to withstand it. The relation of superiors to dependants is the nursery of these vices of character, which wherever else they appear are an overflow from that source. A man who is morose or violent to his equals is sure to be one who has lived among inferiors he could frighten or badger into submission. If the family at its best is, as it is often said to be, a school of sympathy, tenderness and loving self-forgetfulness, it is still more often, as far as its head is concerned, a school of wilfulness, overbearingness, unbounded self-indulgence and a double-dyed and idealised selfishness of which self-sacrifice itself is only a particular form — the care for wife and children being only care for them as parts of the man's own interests and belongings, and their individual happiness being sacrificed in every shape to his smallest preferences.

What better is to be expected under the existing form of the institution? We know that the bad tendencies of human nature are only kept within bounds when they are allowed no scope for indulgence. We know that from impulse and habit, when not from deliberate purpose, almost everybody to whom others give way goes on encroaching until a point is reached at which they are forced to resist. Such being the common tendency of human nature, the almost unlimited power that present social institutions give a man over at least one human being — the one he lives with, and who is always there — seeks out and calls up the latent germs of selfishness in the remotest corners of his nature. It fans their faintest sparks and smouldering embers. It offers him a licence to indulge those points of his original character which in every other relation he would have found it necessary to repress and conceal, and the repression of which would in time have become second nature.

I know there is another side to the question. I grant that the wife, if she cannot effectually resist, can at least retaliate; she too can make the man's life extremely uncomfortable, and by that power can carry many points that she ought to carry, and many that she ought not. But this instrument of self-protection — which may be called the power of the scold, or the shrewish sanction — has the fatal defect that it works best against the least tyrannical superiors and in favour of the least deserving dependants. It is the weapon of irritable and self-willed women, of those who would make the worst use of power if they had it, and who generally do turn this power to bad use. The amiable cannot use such an instrument, and the high-minded disdain it. And on the other hand, the husbands it is used against most effectively are the gentler and more inoffensive ones, who cannot be induced, even by provocation, to resort to any very harsh exercise of authority. The wife's power of being disagreeable generally only sets up a counter-tyranny, and makes victims in their turn chiefly of the husbands least inclined to be tyrants.

What is it, then, that really tempers the corrupting effects of this power and makes it compatible with the amount of good we actually see? Mere feminine charm, though it has great effect in individual cases, has very little effect in modifying the general tendencies of the situation, since its power lasts only while the woman is young and attractive, often only while her charm is new and not dimmed by familiarity — and on many men it has not much influence at any time. The real mitigating causes are these: the personal affection that grows with time, so far as the man's nature is capable of it and the woman's character is congenial enough with his to call it out; their common interest in the children, and their general community of interest as regards other people, though there are very great limits to that; the real importance of the wife to his daily comforts and enjoyments, and the value he consequently sets on her for his own sake, which in a man capable of feeling for others lays the foundation of caring for her for her own sake; and lastly, the influence naturally acquired over almost all human beings by those who are close to them, if they are not positively disagreeable to them — people who, both by direct entreaty and by the imperceptible contagion of their feelings and dispositions, are often able, unless counteracted by some equally strong personal influence, to obtain a degree of command over their superior's conduct that is altogether excessive and unreasonable.

Through these various means the wife frequently exercises even too much power over the man. She is able to affect his conduct in matters she may not be qualified to influence for good, in which her influence may be not only unenlightened but exerted on the morally wrong side, and in which he would act better if left to his own promptings. But neither in the affairs of families nor in those of states is power any compensation for the loss of freedom. Her power often gives her what she has no right to, but does not enable her to assert her own rights. A Sultan's favourite slave has slaves under her whom she tyrannises over; but the desirable thing would be that she should neither have slaves nor be one. By sinking her own existence entirely in her husband, by having no will — or persuading him that she has none — but his in anything concerning their joint relation, and by making it the business of her life to work on his feelings, a wife may gratify herself by influencing, and very probably perverting, his conduct in those of his external relations she has never qualified herself to judge, or in which she is herself wholly swayed by some personal partiality or prejudice. And so, as things now are, those who act most kindly to their wives are quite as often made worse as better by the wife's influence in everything that extends beyond the family. She is taught that she has no business with anything outside that sphere, and accordingly she seldom has any honest and conscientious opinion about it, and so hardly ever meddles with it for any legitimate purpose, but generally for an interested one. She neither knows nor cares which is the right side in politics, but she knows what will bring in money or invitations, get her husband a title, her son a place, or her daughter a good marriage.

But how, it will be asked, can any society exist without government? In a family, as in a state, somebody must be the ultimate ruler. Who is to decide when a married couple differ in opinion? Both cannot have their way, and yet a decision one way or the other has to be reached.
