Chapter Two: What the Law Makes of a Wife

(Part 2 of 2)

It is not true that in every voluntary association between two people one of them must be absolute master, still less that the law must determine which of them it shall be. The commonest case of voluntary association after marriage is partnership in business, and nobody finds it necessary, or thinks it necessary, to enact that in every partnership one partner shall have entire control of the concern and the others shall be bound to obey his orders. Nobody would enter a partnership on terms that subjected him to the responsibilities of a principal with only the powers and privileges of a clerk or an agent. If the law dealt with other contracts as it deals with marriage, it would ordain that one partner should administer the common business as though it were his private concern, that the others should have only delegated powers, and that this one should be picked out by some general presumption of law — being the eldest, for example. The law never does this; nor does experience show that any theoretical inequality of power between partners is necessary, or that a partnership needs any conditions except the ones the partners themselves set down in their articles of agreement. And yet one might think that exclusive power could be conceded with less danger to the rights and interests of the inferior in a partnership than in a marriage, since a partner is free to cancel the power by withdrawing from the connection. The wife has no such power; and even if she had, it is almost always desirable that she should try every other measure before resorting to it.

It is quite true that things which have to be decided every day, and cannot adjust themselves gradually or wait for a compromise, ought to depend on one will: one person must have sole control of them. But it does not follow that it should always be the same person. The natural arrangement is a division of powers between the two, each being absolute in the executive branch of their own department, and any change of system or principle requiring the consent of both. The division neither can nor should be settled in advance by law, since it must depend on individual capacities and suitabilities. If the two people chose, they might settle it in advance in the marriage contract, as financial arrangements are now often settled in advance. There would seldom be any difficulty in deciding such things by mutual consent, unless the marriage were one of those unhappy ones in which everything else becomes a subject of bickering and dispute as well. The division of rights would naturally follow the division of duties and functions, and that is already made by consent — or at any rate not by law but by general custom, modified and modifiable at the pleasure of the people concerned.

The real practical decision of affairs, whichever of them is given the legal authority, will depend greatly, as it already does, on their comparative qualifications. The mere fact that he is usually the elder will in most cases give the man the preponderance, at least until they both reach an age at which the difference in their years is of no importance. Naturally there will also be a more powerful voice on whichever side brings in the means of support. Inequality from that source does not depend on the law of marriage but on the general conditions of human society as now constituted. The influence of mental superiority, whether general or particular, and of a more decided character, will necessarily count for much. It always does at present. And this fact shows how little foundation there is for the fear that the powers and responsibilities of partners in life, like those of partners in business, cannot be satisfactorily apportioned by agreement between themselves. They always are so apportioned, except where the institution of marriage has failed. Things never come to a plain issue of power on one side and obedience on the other except where the connection has been a mistake altogether, and it would be a blessing to both parties to be released from it.

Some may say that the very thing which makes a friendly settlement of differences possible is the known reserve of legal compulsion — as people submit to arbitration because there is a court of law in the background which they know can force them to obey. But to make the cases parallel, we must suppose that the court's rule was not to try the case but always to give judgment for the same side, the defendant, say. If so, being subject to it would be a motive for the plaintiff to agree to almost any arbitration, but it would have exactly the opposite effect on the defendant. The despotic power the law gives the husband may be a reason for the wife to agree to any compromise by which power is practically shared between them, but it cannot be the reason why the husband agrees. That there is always a practical compromise among decently behaved people, though at least one of them is under no physical or moral necessity of making it, shows that the natural motives leading to a voluntary adjustment of the shared life of two people in a way acceptable to both do on the whole prevail, except in unfavourable cases. Matters are certainly not improved by laying it down as an ordinance of law that the superstructure of free government shall be raised on a legal foundation of despotism on one side and subjection on the other, and that every concession the despot makes may be recalled at his mere pleasure and without warning. Quite apart from the fact that no freedom is worth much when it is held on so precarious a tenure, its terms are not likely to be the most equitable when the law throws so prodigious a weight into one scale — when the adjustment lies between two people, one of whom is declared entitled to everything, while the other is not only entitled to nothing except during the first one's good pleasure, but is under the strongest moral and religious obligation not to rebel however excessive the oppression becomes.

A persistent opponent, pushed to extremes, may say that husbands are indeed willing to be reasonable and to make fair concessions to their partners without being compelled to, but that wives are not — that if allowed any rights of their own they will acknowledge no rights at all in anybody else, and will never yield in anything unless they can be compelled by the man's mere authority to yield in everything. This would have been said by many people a few generations ago, when satires on women were in fashion and men thought it clever to insult women for being what men had made them. But it will be said now by nobody worth answering. It is not the doctrine of the present day that women are less capable of good feeling, and of consideration for those they are bound to by the strongest ties, than men are. On the contrary, we are perpetually told that women are better than men, by people totally opposed to treating them as if they were as good — so that the saying has passed into a piece of tiresome cant, meant to put a complimentary face on an injury, rather like those celebrations of royal clemency which, according to Gulliver, the king of Lilliput always prefixed to his bloodiest decrees. If women are better than men in anything, it is surely in individual self-sacrifice for their own family. But I lay little stress on this while they are universally taught that they were born and created for self-sacrifice. I believe that equality of rights would reduce the exaggerated self-abnegation that is the present artificial ideal of the feminine character, and that a good woman would be no more self-sacrificing than the best man; but on the other hand men would be much more unselfish and self-sacrificing than at present, because they would no longer be taught to worship their own will as such a grand thing that it is actually the law for another rational being. There is nothing men learn so easily as this self-worship. All privileged people and all privileged classes have had it. The further we descend in the scale of humanity the more intense it is — and it is most intense of all in those who are not, and can never expect to be, raised above anyone except an unfortunate wife and children. The honourable exceptions are proportionally fewer than with almost any other human failing. Philosophy and religion, instead of keeping it in check, are generally suborned to defend it; and nothing controls it but that practical sense of the equality of human beings which is the theory of Christianity, but which Christianity will never teach in practice while it sanctions institutions grounded on an arbitrary preference of one human being over another.

There are, no doubt, women, as there are men, whom equality of consideration will not satisfy, with whom there is no peace while any will or wish but their own is regarded. Such people are a proper subject for the law of divorce. They are only fit to live alone, and no human being ought to be compelled to join their life to theirs. But legal subordination tends to make such characters among women more frequent, not less. If the man exerts his whole power the woman is of course crushed; but if she is treated with indulgence and allowed to assume power, there is no rule setting any limit to her encroachments. The law, by not determining her rights but theoretically allowing her none at all, practically declares that the measure of what she has a right to is whatever she can contrive to get.

The equality of married people before the law is not only the sole way in which that particular relation can be made consistent with justice to both sides and conducive to the happiness of both; it is also the only means of making the daily life of mankind, in any high sense, a school of moral cultivation. Though the truth may not be felt or generally acknowledged for generations to come, the only school of genuine moral feeling is society between equals. The moral education of mankind has so far come chiefly from the law of force, and is adapted almost solely to the relations force creates. In the less advanced states of society people hardly recognise any relation with their equals. To be an equal is to be an enemy. Society, from its highest place to its lowest, is one long chain, or rather ladder, on which every individual is either above or below his nearest neighbour, and wherever he does not command he must obey. Existing moralities, accordingly, are mainly fitted for a relation of command and obedience. Yet command and obedience are only unfortunate necessities of human life; society in equality is its normal state. Already in modern life, and more and more as it improves, command and obedience are becoming exceptional facts and equal association the general rule. The morality of the first ages rested on the obligation to submit to power; that of the ages after them on the right of the weak to the forbearance and protection of the strong. How much longer is one form of society and life to content itself with the morality made for another? We have had the morality of submission, and the morality of chivalry and generosity; the time has now come for the morality of justice.

Whenever in former ages any approach was made to society between equals, justice asserted its claim to be the foundation of virtue. So it was in the free republics of antiquity. But even in the best of them, the equals were limited to the free male citizens; slaves, women and unenfranchised residents were under the law of force. The joint influence of Roman civilisation and of Christianity obliterated these distinctions, and in theory, if only partially in practice, declared the claims of the human being as such to outweigh those of sex, class or social position. The barriers that had begun to be levelled were raised again by the northern conquests, and the whole of modern history consists of the slow process by which they have been wearing away ever since. We are entering an order of things in which justice will again be the primary virtue — grounded, as before, on equal association, but now on sympathetic association too; rooted no longer in the instinct of equals for self-protection but in a cultivated sympathy between them; and with nobody now left out, an equal measure being extended to all.

It is no novelty that mankind does not clearly foresee its own changes, and that people's feelings are adapted to past ages rather than coming ones. To see the future of the species has always been the privilege of the intellectual elite, or of those who have learned from them; to have the feelings of that future has been the distinction, and usually the martyrdom, of a still rarer elite. Institutions, books, education, society, all go on training human beings for the old long after the new has arrived — much more when it is only coming. But the true virtue of human beings is fitness to live together as equals: claiming nothing for themselves but what they as freely concede to everyone else; regarding command of any kind as an exceptional necessity and in every case a temporary one; and preferring, wherever possible, the society of those with whom leading and following can be alternate and reciprocal. Life as at present constituted gives none of these virtues any cultivation by exercise. The family is a school of despotism, in which the virtues of despotism, but also its vices, are richly nourished. Citizenship, in free countries, is partly a school of society in equality; but citizenship fills only a small place in modern life and does not come near people's daily habits or innermost feelings. The family, justly constituted, would be the real school of the virtues of freedom. It is sure to be a sufficient school of everything else. It will always be a school of obedience for the children and of command for the parents. What is needed is that it should be a school of sympathy in equality, of living together in love, with no power on one side and no obedience on the other. That is what it ought to be between the parents. It would then exercise the very virtues each of them needs to fit them for every other association, and would model for the children the feelings and conduct that their temporary training through obedience is meant to make habitual, and so natural, to them. The moral training of mankind will never be adapted to the conditions of the life that all other human progress is a preparation for, until people practise in the family the same moral rule that suits the normal constitution of human society. Any feeling of freedom that can exist in a man whose nearest and dearest intimacies are with people he is absolute master of is not the genuine or Christian love of freedom, but what the love of freedom generally was among the ancients and in the Middle Ages: an intense sense of the dignity and importance of his own personality, making him scorn a yoke for himself, though he has no abhorrence of it in the abstract and is abundantly ready to impose it on others for his own interest or glory.

I readily admit — and it is the very foundation of my hopes — that numbers of married people even under the present law, probably a great majority in the higher classes of England, live in the spirit of a just law of equality. Laws would never be improved if there were not numerous people whose moral feelings are better than the existing laws. Such people ought to support the principles argued for here, whose only object is to make all other married couples like what these already are. But people even of considerable moral worth, unless they are thinkers as well, are very ready to believe that laws or practices whose evils they have not personally experienced produce no evils at all, and probably do good if they seem to be generally approved of, and that it is wrong to object to them. It would, however, be a great mistake for such married people to suppose that because the legal conditions of the tie uniting them do not enter their thoughts once in a twelvemonth, and because they live and feel in every respect as if they were legally equals, the same is true of every other married couple where the husband is not a notorious ruffian. To suppose that would be to show equal ignorance of human nature and of fact. The less fit a man is to possess power — the less likely he is to be allowed to exercise it over anybody with that person's voluntary consent — the more he hugs himself in the consciousness of the power the law gives him, exacts its legal rights to the utmost point that custom (the custom of men like himself) will tolerate, and takes pleasure in using the power merely to enliven the agreeable sense of possessing it. What is more, in the most naturally brutal and morally uneducated part of the lower classes, the legal slavery of the woman, and something in the merely physical subjection of her to their will as an instrument, makes them feel a kind of disrespect and contempt towards their own wife that they do not feel towards any other woman, or any other human being they come into contact with — and which makes her seem to them a fit subject for any sort of indignity. Let any acute observer of the signs of feeling who has the necessary opportunities judge for himself whether this is not so; and if he finds that it is, let him not wonder at any amount of disgust and indignation that can be felt against institutions which lead naturally to this depraved state of the human mind.

We shall be told, perhaps, that religion imposes the duty of obedience — as every established fact too bad to admit of any other defence is always presented to us as an injunction of religion. The Church, it is very true, enjoins it in her formularies; but it would be difficult to derive any such injunction from Christianity. We are told that St Paul said "Wives, obey your husbands"; but he also said "Slaves, obey your masters." It was not St Paul's business, nor was it consistent with his object of propagating Christianity, to incite anyone to rebel against existing laws. The apostle's acceptance of all social institutions as he found them is no more to be read as disapproval of attempts to improve them at the proper time than his declaration that "the powers that be are ordained of God" gives his sanction to military despotism, and to that alone, as the Christian form of political government, or commands passive obedience to it. To pretend that Christianity was intended to fix existing forms of government and society in place and protect them against change is to reduce it to the level of Islam or of Brahminism. It is precisely because Christianity has not done this that it has been the religion of the progressive portion of mankind, while Islam and Brahminism have been the religions of the stationary portions — or rather, since there is no such thing as a really stationary society, of the declining portions. There have been plenty of people in every age of Christianity who tried to make it something of the same kind, to convert us into a sort of Christian Muslims with the Bible for a Koran, prohibiting all improvement; and their power has been great, and many have had to give their lives resisting them. But they have been resisted, and the resistance has made us what we are, and will yet make us what we are to be.

After what has been said about the obligation of obedience, it is almost superfluous to say anything about the more particular point contained in it, a woman's right to her own property; for I cannot hope that this essay will make any impression on anyone who needs convincing that a woman's inheritance or earnings ought to be as much her own after marriage as before. The rule is simple: whatever would be the husband's or the wife's if they were not married should be under their exclusive control during the marriage — which need not interfere with the power to tie up property by settlement in order to preserve it for children. Some people are sentimentally shocked at the idea of a separate interest in money matters, as inconsistent with the ideal fusion of two lives into one. For my own part I am one of the strongest supporters of community of goods, when it results from an entire unity of feeling in the owners that makes everything common between them. But I have no taste for a community of goods resting on the doctrine that what is mine is yours but what is yours is not mine; and I should prefer to decline entering into such a compact with anybody, even if I were the one who profited by it.

This particular injustice and oppression to women, which to ordinary understanding is more obvious than all the rest, can be remedied without touching any of the other mischiefs, and there can be little doubt it will be among the first to be remedied. Already, in many of the new and several of the old states of the American Confederation, provisions have been inserted even in the written constitutions securing women equality of rights in this respect. This materially improves the position within marriage of those women at least who have property, by leaving them one instrument of power they have not signed away; and it also prevents the scandalous abuse of the marriage institution that is committed when a man traps a girl into marrying him without a settlement, for the sole purpose of getting hold of her money.

Where the support of the family depends not on property but on earnings, the common arrangement by which the man earns the income and the wife manages the domestic spending seems to me in general the most suitable division of labour between the two. If, on top of the physical suffering of bearing children and the whole responsibility for their care and education in the early years, the wife undertakes the careful and economical application of the husband's earnings to the general comfort of the family, she is taking not merely her fair share but usually the larger share of the bodily and mental exertion their joint existence requires. If she takes on any additional portion, it seldom relieves her of this and only prevents her from doing it properly. Nobody else takes the care of the children and the household that she is thereby prevented from taking; those of the children who do not die grow up as best they can, and the management of the household is likely to be so bad that even in point of economy it is a great deduction from the value of the wife's earnings. In an otherwise just state of things it is not, therefore, I think, a desirable custom that the wife should contribute to the family income by her labour. In an unjust state of things her doing so may be useful to her, by making her of more value in the eyes of the man who is legally her master; but on the other hand it lets him abuse his power still further, by forcing her to work and leaving the support of the family to her exertions while he spends most of his time drinking and idling. The *power* of earning is essential to a woman's dignity if she has no independent property. But if marriage were an equal contract, not implying an obligation of obedience; if the connection were no longer enforced to the oppression of those to whom it is purely a misery, but a separation on just terms — I am not speaking now of a divorce — could be obtained by any woman morally entitled to it; and if she would then find every honourable employment as freely open to her as to men, then it would not be necessary for her protection that during marriage she should use her faculties in this particular way. Just as a man chooses a profession, so, when a woman marries, it may in general be understood that she chooses the management of a household and the bringing up of a family as the first call on her exertions for as many years of her life as that requires, and that she gives up not all other objects and occupations but all those that are inconsistent with the requirements of this one. The habitual or systematic exercise of outdoor occupations, or of any that cannot be carried on at home, would by this principle be practically ruled out for the greater number of married women. But the utmost latitude ought to exist for adapting general rules to individual suitabilities, and there ought to be nothing to prevent faculties exceptionally suited to some other pursuit from obeying their vocation in spite of marriage, provided that whatever inevitable falling short there might be in her full performance of the ordinary functions of the mistress of a family is otherwise provided for. These things, once opinion was rightly directed on the subject, might with perfect safety be left to be regulated by opinion, with no interference from the law.
