Chapter Three: Whether Women Should Be Shut Out of Anything

(Part 2 of 2)

But, it is said, there is anatomical evidence of the superior mental capacity of men compared with women: they have a larger brain. I reply that in the first place the fact itself is doubtful. It is by no means established that a woman's brain is smaller than a man's. If it is inferred merely from the fact that a woman's body is generally smaller than a man's, that criterion would lead to strange consequences. A tall, big-boned man must on this showing be wonderfully superior in intelligence to a small one, and an elephant or a whale must prodigiously excel mankind. The size of the brain in human beings, anatomists say, varies much less than the size of the body or even of the head, and the one cannot be inferred from the other at all. It is certain that some women have as large a brain as any man. I know of a man who had weighed many human brains and said that the heaviest he knew of, heavier even than Cuvier's, the heaviest previously recorded, was a woman's.

Next, I must observe that the precise relation between the brain and the intellectual powers is not yet well understood and is a subject of great dispute. That there is a very close relation we cannot doubt. The brain is certainly the material organ of thought and feeling; and, setting aside the great unsettled controversy about which parts of the brain belong to which mental faculties, I admit that it would be an anomaly, and an exception to everything we know of the general laws of life and organisation, if the size of the organ were wholly irrelevant to the function, and no accession of power came from a greater size of the instrument. But the exception and the anomaly would be just as great if the organ exercised influence by its size *only*. In all the more delicate operations of nature — of which those of animate creation are the most delicate, and those of the nervous system by far the most delicate of these — differences in the effect depend as much on differences in the quality of the physical agents as on their quantity. And if the quality of an instrument is to be tested by the nicety and delicacy of the work it can do, the indications point to a greater average fineness of quality in the brain and nervous system of women than of men. Setting aside abstract difference of quality, a thing difficult to verify, the efficiency of an organ is known to depend not solely on its size but on its activity; and of that we have an approximate measure in the energy with which the blood circulates through it, since both the stimulus and the restorative force depend mainly on the circulation. It would not be surprising — indeed it is a hypothesis that fits well with the differences actually observed between the mental operations of the two sexes — if men on average had the advantage in size of brain and women in activity of cerebral circulation.

The results that conjecture founded on analogy would lead us to expect from such a difference of organisation would correspond to some of those we most commonly see. In the first place, men's mental operations might be expected to be slower. They would be neither as prompt as women in thinking nor as quick to feel. Large bodies take longer to get into full action. On the other hand, once thoroughly in play, men's brains would bear more work. They would be more persistent along the line first taken; they would have more difficulty changing from one mode of action to another, but in the one thing they were doing they could go on longer without loss of power or sense of fatigue. And do we not find that the things men most excel women in are those requiring the most plodding and long hammering at a single thought, while women do best what has to be done rapidly? A woman's brain is sooner tired and sooner exhausted; but given the same degree of exhaustion we should expect to find that it recovered sooner. I repeat that this speculation is entirely hypothetical; it pretends to no more than to suggest a line of inquiry. I have already repudiated the notion that it is yet certainly known that there is any natural difference at all in the average strength or direction of the mental capacities of the two sexes, much less what that difference is. Nor is it possible that this should be known while the psychological laws of the formation of character have been so little studied even in a general way, and in this particular case never scientifically applied at all; and while the most obvious external causes of difference of character are habitually disregarded, left unnoticed by the observer and looked down on with a kind of supercilious contempt by the prevailing schools both of natural history and of mental philosophy, who — whether they look for the source of what chiefly distinguishes human beings from one another in the world of matter or in the world of spirit — agree in running down those who prefer to explain these differences by the different relations of human beings to society and to life.

The notions formed about the nature of women are mere empirical generalisations, framed without philosophy or analysis on the first instances that present themselves — and to such a ridiculous extent that the popular idea of it differs from country to country, according as the opinions and social circumstances of the country have given the women living in it some speciality of development or of non-development. A man in the East thinks women are by nature peculiarly voluptuous; see the violent abuse of them on that ground in Hindu writings. An Englishman usually thinks they are by nature cold. The sayings about women's fickleness are mostly of French origin, from the famous couplet of Francis I onwards. In England it is a common remark how much more constant women are than men. Inconstancy has been counted discreditable to a woman longer in England than in France, and Englishwomen are besides, in their innermost nature, much more subdued to opinion.

It may be remarked in passing that Englishmen are in peculiarly unfavourable circumstances for judging what is or is not natural, not merely to women but to men, or to human beings altogether — at least if they have only English experience to go on, because there is nowhere human nature shows so little of its original lineaments. In a good sense and a bad one, the English are further from a state of nature than any other modern people. They are, more than any other people, a product of civilisation and discipline. England is the country where social discipline has most succeeded, not so much in conquering as in suppressing whatever is liable to conflict with it. The English, more than any other people, not only act but feel according to rule. In other countries the taught opinion, or the requirement of society, may be the stronger power, but the promptings of the individual nature are always visible under it and often resisting it: rule may be stronger than nature, but nature is still there. In England, rule has to a great degree substituted itself for nature. Most of life is carried on not by following inclination under the control of rule, but by having no inclination except to follow a rule. Now this has its good side, no doubt, though it also has a wretchedly bad one; but it must make an Englishman peculiarly ill qualified to pass judgment on the original tendencies of human nature from his own experience. The errors observers elsewhere are liable to on the subject are of a different character. An Englishman is ignorant about human nature; a Frenchman is prejudiced. An Englishman's errors are negative, a Frenchman's positive. An Englishman fancies things do not exist because he never sees them; a Frenchman thinks they must always and necessarily exist because he does see them. An Englishman does not know nature because he has had no opportunity of observing it; a Frenchman generally knows a great deal of it but often mistakes it, because he has only seen it sophisticated and distorted. For the artificial state that society brings on disguises the natural tendencies of the thing observed in two different ways: by extinguishing the nature, or by transforming it. In the one case only a starved residue of nature remains to be studied; in the other there is much, but it may have expanded in any direction rather than the one it would grow in spontaneously.

I have said that it cannot now be known how much of the existing mental difference between men and women is natural and how much artificial; whether there are any natural differences at all; or, supposing all artificial causes of difference were withdrawn, what natural character would be revealed. I am not about to attempt what I have pronounced impossible; but doubt does not forbid conjecture, and where certainty is unattainable there may still be means of reaching some degree of probability. The first point, the origin of the differences actually observed, is the one most accessible to speculation, and I shall try to approach it by the only path that can reach it: by tracing the mental consequences of external influences. We cannot isolate a human being from the circumstances of his condition so as to find out experimentally what he would have been by nature; but we can consider what he is, and what his circumstances have been, and whether the second could have produced the first.

Let us take, then, the one marked case observation affords of apparent inferiority of women to men, leaving aside the merely physical one of bodily strength. No production in philosophy, science or art entitled to the first rank has been the work of a woman. Is there any way of accounting for this without supposing that women are naturally incapable of producing them?

In the first place, we may fairly question whether experience has yet given sufficient grounds for an induction. It is barely three generations since women, save very rare exceptions, began to try their capacity in philosophy, science or art. It is only in the present generation that their attempts have been at all numerous, and even now they are extremely few anywhere but in England and France. It is a relevant question whether a mind possessing the requisites of first-rate eminence in speculation or creative art could have been expected, on the mere calculation of chances, to turn up in that space of time among the women whose tastes and personal position allowed them to devote themselves to these pursuits. In everything there has yet been time for — in everything but the very highest grades on the scale of excellence, especially in the department they have been engaged in longest, literature both in prose and poetry — women have done quite as much, and have carried off as high prizes and as many of them, as could be expected from the length of time and the number of competitors. If we go back to the earlier period when very few women made the attempt, some of those few made it with distinguished success. The Greeks always counted Sappho among their great poets; and we may well suppose that Myrtis, said to have been Pindar's teacher, and Corinna, who five times carried off the prize for poetry against him, must at least have had merit enough to bear comparison with that great name. Aspasia left no philosophical writings, but it is an admitted fact that Socrates went to her for instruction and declared that he had received it.

If we consider the works of women in modern times and contrast them with men's, in either the literary or the artistic department, such inferiority as can be observed resolves itself essentially into one thing — but that one thing is most material: a deficiency of originality. Not a total deficiency, for every production of the mind that has any substantive value has an originality of its own, being a conception of the mind itself and not a copy of something else. Thoughts that are original in the sense of being unborrowed, of being derived from the thinker's own observation or intellectual processes, are abundant in the writings of women. But they have not yet produced any of those great and luminous new ideas that make an era in thought, nor those fundamentally new conceptions in art that open a vista of possible effects nobody had thought of before and found a new school. Their compositions are mostly grounded on the existing fund of thought, and their creations do not deviate widely from existing types. That is the sort of inferiority their works show; for in point of execution, in the detailed application of thought and the perfection of style, there is no inferiority. Our best novelists in point of composition and management of detail have mostly been women, and there is not in all modern literature a more eloquent vehicle of thought than the style of Madame de Staël, nor, as a specimen of purely artistic excellence, anything superior to the prose of Madame Sand, whose style acts on the nervous system like a symphony of Haydn or Mozart. High originality of conception is, as I have said, what is chiefly wanting. And now let us examine whether there is any way this deficiency can be accounted for.

Let us remember, then, so far as mere thought is concerned, that during the whole period of the world's existence, and of the progress of cultivation, in which great and fruitful new truths could be reached by mere force of genius, with little previous study and accumulation of knowledge, women did not concern themselves with speculation at all. From the days of Hypatia to those of the Reformation, the illustrious Héloïse is almost the only woman to whom any such achievement might have been possible, and we do not know how great a capacity for speculation in her may have been lost to mankind through the misfortunes of her life. Never since any considerable number of women began to cultivate serious thought has originality been possible on easy terms. Nearly all the thoughts that can be reached by mere strength of original faculties have long since been reached, and originality in any high sense of the word is now hardly ever attained except by minds that have undergone elaborate discipline and are deeply versed in the results of previous thinking. It is Mr Maurice, I think, who remarked of the present age that its most original thinkers are those who have known most thoroughly what their predecessors thought; and this will always be the case from now on. Every fresh stone in the building now has to be placed on top of so many others that a long process of climbing, and of carrying up materials, has to be gone through by anyone who aspires to take a share in the present stage of the work. How many women have gone through any such process? Mrs Somerville, alone perhaps among women, knows as much mathematics as is now needed to make any considerable mathematical discovery. Is it any proof of inferiority in women that she has not happened to be one of the two or three people who in her lifetime have attached their names to some striking advance in the science? Two women, since political economy became a science, have known enough of it to write usefully on the subject; of how many of the innumerable men who have written on it in the same period can it truthfully be said that they knew more? If no woman has yet been a great historian, what woman has had the necessary learning? If no woman is a great philologist, what woman has studied Sanskrit and Slavonic, the Gothic of Ulfilas and the Persian of the Zend-Avesta? Even in practical matters we all know what the originality of untaught geniuses is worth. It means inventing over again, in its rudimentary form, something already invented and improved on by many successive inventors. When women have had the preparation all men now require in order to be eminently original, it will be time enough to begin judging their capacity for originality by experience.

It no doubt often happens that a person who has not widely and accurately studied other people's thoughts on a subject has by natural sagacity a happy intuition, which he can suggest but cannot prove, and which yet when matured may be an important addition to knowledge. But even then no justice can be done to it until somebody else, who does have the previous acquirements, takes it in hand, tests it, gives it a scientific or practical form, and fits it into its place among the existing truths of philosophy or science. Is it supposed that such lucky thoughts do not occur to women? They occur by the hundred to every woman of intellect. But they are mostly lost, for want of a husband or a friend who has the other knowledge that would enable him to value them properly and bring them before the world; and even when they are brought before it, they generally appear as his ideas and not their real author's. Who can tell how many of the most original thoughts put forth by male writers belong to a woman by suggestion, and to themselves only by the verifying and working out? If I may judge from my own case, a very large proportion indeed.

If we turn from pure speculation to literature in the narrow sense, and to the fine arts, there is a very obvious reason why women's literature is, in its general conception and its main features, an imitation of men's. Why is Roman literature, as the critics proclaim to satiety, not original but an imitation of the Greek? Simply because the Greeks came first. If women lived in a different country from men and had never read any of their writings, they would have had a literature of their own. As it is, they have not created one, because they found a highly advanced literature already created. If there had been no interruption in the knowledge of antiquity, or if the Renaissance had happened before the Gothic cathedrals were built, they would never have been built. We see that in France and Italy imitation of the ancient literature stopped the original development even after it had begun. All women who write are pupils of the great male writers. A painter's early pictures, even if he is a Raphael, are indistinguishable in style from his master's. Even a Mozart does not display his powerful originality in his earliest pieces. What years are to a gifted individual, generations are to a mass. If women's literature is destined to have a different collective character from men's, depending on some difference of natural tendency, much more time is needed than has passed yet before it can emancipate itself from the influence of accepted models and steer by its own impulses. But if, as I believe, there prove to be no natural tendencies common to women that distinguish their genius from men's, still every individual writer among them has her individual tendencies, which at present are subdued by the influence of precedent and example; and it will take generations more before their individuality is developed enough to make headway against that influence.

It is in the fine arts, properly so called, that the initial evidence of inferior original powers in women appears at first sight strongest, since opinion, it may be said, does not exclude them from these but rather encourages them, and their education, instead of passing this department over, consists mainly of it in the wealthy classes. Yet in this line of exertion they have fallen still further short than in many others of the highest eminence attained by men. This shortfall, however, needs no explanation beyond the familiar fact, more universally true in the fine arts than in anything else: the vast superiority of professionals over amateurs. Women in the educated classes are almost universally taught something or other of some branch of the fine arts, but not so that they may earn their living or their social standing by it. Women artists are all amateurs. The exceptions are only of the kind that confirms the general truth. Women are taught music, but not for the purpose of composing, only of performing it — and accordingly it is only as composers that men in music are superior to women. The one fine art women do follow to any extent as a profession and an occupation for life is acting, and in that they are confessedly equal to men, if not superior. To make the comparison fair, it should be made between the productions of women in any branch of art and those of men who do not follow it as a profession. In musical composition, for example, women have surely produced things fully as good as any that have ever been produced by male amateurs. There are now a few women, a very few, who practise painting as a profession, and they are already beginning to show quite as much talent as could be expected. Even male painters, with all respect to Mr Ruskin, have not cut any very remarkable figure these last few centuries, and it will be long before they do. The reason the old painters were so greatly superior to the modern ones is that a greatly superior class of men applied themselves to the art. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the Italian painters were the most accomplished men of their age. The greatest of them were men of encyclopaedic acquirements and powers, like the great men of Greece. But in their day fine art was, to men's feelings and conceptions, among the grandest things a human being could excel in, and it made men what only political or military distinction now makes them: the companions of sovereigns and the equals of the highest nobility. In the present age, men of anything like similar calibre find something more important to do, for their own fame and the uses of the modern world, than painting; and it is only now and then that a Reynolds or a Turner — on whose relative rank among eminent men I pretend to no opinion — applies himself to that art. Music belongs to a different order of things. It does not require the same general powers of mind but seems more dependent on a natural gift, and it may be thought surprising that none of the great musical composers has been a woman. But even this natural gift, to be made available for great creations, requires study and professional devotion to the pursuit. The only countries that have produced first-rate composers even of the male sex are Germany and Italy — countries where, in both special and general cultivation, women have remained far behind France and England, being generally, it may be said without exaggeration, very little educated and having hardly cultivated any of the higher faculties of the mind at all. And in those countries the men acquainted with the principles of musical composition must be counted by hundreds, or more probably by thousands, and the women barely by scores; so that here again, on the doctrine of averages, we cannot reasonably expect to see more than one eminent woman to fifty eminent men — and the last three centuries have not produced fifty eminent male composers in Germany or in Italy either.

There are other reasons besides those I have given that help to explain why women remain behind men even in the pursuits open to both. For one thing, very few women have time for them. This may seem a paradox; it is an undoubted social fact. Every woman's time and thoughts have to satisfy great prior demands on them for practical things. There is, first, the superintendence of the family and the domestic spending, which occupies at least one woman in every family, generally the one of mature years and acquired experience, unless the family is rich enough to delegate the task to hired help and to submit to all the waste and mismanagement inseparable from doing it that way. The superintendence of a household, even when not otherwise laborious, is extremely burdensome to the thoughts. It requires unceasing vigilance and an eye that no detail escapes, and it presents questions for consideration and solution, foreseen and unforeseen, at every hour of the day, from which the person responsible for them can hardly ever shake herself free. If a woman is of a rank and circumstances that relieve her to some extent from these cares, she still has devolving on her the management of the whole family's dealings with other people — of what is called society; and the less the first duty calls on her, the greater is always the development of the second: the dinner parties, concerts, evening parties, morning visits, letter writing and everything that goes with them. And all this is over and above the engrossing duty society imposes exclusively on women, of making themselves charming. A clever woman of the higher ranks finds nearly enough employment for her talents in cultivating the graces of manner and the arts of conversation.

To look only at the outward side of the subject: the great and continual exercise of thought that every woman who attaches any value to dressing well — I do not mean expensively, but with taste and a perception of natural and artificial *convenance* — has to spend on her own dress, and perhaps on her daughters' too, would by itself go a long way towards achieving respectable results in art or science or literature, and does in fact exhaust much of the time and mental power she might have to spare for either. If it were possible for all this number of little practical interests, which are made great to them, to leave them either much leisure or much energy and freedom of mind to devote to art or speculation, they would have to have a far greater original supply of active faculty than the vast majority of men. But this is not all. Quite apart from the regular offices of life that fall to a woman, she is expected to have her time and her faculties always at everybody's disposal. If a man has no profession to exempt him from such demands, still, if he has a pursuit, he offends nobody by devoting his time to it; occupation is accepted as a valid excuse for not answering every casual demand made on him. Are a woman's occupations, especially her chosen and voluntary ones, ever regarded as excusing her from any of what are called the claims of society? Hardly even her most necessary and recognised duties are allowed as an exemption. It takes an illness in the family, or something else out of the common way, to entitle her to give her own business precedence over other people's amusement. She must always be at the beck and call of somebody, generally of everybody. If she has a study or a pursuit, she must snatch whatever short interval happens to occur to be employed in it. A celebrated woman, in a work I hope will one day be published, remarks truly that everything a woman does is done at odd times. Is it any wonder, then, if she does not reach the highest eminence in things that require consecutive attention and the concentration on them of the chief interest of life? Such is philosophy, and such above all is art, in which, besides the devotion of the thoughts and feelings, the hand also has to be kept in constant exercise to attain high skill.

Footnote: "It appears to be the same right turn of mind which enables a man to acquire the *truth*, or the just idea of what is right, in the ornaments, as in the more stable principles of art. It has still the same centre of perfection, though it is the centre of a smaller circle. To illustrate this by the fashion of dress, in which there is allowed to be a good or bad taste. The component parts of dress are continually changing from great to little, from short to long; but the general form still remains: it is still the same general dress which is comparatively fixed, though on a very slender foundation; but it is on this which fashion must rest. He who invents with the most success, or dresses in the best taste, would probably, from the same sagacity employed to greater purposes, have discovered equal skill, or have formed the same correct taste, in the highest labours of art." — Sir Joshua Reynolds' *Discourses*, Discourse VII.

There is another consideration to be added to all these. In the various arts and intellectual occupations there is a degree of proficiency sufficient to live by, and there is a higher degree on which the great productions that immortalise a name depend. For attaining the first there are adequate motives in the case of everyone who follows the pursuit professionally. The second is hardly ever attained where there is not, or has not been at some period of life, an ardent desire for fame. Nothing less is commonly a sufficient stimulus to undergo the long and patient drudgery which, even with the greatest natural gifts, is absolutely required for great eminence in pursuits where we already possess so many splendid memorials of the highest genius. Now, whether the cause is natural or artificial, women seldom have this eagerness for fame. Their ambition is generally confined within narrower bounds. The influence they seek is over those immediately around them. Their desire is to be liked, loved or admired by the people they see with their own eyes; and the proficiency in knowledge, arts and accomplishments that is sufficient for that almost always contents them. This is a trait of character that cannot be left out of account in judging women as they are. I do not at all believe it is inherent in women. It is only the natural result of their circumstances. The love of fame in men is encouraged by education and by opinion; to "scorn delights and live laborious days" for its sake is counted the mark of "noble minds", even if it is spoken of as their "last infirmity", and it is stimulated by the access fame gives to all the objects of ambition, including even the favour of women — while to women themselves all these objects are closed, and the desire for fame itself is considered daring and unfeminine. Besides, how could a woman's interests not be entirely concentrated on the impressions she makes on those who come into her daily life, when society has ordained that all her duties are to them, and has contrived that all her comforts shall depend on them? The natural desire for the regard of our fellow creatures is as strong in a woman as in a man; but society has so arranged things that public regard is, in all ordinary cases, only attainable by her through the regard shown to her husband or her male relations, while her private regard is forfeited by making herself individually prominent, or appearing in any character other than that of an appendage to men. Anybody in the least capable of estimating the influence on the mind of a person's entire domestic and social position, and of the whole habit of a life, must easily recognise in that influence a complete explanation of nearly all the apparent differences between women and men, including all those that imply any inferiority.

As for moral differences, as distinguished from intellectual ones, the distinction commonly drawn is to women's advantage. They are declared to be better than men — an empty compliment, which must provoke a bitter smile from every woman of spirit, since there is no other situation in life in which it is the established order, and considered quite natural and suitable, that the better should obey the worse. If this piece of idle talk is good for anything, it is only as an admission by men of the corrupting influence of power; for that is certainly the only truth the fact, if it is a fact, either proves or illustrates. And it *is* true that servitude, except when it actually brutalises, though corrupting to both, is less corrupting to the slaves than to the slave masters. It is healthier for the moral nature to be restrained, even by arbitrary power, than to be allowed to exercise arbitrary power without restraint. Women, it is said, less often fall under the penal law and contribute a much smaller number of offenders to the criminal calendar than men. I do not doubt that the same thing could be said, with the same truth, of enslaved people. Those under the control of others cannot often commit crimes, except at their masters' command and for their masters' purposes. I do not know a more signal instance of the blindness with which the world, including the herd of studious men, ignores and passes over all the influences of social circumstances, than its silly disparagement of the intellectual nature of women and its silly panegyrics on their moral nature.

The complimentary dictum about women's superior moral goodness may be allowed to pair off with the disparaging one about their greater liability to moral bias. Women, we are told, are not capable of resisting their personal partialities; their judgment in grave affairs is warped by their sympathies and antipathies. Assuming this to be so, it still remains to be proved that women are more often misled by their personal feelings than men by their personal interests. The chief difference would seem in that case to be that men are led away from the course of duty and the public interest by regard for themselves, and women — not being allowed to have private interests of their own — by regard for somebody else. It should also be considered that all the education women receive from society instils in them the feeling that the individuals connected with them are the only ones they owe any duty to, the only ones whose interest they are called on to care about; while as far as education goes they are left strangers even to the elementary ideas presupposed in any intelligent regard for larger interests or higher moral objects. The complaint against them resolves itself merely into this, that they fulfil only too faithfully the sole duty they are taught, and almost the only one they are permitted to practise.

The concessions of the privileged to the unprivileged are so seldom brought about by any better motive than the power of the unprivileged to extort them, that any argument against the prerogative of sex is likely to get little attention from most people so long as they can say to themselves that women do not complain of it. That fact certainly enables men to keep the unjust privilege a while longer, but it does not make it less unjust. Exactly the same thing may be said of the women in an Eastern harem: they do not complain of not being allowed the freedom of European women. They think our women insufferably bold and unfeminine. How rarely even men complain of the general order of society, and how much rarer still such a complaint would be if they did not know of any different order existing anywhere else. Women do not complain of the general lot of women — or rather they do, for plaintive elegies on it are very common in the writings of women, and were still more so as long as the lamentations could not be suspected of having any practical object. Their complaints are like the complaints men make of the general unsatisfactoriness of human life; they are not meant to imply blame or to plead for any change. But though women do not complain of the power of husbands, each complains of her own husband, or of the husbands of her friends. It is the same in every other case of servitude, at least at the beginning of the movement for emancipation. The serfs did not at first complain of the power of their lords, but only of their tyranny. The Commons began by claiming a few municipal privileges; next they asked to be exempt from being taxed without their own consent; but they would at that time have thought it a great presumption to claim any share in the king's sovereign authority. The case of women is now the only one in which rebelling against established rules is still looked on with the same eyes as a subject's claim to the right of rebelling against his king used to be. A woman who joins any movement her husband disapproves of makes herself a martyr without even being able to be an apostle, for the husband can legally put a stop to her apostleship. Women cannot be expected to devote themselves to the emancipation of women until men in considerable numbers are prepared to join them in the undertaking.
