Chapter Four: What Would Be Gained

(Part 1 of 2)

There remains a question no less important than those already discussed, and it is the one that will be asked most insistently by the opponents whose conviction has been somewhat shaken on the main point. What good are we to expect from the changes proposed in our customs and institutions? Would mankind be at all better off if women were free? And if not, why disturb their minds and attempt a social revolution in the name of an abstract right?

It is hardly to be expected that the question will be asked about the change proposed in the condition of women in marriage. The suffering, the immorality, the evils of every sort produced in innumerable cases by the subjection of individual women to individual men are far too terrible to be overlooked. Unthinking or disingenuous people, counting only the cases that are extreme or that become public, may say the evils are exceptional; but nobody can be blind to their existence, or in many cases to their intensity. And it is perfectly obvious that the abuse of the power cannot be much checked while the power remains. It is a power given, or offered, not to good men or to decently respectable men but to all men, the most brutal and the most criminal included. There is no check but opinion, and such men are in general within reach of no opinion but that of men like themselves. If such men did not brutally tyrannise over the one human being the law compels to put up with everything from them, society must already have reached a state of paradise. There could be no further need of laws to curb men's vicious tendencies. Astraea must not only have returned to earth, but the heart of the worst of men must have become her temple.

The law of servitude in marriage is a monstrous contradiction of all the principles of the modern world, and of all the experience through which those principles have been slowly and painfully worked out. It is the one case, now that slavery has been abolished, in which a human being in the fullness of every faculty is handed over to the tender mercies of another human being, in the hope, forsooth, that the other will use the power solely for the good of the person subjected to it. Marriage is the only actual bondage known to our law. There remain no legal slaves, except the mistress of every house.

It is not, therefore, on this part of the subject that the question is likely to be asked: what good will it do? We may be told that the evil would outweigh the good, but the reality of the good is not in dispute. On the larger question, however — the removal of women's legal disabilities, their recognition as the equals of men in everything belonging to citizenship, the opening to them of all honourable employments and of the training and education that qualifies people for those employments — there are many people for whom it is not enough that the inequality has no just or legitimate defence. They require to be told what express advantage would be gained by abolishing it.

To which let me first answer: the advantage of having the most universal and pervading of all human relations regulated by justice instead of injustice. To anyone who attaches a moral meaning to words, the vast size of this gain to human nature can hardly be put in a stronger light by any explanation or illustration than it is by the bare statement of it. All the selfish tendencies, the self-worship, the unjust self-preference that exist among mankind have their source and root in the present constitution of the relation between men and women, and draw their principal nourishment from it. Think what it is to a boy to grow up to manhood believing that without any merit or any effort of his own — though he may be the most frivolous and empty or the most ignorant and stolid of mankind — by the mere fact of having been born male he is by right the superior of every single one of an entire half of the human race, including probably some whose real superiority to himself he has daily or hourly occasion to feel. Even if in his whole conduct he habitually follows a woman's guidance, still, if he is a fool, she thinks that of course she cannot be equal in ability and judgment to him; and if he is not a fool, he does worse — he sees that she is superior to him, and believes that in spite of her superiority he is entitled to command and she is bound to obey. What must the effect of that lesson be on his character?

Men of the cultivated classes are often unaware how deeply it sinks into the immense majority of male minds. For among right-feeling and well-bred people the inequality is kept as much as possible out of sight, and above all out of the children's sight. As much obedience is required from boys towards their mother as towards their father; they are not permitted to domineer over their sisters, nor are they used to seeing their sisters put after them — quite the contrary — and the compensations of the chivalrous feeling are made prominent, while the servitude that calls for them is kept in the background. Well brought-up youths in the higher classes thus often escape the bad influences of the situation in their early years, and only meet them when, having reached manhood, they fall under the dominion of facts as they really are. Such people are little aware, when a boy is brought up differently, how early the notion of his inherent superiority to a girl arises in his mind; how it grows with his growth and strengthens with his strength; how it is passed from one schoolboy to another like an infection; how early the youth thinks himself superior to his mother, owing her perhaps forbearance but no real respect; and how sublime and sultan-like a sense of superiority he feels above all towards the woman he honours by admitting her to a partnership in his life. Is it imagined that all this does not pervert the whole manner of the man's existence, both as an individual and as a social being? It is an exact parallel to the feeling of a hereditary king that he is excellent above others by being born a king, or of a nobleman that he is so by being born noble. The relation between husband and wife is very like that between lord and vassal, except that the wife is held to a more unlimited obedience than the vassal was. However the vassal's character may have been affected, for better and for worse, by his subordination, who can help seeing that the lord's was affected greatly for the worse — whether he was led to believe that his vassals were really superior to himself, or to feel that he was placed in command over people as good as himself for no merit or labour of his own, but merely for having, as Figaro says, taken the trouble to be born?

The self-worship of the monarch, or of the feudal superior, is matched by the self-worship of the male. Human beings do not grow up from childhood in possession of unearned distinctions without pluming themselves on them. Those in whom privileges not acquired by merit, and which they feel to be out of proportion to it, inspire additional humility are always the few, and the best few. The rest are only inspired with pride, and the worst sort of pride, the sort that values itself on accidental advantages that are not of its own achieving. Above all, when the feeling of being raised above the whole of the other sex is combined with personal authority over one individual among them, the situation — which for those whose strongest points of character are conscience and affection is a school of conscientious and affectionate forbearance — is for men of another quality a regularly constituted academy or gymnasium for training them in arrogance and overbearingness. And those vices, curbed in their dealings with other men, their equals, by the certainty of resistance, break out towards everyone who is in a position of having to tolerate them, and often revenge themselves on the unfortunate wife for the involuntary restraint they have to submit to elsewhere.

The example set, and the education given to the feelings, by founding domestic existence on a relation that contradicts the first principles of social justice must, from the very nature of man, have a perverting influence of such magnitude that with our present experience we can hardly raise our imaginations to conceive how great a change for the better its removal would make. Everything that education and civilisation are doing to efface the influences of the law of force on character, and to replace them with the influences of justice, stays on the surface as long as the citadel of the enemy is not attacked. The principle of the modern movement in morals and politics is that conduct, and conduct alone, entitles a person to respect; that not what men are but what they do constitutes their claim to deference; and that above all merit, and not birth, is the only rightful claim to power and authority. If no authority that was not temporary in its nature were allowed to one human being over another, society would not be building up with one hand the tendencies it has to curb with the other. The child would really, for the first time in the existence of man on earth, be trained up in the way he should go, and when he was old there would be a chance that he would not depart from it. But so long as the right of the strong to power over the weak rules in the very heart of society, the attempt to make the equal right of the weak the principle of its outward actions will always be an uphill struggle; for the law of justice, which is also the law of Christianity, will never take possession of men's innermost feelings, and they will be working against it even while they bend to it.

The second benefit to be expected from giving women the free use of their faculties, by leaving them free choice of their employments and opening to them the same field of occupation and the same prizes and encouragements as to other human beings, would be the doubling of the mass of mental faculty available for the higher service of humanity. Where there is now one person qualified to benefit mankind and promote the general improvement, as a public teacher or an administrator of some branch of public or social affairs, there would then be a chance of two. Mental superiority of any kind is at present everywhere so far below the demand, there is such a shortage of people competent to do excellently anything that requires any considerable amount of ability, that the loss to the world in refusing to make use of one half of the whole quantity of talent it possesses is extremely serious. It is true that this amount of mental power is not totally lost. Much of it is employed, and would in any case be employed, in domestic management and in the few other occupations open to women; and from the remainder an indirect benefit is obtained in many individual cases, through the personal influence of individual women over individual men. But these benefits are partial, their range is extremely narrow; and if they must be admitted on the one hand as a deduction from the amount of fresh social power that would be gained by giving freedom to one half of the whole sum of human intellect, there must be added on the other the benefit of the stimulus that would be given to men's intellects by the competition — or, to put it more truly, by the necessity that would be imposed on them of deserving precedence before they could expect to get it.

This great addition to the intellectual power of the species, and to the amount of intellect available for the good management of its affairs, would be gained partly through the better and more complete intellectual education of women, which would then improve at the same pace as that of men. Women in general would be brought up equally capable of understanding business, public affairs and the higher matters of speculation as men in the same class of society; and the select few of the one sex as well as of the other, who were qualified not merely to understand what is done or thought by others but to think or do something considerable themselves, would find the same facilities for improving and training their capacities in the one sex as in the other. In this way, widening the sphere of action for women would work for good by raising their education to the level of men's, and making the one share in every improvement made in the other. But quite apart from this, merely breaking down the barrier would in itself have an educational value of the highest worth. Merely getting rid of the idea that all the wider subjects of thought and action, everything that is of general and not solely private interest, is men's business, from which women are to be warned off — positively forbidden most of it, coldly tolerated in the little that is allowed them — merely the consciousness a woman would then have of being a human being like any other, entitled to choose her pursuits, urged or invited by the same inducements as anyone else to interest herself in whatever interests human beings, entitled to exert the share of influence over all human concerns that belongs to an individual opinion, whether she attempted actual participation in them or not: this alone would produce an immense expansion of women's faculties, as well as an enlargement of the range of their moral feelings.

Besides the addition to the amount of individual talent available for conducting human affairs — which are certainly not at present so abundantly provided in that respect that they can afford to dispense with half of what nature offers — the opinion of women would then have a more beneficial, rather than a greater, influence on the general mass of human belief and feeling. I say a more beneficial rather than a greater influence, because the influence of women over the general tone of opinion has always, or at least since the earliest known period, been very considerable. The influence of mothers on the early character of their sons, and the desire of young men to recommend themselves to young women, have in all recorded times been important agents in the formation of character, and have determined some of the chief steps in the progress of civilisation. Even in the Homeric age, *αἰδώς* — the sense of shame and reverence — towards the *Τρωάδας ἑλκεσιπέπλους*, the Trojan women with their trailing robes, is an acknowledged and powerful motive of action in the great Hector.

The moral influence of women has worked in two ways. First, it has been a softening influence. Those most liable to be the victims of violence have naturally tended as much as they could towards limiting its sphere and moderating its excesses. Those who were not taught to fight have naturally leaned in favour of any other way of settling differences than fighting. In general, those who have suffered most from the indulgence of selfish passion have been the most earnest supporters of any moral law offering a means of bridling passion. Women were powerfully instrumental in inducing the northern conquerors to adopt the creed of Christianity, a creed so much more favourable to women than any that preceded it. The conversion of the Anglo-Saxons and of the Franks may be said to have been begun by the wives of Ethelbert and Clovis. The other way in which the effect of women's opinion has been conspicuous is by giving a powerful stimulus to the qualities in men that, not being trained in them themselves, they needed to find in their protectors. Courage, and the military virtues generally, have at all times been greatly indebted to men's desire to be admired by women; and the stimulus reaches far beyond this one class of eminent qualities, since, by a very natural effect of their position, the best passport to the admiration and favour of women has always been to be highly thought of by men.

From the combination of these two kinds of moral influence exercised by women arose the spirit of chivalry, whose peculiarity is that it aims at combining the highest standard of the warlike qualities with the cultivation of a totally different class of virtues: gentleness, generosity and self-abnegation towards the non-military and defenceless classes generally, and a special submission and worship directed towards women, who were distinguished from the other defenceless classes by the high rewards it was in their power to bestow voluntarily on those who tried to earn their favour instead of extorting their submission. Though the practice of chivalry fell even more sadly short of its theoretical standard than practice generally falls below theory, it remains one of the most precious monuments of the moral history of our race — a remarkable instance of a concerted and organised attempt, by a most disorganised and distracted society, to raise up and put into practice a moral ideal greatly in advance of its social condition and institutions; so far in advance that it was completely frustrated in its main object, and yet never entirely ineffective, and has left a very perceptible and for the most part a highly valuable mark on the ideas and feelings of all later times.

The chivalrous ideal is the high point of the influence of women's feelings on the moral cultivation of mankind; and if women are to remain in their subordinate situation, it is greatly to be regretted that the chivalrous standard has passed away, for it is the only one at all capable of moderating the demoralising influences of that position. But changes in the general state of the species made it inevitable that a totally different ideal of morality would be substituted for the chivalrous one. Chivalry was the attempt to infuse moral elements into a state of society in which everything depended for good or evil on individual prowess, under the softening influence of individual delicacy and generosity. In modern societies everything, even in the military department of affairs, is decided not by individual effort but by the combined operations of numbers, while the main occupation of society has changed from fighting to business, from military to industrial life. The demands of the new life exclude the virtues of generosity no more than the old ones did, but they no longer depend on them entirely. The main foundations of the moral life of modern times must be justice and prudence: the respect of each for the rights of everyone else, and the ability of each to take care of himself. Chivalry left without legal check all the forms of wrong that reigned unpunished throughout society; it merely encouraged a few to do right rather than wrong, by the direction it gave to the instruments of praise and admiration. But morality must always really depend on its penal sanctions, on its power to deter people from evil. The security of society cannot rest on merely doing honour to what is right — a motive comparatively weak in all but a few, and with very many people not operative at all. Modern society is able to repress wrong throughout every department of life, by a fit exertion of the superior strength civilisation has given it, and so to make the existence of the weaker members of society — no longer defenceless, but protected by law — tolerable to them, without relying on the chivalrous feelings of those in a position to tyrannise. The beauties and graces of the chivalrous character are still what they were, but the rights of the weak and the general comfort of human life now rest on a far surer and steadier support. Or rather they do so in every relation of life except the conjugal one.

At present the moral influence of women is no less real, but it no longer has so marked and definite a character; it has more nearly merged into the general influence of public opinion. Both through the contagion of sympathy and through men's desire to shine in women's eyes, their feelings have great effect in keeping alive what remains of the chivalrous ideal, in fostering the sentiments and continuing the traditions of spirit and generosity. In these points of character their standard is higher than men's; in the quality of justice, somewhat lower. As regards the relations of private life it may be said generally that their influence is on the whole encouraging to the softer virtues and discouraging to the sterner ones, though the statement must be taken with all the modifications that individual character makes necessary. In the chief of the greater trials to which virtue is subject in the concerns of life — the conflict between interest and principle — the tendency of women's influence is of a very mixed character. When the principle involved happens to be one of the very few their religious or moral education has strongly impressed on them, they are potent allies of virtue, and their husbands and sons are often prompted by them to acts of self-denial they would never have been capable of without that stimulus. But with the present education and position of women, the moral principles impressed on them cover only a comparatively small part of the field of virtue and are moreover mainly negative, forbidding particular acts but having little to do with the general direction of the thoughts and purposes. I am afraid it must be said that disinterestedness in the general conduct of life — devoting one's energies to purposes that hold out no promise of private advantage to the family — is very seldom encouraged or supported by women's influence. It is small blame to them that they discourage objects whose advantage they have not been taught to see, and which draw their men away from them and from the interests of the family. But the consequence is that women's influence is often anything but favourable to public virtue.

Women do, however, have some share of influence in setting the tone of public morality, now that their sphere of action has been a little widened and a considerable number of them have occupied themselves practically in promoting objects that reach beyond their own family and household. The influence of women counts for a great deal in two of the most marked features of modern European life: its aversion to war and its addiction to philanthropy. Excellent characteristics both; but unhappily, though women's influence is valuable in the encouragement it gives to these feelings in general, in particular applications the direction it gives them is at least as often mischievous as useful. In the philanthropic department especially, the two provinces chiefly cultivated by women are religious proselytising and charity. Religious proselytising at home is only another word for embittering religious animosities; abroad it is usually a blind rush at an object, without either knowing or heeding the fatal mischiefs — fatal to the religious object itself as well as to every other desirable object — that the means employed may produce. As for charity, it is a matter in which the immediate effect on the people directly concerned and the ultimate consequence to the general good are apt to be at complete war with one another; while the education given to women, an education of the feelings rather than of the understanding, and the habit instilled by their whole life of looking to immediate effects on individuals rather than remote effects on classes of people, make them both unable to see and unwilling to admit the ultimately bad tendency of any form of charity or philanthropy that recommends itself to their sympathetic feelings. The great and continually increasing mass of unenlightened and short-sighted benevolence which, by taking the care of people's lives out of their own hands and relieving them of the disagreeable consequences of their own acts, saps the very foundations of the self-respect, self-help and self-control that are the essential conditions both of individual prosperity and of social virtue — this waste of resources and of benevolent feeling on doing harm instead of good is immensely swollen by women's contributions and stimulated by their influence.

Not that this is a mistake women are likely to make where they actually have the practical management of schemes of beneficence. It sometimes happens that women who administer public charities recognise in the clearest way the demoralising influence of the alms given or the help afforded — with that insight into present fact, and especially into the minds and feelings of those they are in immediate contact with, in which women generally excel men — and could give lessons on the subject to many a male political economist. But women who only give their money, and are never brought face to face with the effects it produces, how can they be expected to foresee them? A woman born to the present lot of women, and content with it, how should she appreciate the value of self-dependence? She is not self-dependent; she is not taught self-dependence; her destiny is to receive everything from others; and why should what is good enough for her be bad for the poor? Her familiar notions of good are of blessings descending from a superior. She forgets that she is not free and that the poor are; that if what they need is given to them unearned, they cannot be compelled to earn it; that everybody cannot be taken care of by everybody, but that there must be some motive to induce people to take care of themselves; and that to be helped to help themselves, if they are physically capable of it, is the only charity that proves to be charity in the end.

These considerations show how usefully the part women take in forming general opinion would be modified for the better by that wider instruction, and that practical acquaintance with the things their opinions influence, which would necessarily follow from their social and political emancipation. But the improvement it would work through the influence they exercise, each in her own family, would be still more remarkable.

It is often said that in the classes most exposed to temptation a man's wife and children tend to keep him honest and respectable, both through the wife's direct influence and through the concern he feels for their future welfare. This may be so, and no doubt often is so, with those who are more weak than wicked; and this beneficial influence would be preserved and strengthened under equal laws. It does not depend on the woman's servitude, but is on the contrary diminished by the disrespect that the inferior class of men always feel at heart towards those who are subject to their power. But when we go higher up the scale we come among a totally different set of moving forces. The wife's influence tends, as far as it goes, to prevent the husband from falling below the country's common standard of approval. It tends quite as strongly to stop him from rising above it. The wife is the auxiliary of common public opinion. A man married to a woman who is his inferior in intelligence finds her a perpetual dead weight — or worse than a dead weight, a drag — on every aspiration of his to be better than public opinion requires him to be. It is hardly possible for a man in these bonds to attain exalted virtue. If he differs in opinion from the mass; if he sees truths that have not yet dawned on them; or if, feeling in his heart truths they nominally recognise, he would like to live up to those truths more conscientiously than most of mankind — to all such thoughts and desires marriage is the heaviest of drawbacks, unless he is fortunate enough to have a wife as far above the common level as he is himself.
