Chapter Four: What Would Be Gained

(Part 2 of 2)

For in the first place, some sacrifice of personal interest is always required: of social standing, or of money, perhaps even the risk of his means of subsistence. He may be willing to face these sacrifices and risks for himself, but he will pause before imposing them on his family. And his family in this case means his wife and daughters, for he always hopes his sons will feel as he does, and that what he can do without they will do without willingly, in the same cause. But his daughters — their marriages may depend on it; and his wife, who is unable to enter into or understand the objects these sacrifices are made for, who if she thought them worth any sacrifice would think so on trust and solely for his sake, who can share none of the enthusiasm or the self-approval he himself may feel, while the things he is prepared to sacrifice are everything to her: will not the best and most unselfish man hesitate longest before bringing this consequence on her? If it is not the comforts of life but only social standing that is at stake, the burden on his conscience and his feelings is still very severe. Whoever has a wife and children has given hostages to Mrs Grundy. The approval of that potentate may be a matter of indifference to him, but it is of great importance to his wife. The man himself may be above opinion, or may find sufficient compensation in the opinion of people who think as he does. But to the women connected with him he can offer no compensation.

The almost invariable tendency of a wife to throw her influence into the same scale as social standing is sometimes made a reproach to women, and represented as a peculiar mark of feebleness and childishness in them — surely with great injustice. Society makes the whole life of a woman in the comfortable classes one continued self-sacrifice. It exacts from her an unremitting restraint of the whole of her natural inclinations, and the sole return it makes her for what often deserves the name of martyrdom is standing. Her standing is inseparably bound up with her husband's; and after paying the full price for it she finds she is to lose it, for a reason whose force she cannot feel. She has sacrificed her whole life to it, and her husband will not sacrifice to it a whim, a freak, an eccentricity — something the world does not recognise or make allowance for, and which the world will agree with her in thinking a folly, if it thinks no worse of it. The dilemma falls hardest on that very meritorious class of men who, without possessing the talents to cut a figure among those they agree with in opinion, hold their opinion from conviction and feel bound in honour and conscience to serve it, by professing their belief and giving their time, labour and money to anything undertaken on its behalf. The worst case of all is when such men happen to be of a rank and position that by itself neither gives them nor excludes them from what is considered the best society, so that their admission to it depends mainly on what is thought of them personally — and however unexceptionable their breeding and habits, being identified with opinions and public conduct unacceptable to those who set the tone of society would work as an effectual exclusion. Many a woman flatters herself, nine times out of ten quite mistakenly, that nothing prevents her and her husband from moving in the highest society of her neighbourhood — society in which others she knows well, and in the same class of life, mix freely — except that her husband is unfortunately a Dissenter, or has a reputation for mixing in low radical politics. That, she thinks, is what stops George from getting a commission or a place, and Caroline from making an advantageous match, and keeps her and her husband from getting invitations, perhaps honours, that for all she can see they are as well entitled to as some people. With such an influence in every house, either actively exerted or working all the more powerfully for not being stated, is it any wonder that people in general are kept down in that mediocrity of respectability which is becoming a marked characteristic of modern times?

There is another very injurious aspect of the matter that needs considering — the effect not of women's disabilities directly, but of the broad line of difference those disabilities create between the education and character of a woman and those of a man. Nothing can be more unfavourable to that union of thoughts and inclinations which is the ideal of married life. Intimate society between people radically unlike one another is an idle dream. Unlikeness may attract, but it is likeness that keeps, and the suitability of two individuals to give each other a happy life is in proportion to their likeness. While women are so unlike men, it is not surprising that selfish men should feel the need of arbitrary power in their own hands, to cut short at the outset the lifelong conflict of inclinations by deciding every question on the side of their own preference. When people are extremely unlike, there can be no real identity of interest. Very often there is a conscientious difference of opinion between married people on the highest points of duty. Is there any reality in the marriage union where that happens? Yet it is not uncommon anywhere when the woman has any earnestness of character, and it is a very general case indeed in Catholic countries, where she is supported in her dissent by the only other authority she is taught to bow to, the priest. With the usual barefacedness of a power not used to finding itself disputed, the influence of priests over women is attacked by Protestant and Liberal writers less for being bad in itself than because it is a rival authority to the husband and raises a revolt against his infallibility. In England similar differences occasionally exist when an Evangelical wife has allied herself with a husband of a different quality; but in general this source of dissension at least is got rid of by reducing women's minds to such a nullity that they have no opinions but those of Mrs Grundy, or those the husband tells them to have.

Where there is no difference of opinion, mere differences of taste may be enough to detract greatly from the happiness of married life. And though it may stimulate the amorous inclinations of men, it does not conduce to married happiness to exaggerate by differences of education whatever the native differences of the sexes may be. If the married pair are well-bred, well-behaved people, they tolerate each other's tastes; but is mutual toleration what people look forward to when they enter into marriage? These differences of inclination will naturally make their wishes different, unless restrained by affection or duty, on almost every domestic question that arises. What a difference there must be in the society the two of them will wish to visit, or to be visited by! Each will want associates who share their own tastes; the people agreeable to one will be indifferent or positively disagreeable to the other — and yet there can be none who are not common to both, since married people no longer live in different parts of the house and keep totally different visiting lists, as they did in the reign of Louis XV. They cannot help having different wishes about the bringing up of the children; each will want to see their own tastes and feelings reproduced in them. Either there is a compromise, and only half satisfaction for either, or the wife has to give way, often with bitter suffering — and, with or without intention, her hidden influence goes on working against her husband's purposes.

It would of course be extreme folly to suppose that these differences of feeling and inclination exist only because women are brought up differently from men, and that there would be no differences of taste in any imaginable circumstances. But it is not going beyond the mark to say that the distinction in bringing up immensely aggravates those differences and makes them wholly unavoidable. While women are brought up as they are, a man and a woman will only rarely find in one another real agreement of tastes and wishes about daily life. They will generally have to give it up as hopeless, and abandon the attempt to have in the intimate companion of their daily life that *idem velle, idem nolle* — wanting the same things and refusing the same things — which is the acknowledged bond of any society that is really a society. Or, if the man does succeed in getting it, he does so by choosing a woman who is so complete a nullity that she has no *velle* or *nolle* at all, and is as ready to comply with one thing as with another if anybody tells her to. Even this calculation is apt to fail: dullness and lack of spirit are not always a guarantee of the submission so confidently expected from them. But if they were, is this the ideal of marriage? What in that case does the man get by it, except an upper servant, a nurse or a mistress?

On the contrary, when each of two people, instead of being a nothing, is a something; when they are attached to one another and are not too unlike to begin with, then constantly sharing in the same things, helped by their sympathy, draws out the latent capacity of each for taking an interest in the things that at first interested only the other, and works a gradual assimilation of their tastes and characters — partly by the imperceptible modification of each, but more by a real enriching of the two natures, each acquiring the tastes and capacities of the other in addition to its own. This often happens between two friends of the same sex who are much thrown together in daily life; and it would be a common case in marriage, if not the commonest, were it not that the totally different bringing up of the two sexes makes it next to impossible to form a really well-matched union. If that were remedied, then whatever differences there might still be in individual tastes, there would at least be, as a general rule, complete unity and unanimity about the great objects of life. When two people both care about great objects, and are a help and an encouragement to each other in everything concerning them, the minor matters their tastes may differ about are not all-important to them; and there is a foundation for solid friendship of an enduring kind, more likely than anything else to make it, through the whole of life, a greater pleasure to each to give pleasure to the other than to receive it.

So far I have considered the effects on the pleasures and benefits of the marriage union that depend on the mere unlikeness between the wife and the husband. But the harmful tendency is prodigiously aggravated when the unlikeness is inferiority. Mere unlikeness, when it only means a difference of good qualities, may be more a benefit in the way of mutual improvement than a subtraction from comfort. When each envies, and wants and tries to acquire, the other's particular qualities, the difference does not produce a diversity of interest but an increased identity of it, and makes each still more valuable to the other. But when one of the two is much the inferior in mental ability and cultivation, and is not actively attempting with the other's help to rise to the other's level, the whole influence of the connection on the development of the superior one is deteriorating — and still more so in a tolerably happy marriage than in an unhappy one. It is not without penalty that the superior in intellect shuts himself up with an inferior and elects that inferior as his chosen and only completely intimate companion. Any society that is not improving is deteriorating, and the more so the closer and more familiar it is. Even a really superior man almost always begins to deteriorate when he is habitually, as the phrase goes, king of his company — and in his most habitual company the husband who has a wife inferior to him always is. While his self-satisfaction is being incessantly fed on the one hand, on the other he imperceptibly absorbs the ways of feeling and of looking at things that belong to a more limited or more vulgar mind than his own.

This evil differs from many of those dwelt on so far in that it is an increasing one. The association of men with women in daily life is much closer and more complete than it ever was before. Men's lives are more domestic. Formerly their pleasures and chosen occupations were among men and in men's company; their wives had only a fragment of their lives. At present, the progress of civilisation and the turn of opinion against the rough amusements and convivial excesses that used to occupy most men in their hours of relaxation — together with, it must be said, the improved tone of modern feeling about the reciprocal duty binding a husband towards his wife — have thrown a man much more on his home and the people in it for his personal and social pleasures; while the kind and degree of improvement made in women's education has made them to some extent capable of being his companions in ideas and mental tastes, while still leaving them in most cases hopelessly inferior to him. So his desire for mental communion is generally satisfied by a communion from which he learns nothing. An unimproving, unstimulating companionship is substituted for what he might otherwise have been obliged to seek: the society of his equals in powers and his fellows in the higher pursuits. Accordingly we see that young men of the greatest promise generally stop improving as soon as they marry — and, not improving, they inevitably degenerate. If the wife does not push the husband forward, she always holds him back. He stops caring for what she does not care for; he no longer wants, and ends by disliking and avoiding, the society congenial to his former aspirations, which would now shame him for having fallen away from them; his higher faculties of mind and heart stop being called into activity. And with this change coinciding with the new and selfish interests the family creates, after a few years he differs in no material respect from men who have never wished for anything but the common vanities and the common money objects.

What marriage may be in the case of two people of cultivated faculties, identical in opinions and purposes, between whom there exists that best kind of equality — similarity of powers and capacities with reciprocal superiority in them, so that each can enjoy the luxury of looking up to the other, and can take it in turns to have the pleasure of leading and of being led along the path of development — I will not attempt to describe. To those who can conceive it there is no need; to those who cannot, it would seem the dream of an enthusiast. But I maintain, with the profoundest conviction, that this and this alone is the ideal of marriage, and that all opinions, customs and institutions that favour any other notion of it, or turn the conceptions and aspirations connected with it in any other direction, whatever pretences they may be coloured with, are relics of primitive barbarism. The moral regeneration of mankind will only really begin when the most fundamental of the social relations is placed under the rule of equal justice, and when human beings learn to cultivate their strongest sympathy with an equal in rights and in cultivation.

So far, the benefits the world would gain by ceasing to make sex a disqualification for privileges and a badge of subjection have appeared to be social rather than individual: an increase in the general fund of thinking and acting power, and an improvement in the general conditions of the association of men with women. But it would be a grievous understatement of the case to leave out the most direct benefit of all: the unspeakable gain in private happiness to the liberated half of the species, the difference to them between a life of subjection to the will of others and a life of rational freedom. After the primary necessities of food and clothing, freedom is the first and strongest want of human nature. While mankind are lawless, their desire is for lawless freedom. When they have learned to understand the meaning of duty and the value of reason, they incline more and more to be guided and restrained by these in the exercise of their freedom; but they do not on that account desire freedom less, and they do not become willing to accept the will of other people as the representative and interpreter of those guiding principles. On the contrary, the communities in which reason has been most cultivated, and in which the idea of social duty has been most powerful, are the ones that have most strongly asserted the freedom of action of the individual — the liberty of each to govern his conduct by his own sense of duty, and by such laws and social restraints as his own conscience can subscribe to.

Anyone who would rightly appreciate the worth of personal independence as an element of happiness should consider the value he himself puts on it as an ingredient of his own. There is no subject on which there is a greater habitual difference of judgment between a man judging for himself and the same man judging for other people. When he hears others complaining that they are not allowed freedom of action, that their own will has not sufficient influence in the regulation of their affairs, his inclination is to ask what their grievances are, what positive damage they suffer, and in what respect they consider their affairs mismanaged; and if they fail to make out in answer what seems to him a sufficient case, he turns a deaf ear and regards their complaint as the fanciful querulousness of people whom nothing reasonable will satisfy. But he has quite a different standard of judgment when he is deciding for himself. Then the most unexceptionable administration of his interests by a guardian set over him does not satisfy his feelings; his personal exclusion from the deciding authority appears in itself the greatest grievance of all, making it superfluous even to enter into the question of mismanagement. It is the same with nations. What citizen of a free country would listen to any offer of good and skilful administration in return for abdicating his freedom? Even if he could believe that good and skilful administration can exist among a people ruled by a will that is not their own, would not the consciousness of working out their own destiny under their own moral responsibility compensate his feelings for great roughness and imperfection in the details of public affairs? Let him rest assured that whatever he feels on this point, women feel in a fully equal degree.

Everything that has been said or written, from the time of Herodotus to the present, about the ennobling influence of free government — the nerve and spring it gives to all the faculties, the larger and higher objects it presents to the intellect and the feelings, the more unselfish public spirit and the calmer and broader views of duty it engenders, and the generally loftier platform on which it raises the individual as a moral, spiritual and social being — is every particle as true of women as of men. Are these things no important part of individual happiness? Let any man call to mind what he himself felt on emerging from boyhood, from the tutelage and control of even loved and affectionate elders, and entering on the responsibilities of manhood. Was it not like the physical effect of taking off a heavy weight, or of being released from bonds that obstructed him even if they were not otherwise painful? Did he not feel twice as much alive, twice as much a human being, as before? And does he imagine that women have none of these feelings? But it is a striking fact that the satisfactions and mortifications of personal pride, though everything to most men when the case is their own, have less allowance made for them in other people's case, and are less listened to as a ground or a justification for conduct, than any other natural human feelings — perhaps because men compliment them in their own case with the names of so many other qualities that they are seldom conscious how mighty an influence these feelings exercise in their own lives. Their part in the lives and feelings of women is, we may be sure, no less large and powerful. Women are schooled into suppressing them in their most natural and healthy direction, but the internal principle remains, in a different outward form.

An active and energetic mind, if denied liberty, will seek power. Refused the command of itself, it will assert its personality by trying to control others. To allow human beings no existence of their own except what depends on others is to put far too high a premium on bending others to their purposes. Where liberty cannot be hoped for and power can, power becomes the grand object of human desire; those whom others will not leave to the undisturbed management of their own affairs will compensate themselves, if they can, by meddling for their own purposes in the affairs of others. Hence also women's passion for personal beauty and for dress and display, and all the evils that flow from it in the way of mischievous luxury and social immorality. The love of power and the love of liberty are in eternal antagonism. Where there is least liberty, the passion for power is the most ardent and unscrupulous. The desire for power over others can only stop being a depraving agency among mankind when each of them individually is able to do without it — which can only happen where respect for liberty in the personal concerns of each is an established principle.

But it is not only through the sense of personal dignity that the free direction and disposal of their own faculties is a source of individual happiness to human beings, and being fettered and restricted in it a source of unhappiness — and not least to women. There is nothing, after disease, poverty and guilt, so fatal to the pleasurable enjoyment of life as the lack of a worthy outlet for the active faculties. Women who have the cares of a family have this outlet while they have those cares, and it generally suffices for them. But what of the greatly increasing number of women who have had no opportunity of exercising the vocation they are mocked by being told is their proper one? What of the women whose children have been lost to them by death or distance, or have grown up, married and made homes of their own? There are abundant examples of men who, after a life engrossed by business, retire with a competence to the enjoyment, as they hope, of rest, but who, being unable to acquire new interests and excitements to replace the old ones, find that the change to a life of inactivity brings boredom, melancholy and premature death. Yet nobody thinks of the parallel case of so many worthy and devoted women who, having paid what they are told is their debt to society — having brought up a family blamelessly to manhood and womanhood, having kept a house as long as they had a house that needed keeping — are deserted by the sole occupation they have fitted themselves for, and remain with undiminished activity but with no employment for it, unless perhaps a daughter or daughter-in-law is willing to abdicate in their favour the discharge of the same functions in her own younger household. Surely a hard lot for the old age of those who have worthily discharged, as long as it was given them to discharge it, what the world counts their only social duty.

For such women, and for the others to whom this duty has never been committed at all, many of whom pine through life conscious of thwarted vocations and of activities not allowed to expand, the only resources, generally speaking, are religion and charity. But their religion, though it may be a religion of feeling and of ceremonial observance, cannot be a religion of action except in the form of charity. Many of them are by nature admirably fitted for charity; but to practise it usefully, or even without doing mischief, requires the education, the manifold preparation, the knowledge and the thinking powers of a skilful administrator. There are few of the administrative functions of government that a person would not be fit for who is fit to bestow charity usefully. In this as in other cases — pre-eminently in the education of children — the duties permitted to women cannot be performed properly without their being trained for duties which, to the great loss of society, are not permitted to them.

And here let me notice the peculiar way in which the question of women's disabilities is often presented by those who find it easier to draw a ludicrous picture of what they dislike than to answer the arguments for it. When it is suggested that women's executive capacities and prudent counsel might sometimes be found valuable in affairs of state, these lovers of fun hold up to the world's ridicule the image of girls in their teens, or young wives of two or three and twenty, transported bodily, exactly as they are, from the drawing room to the House of Commons. They forget that males are not usually selected at that early age for a seat in Parliament or for responsible political functions. Common sense would tell them that if such trusts were confided to women, it would be to women who, having no special vocation for married life, or preferring another employment of their faculties — as many women even now prefer to marriage some of the few honourable occupations within their reach — had spent the best years of their youth trying to qualify themselves for the pursuits they wished to engage in; or, still more frequently perhaps, to widows or wives of forty or fifty, whose knowledge of life and faculty of government acquired in their families could with the help of appropriate study be made available on a less cramped scale. There is no country in Europe where the ablest men have not frequently experienced, and keenly appreciated, the value of the advice and help of clever and experienced women of the world in attaining both private and public objects; and there are important matters of public administration for which few men are as competent as such women — among others, the detailed control of expenditure.

But what we are discussing now is not society's need of women's services in public business, but the dull and hopeless life to which it so often condemns them by forbidding them to exercise the practical abilities many of them are conscious of, in any wider field than one which for some of them never was, and for others is no longer, open. If anything is vitally important to the happiness of human beings, it is that they should relish their habitual pursuit. This requisite of an enjoyable life is very imperfectly granted, or altogether denied, to a large part of mankind, and for want of it many a life is a failure that has to all appearance every requisite for success. But if circumstances that society is not yet skilful enough to overcome make such failures often unavoidable for the present, society need not inflict them itself. The bad judgment of parents, a young person's own inexperience, or the absence of external opportunities for the congenial vocation and their presence for an uncongenial one condemn numbers of men to spend their lives doing one thing reluctantly and badly when there are other things they could have done well and happily. But on women this sentence is imposed by actual law, and by customs equivalent to law. What colour, race, religion, or in a conquered country nationality, are to some men in unenlightened societies, sex is to all women: a peremptory exclusion from almost every honourable occupation except those that others cannot carry out, or those that others do not think worth accepting. Suffering arising from causes of this kind usually meets with so little sympathy that few people are aware of the great amount of unhappiness even now produced by the feeling of a wasted life. It will grow more frequent still, as increased cultivation creates a greater and greater disproportion between the ideas and faculties of women and the scope society allows to their activity.

When we consider the positive evil caused to the disqualified half of the human race by their disqualification — first in the loss of the most inspiriting and elevating kind of personal enjoyment, and next in the weariness, disappointment and profound dissatisfaction with life that is so often the substitute for it — one feels that among all the lessons men need for carrying on the struggle against the inevitable imperfections of their lot on earth, there is none they need more than not to add to the evils nature inflicts by their jealous and prejudiced restrictions on one another. Their vain fears only substitute other and worse evils for the ones they are idly apprehensive of; while every restraint on the freedom of conduct of any of their fellow creatures — otherwise than by making them answerable for any harm actually caused by it — dries up to that extent the principal fountain of human happiness, and leaves the species less rich, to an incalculable degree, in everything that makes life valuable to the individual human being.
