Introductory: The Problem
=========================

The Problem

Our era has seen an enormous increase in the power to produce wealth. Steam and electricity, better manufacturing processes, labor-saving machinery, larger-scale production, and vastly improved trade networks have multiplied the effectiveness of human labor many times over.

At the dawn of this marvelous age, it was natural to expect -- and people did expect -- that labor-saving inventions would lighten the burden of work and improve the lives of working people. The enormous increase in productive power, it seemed certain, would make real poverty a thing of the past. Imagine if someone from the previous century -- a Benjamin Franklin or a Joseph Priestley -- could have seen, in a vision of the future, the steamship replacing the sailing vessel, the railroad train replacing the wagon, the reaping machine replacing the scythe, the threshing machine replacing the flail. Imagine they could have heard the throb of engines that, in obedience to human will and for the satisfaction of human desire, exert more power than all the people and all the beasts of burden on earth combined. Imagine they could have seen the forest tree transformed into finished lumber -- into doors, window frames, blinds, boxes, and barrels, with hardly the touch of a human hand. The great workshops where boots and shoes are turned out by the crate with less labor than an old-fashioned cobbler could have put into a single sole. The factories where, under the watch of a young worker, cotton becomes cloth faster than hundreds of strong weavers could have managed with their handlooms. Imagine they could have seen steam hammers shaping enormous shafts and mighty anchors, and delicate machinery making tiny watches. The diamond drill cutting through the heart of solid rock, and petroleum lamps sparing the whale. Imagine they could have grasped the enormous savings of labor from improved communication and trade -- sheep slaughtered in Australia eaten fresh in England, and an order placed by a London banker in the afternoon carried out in San Francisco the same morning. If they could have imagined the hundred thousand improvements that these only hint at, what would they have concluded about the condition of humanity?

It would not have seemed like a mere guess. Beyond what the vision showed, they would have felt they could see the rest as clearly as if it were before their eyes. Their hearts would have leaped, their nerves would have thrilled, like someone who from a hilltop spots, just ahead of a thirst-stricken caravan, the living gleam of rustling woods and the glint of laughing waters. Plainly, in their mind's eye, they would have seen these new forces lifting society from its very foundations, raising the poorest above any possibility of want, freeing even the lowest from anxiety about the basic needs of life. They would have seen these servants of knowledge taking on the ancient curse of toil, these muscles of iron and sinews of steel making the poorest worker's life a holiday, in which every noble quality and generous impulse could have room to grow.

And out of these bountiful material conditions, they would have seen arising, as natural consequences, the moral conditions of the golden age that humanity has always dreamed of. Youth no longer stunted and starved. Old age no longer driven by greed. The child at play with the tiger. The person bent over petty concerns suddenly looking up to drink in the glory of the stars! Foul things driven away, fierce things made tame, discord turned to harmony! For how could there be greed where everyone had enough? How could the vice, the crime, the ignorance, the brutality that spring from poverty and the fear of poverty exist where poverty had vanished? Who would grovel where all were free? Who would oppress where all were equals?

More or less vaguely or clearly, these have been the hopes, these the dreams, born of the improvements that give this remarkable century its place in history. They have sunk so deeply into the popular mind as to radically change the currents of thought, reshape beliefs, and displace the most fundamental assumptions. The haunting visions of a better world have not merely grown in splendor and vividness -- their direction has changed. Instead of looking backward at the faint glow of a dying sunset, all the glory of the sunrise now lights up the sky ahead.

It is true that disappointment has followed disappointment, and that discovery after discovery, invention after invention, have neither lightened the toil of those who most need relief nor brought plenty to the poor. But there have been so many things to blame for this failure that, up to our time, the new faith has hardly weakened. We have gained a better appreciation of the difficulties to be overcome, but we have not lost our trust that the direction of the times was toward overcoming them.

Now, however, we are colliding with facts that cannot be mistaken. From all parts of the civilized world come complaints of economic depression -- of workers condemned to involuntary idleness, of capital sitting idle and going to waste, of financial distress among business owners, of want and suffering and anxiety among the working classes. All the dull, deadening pain, all the sharp, maddening anguish that the words "hard times" mean for great masses of people, afflict the world today. This state of affairs, common to societies that differ widely in geography, political systems, tax and financial structures, population density, and social organization, can hardly be explained by local causes. There is distress where large standing armies are maintained, but also where armies are practically nonexistent. There is distress where protective tariffs stupidly and wastefully hamper trade, but also where trade is nearly free. There is distress where autocratic government still prevails, but also where political power is wholly in the hands of the people -- in countries where paper serves as money, and in countries where gold and silver are the only currency. Clearly, beneath all these surface differences, we must look for a common cause.

That there is a common cause -- and that it is either what we call material progress itself, or something closely connected with material progress -- becomes more than a guess when we notice that the symptoms we group together as "economic depression" are simply intensified versions of conditions that always accompany material progress, and that show themselves more clearly and more strongly as progress advances. Where the conditions that material progress everywhere tends toward are most fully realized -- that is, where population is densest, wealth greatest, and the machinery of production and exchange most highly developed -- we find the deepest poverty, the fiercest struggle for existence, and the most involuntary idleness.

It is to the newer countries -- the countries where material progress is still in its early stages -- that workers emigrate in search of higher wages and capital flows in search of higher returns. It is in the older countries -- the countries where material progress has reached its later stages -- that widespread destitution exists amid the greatest abundance. Visit a new community where vigorous settlers are just beginning the race of progress, where the machinery of production and exchange is still rough and inefficient, where the growth of wealth is not yet great enough to allow any class to live in ease and luxury, where the best house is a log cabin or a cloth-and-paper shanty, and the richest person must still do daily work -- and though you will find an absence of wealth and everything that comes with it, you will find no beggars. There is no luxury, but there is no destitution. No one makes an easy living, nor a very good one, but everyone can make a living, and no one who is able and willing to work is crushed by the fear of want.

But as such a community achieves the very conditions that all civilized societies are striving for, and advances up the scale of material progress -- as denser settlement and closer connection with the rest of the world, and greater use of labor-saving machinery, make possible greater efficiencies in production and exchange, and wealth in consequence increases, not just in total but per person -- poverty takes on a darker aspect. Some people get an infinitely better and easier living, but others find it hard to get a living at all. The vagrant arrives with the locomotive, and poorhouses and prisons are as surely the marks of "material progress" as are grand homes, rich warehouses, and magnificent churches. On streets lit by gas and patrolled by uniformed police, beggars wait for passersby, and in the shadow of colleges, libraries, and museums gather the modern barbarians -- the more dangerous invaders that the historian Macaulay warned about.

This fact -- the great fact that poverty and all its companions appear in communities precisely as they develop toward the conditions that material progress creates -- proves that the social problems that emerge wherever a certain stage of progress has been reached do not arise from local circumstances. They are, in one way or another, produced by progress itself.

And, unpleasant as it may be to admit, it is at last becoming clear that the enormous increase in productive power that has marked our century -- and is still accelerating -- has no tendency to eliminate poverty or to lighten the burdens of those who must toil. It simply widens the gulf between rich and poor, and makes the struggle for existence more intense. The march of invention has given humanity powers that the boldest imagination could not have dreamed of a century ago. But in factories where labor-saving machinery has reached its most wonderful development, little children are at work. Wherever the new forces are anything close to fully utilized, large numbers of people are kept alive by charity or live on the edge of needing it. Amid the greatest concentrations of wealth, people die of starvation, and starving infants nurse at empty breasts -- while everywhere the greed for gain and the worship of wealth reveal the power of the fear of want. The promised land retreats before us like a mirage. The fruits of the tree of knowledge turn, as we reach for them, to ashes that crumble at the touch.

It is true that wealth has been greatly increased, and that the average level of comfort, leisure, and refinement has been raised. But these gains are not shared by all. The lowest class has no part in them.1 I do not mean that the condition of the lowest class has improved nowhere and in nothing, but that there is no improvement anywhere that can be credited to increased productive power. What I mean is that the tendency of what we call material progress is in no way to improve the condition of the lowest class in the essentials of a healthy, happy human life. More than that -- it tends to push the lowest class even further down. The new forces, uplifting as they are by nature, do not act on society from underneath, as was long hoped and believed. Instead, they strike at a point between the top and bottom. It is as though an immense wedge were being driven, not underneath society, but through it. Those above the point of separation are lifted up, but those below are crushed down.

This downward pressure is not widely recognized, because it is not visible where a class barely able to survive has long existed. Where the lowest class already lives at the bare minimum, as has been the case for a long time in many parts of Europe, it is impossible for them to sink any lower -- the next step down is death. No tendency toward further depression can easily show itself. But in the development of new settlements into the conditions of older communities, it can be clearly seen that material progress does not merely fail to relieve poverty -- it actually produces it. In the United States, it is plain that squalor and misery, and the vices and crimes that spring from them, increase everywhere as the village grows into a city and advancing development brings the advantages of improved methods of production and exchange. It is in the older and richer regions of the country that poverty and distress among the working classes are becoming most painfully apparent. If there is less deep poverty in San Francisco than in New York, is it not because San Francisco is still behind New York in everything that both cities are striving for? When San Francisco reaches the point where New York now is, who can doubt that there will also be ragged and barefoot children on its streets?

This link between poverty and progress is the great enigma of our times. It is the central fact from which spring the economic, social, and political difficulties that perplex the world, and that statesmanship, philanthropy, and education grapple with in vain. From it come the clouds that darken the future of the most progressive and self-reliant nations. It is the riddle that the Sphinx of Fate puts to our civilization -- and to fail to answer it is to be destroyed. So long as all the increased wealth that modern progress brings goes only to build up great fortunes, to increase luxury, and to sharpen the contrast between the House of Have and the House of Want, progress is not real and cannot last. The reaction must come. The tower leans from its foundations, and every new story only hastens the final collapse. To educate people who are condemned to poverty is only to make them restless. To build political institutions founded on the theoretical equality of all people on top of the most glaring social inequality is to stand a pyramid on its point.

As urgent as this question is, pressing itself painfully upon our attention from every direction, it has not yet received an answer that accounts for all the facts and points to any clear and simple remedy. This is shown by the wildly varying attempts to explain the ongoing economic depression. They reveal not merely a gap between popular ideas and scientific theories, but also that the agreement that should exist among those who share the same general theories breaks down into a chaos of opinion when it comes to practical questions. On high economic authority, we have been told that the depression is caused by overconsumption; on equally high authority, that it is caused by overproduction. Meanwhile, the costs of war, the expansion of railroads, workers' attempts to maintain their wages, the removal of silver from the currency, the printing of paper money, the spread of labor-saving machinery, the opening of new trade routes -- each of these has been separately pointed to as the cause by writers of reputation.

And while the experts disagree, ideas are rapidly gaining ground among ordinary people -- who keenly feel the hurt and are sharply aware of a wrong. The idea that there is an inevitable conflict between capital and labor. That machinery is an evil. That competition must be restrained and interest abolished. That wealth can be created by printing money. That it is the government's duty to provide capital or provide jobs. Such ideas, which place great masses of people -- the holders of ultimate political power -- under the influence of charlatans and demagogues, are dangerous. But they cannot be successfully fought until economics provides an answer to the great question that is consistent with all its teachings and that makes sense to ordinary people.

It must be within the power of economics to give such an answer. For economics is not a set of dogmas. It is the explanation of a certain set of facts. It is the science that, in the sequence of certain phenomena, seeks to trace causes and effects, just as the physical sciences do with other phenomena. It rests on firm ground. The premises from which it draws its conclusions are truths of the highest order -- principles we all recognize, on which we safely base the reasoning and actions of everyday life, and which boil down to the common-sense version of a physical law: that people seek to satisfy their desires with the least effort. Starting from this solid foundation, its methods -- which consist simply of identifying and separating out different factors -- carry the same certainty. In this sense, economics is as exact a science as geometry, which starts from similarly self-evident truths about space, reaches its conclusions by similar methods, and produces conclusions that, when valid, should be equally obvious. And although in economics we cannot test our theories by artificially controlled experiments the way some other sciences can, we can apply tests that are no less conclusive -- by comparing societies where different conditions exist, or by mentally isolating, combining, adding, or removing forces whose direction we already know.

In the following pages, I propose to attempt to solve, by the methods of economics, the great problem I have outlined. I propose to find the law that links poverty to progress and increases want alongside advancing wealth. And I believe that in explaining this paradox, we will also find the explanation of those recurring waves of economic paralysis that, when viewed in isolation from larger patterns, seem so baffling. Properly begun and carefully pursued, such an investigation must yield a conclusion that will stand every test, and that, as truth, will fit together with all other truth. For in the chain of cause and effect, there is no accident. Every effect has a cause, and every fact implies a preceding fact.

That economics, as currently taught, does not explain the persistence of poverty amid advancing wealth in a way that satisfies people's deep-seated sense of justice; that the genuine truths it does teach stand unconnected and disjointed; that it has failed to win acceptance in the popular mind, as truth, even unpleasant truth, eventually must; that, on the contrary, after a century of development, during which it has occupied some of the most brilliant and powerful intellects, it should be dismissed by politicians, rejected by the masses, and regarded by many educated and thoughtful people as a pseudo-science where nothing is settled or can be settled -- all of this must, it seems to me, be due not to any failing of the science when properly pursued, but to some false step in its premises, or some overlooked factor in its calculations. And since such mistakes are generally hidden by the respect paid to authority, I propose in this investigation to take nothing for granted, but to test even accepted theories against first principles -- and if they fail the test, to question the facts anew in an effort to discover their true law.

I propose to dodge no question, to shrink from no conclusion, but to follow truth wherever it may lead. The responsibility of seeking the law falls on us, for in the very heart of our civilization today, women faint and little children cry out in suffering. But what that law may prove to be is not our concern. If the conclusions we reach run counter to our prejudices, let us not flinch. If they challenge institutions that have long been considered wise and natural, let us not turn back.
