<modernized_text>
Book VI, Chapter 1: Insufficiency of Remedies Currently Advocated

I

Insufficiency of Remedies Currently Advocated


In tracing the cause of increasing poverty amid advancing wealth back to its source, we've already discovered the remedy. But before we turn to that part of our argument, it will be worth reviewing the solutions that are currently relied on or being proposed. The remedy our conclusions point to is at once radical and simple -- so radical that, on one hand, it won't get a fair hearing as long as anyone still has faith in less drastic measures; so simple that, on the other hand, its real power and scope are likely to be overlooked until the effects of more elaborate plans have been assessed.

The proposals and trends that show up in current writing and debate as supposed cures for poverty and hardship among the masses can be grouped into six categories. I don't mean there are six distinct political parties or schools of thought -- only that, for the purposes of our inquiry, the prevailing opinions and proposed remedies can be usefully sorted this way. Proposals that we'll examine separately are often combined in practice.

Many people still cling to the comforting belief that material progress will eventually eliminate poverty, and many others look to restraint on population growth as the most effective solution. But we've already shown the flaws in both of these views. Let us now consider what might be hoped for:


1. From greater economy in government.

2. From better education of the working classes and improved habits of hard work and thrift.

3. From labor unions pushing for higher wages.

4. From cooperation between labor and capital.

5. From government direction and intervention.

6. From a more widespread distribution of land.


Under these six headings, I believe we can review, in their essential forms, all the hopes and proposals for relieving social distress that fall short of the simple but far-reaching measure I'm going to propose.



I

From Greater Economy in Government


Until very recently, it was an article of faith among Americans -- a belief shared by European liberals -- that the poverty of the downtrodden masses of the Old World was caused by aristocratic and monarchical institutions. This belief has rapidly faded as the United States, under its republican institutions, has begun to show social distress of the same kind, if not the same severity, as Europe's. But social distress is still widely blamed on the enormous burdens that existing governments impose -- the huge national debts, the military and naval establishments, the extravagance that's characteristic of republican rulers just as much as monarchs, and especially characteristic of big-city government. To these burdens we must add, in the United States, the robbery involved in the protective tariff, which for every twenty-five cents it puts in the treasury takes a dollar -- and maybe four or five -- out of the consumer's pocket. There does seem to be an obvious connection between the immense sums taken from the people this way and the hardships of the lower classes, and it's natural, on first glance, to suppose that reducing these enormous and needless burdens would make it easier for the poorest to get by. But if we consider the matter in light of the economic principles we've already traced out, we'll see that this wouldn't actually be the result. A reduction in the amount that taxation takes from a community's total output would simply be equivalent to an increase in the power of net production. In effect, it would add to the productive power of labor in exactly the same way as increasing population density and improvements in technology do. And just as the advantage in those cases goes -- and must go -- to landowners in the form of higher rent, so would the advantage in this case.

From the output of England's labor and capital, the country currently supports the burden of an immense national debt, an established church, an expensive royal family, a large number of people in do-nothing government jobs, a great army, and a great navy. Now suppose the debt were repudiated, the church disestablished, the royal family set adrift to make their own living, the holders of fake government jobs cut off, the army disbanded, and the officers and sailors of the navy discharged and the ships sold. An enormous reduction in taxation would become possible. There would be a huge addition to the net output remaining to be divided among those involved in production. But it would only be the same kind of addition that improvements in technology have been constantly making for a long time, and not as great an addition as steam and machinery have made in the last twenty or thirty years. And since those additions haven't relieved poverty but have only increased rent, this one would do the same. English landowners would reap the entire benefit. I won't argue that if all these things could be done suddenly, and without the destruction and expense of a revolution, there might be a temporary improvement in the condition of the lowest class. But such a sudden and peaceful reform is clearly impossible. And even if it weren't, any temporary improvement would eventually be swallowed up by increased land values, through the same process we now see happening in the United States.

And the same holds true in the United States. If we were to reduce public spending to the lowest possible point, and cover it through revenue-based taxation, the benefit certainly couldn't be greater than what the railroads have brought. There would be more wealth left in the hands of the people as a whole, just as the railroads have put more wealth in their hands. But the same inexorable laws of distribution would operate. The condition of those who live by their labor would not ultimately be improved.

A dim awareness of this pervades -- or, rather, is beginning to pervade -- the masses, and it's one of the grave political difficulties closing in around the American republic. Those who have nothing but their labor, and especially the urban working poor -- a growing class -- care little about government waste, and in many cases are inclined to see it as a good thing: "providing jobs" or "putting money in circulation." Boss Tweed, who robbed New York the way a guerrilla chief might plunder a captured town (and who was just a representative example of the new breed of political bandits seizing control of all our cities' governments), was undoubtedly popular with a majority of voters, even though his thievery was notorious and his spoils were displayed in big diamonds and lavish personal spending. After his indictment, he was triumphantly elected to the state Senate. Even as a recaptured fugitive, he was frequently cheered on his way from court to prison. He had robbed the public treasury of many millions, but the working poor felt he hadn't robbed them. And the verdict of economics is the same as theirs.

Let me be clearly understood. I'm not saying that government economy isn't desirable -- only that reducing government expenses can have no direct effect in eliminating poverty or raising wages, as long as land is monopolized.

Although this is true, even with sole regard to the interests of the lowest class, every effort should be made to keep down useless spending. The more complex and extravagant government becomes, the more it turns into a power separate from and independent of the people, and the harder it becomes to bring real questions of public policy to a popular decision. Look at our elections in the United States -- what do they turn on? The most momentous problems are pressing on us, yet there's so much money in politics, and so many personal interests at stake, that the most important questions of government barely get considered. The average American voter has prejudices, party loyalties, and vague notions of a certain kind, but gives about as much thought to the fundamental questions of government as a streetcar horse does to the profits of the line. If this weren't the case, so many longstanding abuses couldn't have survived, and so many new ones couldn't have been added. Anything that tends to make government simpler and cheaper tends to put it under the people's control and to bring truly important questions to the front. But no reduction in government expenses can, by itself, cure or lessen the evils that arise from the constant tendency toward unequal distribution of wealth.



II

From the Spread of Education and Improved Habits of Hard Work and Thrift


There is, and always has been, a widespread belief among the more comfortable classes that the poverty and suffering of the masses are caused by their lack of hard work, thrift, and intelligence. This belief, which soothes the conscience and flatters with its suggestion of superiority, is probably even more widespread in countries like the United States, where everyone is politically equal and where, because the society is so new, the division into classes has been between individuals rather than between old families, than it is in older countries where the lines of separation have been drawn longer and more sharply. It's only natural for those who can trace their own better circumstances to the superior work ethic and thrift that gave them their start, and the superior intelligence that let them seize every opportunity,44 to imagine that those who remain poor simply lack these qualities.

But anyone who has grasped the laws of distribution, as we've traced them out in previous chapters, will see the mistake in this idea. The fallacy is like claiming that every runner in a race could win. That any one of them might win is true. That every one of them could win is impossible.

Here's why. As soon as land acquires value, wages -- as we've seen -- don't depend on the real earnings or output of labor, but on what's left over after rent is taken out. And when all the land is monopolized, as it is everywhere except in the newest communities, rent must drive wages down to the point where the lowest-paid workers can just barely live and reproduce. Wages are forced to a minimum set by what's called the standard of comfort -- the level of necessities and small luxuries that, by force of habit, the working classes demand as the lowest they'll accept while still maintaining their numbers. This being the case, hard work, skill, thrift, and intelligence can only help an individual to the extent that they're above the general level -- just as speed can help a runner only to the extent that it exceeds that of the other runners. If one person works harder, or with superior skill or intelligence, they'll get ahead. But if the average level of effort, skill, or intelligence is raised across the board, the increased effort will only earn the old rate of wages, and whoever wants to get ahead will have to work harder still.

An individual might save money from their wages by living the way Benjamin Franklin did during his apprenticeship and early working days, when he decided to try vegetarianism. And many poor families might be made more comfortable by being taught to prepare the cheap dishes Franklin tried to limit his employer Keimer's appetite to -- as a condition of Franklin accepting the job of debating opponents of the new religion Keimer wanted to found.45 But if working people generally came to live that way, wages would eventually fall by the same amount, and whoever wanted to get ahead through frugality, or to relieve poverty by teaching it, would have to invent some still cheaper way of keeping body and soul together. If, under current conditions, American workers came down to the Chinese standard of living, they'd eventually have to come down to the Chinese standard of wages. If English laborers were content with the rice diet and scanty clothing of the Bengali worker, labor would soon be as poorly paid in England as in Bengal. The introduction of the potato into Ireland was expected to improve the condition of the poorer classes by increasing the gap between the wages they received and their cost of living. What actually happened was a rise in rent and a drop in wages. And when the potato blight came, famine ravaged a population that had already lowered its standard of comfort so far that the next step was starvation.

Similarly, if one person works more hours than the average, they'll increase their earnings. But the wages of everyone can't be increased this way. It's well known that in occupations where the hours are long, wages are no higher than where hours are shorter -- generally the reverse. The longer the working day, the more helpless the worker becomes: the less time they have to look around, develop other abilities beyond those their job requires, and the less able they are to switch occupations or take advantage of opportunities. And in the same way, an individual worker who gets their spouse and children to help may increase the family income. But in occupations where it's become customary for the whole family to supplement the main earner's work, the wages earned by the entire family don't, on average, exceed what one worker earns in occupations where only one person works. Swiss family labor in watchmaking competes in cheapness with American machinery. The Bohemian cigar makers of New York, who work -- men, women, and children -- in their tenement-house rooms, have driven the price of cigar making below what the Chinese in San Francisco were getting.

These general facts are well known. They're fully recognized in standard economics textbooks, where, however, they're explained by the Malthusian theory that population tends to multiply up to the limit of what the land can support. The true explanation, as I've shown in detail, is the tendency of rent to reduce wages.

As for the effects of education, it may be worth saying a few words specifically, because there's a common tendency to attribute to it something almost magical. But education is only education to the extent that it helps a person use their natural abilities more effectively -- and a great deal of what we call education fails to do this. I remember a little girl, pretty far along in her school geography and astronomy, who was amazed to discover that the ground in her mother's backyard really was the surface of the earth. If you talk to them, you'll find that a good deal of the knowledge of many college graduates is much like that little girl's. They seldom think any better, and sometimes not as well, as people who never went to college.

A gentleman who had spent many years in Australia and knew the Aboriginal people's customs intimately (the Reverend Dr. Bleesdale), after describing some instances of their remarkable skill in using their weapons, predicting changes in wind and weather, and trapping the shyest birds, once said to me: "I think it's a great mistake to look on these people as ignorant. Their knowledge is different from ours, but within it they're generally better educated. As soon as they begin to toddle, they're taught to play with little boomerangs and other weapons, to observe and to judge. By the time they're old enough to take care of themselves, they're fully able to do so -- in fact, in relation to the kind of knowledge they need, they're what I'd call well-educated. Which is more than I can say for many of our young people who've had what we call the best advantages but who enter adulthood unable to do anything either for themselves or for others."

Be that as it may, it's clear that intelligence -- which is or should be the goal of education -- until it drives and enables the masses to discover and remove the cause of unequal distribution of wealth, can only affect wages by increasing the effective power of labor. It has the same effect as increased skill or effort. And it can raise any individual's wages only to the extent that it makes them superior to others. When reading and writing were rare accomplishments, a clerk commanded high respect and large wages. But now, the ability to read and write has become so nearly universal as to give no advantage. Among the Chinese, literacy seems virtually universal, but wages in China touch the lowest possible point. The spread of intelligence -- except to the extent that it makes people dissatisfied with a system that condemns producers to a life of toil while non-producers lounge in luxury -- cannot tend to raise wages generally, or in any way improve the condition of the lowest class, the foundation of society, who must rest on the ground no matter how high the structure above them is built. No increase in the effective power of labor can raise general wages, as long as rent swallows up all the gains. This isn't merely a deduction from principles -- it's a fact, proved by experience. The growth of knowledge and the march of invention have multiplied the effective power of labor over and over again without raising wages. In England there are over a million people on public relief. In the United States, poorhouses are growing in number and wages are declining.

It's true that greater effort and skill, greater prudence and higher intelligence are, as a rule, found alongside a better material condition among the working classes. But this is effect, not cause -- as the relationship between the facts shows. Wherever the material condition of working people has improved, improvement in their personal qualities has followed. Wherever their material condition has worsened, these qualities have deteriorated. But nowhere can improvement in material condition be shown to result from the increased effort, skill, prudence, or intelligence of a class condemned to toil for a bare living -- though these qualities, once gained (or rather, their companion -- an improved standard of comfort), offer strong and often sufficient resistance to a decline in material condition.

The fact is that the qualities that raise humans above animals are built on top of the qualities we share with animals. It's only when people are freed from the demands of their animal nature that their intellectual and moral nature can grow. Force someone to drudge for the bare necessities of survival, and they'll lose the motivation to be productive -- the motivation that's the parent of skill -- and will do only what they're forced to do. Make their condition such that it can't get much worse, while there's little hope that anything they do will make it much better, and they'll stop thinking beyond today. Deny them leisure -- and by leisure I don't mean lack of work, but freedom from the *need* that forces them into work they hate -- and you can't make them intelligent, even by running the child through school and providing the adult with a newspaper.

It's true that improvement in the material condition of a people or class may not show immediately in mental and moral improvement. Higher wages may at first be spent on idleness and bad habits. But they will ultimately bring increased effort, skill, intelligence, and thrift. Comparisons between different countries, between different classes in the same country, between the same people at different periods, and between the same people when their conditions change through emigration, show one invariable result: these personal qualities appear as material conditions improve, and disappear as material conditions decline. Poverty is Bunyan's Slough of Despond -- the swamp of despair from *The Pilgrim's Progress* -- into which good books may be tossed forever without effect. To make people hardworking, prudent, skillful, and intelligent, they must be freed from want. If you would have the slave show the virtues of a free person, you must first make them free.



III

From Labor Unions


It's clear from the laws of distribution, as previously traced, that labor unions can raise wages -- and not at the expense of other workers, as is sometimes claimed, nor at the expense of capital, as is generally believed, but ultimately at the expense of rent. The idea that no general increase in wages can be won through collective action, or that any increase in particular wages must reduce other wages or eat into the profits of capital, or both -- these ideas spring from the mistaken notion that wages are drawn from capital. The flaw in these ideas is demonstrated not only by the laws of distribution as we've worked them out, but by experience so far. The many examples of wages being raised in particular trades through union action have nowhere shown any effect in lowering wages in other trades or reducing the rate of profit. Except as it may affect an employer's fixed capital or current contracts, a drop in wages can benefit, and an increase can harm, an employer only to the extent that it gives them an advantage or puts them at a disadvantage compared to other employers. The employer who first manages to cut workers' wages, or is first forced to pay higher ones, gains an advantage or suffers a disadvantage relative to competitors -- but that edge disappears when the change spreads to everyone. However, to the extent that the wage change affects existing contracts or inventory, by changing relative production costs, it may represent a real gain or loss to a specific employer -- though this gain or loss, being purely relative, disappears when we consider the whole community. And if the wage change shifts relative demand, it may make capital that's fixed in machinery, buildings, or other forms more or less profitable. But a new equilibrium is soon reached, because -- especially in a growing country -- fixed capital is only somewhat less mobile than circulating capital. If there's too little in a certain form, the natural tendency of capital to flow into that form soon brings it up to the needed amount. If there's too much, the halt in new investment soon restores the balance.

But while a change in wages in any particular occupation may shift relative demand for labor, it can produce no change in the *total* demand. For instance, suppose a union of workers in some particular industry raises wages in one country, while a combination of employers cuts wages in the same industry in another country. If the change is big enough, demand in the first country will now be partly met by imports of those goods from the second country. But clearly, this increase in one kind of imports must mean either a corresponding decrease in imports of other kinds, or a corresponding increase in exports. A country can only demand and obtain the products of another country's labor and capital by trading the products of its own. The idea that lowering wages can increase a country's trade, or that raising wages can diminish it, is as baseless as the idea that a country's prosperity can be boosted by taxes on imports or damaged by removing trade restrictions. If all wages in a particular country were doubled, that country would continue to export and import the same things, in the same proportions -- because trade is determined not by absolute but by relative cost of production. But if wages in some industries were doubled while in others they weren't raised at all, or not raised as much, there would be a change in the mix of things imported, but no change in the overall balance between exports and imports.

While most of the objections raised against unions pushing for higher wages are thus baseless, and while their success can't reduce other wages, or cut into the profits of capital, or harm national prosperity, the difficulties standing in the way of effective labor organizing are so great that the good that can be accomplished is extremely limited, and the process carries inherent drawbacks.

Raising wages in a particular occupation or group of occupations -- which is all any union has yet attempted -- is clearly a task that gets progressively harder. The higher the wages in any particular trade are pushed above their normal level relative to other wages, the stronger the forces pushing them back. For example, if a printers' union, through a successful or threatened strike, raises the wages of typesetting ten percent above the normal rate compared to other wages, supply and demand are immediately affected. On one hand, there's a tendency to reduce the amount of typesetting demanded. On the other, the higher wages tend to attract more typesetters in ways even the strongest union can't entirely prevent. If the increase is twenty percent, these pressures are much stronger. At fifty percent, stronger still, and so on. So in practice -- even in countries like England, where the lines between different trades are much more distinct and harder to cross than in countries like the United States -- what unions can do in the way of raising wages, even when supporting each other, is relatively small. And even this small gain is confined to their own sphere and doesn't reach the lower layer of unorganized workers, whose condition most needs relief and ultimately determines the condition of everyone above them. The only way wages could be raised substantially and permanently through this method would be through a universal combination, like the one the International Workers' Association aimed at, that would include workers of all kinds. But such a combination can be considered practically impossible, because the difficulties of organizing -- already great in the highest-paid and smallest trades -- become greater and greater as you go down the industrial ladder.

And in the struggle of endurance -- the only method by which unions refusing to work below a certain minimum can actually force wages up -- we must not forget who the real opponents are. It's not labor versus capital. It's workers on one side and landowners on the other. If the contest were between labor and capital, it would be on much more equal terms. Capital's ability to hold out is only slightly greater than labor's. Capital not only stops earning anything when it's not being used, but it goes to waste -- since in nearly all its forms it can only be maintained by constant replacement. But land doesn't starve like workers or go to waste like capital. Its owners can wait. They may be inconvenienced, it's true, but what's merely an inconvenience to them means ruin for capital and starvation for labor.

The agricultural laborers in certain parts of England are currently trying to organize to get an increase in their miserably low wages. If it were capital receiving the enormous difference between what their labor actually produces and the pittance they get, they would only need to form an effective union to succeed -- because the farmers, their direct employers, can afford to go without labor barely any better than the laborers can afford to go without wages. But the farmers can't give much without a reduction in rent. So the real struggle must come between the landowners and the laborers. Suppose the organization were so thorough as to include all agricultural laborers, and prevented anyone else from taking their places. The laborers refuse to work unless wages are substantially raised. The farmers can only pay the increase by securing a substantial reduction in rent, and they have no way to back their demands except by the same method the laborers use: refusing to continue production. If farming thus comes to a standstill, the landowners would lose only their rent, while the land actually improved by lying fallow. But the laborers would starve. And if English workers of all kinds were united in one grand league for a general increase of wages, the real contest would be the same, under the same conditions. Wages could only go up at the expense of rent. And in a general standstill, landowners could survive, while workers of every kind would starve or emigrate. The owners of the land of England are, by virtue of their ownership, the masters of England. So true is the old saying: "To whomsoever the soil at any time belongs, to him belong the fruits of it." Power and privilege follow the ownership of land, and ordinary people can never regain their power until that ownership is reclaimed. What is true of England is true everywhere.

It may be said that such a complete halt in production could never happen. That's true -- but only because no such thorough combination of labor as might produce it is possible. Yet the fixed and definite nature of land enables landowners to combine much more easily and effectively than either workers or capitalists. History provides many examples of how easy and effective their combination is. And the absolute necessity for land, combined with the certainty in all growing countries that its value will increase, produces among landowners -- without any formal agreement -- all the effects that the most rigorous organization of workers or capitalists could produce. Take away a worker's opportunity for employment, and they'll soon be desperate to get work on any terms. But when the receding wave of speculation leaves the stated price of land clearly above its real value, anyone who has lived in a growing country knows with what stubbornness landowners hold on.

Beyond these practical difficulties with the strategy of forcing higher wages through endurance, there are inherent drawbacks in such methods that workers shouldn't ignore. I speak without prejudice -- I'm still an honorary member of the union I always loyally supported while working at my trade. But consider: the methods available to a trade union are necessarily destructive. Its organization is necessarily authoritarian. A strike -- the only weapon by which a union can enforce its demands -- is a destructive contest, much like the one proposed by an eccentric known as "The Money King" in early San Francisco, who challenged a man who had taunted him about his stinginess to go down to the wharf and take turns tossing twenty-dollar gold pieces into the bay until one of them gave in. The endurance struggle of a strike is really what it's often been compared to -- a war. And like all war, it destroys wealth. The organization required for it must, like the organization for war, be authoritarian. Just as even someone who would fight for freedom must, upon entering an army, give up personal freedom and become a mere cog in a great machine, so it must be with workers who organize for a strike. These combinations therefore tend to destroy the very things workers seek through them -- wealth and freedom.

There's an ancient Hindu method of compelling payment of a legitimate debt, traces of which the legal scholar Sir Henry Maine found in the laws of the Irish Brehons. It's called "sitting dharna" -- the creditor tries to enforce the debt by sitting down at the debtor's door and refusing to eat or drink until they're paid.

Labor unions use a similar method. In their strikes, they sit dharna. But unlike the Hindu, they don't have the power of superstition to back them up.



IV

From Cooperation


It is now, and has been for some time, fashionable to preach cooperation as the ultimate remedy for the grievances of the working classes. But unfortunately for cooperation as a cure for social ills, these ills -- as we've seen -- don't arise from any conflict between labor and capital. And if cooperation were universal, it couldn't raise wages or relieve poverty. Here's why.

Cooperation is of two kinds: cooperation in supply and cooperation in production. Cooperation in supply, no matter how far it goes in cutting out middlemen, only reduces the cost of exchanges. It's simply a way to save labor and eliminate risk, and its effect on distribution can only be the same as all the improvements and inventions that have so wonderfully cheapened and streamlined trade in modern times -- namely, to increase rent. And cooperation in production is simply a return to the form of wages that still prevails in the whaling industry, where it's called a "lay." It's the substitution of proportional wages for fixed wages -- a substitution that pops up occasionally in almost all types of work. Or, if the workers handle the management themselves while the capitalist simply takes a share of the net output, it's just the system that has prevailed widely in European agriculture since the days of the Roman Empire -- the sharecropping system. All that's claimed for cooperation in production is that it makes workers more energetic and productive -- in other words, that it increases the efficiency of labor. Its effect therefore goes in the same direction as the steam engine, the cotton gin, the reaping machine -- everything that material progress consists of -- and it can only produce the same result: the increase of rent.

It's a striking proof of how basic principles get ignored when dealing with social problems that current economics writing attaches so much importance to cooperation as a way of raising wages and relieving poverty. That it can have no such general tendency is clear.

Setting aside all the difficulties that currently beset cooperation in either supply or production, and suppose it expanded so far as to replace present methods -- that cooperative stores connected producer and consumer at minimum expense, and cooperative workshops, factories, farms, and mines eliminated the employing capitalist who pays fixed wages while greatly increasing the efficiency of labor. What then? Simply that it would become possible to produce the same amount of wealth with less labor, and consequently that the owners of land -- the source of all wealth -- could demand a greater amount of wealth for the use of their land. This isn't mere theory; it's proved by experience and existing facts. Improved methods and improved machinery have exactly the effect that cooperation aims at -- reducing the cost of getting goods to consumers and increasing the efficiency of labor. And it's in these respects that older countries have the advantage over new settlements. But as experience has abundantly shown, improvements in the methods and machinery of production and trade have no tendency to improve the condition of the lowest class. Wages are lower and poverty deeper where trade operates at minimum cost and production has the benefit of the best machinery. The advantage simply adds to rent.

But what about cooperation between producers and landowners? That would simply amount to paying rent in kind -- the same arrangement under which much land is rented in California and the Southern states, where the landowner gets a share of the crop. Except as a matter of calculation, it's no different from the English system of a fixed money rent. Call it cooperation if you like -- the terms of the deal would still be determined by the laws that govern rent, and wherever land was monopolized, any increase in productive power would simply give landowners the power to demand a larger share.

The reason so many people believe cooperation is the answer to "the labor question" is that, where it's been tried, it has in many cases visibly improved the condition of those directly involved. But this is simply because these cases are isolated. Just as hard work, thrift, or skill may improve the condition of workers who possess these qualities to a higher degree, but stop having this effect when the improvement becomes general, so a special advantage in obtaining supplies or a special boost to some workers' efficiency may bring benefits that would vanish as soon as these improvements spread widely enough to affect the overall distribution of wealth. The truth is that, aside perhaps from its educational effects, cooperation can produce no general results that competition wouldn't also produce. Just as cheap cash-and-carry stores have a similar effect on prices as cooperative supply associations, so does competition in production lead to a similar arrangement of forces and division of proceeds as cooperative production would. The reason increasing productive power doesn't increase the reward of labor is not because of competition, but because competition is one-sided. Land -- without which there can be no production -- is monopolized, and the competition of producers for its use forces wages to a minimum and hands all the advantage of increasing productive power to landowners, in the form of higher rents and rising land values. Destroy this monopoly, and competition could only serve the purpose that cooperation aims at -- giving each person what they fairly earn. Destroy this monopoly, and industry must become the cooperation of equals.



V

From Government Direction and Intervention


The limits within which I want to keep this book won't allow a detailed examination of every proposal for relieving or eliminating poverty through government regulation of industry and accumulation -- proposals that, in their most thoroughgoing form, are called socialistic. Nor is it necessary, since the same flaws run through them all. These flaws are: the substitution of government direction for the play of individual initiative, and the attempt to achieve by restriction what can better be achieved by freedom. I'll have more to say later about the truths contained in socialist ideas, but it's clear that anything that involves regulation and restriction is bad in itself, and shouldn't be resorted to if there's any other way to accomplish the same end. Take, for instance, one of the simplest and mildest measures in this category -- a graduated tax on incomes. The goal it aims at -- reducing or preventing immense concentrations of wealth -- is good. But the means involves employing a large number of officials with intrusive powers, creating temptations to bribery, perjury, and every other form of evasion that breeds a corruption of public morals, puts a premium on dishonesty and a tax on conscience. And ultimately, to the extent that the tax actually works, it weakens the incentive to accumulate wealth -- one of the powerful engines of industrial progress. Meanwhile, if the elaborate schemes for regulating everything and finding a place for everybody could be carried out, we'd have a society resembling ancient Peru, or the one the Jesuits -- to their eternal credit -- established and long maintained in Paraguay.

I won't say that such a state wouldn't be better than the one we now seem to be heading toward. In ancient Peru, though production operated under enormous disadvantages -- they lacked iron and domesticated animals -- there was no such thing as want, and the people went to their work singing. But this we don't need to debate. Socialism in anything approaching such a form is something modern society cannot successfully attempt. The only force that has ever proved adequate to make it work -- a strong and definite religious faith -- is absent and growing weaker every day. We've passed out of the socialism of the tribal state and can't reenter it except by going backward in a way that would involve anarchy and perhaps barbarism. Our governments, as is already painfully obvious, would break down in the attempt. Instead of an intelligent assignment of duties and earnings, we'd get a Roman-style distribution of free grain, and the demagogue would soon become the dictator.

The ideal of socialism is grand and noble. And I'm convinced it's possible to achieve. But such a state of society can't be manufactured -- it must grow. Society is an organism, not a machine. It can live only through the individual life of its parts. In the free and natural development of all the parts, the harmony of the whole will be secured. All that's necessary for social regeneration is contained in the motto of those Russian reformers sometimes called Nihilists: "Land and Liberty!"



VI

From a More Widespread Distribution of Land


There's a rapidly growing feeling that the way land is owned is somehow connected to the social distress that shows up in the most progressive countries. But this feeling mostly expresses itself in proposals for a more even division of landed property -- in England, through free trade in land, tenant rights, or equal partition of estates among heirs; in the United States, through limits on the size of individual holdings. It has also been proposed in England that the state should buy out the landlords, and in the United States that money should be granted to help settle colonies on public lands. The first proposal we'll set aside for now. The second, as far as its distinctive feature goes, falls into the category of government measures we just considered. It needs no argument to show what abuses and corruption grants of public money or credit would lead to.

How what English writers call "free trade in land" -- the removal of duties and restrictions on property transfers -- could actually promote smaller land ownership in agricultural areas, I can't see, though it might have some effect with urban property. Removing restrictions on buying and selling would merely let land ownership take on whatever form it naturally tends toward more quickly. And the tendency in Great Britain is clearly toward concentration, as shown by the fact that, despite the difficulties created by the high cost of transfers, land ownership has been and is steadily concentrating there. That this tendency is a general one is shown by the same process of concentration happening in the United States. I say this without hesitation, even though statistical tables are sometimes cited to show a different trend. But it's easy to see how, in a country like the United States, land ownership may be truly concentrating even while census tables show a decline in the average size of holdings. As land is brought into use and, with population growth, shifts from a lower to a higher or more intensive use, the size of holdings tends to shrink. A small cattle range would be a large farm. A small farm would be a large orchard, vineyard, nursery, or vegetable garden. And a patch of land that would be small even for those purposes would make a very large piece of city property. So the growth of population, which puts land to higher and more intensive uses, naturally reduces the size of holdings -- a process very visible in new countries. But alongside this can go a tendency toward concentration of ownership that, though invisible in tables showing average holding sizes, is just as real. Average holdings of one acre in a city may represent a much greater concentration of ownership than average holdings of 640 acres in a newly settled township. I mention this to show the flaw in the conclusions drawn from tables that are frequently paraded in the United States to claim that land monopoly is a problem that will cure itself. On the contrary, the proportion of landowners to the total population is constantly shrinking.

And there is in the United States, just as in Great Britain, a strong tendency toward the concentration of land ownership in farming. Just as in England and Ireland small farms are being absorbed into larger ones, so in New England -- according to reports from the Massachusetts Bureau of Labor Statistics -- the size of farms is increasing. This tendency is even more clearly visible in the newer states and territories. Only a few years ago, under the style of farming common in the northern United States, a 320-acre farm would have been a large one anywhere -- probably as much as one person could cultivate effectively. In California today, there are farms (not cattle ranges) of five, ten, twenty, forty, and sixty thousand acres, while the model farm of Dakota covers 100,000 acres. The reason is obvious. It's the application of machinery to agriculture and the general trend toward large-scale production. The same force that replaced many independent hand-loom weavers with the factory and its army of workers is now making itself felt in farming.

Now, the existence of this trend shows two things. First, any measures that merely permit or encourage the division of land into smaller holdings would be ineffective. Second, any measures that would force such division would tend to reduce production. If large farms can be cultivated more cheaply than small ones, restricting ownership to small parcels will reduce the total production of wealth. To the extent that such restrictions are imposed and take effect, they will tend to diminish the overall productivity of labor and capital.

The effort to secure a fairer distribution of wealth through such restrictions therefore carries the drawback of shrinking the amount to be distributed. The strategy is like the old story of the monkey dividing a piece of cheese between two cats: he evened things up by taking a bite off the bigger piece.

But this isn't the only objection, and with every proposal to restrict land ownership, it grows stronger the more effective the proposed measure would be. There's a further and fatal objection: restriction won't achieve the only end worth pursuing -- a fair division of what's produced. It won't reduce rent, and therefore it can't increase wages. It may make the comfortable classes larger, but it won't improve the condition of the lowest class.

If what's known as the Ulster tenant right were extended to all of Great Britain, it would simply carve out of the landlord's estate an estate for the tenant. The condition of the laborer wouldn't be improved one bit. If landlords were prohibited from raising rent on their tenants and from evicting a tenant as long as the fixed rent was paid, the mass of producers would gain nothing. Economic rent would still increase and would still steadily reduce the share of production going to labor and capital. The only difference would be that the original tenants, having become landlords in their turn, would profit from the increase.

If, through restrictions on how much land anyone could hold, through regulation of inheritances, or through cumulative taxation, the few thousand landholders of Great Britain were increased by two or three million, those two or three million people would gain. But the rest of the population would gain nothing. They'd have no more share in the advantages of land ownership than before. And if -- which is clearly impossible -- a fair distribution of the land were made among the entire population, giving each person an equal share, and laws were enacted to prevent concentration by forbidding anyone from holding more than the fixed amount, what would happen as population grew?

Exactly what can be accomplished by the wider distribution of land can be seen in those districts of France and Belgium where extremely small holdings prevail. Such a division of land is, on the whole, much better than what exists in England, and it gives a far more stable foundation to the state. Of that there's no doubt. But that it doesn't make wages any higher, or improve the condition of the class that has only their labor, is equally clear. These French and Belgian peasants practice a rigid economy unknown to any English-speaking people. And if the same striking symptoms of poverty and distress among the lowest class aren't as visible as across the English Channel, the reason, I think, is not only this strict thrift, but also another factor -- the one that explains the continued survival of the small-holding system itself: material progress hasn't been as rapid.

Population hasn't increased at the same rate (it's been nearly stagnant), nor have improvements in production been as great. Nevertheless, Emile de Laveleye -- whose sympathies all lie with small holdings, and whose testimony therefore carries more weight than that of English observers who might be suspected of bias toward their own country's system -- states in his paper on the Land Systems of Belgium and Holland, published by the Cobden Club, that the condition of the laborer is actually worse under this system of tiny landholdings than it is in England. The tenant farmers -- for tenancy prevails widely even where the smallest holdings are most common -- are rack-rented with a ruthlessness unknown in England and even in Ireland. And the right to vote, "so far from raising them in the social scale, is but a source of mortification and humiliation to them, for they are forced to vote according to the dictates of the landlord instead of following the dictates of their own inclination and convictions."

And while the subdivision of land can do nothing to cure the evils of land monopoly -- while it can have no effect in raising wages or improving the condition of the lowest classes -- its tendency is to prevent the adoption or even discussion of more thorough-going solutions, and to strengthen the existing unjust system by giving more people a stake in maintaining it. De Laveleye, in concluding the paper from which I've quoted, urges the wider distribution of land as the surest way to protect England's great landowners from something far more radical. Although in the districts where land is most minutely divided the condition of the laborer is, by his own account, the worst in Europe and the renting farmer is much more ground down by his landlord than the Irish tenant, yet "feelings hostile to social order," de Laveleye says, "do not manifest themselves," because --

"The tenant, although ground down by the constant rise of rents, lives among his equals, peasants like himself who have tenants whom they use just as the large land holder does his. His father, his brother, perhaps the man himself, possesses something like an acre of land, which he lets at as high a rent as he can get. In the public house peasant proprietors will boast of the high rents they get for their lands, just as they might boast of having sold their pigs or potatoes very dear. Letting at as high a rent as possible comes thus to seem to him to be quite a matter of course, and he never dreams of finding fault with either the land owners as a class or with property in land. His mind is not likely to dwell on the notion of a caste of domineering landlords, of 'bloodthirsty tyrants,' fattening on the sweat of impoverished tenants and doing no work themselves; for those who drive the hardest bargains are not the great land owners but his own fellows. Thus, the distribution of a number of small properties among the peasantry forms a kind of rampart and safeguard for the holders of large estates, and peasant property may without exaggeration be called the lightning conductor that averts from society dangers which might otherwise lead to violent catastrophes.

"The concentration of land in large estates among a small number of families is a sort of provocation of leveling legislation. The position of England, so enviable in many respects, seems to me to be in this respect full of danger for the future."

To me, for the very same reason de Laveleye expresses, the position of England seems full of hope.

Let us abandon all attempts to get rid of the evils of land monopoly by restricting land ownership. An equal distribution of land is impossible, and anything short of that would be only a partial fix, not a cure -- and a partial fix that would prevent the adoption of a real cure. Nor is any remedy worth considering that doesn't align with the natural direction of social development and swim, so to speak, with the current of the times. That concentration is the direction of development is unmistakable -- the concentration of people in large cities, the concentration of crafts in large factories, the concentration of transportation in railroad and steamship lines, the concentration of farming in large operations. Even the most trivial businesses are being concentrated in the same way -- errands are run and luggage is carried by companies. All the currents of the time flow toward concentration. To resist it successfully, we'd have to put steam back in the bottle and discharge electricity from human service.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
Major changes and rationale:

1. SENTENCE STRUCTURE: This is the longest chapter in the book (~9300 words) and George's sentences are frequently enormous -- multi-clause constructions chained with semicolons. Throughout, these are broken into shorter sentences while preserving logical connections. For example, the opening sentence (over 90 words with nested clauses) is reorganized into two clearer sentences. The massive paragraph about England's hypothetical government reform is broken into several sentences tracking the logical steps.

2. KEY TERMS: "political economy" -> "economics" (consistent with prior chapters). "politico-economic works" -> "economics textbooks." "Combinations of workmen" -> "labor unions" in the section heading and most usages, though "combinations" is sometimes retained where it's specifically about the act of combining. "Effectual" -> "effective." "Sinecurists" -> "people in do-nothing government jobs" and later "holders of fake government jobs." "Morcellement" (French term for subdivision) retained in context. "Rack-rented" retained as it's vivid and its meaning is clear. "In nowise" -> "no different." "Viz." -> "namely" or dash construction.

3. GENDER-NEUTRAL LANGUAGE: "men" -> "people," "workers," "human beings" as appropriate. "Working men" -> "workers" or "working people." "Workmen" -> "workers." "He" -> "they" in general statements. "Every one of a number of competitors might win a race" retains the individual pronoun structure. "If a man work harder" -> "If one person works harder." "A man more effectively" -> "a person use their natural abilities more effectively." The Dr. Bleesdale quote about "black fellows" is modernized to "these people" while preserving the substance of the quote. "Well-educated gentlemen" -> "well-educated" (removing the gendered term). "Our young fellows" -> "our young people."

4. SECTION STRUCTURE: Preserved George's six-part structure (I through VI) with his original headings, lightly modernized. "From Combinations of Workmen" -> "From Labor Unions." "From the Diffusion of Education..." -> "From the Spread of Education..." The numbered list at the chapter's opening is formatted as a clean numbered list for clarity.

5. HISTORICAL REFERENCES: Boss Tweed of New York -- kept with brief context ("Boss Tweed"). "The Internationals" -> "the International Workers' Association." De Laveleye -- identified on first reference with first name. The Cobden Club -- retained as-is (context is sufficient). Benjamin Franklin anecdote -- preserved with all its colorful detail about Keimer. "Sitting dharna" -- preserved and explained. The Jesuits in Paraguay -- retained. Ancient Peru -- retained.

6. EXTENDED QUOTES: De Laveleye's long block quote is preserved verbatim (it's a direct quotation from another writer). The Dr. Bleesdale passage is treated as a paraphrase/reported speech and modernized where appropriate.

7. ENDNOTES: Both endnote references (44, 45) preserved exactly as they appear.

8. TONE: This chapter has George in systematic, methodical mode -- he's working through six proposed remedies and demolishing each one. The translation preserves his patient but firm dismissal of each alternative, building toward the dramatic reveal in the next chapter. Key moments of George's characteristic voice are preserved: "The average American voter... gives about as much thought to the fundamental questions of government as a streetcar horse does to the profits of the line." The "Slough of Despond" reference is glossed for modern readers.

9. BUNYAN REFERENCE: "the Slough of Despond which Bunyan saw in his dream" -> added gloss "the swamp of despair from The Pilgrim's Progress" since fewer modern readers will know this reference.

10. THE COOPERATION SECTION: George's argument here is subtle and counterintuitive -- he argues that even worker cooperatives can't raise wages because any efficiency gains will be captured by landowners through higher rent. The translation preserves the logical chain carefully while making each step clearer.

11. THE SOCIALISM SECTION: George is sympathetic to socialist ideals but skeptical of socialist methods. The translation preserves this nuanced stance -- "The ideal of socialism is grand and noble" followed by "But such a state of society can't be manufactured -- it must grow." The "Land and Liberty!" ending is preserved as George's bridge to his own solution.

12. THE LAND DISTRIBUTION SECTION: This is the longest subsection and the most directly relevant to what follows. George's argument that subdividing land would (a) not work, (b) actually reduce production, and (c) prevent real reform is carefully preserved. The de Laveleye analysis -- where George turns the conservative argument for small holdings on its head -- is one of his most politically sophisticated passages.

13. COMPLETENESS: Every paragraph, every argument, every example, every quotation in the original has been translated. Nothing has been summarized or truncated.
</explanation>

<next_chapter_notes>
KEY TERMS AND REFERENCES ESTABLISHED IN THIS CHAPTER:

- SIX REJECTED REMEDIES: George has now systematically demolished: (1) government economy, (2) education and thrift, (3) labor unions, (4) worker cooperatives, (5) government regulation/socialism, (6) land redistribution. Each fails for the same fundamental reason: as long as land is privately owned and monopolized, any gains in productivity or efficiency will be captured by landowners through higher rent. This is the recurring refrain.

- RENT AS THE ABSORBER: The core logic repeated in every section: any improvement in productive efficiency -> increased rent -> no benefit to labor. This principle, established in Books III-V, is applied here to each proposed remedy.

- "LAND AND LIBERTY!": George ends the socialism section with the Nihilist motto, previewing his own remedy. This is the bridge to Chapter 026.

- DE LAVELEYE'S PARADOX: The extended discussion of French/Belgian small holdings, where the system that supposedly distributes land more fairly actually produces worse conditions for laborers than England's concentrated system -- but prevents radical reform by giving peasants a stake in the status quo. George sees England's concentrated ownership as "full of hope" precisely because it makes the injustice so visible.

- CONCENTRATION AS THE DIRECTION OF PROGRESS: The chapter's final argument -- that all of modern development moves toward concentration, making proposals to subdivide land backward-looking and futile. This sets up George's remedy, which works WITH the trend toward concentration rather than against it.

- TONE SHIFT: This chapter has been systematic and patient -- methodically clearing the ground. Chapter 026 should be dramatically different: short, powerful, declarative. George is about to reveal his answer. The tone should shift from patient demolition to bold proclamation.

- FORMATTING: Chapter 026 ("The True Remedy") is very short (~640 words) and contains the book's central declaration: "We must make land common property." This should be formatted to carry maximum dramatic weight.

VOCABULARY CONSISTENCY: "economics" for "political economy." "Rent" / "economic rent" used consistently. "The margin" for marginal land. "Labor unions" for "combinations of workmen." "Workers" / "working people" for "workmen" / "laboring classes." "Productivity" and "productive power" used interchangeably. Endnote numbers preserved.
</next_chapter_notes>
