Book IX, Chapter 4: The Changes This Would Bring to Society and Social Life

We're dealing only with general principles here. There are some questions of detail -- like how to divide revenue between local and national governments -- that would come up when these principles were applied, but we don't need to discuss them now. Once principles are settled, details can be readily worked out.

And without getting too elaborate, it's impossible to cover all the changes that would be brought about -- or made possible -- by a reform that would readjust the very foundation of society. But let me call attention to some of the main ones.

One of the most striking is the enormous simplification that would become possible in government. Collecting taxes, preventing and punishing tax evasion, checking and cross-checking revenues drawn from dozens of different sources -- these activities probably make up three-quarters, maybe seven-eighths, of what government does, aside from keeping order, maintaining the military, and administering justice. An immense and complicated web of governmental machinery would simply be swept away.

In the justice system, the relief would be similar. Much of the civil business of our courts comes from disputes over land ownership. These would end when the government was effectively recognized as the sole owner of land, and all occupants became what they practically would be: rent-paying tenants. The growth of moral behavior that would follow the end of poverty would bring a similar reduction in other civil cases. This could be accelerated by adopting the commonsense proposal of the philosopher Jeremy Bentham to abolish all laws for the collection of debts and the enforcement of private contracts. Rising wages and the opening of opportunities for everyone to make a comfortable living would quickly reduce and eventually eliminate from society the thieves, con artists, and other criminals who spring from the unequal distribution of wealth. So the criminal justice system, with its whole apparatus of police officers, detectives, prisons, and penitentiaries, would -- like the civil courts -- stop draining so much of society's energy and attention. We'd be rid not only of many judges, bailiffs, clerks, and prison guards, but also of the vast army of lawyers now supported at the expense of productive workers. Talent currently wasted on legal technicalities would be turned to higher pursuits.

The legislative, judicial, and executive functions of government would be vastly simplified in this way. And I don't think public debts and standing armies -- which historically grew out of the shift from feudal to private land ownership -- would last long after the return to the old idea that a country's land is the common right of its people. Public debts could easily be paid off by a tax that would neither reduce wages nor hamper production. Standing armies would fade away as the masses grew more intelligent and independent, aided perhaps by advances in military technology that are revolutionizing the art of war.

Society would thus approach the ideal of Jeffersonian democracy, what the philosopher Herbert Spencer called the ultimate "abolition of government." But only government in its role as a directing and repressive power. At the same time and to the same degree, it would become possible to realize the dream of socialism. All this simplification and elimination of government's current functions would free it to take on certain other functions that are now urgently needed. Government could handle the transmission of messages by telegraph as well as by mail, and build and operate railroads as well as public roads. With its present functions so simplified and reduced, it could take on roles like these without danger or strain, and they'd be under the watchful eye of a public no longer distracted by the current system's complexity. There would be a large and growing surplus of revenue from taxing land values, because material progress -- which would accelerate dramatically -- would constantly push rent higher. This revenue, arising from common property, could be applied to the common good, the way revenues were once used in ancient Sparta. We might not set up public dining halls -- they'd be unnecessary -- but we could build public baths, museums, libraries, gardens, lecture halls, music and dance venues, theaters, universities, technical schools, shooting ranges, playgrounds, gyms, and more. Heat, light, and power, as well as water, could be piped through our streets at public expense. Our roads could be lined with fruit trees. Discoverers and inventors could be rewarded, scientific research supported, and in a thousand ways public revenue could be used to encourage efforts that benefit everyone. We'd reach the ideal of the socialist -- but not through government coercion. Government would change its character and become the administration of a great cooperative society. It would become simply the agency through which common property was managed for the common benefit.

Does this sound impractical? Consider for a moment the vast changes that would transform social life through a reform that guaranteed labor its full reward, that banished want and the fear of want, and gave even the humblest person the freedom to develop their full potential.

When we think about what's possible in social organization, we tend to assume that greed is the strongest of human motives, and that any system of administration can only work if it's built on the idea that people must be threatened with punishment to stay honest -- that selfish interests are always stronger than shared interests. Nothing could be further from the truth.

Where does this lust for gain come from -- this force that drives people to trample everything pure and noble underfoot, to sacrifice all the higher possibilities of life, that turns civility into a hollow performance, patriotism into a fraud, and religion into hypocrisy, that makes so much of civilized life a war of all against all, fought with the weapons of cunning and deception?

Doesn't it spring from the existence of want? Thomas Carlyle somewhere says that poverty is the hell the modern person is most afraid of. And he's right. Poverty is the open-mouthed, relentless hell that yawns beneath civilized society. And it's hell enough. The ancient Hindu scriptures declare no truer thing than when the wise crow Bushanda tells the eagle-bearer of Vishnu that the sharpest pain is poverty. Because poverty is not just deprivation. It means shame, degradation -- the searing of the most sensitive parts of our moral and mental nature as with hot irons. It means the denial of our strongest impulses and our deepest affections, the wrenching of our most vital nerves. You love your partner, you love your children -- but wouldn't it be easier to watch them die than to watch them ground down by the kind of desperate want in which large classes of people in every highly developed society actually live? The strongest of animal instincts is the one by which we cling to life. But it's an everyday event in civilized societies for people to drink poison or put a gun to their head out of fear of poverty. And for every one who does, there are probably a hundred who feel the urge but are held back by instinctive recoil, religious conviction, or family bonds.

From this hell of poverty, it's only natural that people would make every effort to escape. The impulse of self-preservation and self-interest combines with nobler feelings, and love as much as fear drives the struggle. Many a person does a mean thing, a dishonest thing, a greedy and grasping and unjust thing, in the effort to protect a parent, a spouse, or children from want, or from the fear of want.

And out of this state of affairs grows a public opinion that enlists, as a driving force in the scramble to grab and hold, one of the strongest -- perhaps for many people the very strongest -- springs of human action. The desire for approval, the urge to win the respect, admiration, or sympathy of our fellow human beings, is instinctive and universal. Sometimes distorted into the most bizarre forms, it's present everywhere. It's powerful among the most isolated tribal people, as among the most polished members of the most refined society. It shows itself with the first gleam of intelligence and persists to the last breath. It triumphs over the love of ease, over the sense of pain, over the dread of death. It shapes both the most trivial and the most important actions.

The toddler just learning to walk or talk will try harder as its cute little tricks draw attention and laughter. The dying ruler of the world gathers his robes around him so he may pass away as befits a king. Chinese mothers used to deform their daughters' feet with cruel bindings; European women have sacrificed their own comfort and their families' comfort to similar dictates of fashion. The Polynesian, that he might be admired for his beautiful tattoo, held himself still while his flesh was torn by sharks' teeth. The North American Indian, tied to the stake, bore the most fiendish tortures without a moan, and, to be respected and admired as a great warrior, taunted his tormentors to new cruelties. It's this desire that leads the desperate charge. It's this that keeps the student's lamp burning. It's this that drives people to strive, to strain, to toil, and to die. It's this that raised the pyramids and set fire to the great temple at Ephesus.

Now, people admire what they desire. How sweet the safe harbor looks to those battered by the storm; food to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, warmth to the freezing, rest to the exhausted, power to the powerless, knowledge to those whose intellectual hunger has been awakened. And so the sting of want and the fear of want make people admire above all things the possession of riches, and to become wealthy is to become respected, admired, and influential. Get money -- honestly if you can, but at any rate get money! That's the lesson society drums into its members' ears day and night. People instinctively admire virtue and truth, but the sting of want and the fear of want make them admire the rich and envy the fortunate even more. It's good to be honest and just, and people will praise it. But the person who amasses a million dollars through fraud and injustice will get more respect, admiration, and influence -- more deference and flattery, if not genuine loyalty -- than the one who refuses to do so. The honest person may have their reward in the future. They may know that their name is written in the Book of Life, that theirs is the white robe and the palm branch of the one who conquered temptation. But the other has their reward right now. Their name is on the list of "our substantial citizens." They enjoy the courtship of powerful people and the flattery of the fashionable; the best pew in the church and the personal attention of the eloquent clergyman who, in Christ's name, preaches the Gospel of the rich, and softens into a meaningless decoration the stern biblical metaphor of the camel and the eye of the needle. They may become a patron of the arts, a sponsor of writers and scholars. They may benefit from the conversation of the intelligent and be polished by the company of the refined. Their charity may feed the poor, help the struggling, and bring sunshine into desolate places. And noble public institutions may commemorate their name and fame after they are gone. Satan doesn't tempt people in the form of a hideous monster with horns and a tail, but as an angel of light. His promises aren't only of the kingdoms of the world, but of mental and moral authority and power. He appeals not just to animal appetites, but to the cravings that stir in us precisely because we are more than animals.

Take the case of those miserable people with muckrakes -- to borrow the image from Bunyan's allegorical Pilgrim's Progress -- who can be seen in every community as plainly as Bunyan saw their type in his vision. Long after they've accumulated enough wealth to satisfy every desire, they go on working, scheming, striving to pile riches upon riches. It was the desire "to be somebody" -- indeed, in many cases the desire to do noble and generous things -- that started them on their money-making careers. And what drives them long after every possible need is met, what pushes them on with unsatisfied and ravenous greed, is not simply the force of tyrannical habit, but the subtler rewards that possessing riches brings -- the sense of power and influence, the sense of being looked up to and respected, the knowledge that their wealth doesn't just raise them above want, but makes them people of importance in the community where they live. This is what makes the rich so reluctant to part with their money, so driven to get more.

Against temptations that appeal to the deepest impulses of our nature, the sanctions of law and the teachings of religion can do very little. The wonder is not that people are so self-seeking, but that they aren't far more so. That under current conditions people aren't more grasping, more unfaithful, more selfish than they are proves the goodness and resilience of human nature -- the ceaseless flow from the deep springs that feed our moral qualities. All of us have mothers. Most of us have children. And so faith, purity, and selflessness can never be entirely banished from the world, no matter how badly we arrange our social systems.

But whatever is powerful for evil can be made powerful for good. The change I've proposed would destroy the conditions that twist impulses that are in themselves healthy and beneficial, and would transform the forces that now tear society apart into forces that would unite and purify it.

Give labor a free field and its full earnings. Collect for the benefit of the whole community the fund that the community's growth creates. And want and the fear of want would vanish. The springs of production would be released, and the enormous increase in wealth would give even the poorest ample comfort. People would no more worry about finding work than they worry about finding air to breathe. They'd need have no more anxiety about physical necessities than do the lilies of the field. The progress of science, the march of invention, the spread of knowledge would bring their benefits to all.

With want and the fear of want abolished, the admiration of riches would fade, and people would seek the respect and approval of their peers in ways other than acquiring and displaying wealth. In this way, the skill, attention, integrity, and dedication that can now be enlisted only for private gain would be brought to bear on public affairs and the management of shared resources. A railroad or gas utility might be operated by the public not only more economically and efficiently than under the current system of corporate stockholder management, but as economically and efficiently as would be possible under a single owner. The prize at the ancient Olympic games, which called forth the most intense efforts of all Greece, was nothing more than a wreath of wild olive. For a bit of ribbon, people have over and over again performed services no amount of money could have purchased.

Shortsighted is the philosophy that counts on selfishness as the master motive of human action. It's blind to facts the world is full of. It doesn't see the present, and it misreads the past. If you want to move people to action, what should you appeal to? Not their wallets, but their patriotism. Not selfishness, but sympathy. Self-interest is, in a sense, a mechanical force -- powerful, certainly, and capable of large and wide-ranging results. But there is in human nature what might be compared to a chemical force -- something that melts and fuses and overwhelms, something to which nothing seems impossible. "All that a man hath will he give for his life" -- that is self-interest. But in loyalty to higher impulses, people will give even life itself.

It's not selfishness that fills the history of every people with heroes and saints. It's not selfishness that blazes out on every page of world history in sudden splendor of noble deeds, or sheds the soft glow of compassionate lives. It wasn't selfishness that turned Gautama Buddha's back on his royal home, or called the Maid of Orleans to lift the sword from the altar. It wasn't selfishness that held the three hundred Spartans in the pass at Thermopylae, or gathered into Arnold Winkelried's chest the sheaf of enemy spears. It wasn't selfishness that chained Vincent de Paul to the bench of a galley to take a prisoner's place, or brought little starving children during the Indian famine, tottering on their own weak legs, to the relief stations with even weaker children in their arms. Call it religion, patriotism, sympathy, the enthusiasm for humanity, or the love of God -- give it whatever name you want -- there is a force that overcomes and drives out selfishness. A force that is the electricity of the moral universe, a force beside which all others are weak. Everywhere that human beings have lived, it has shown its power, and today, as ever, the world is full of it. To be pitied is the person who has never seen it and never felt it. Look around! Among ordinary people, in the care and struggle of daily life, in the noise of the busy street and the squalor where poverty hides -- here and there the darkness is lit with the trembling play of its gentle flames. Those who haven't seen it have walked with shut eyes. Those who look may see, as the ancient writer Plutarch said, that "the soul has a principle of kindness in itself, and is born to love, as well as to perceive, think, or remember."

And this force of all forces -- that now goes to waste or takes on twisted forms -- we can harness for the strengthening, building up, and ennobling of society, if we choose, just as we now harness physical forces that once seemed nothing but powers of destruction. All we have to do is give it freedom and room to work. The injustice that produces inequality -- the injustice that in the midst of abundance tortures people with want or haunts them with the fear of want, that stunts them physically, degrades them intellectually, and warps them morally -- is what alone prevents harmonious social development. For, as the Stoic philosopher Marcus Aurelius wrote, "all that is from the gods is full of providence. We are made for cooperation -- like feet, like hands, like eyelids, like the rows of the upper and lower teeth."

There are people who can't even conceive of any better society than the one that exists now -- who think the idea that greed could be banished, prisons could stand empty, individual interests could be aligned with shared interests, and no one would try to rob or exploit their neighbor is nothing but the dream of impractical dreamers. These self-proclaimed practical, levelheaded types, who pride themselves on seeing things as they are, have a hearty contempt for such visions. But these people -- though some of them write books, some occupy university chairs, and some stand in pulpits -- don't actually think.

If they were accustomed to dining in the kind of cheap eating houses found in the rougher quarters of London and Paris, where the knives and forks are chained to the tables, they'd conclude it was the natural, ineradicable tendency of human beings to steal cutlery.

Take a group of well-mannered people dining together. There's no scrambling for food, no one trying to get more than their neighbor, no one grabbing or hoarding. On the contrary, each person is eager to serve their neighbor before themselves, to offer others the best rather than claim it for themselves. And should anyone show the slightest tendency to put the gratification of their own appetite ahead of the others', or in any way act piggish or grabby, the swift and heavy penalty of social contempt and exclusion would show how strongly common opinion condemns such behavior.

All this is so ordinary as to attract no attention -- it seems like the natural state of things. Yet it's no more natural for people not to be greedy about food than for them not to be greedy about wealth. People get greedy about food when they're not confident there will be a fair distribution that gives everyone enough. But when those conditions are assured, they stop being greedy about food. And the same is true in society at large. Under current arrangements, people are greedy about wealth because distribution is so unjust that instead of everyone being assured of enough, many are guaranteed to end up in want. It's the "devil take the hindmost" quality of our current social system that creates the race and scramble for wealth -- the competition in which all considerations of justice, mercy, religion, and fellow feeling are trampled underfoot, in which people forget their own souls and struggle to the very edge of the grave for what they can't take beyond it. But a fair distribution of wealth, one that freed everyone from the fear of want, would destroy the greed for wealth, just as in polite society the greed for food has been destroyed.

On the crowded steamships of the early California lines, there was often a striking difference between the manners of the steerage and the cabin, which illustrates this principle of human nature. Plenty of food was provided for the steerage as for the cabin, but in the steerage there were no rules ensuring orderly service, and meals became a free-for-all. In the cabin, by contrast, where everyone had an assigned place and there was no fear that anyone would go without, there was no such scrambling and waste as happened in the steerage. The difference wasn't in the character of the passengers, but simply in this one fact. Move a cabin passenger to the steerage and they'd join the greedy rush. Move a steerage passenger to the cabin and they'd immediately become polite and well-mannered. The same difference would show itself throughout society if our present unjust distribution of wealth were replaced by a just one.

Consider this real fact of a cultivated and refined social setting, in which all the coarser impulses are held in check -- not by force, not by law, but by shared opinion and the mutual desire to please. If this is possible for part of a community, it's possible for a whole community. There are stages of society in which everyone has to go armed, in which everyone must be ready to defend their person and property with their own strength. If we've progressed beyond that, we can progress further still.

But someone may say: to banish want and the fear of want would destroy the incentive to work. People would become idlers, and such a happy state of general comfort and contentment would be the death of progress. This is the old slaveholder's argument -- that people can only be driven to labor with the whip. Nothing is more untrue.

Want might be banished, but desire would remain. Humans are the unsatisfied animal. We've barely begun to explore, and the universe lies before us. Each step opens new vistas and kindles new desires. We are the constructive animal: we build, we improve, we invent and put things together, and the greater the thing we accomplish, the greater the thing we want to accomplish next. We are more than animals. Whatever intelligence breathes through nature, it is in that likeness that we are made. The steamship, driven by its throbbing engines through the sea, is in kind -- though not in degree -- as much a creation as the whale that swims beneath it. The telescope and the microscope, what are they but added eyes that we've made for ourselves? The fine fabrics and beautiful colors in which people dress themselves -- don't they answer to the plumage that nature gives the bird? Human beings must be doing something, or imagining they're doing something, because in us throbs the creative impulse. The person who simply basks in the sunshine is not a natural human being, but an abnormal one.

As soon as children can control their muscles, they begin making mud pies or dressing a doll. Their play is just imitation of the work of their elders. Their very destructiveness comes from the desire to accomplish something, from the satisfaction of seeing themselves make something happen. There's no such thing as the pursuit of pleasure purely for pleasure's sake. Our very amusements entertain only insofar as they involve, or simulate, learning or doing something. The moment they stop engaging either our curiosity or our creative drive, they stop being fun. Telling novel readers how the story ends spoils their interest. It's only the element of chance and skill that lets the card player "kill time" by shuffling bits of pasteboard. The luxurious frivolities of Versailles were bearable to human beings only because the king believed he was governing a kingdom and the courtiers were chasing new honors and pensions. People who lead what are called lives of fashion and pleasure must have some purpose beyond amusement, or they'd die of boredom. They endure it only because they imagine they're gaining social position, making connections, or improving their children's prospects. Lock someone up and deny them any work to do, and they must either die or go insane.

It's not labor itself that people find repulsive. It's not the natural need for effort that is a curse. It's only labor that produces nothing -- effort whose results we can never see. To toil day after day and get only the bare necessities of life, that is indeed hard. It's like the infernal punishment of forcing someone to keep pumping or drown, or to keep trudging on a treadmill or be crushed. But released from that necessity, people would work harder and better, because then they'd work as their inclinations led them -- then they'd feel they were truly accomplishing something for themselves or others. Was Alexander von Humboldt's life an idle one? Did Benjamin Franklin find nothing to do when he retired from the printing business with enough to live on? Is Herbert Spencer a slacker? Did Michelangelo paint for room and board?

The fact is that the work which improves the human condition, the work that extends knowledge and increases power, that enriches literature and elevates thought, is not done to earn a living. It's not the work of slaves, driven to their task either by a master's whip or by animal necessity. It's the work of people who perform it for its own sake, not for more food or drink or clothing or show. In a society where want was abolished, work of this kind would increase enormously.

I'm inclined to think that collecting rent in the way I've proposed would cause the organization of labor, wherever large amounts of capital were used, to take on the cooperative form, since the more equal spread of wealth would unite investor and worker in the same person. But whether this happened or not is of little consequence. The grinding toil of routine labor would fade away. Wages would be too high and opportunities too abundant for anyone to be forced to suppress the higher qualities of their nature. In every line of work, the brain would aid the hand. Work, even of the rougher kinds, would become something lighter, and the modern tendency toward specialization wouldn't mean monotony or the narrowing of workers' abilities. It would be offset by shorter hours, by variety, and by the alternation of intellectual with manual work. The result would be not only the productive forces now going to waste being put to use, not only our present knowledge -- so imperfectly applied today -- being fully utilized, but from the mobility of labor and the mental energy that would be unleashed, there would come advances in methods of production that we can't now imagine.

For the greatest of all the enormous wastes our current social system involves is the waste of human potential. How tiny are the forces that actually drive civilization forward, compared to the forces that lie dormant! How few are the thinkers, the discoverers, the inventors, the organizers, compared to the great mass of people! Yet such individuals are born in abundance. It's the conditions of life that allow so few to develop. Among human beings there are infinite varieties of talent and inclination, just as there are such infinite varieties of physical form that among a million people you won't find two who can't be told apart. But, both from observation and reflection, I'm inclined to think that the differences in natural ability are no greater than the differences in height or physical strength.

Look at the lives of great people, and see how easily they might never have been heard of. Had Caesar been born into a common family; had Napoleon entered the world a few years earlier; had Columbus gone into the Church instead of to sea; had Shakespeare been apprenticed to a cobbler or chimney sweep; had Isaac Newton been consigned by fate to the education and toil of a farm laborer; had Adam Smith been born in the coal mines, or Herbert Spencer been forced to make his living as a factory worker -- what would their talents have mattered? But there would have been, it will be said, other Caesars or Napoleons, other Columbuses or Shakespeares, other Newtons, Smiths, or Spencers. True. And that shows how abundant our human nature is. Just as the ordinary worker bee is transformed when needed into a queen bee, so, when circumstances favor development, what might otherwise pass for an ordinary person rises into a hero or leader, discoverer or teacher, sage or saint. So widely has the sower scattered the seed, so strong is the life force that bids it bud and blossom. But alas for the stony ground, and the birds, and the weeds! For every one who reaches their full height, how many are stunted and deformed.

The will within us is the ultimate fact of consciousness. Yet how little of what the best of us have -- in learning, in position, even in character -- can be credited entirely to ourselves, and how much to the influences that shaped us. Who is there, wise, learned, careful, or strong, who wouldn't, if they traced the inner history of their life, turn -- like the Stoic Emperor Marcus Aurelius -- to give thanks that by this person and that, here and there, good examples were set, noble thoughts reached them, and fortunate opportunities opened before them? Who is there who, with eyes open and having reached the middle of life, hasn't sometimes echoed the thought of the devout person who, watching a criminal led to the gallows, said, "But for the grace of God, there go I"? How little heredity counts compared to circumstances. We say this person is the product of a thousand years of European progress, and that one of a thousand years of Chinese stagnation. Yet place a European infant in the heart of China, and except for the shape of the eye or the shade of the hair, the child would grow up like those around them -- using the same language, thinking the same thoughts, showing the same tastes. Switch a child of privilege in the cradle with an infant from the slums, and will noble blood produce a refined and cultured person?

To remove want and the fear of want, to give all classes leisure, comfort, and independence -- the decencies and refinements of life, the opportunities for mental and moral growth -- would be like turning water onto a desert. The barren waste would clothe itself in green, and the desolate places where life seemed forbidden would before long be shaded by trees and filled with birdsong. Talents now hidden, virtues unsuspected, would emerge to make human life richer, fuller, happier, nobler. Among those round pegs jammed into square holes, and square pegs crammed into round ones; among those wasting their energy in the scramble to get rich; among those who in factories have been turned into machines, or who are chained by necessity to workbench or plow; among children growing up in squalor, vice, and ignorance -- there are powers of the highest order, talents of the most brilliant kind. They need only the opportunity to come forth.

Consider the possibilities of a society that gave that opportunity to everyone. Let your imagination fill in the picture -- its colors grow too bright for words to paint. Consider the moral elevation, the intellectual vitality, the richness of social life. Consider how by a thousand actions and interactions the members of every community are linked together, and how under present conditions even the fortunate few who stand at the top of the social pyramid must suffer, though they may not know it, from the want, ignorance, and degradation beneath them. Consider these things and then say whether the change I propose would not benefit everyone -- even the greatest landowner. Wouldn't they be more confident about their children's future leaving them penniless in such a society than leaving them the largest fortune in this one? If such a society existed anywhere, wouldn't they gladly give up everything they owned to gain entry?

I have now traced social weakness and disease to their source. I have shown the remedy. I have covered every point and met every objection. But the problems we've been considering, great as they are, lead into problems greater still -- into the grandest questions the human mind can wrestle with. I'm about to ask the reader who has come with me this far to go with me further, into still higher territory. But I ask you to remember that in the limited space remaining within the bounds of this book, I can't fully address the questions that arise. I can only suggest some thoughts that may perhaps serve as starting points for further reflection.
