<<<
FIG NOTE:

SS X\\\, 38 The method I have given you for producing the oe third ball is effective since the balls are held close eS together and the appearance of the third shows up = well. However, there is another method for pro-

ducing the third ball which may fit some fingers better at first until the fingers limber up.

Here is the other method: After second ball is produced and the two balls struck together, the left hand places its ball in right hand between third and fourth fingers instead of between first and second, Fig. 38.

Turn hand and show palm empty. As you turn hand back to position again, get second finger under ball and lift it out of shell and into position between first and second fingers, Fig. 39. Try both methods and adopt the one that you can do the better.

“Now, Adam preferred ham and eggs for supper, but Eve insisted that an apple diet was far healthier, as an apple a day keeps the doctor away.”

Reach up with left hand and pretend to remove ball between first and second fingers. Under cover of left hand, slip ball into shell, Fig. 40.

Close left hand and carry it away as though it held the ball. Two balls are left in right hand and the illusion of removing a ball is perfect, Fig. 41. Turn right hand over casually to show empty palm.

““So Adam ate the apple.”

Bring left hand to mouth and pretend to place ball inside. Push tongue into cheek to make it bulge as if ball were really in mouth, Fig. 42. Remove left hand and show it empty. Then push bulge of cheek in with left forefinger and pretend to swallow ball.
===
## Note

The method I have given you for producing the third ball is effective since the balls are held close together and the appearance of the third shows up well. However, there is another method for producing the third ball which may fit some fingers better at first until the fingers limber up.

Here is the other method: After second ball is produced and the two balls struck together, the left hand places its ball in right hand between third and fourth fingers instead of between first and second, Fig. 38.

[FIG 38]

Turn hand and show palm empty. As you turn hand back to position again, get second finger under ball and lift it out of shell and into position between first and second fingers, Fig. 39. Try both methods and adopt the one that you can do the better.

[FIG 39]

*“Now, Adam preferred ham and eggs for supper, but Eve insisted that an apple diet was far healthier, as an apple a day keeps the doctor away.”*

Reach up with left hand and pretend to remove ball between first and second fingers. Under cover of left hand, slip ball into shell, Fig. 40.

[FIG 40]

Close left hand and carry it away as though it held the ball. Two balls are left in right hand and the illusion of removing a ball is perfect, Fig. 41. Turn right hand over casually to show empty palm.

[FIG 41]

*“So Adam ate the apple.”*

Bring left hand to mouth and pretend to place ball inside. Push tongue into cheek to make it bulge as if ball were really in mouth, Fig. 42. Remove left hand and show it empty. Then push bulge of cheek in with left forefinger and pretend to swallow ball.

[FIG 42]
>>>
