page: 6

abolishment, abolition. See -10N &

-MENT.

aborigines. The word being still

usually pronounced with a con-

sciousness that it is Latin (i.e. with

-€z), the sing. aborigine (-ni) is felt

to be anomalous & avoided or dis-

liked; the adj. aboriginal used as a

noun is the best singular.

abridg(e)ment.

For spelling see JUDGEMENT.

abrogate makes -gable; see -ABLE 1.

absence. For conspicuous by a. see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

absolute. See LU; &, for the sense in grammar, TECHNICAL TERMS.

ABSOLUTE CONSTRUCTION. 1. The insertion of a comma between noun & participle in the absolute use is indisputably wrong; it arises from the writer’s or the compositor’s taking the noun, because it happens to stand first, for the subject of the main verb; & it puts the reader to the trouble of readjusting, after he has formed it, his notion of the sentence’s structure. The King having read his speech from the throne, their Majesties retired is the right form; but newspaper writing or printing is so faulty on the point that it would appear nine times out of ten as The King, having read his &c.

2. The case in this construction is the subjective; e.g. There being no clear evidence against him, & he (not him) denying the charge, we could do nothing. There is little danger of the rule’s being broken except where a pronoun stands as complement; though no-one would write me being the person responsible, the form the person responsible being I is likely to be shrunk from; me is ungrammatical & should not be used except colloquially; myself is usually possible, but not always. The formula whom failing (= or in default of him) should be either who failing or failing whom; the justification of failing whom is that failing has, like during &c., passed into a preposition, & whom failing is a confusion between the two right forms.

3. The following example of one absolute construction enclosed in another is a pretty puzzle for those _ who like such things: To the new |

Greek Note Bulgaria replied by a

Note which was returned to the Bul- | garian Foreign Minister, Greece, it being declared, not wishing to enter into any bargaining. It is clear enough that that will not do, & that it must be changed into (a) it being declared that Greece did not wish, or (b) Greece not wishing, it was declared, to ...3 but why will it not do? Because the absolute construction ‘ it being declared ’ cannot, like the ‘it was declared’ of b, be parenthetic, but must be in adverbial relation to the sentence; knowing that, we ask what ‘it’ is, & find that it can only be an anticipatory 2 (see IT) equivalent to ‘ that Greece did not wish’; but the consequent expansion * Greece, that. Greece did not wish being declared, not wishing ° makes nonsense.

ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES. Under this term are included the words hers, ours, theirs, & yours, & (except in the archaic attributive-adjective use, as thine eyes) mine & thine. The ordinary uses of these need not be set forth here. But a mistake is often made when two or more possessives are to be referred to a single noun that follows. the last of them: the absolute word in -s or -ne is wrongly used in the earlier place(s) instead of the simple possessive. The correct forms are: your & our & his efforts (not yours & ours); either my or your informant must have lied (not mine); her & his mutual dislike (not hers); our without your help will not avail (not ours). There is no doubt a natural temptation to substitute the wrong word; the simple possessive seems to pine at separation from its property. The true remedy is a change of order:—your efforts & ours & his; my informant or yours; our help without yours. It is not always available, however; her &
