page: 7

+ his mutual dislike must be left as it is. :

absorbedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY.

abstraction, abstractness. See -10N & -NESS.

abysmal, abyssal. The first is the rhetorical word (abysmal ignorance, degradation, bathos); abyssal, formerly used in the same way, has now been appropriated as a technical term meaning of the bottom of the - ocean or of a depth greater than 300 fathoms.

Academe properly means Academus (a Greek hero); & its use as a poetic variant for academy, though sanctioned by Shakspere, Tennyson, & Lowell, is a mistake; the grove of A., however, (Milton) means rightly The Academy.

Academy. The A., the Garden, the Lyceum, the Porch, the Tub, are names used for five chief schools of Greek philosophy, their founders, adherents, & doctrines: the A., Plato, the Platonists, & Platonism; the Garden, Epicurus, the Epicureans, & Epicureanism; the Lyceum, Aristotle, the Aristotelians, & Aristotelianism; the Porch, Zeno, the Stoics, & Stoicism; the Tub, Antisthenes, the Cynics, & Cynicism.

acapsular. See A-, AN-.

acatalectic. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

acaulous. See A-, AN-.

accelerate makes -rable; see -ABLE 1.

accent. Pronounce the noun 4’ksnt, the verb aksé’nt; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. :

accent(uate). In figurative senses (draw attention to, emphasize, make conspicuous, &c.) the long form is now much the commoner; in literal senses (sound or write with an accent), though either will pass, the short prevails; & the DIFFERENTIA- TION is worth encouraging.

acceptance, acceptation. The words, onee used indifferently in several senses, are now fully differentiated. Acceptation means only the interpretation put on something (the

+ word in its proper acceptation means love; the various acceptations of the doctrine of the Trinity), while acceptance does the ordinary work of a verbal noun for accept (find acceptance, be well received; beg or ask one’s acceptance of, ask him to accept; cf. ask his acceptation of, ask how he understands; cards of acceptance, accepting an invitation; acceptance of persons, partiality; acceptance of a bill, drawee’s accepting of responsibility; endorses my acceptance of the terms, agrees with me in accepting them; cf. endorses my acceptation of them, agrees with my view of their drift).

accepter, -or. See -or.

accept of. This, formerly used almost as widely as the simple verb, is now restricted to the meaning consent to receive as a gift or benefit or possession. We can still accept of a gift or favour, of a person’s love or hand or company, of a brace of grouse, & the like, though even these phrases tend to become archaic. But a theory, an emendation, advice, an apology, a ruling, a challenge, we only accept.

access, accession. There are probably, in modern usage, no contexts in which one of these can be substituted for the other without the meaning’s being modified. But, perhaps owing to the fact that, with such modification, similar collocations for both are not uncommon, the wrong one is sometimes carelessly or ignorantly chosen. With regard to arriving, accession means arrival, access opportunity of arriving; accordingly accession to the throne means becoming sovereign, access to the throne opportunity of petitioning the sovereign; we can say His access to fortune was barred, or His accession to fortune had not yet taken place, but not the converse. The idea of increase, often present in accession, is foreign to aecess; an access of fury, fever, joy, despair, &c., is a fit or sudden attack of it, which may occur whatever the previous
