page: 9

+ good fortune; you are accounted wise or a wise man.

accoutre. Part. -tring; see -RE & -ER. ;

accumulate makes -lable; see -ABLE l.

accumulative. The word, formerly common in various senses, has now given place to cumulative in most of them, retaining in ordinary use only ` the sense given to accumulating property, acquisitive.

accusal. See -AL NOUNS.

accusatival(ly), accusative(ly). See ABLATIVELY.

acharnement. See FRENCH WORDS.

ache, the letter. See AITCH.

acid test. See POPULARIZED TECH- NICALITIES.

acknowledge(ment). For pronunciation see KNOWLEDGE. For -dg(e)ment see JUDGEMENT.

acoustic. Pronunciation varies between -ow- & -00-. In favour of -00- is the adoption from French, the sound of Greek ov in the more recent English pronunciation of Greek, & the general impression that the value of ou in outlandish words is 00 ; in favour of -ow- is the older & still common English pronunciation of Greek, & the normal value of ow in English. If the word came into popular use, it would probably be with -ow-, which even now perhaps tends to prevail.

acquaintanceship is a NEEDLESS VARIANT for acquaintance.

act vb. In the sense behave like, the word, once used as freely as play, has contracted a slangy or vulgarly colloquial tone, & is now more appropriate in such expressions as act the giddy goat than in act the philosopher, lover, child, or even fool, in all of which play is better.

act, action. The distinction between the two words is not always clear. The natural idea that act should mean the thing done, & action the doing of it, is not even historically quite true, since act

+ represents the Latin noun actus (which is very close to actio in sense) as well as the Latin participle actum; but, if not true, it has influence enough to prevent act from being commonly used in the more abstract senses; we can speak only of the action, not the act, of a machine, when we mean the way it acts; & action alone has the collective sense, as in his action throughout (i.e. his acts or actions as a whole) was correct; there are also other senses in which there is obviously no choice open. In contexts that do admit of doubt, it may be said generally that action tends to displace act. If we were making the phrases for the first time now, we should probably prefer action in Through God will we do great acts, The Acts of the Apostles, By the act of God, Be great in act as you have been in thought, I deliver this as my act & deed. 'This tendency, however, is by no means always. effective; it is indifferent, for instance, whether we say we are judged by our acts or by our actions; there is no appreciable difference between it was an act, & it was an action, that he was to regret bitterly. And in certain contexts act more than holds its ground: (1) in the sense deed of the nature of; it would be an act (never action) of folly, cruelty, madness, kindness, mercy, &c.; similarly in the sense deed characteristic of; it was the act (rarely aciton) of a fool (cf. the actions of a fool cannot be foreseen, where the sense is not characteristic deed, but simply deed). On the other hand, when for of folly or of a fool &c. foolish &c. is substituted, action is commoner than act—a cruel, kind, foolish, noble, base, action or act. (2) In the sense instant of doing: caught in the act, was in the very act of jumping. (3) In antithesis with word, thought, plan, &c., when these mean rather every word, each thought, a particular plan, than speech, thinking, planning: faithful in word & act (but in speech & action); innocent in thought & act B3
