page: 10

+ (but supreme in thought & action); the act was mine, the plan yours (but a strategy convincing in plan, but disappointing in action).

actuality. See LITERARY CRITICS’ WORDS.

acuity, acuteness. See -TY & -NESS.

adagio. Pl. -os; see -o(r)s 4.

ad captandum. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

addicted to. This should be followed by an ordinary noun or a verbal noun in -ing—is addicted to whisky, is addicted to reading the jokes in Punch aloud—& never by an infinitive, as in is addicted to read the jokes aloud. The wrong construction, which oceasionally occurs, is probably suggested by the commonest phrase—addicted to drink, in which drink is the noun.

addle, addled. The adjectival use of addle as in an addle egg, his brain is addle, is correct, & was formerly common; but to prefer it now to the usual addled is a Dipacricism. It still prevails, however, in compounds, as addle-paie, addle-brained.

adducible, -eable.

Use -ible; see -ABLE 2,

adhere, adhesion. The established phrase give in one’s adhesion to a policy, party, leader, &c., means to declare one’s acceptance of, & describes a single non-continuous act; it is to be observed, however, that adhere lo is not. used, by good writers at least, in the corresponding sense accept or declare acceptance of, but only in that of remaining constant to.

adieu. See -x, & FRENCH WORDS. adipose. See PEDANTIC HUMOUR. adjectivally, adjectively, &c. Adjectivally & substantivally are preferable to adjectively & substantively (cf. ABLATIVELY) because (1) the words adjective & (in the grammatical sense) substantive are now regarded as nouns; so far as they are still used as adjectives, they are felt to be nouns used attributively; adverbs formed directly from them

+ therefore cause uneasiness; (2) the adjectives adjectival & substantival are of such frequent occurrence in modern grammar that it is natural to form the adverbs from them; (8) adverbs from the other part-ofspeech names correspond to adjectwally, not to adjectively—adverbially, pronominally, verbally, &c., not adverbly &c.

adjudicate makes -cable; see-ABLE 1.

administratrix. For pl. see -TRIX.

admirable. See POSITIVE WORDS.

admiredly. Abad form; see -EDLY.

admission, -ittance, -issible, -ittable. Of the nouns, admission is used in all senses (No admittance except on business is perhaps the only phrase in which the substitution of admission would be noticed), while admittance is confined to the primary sense of letting in, & even in that sense tends to disappear. You have to pay for admission is now commoner than for admittance, & so with What is needed is the admission of outside air; admission 6d. is now the regular form; on the other hand Such an admittance (instead of admission) would give away the case is now impossible.

The difference between the adjectives is that admissible is the established word, & admittable, though formerly current, is now regarded as merely made for the occasion, & used only when the connexion with admit is to be clear; this is chiefly in the predicate, as Defeat is admitiable by anyone without dishonour.

admit of. This combination, formerly used indifferently with admit in several senses, is now restricted. to the sense present an opening or leave room for, & to impersonal nouns usually of an abstract kind as subject: His veracity admits of no question (but not I can admit of no question); A hypothesis admits by its nature of being disputed (but not he admits of being argued with); A modern battleship does not admit of careless handling.
