page: 11

admonishment, admonition. See ‘ION & -MENT.

ado. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 8.

adopted, adoptive. The incorrect use of adopied with parents, father, mother, &c., is to a certain extent excused by such allowed attributive uses as the condemned cell; that is the cell of the condemned, & the adopted father is the father of the adopted. But, while condemned saves a clumsy periphrasis, adopted saves only the trouble of remembering adoptive.

adulterate makes -rable; see-ABLE 1.

adumbrate. See -ATABLE.

advancedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY.

advance(ment). There are no contexts in which advancement can be substituted for advance without damage to or change in the sense; in the following sentence advance should have been written:—It will not be by the setting of class against class that advancement will be made. It is true that both words can be used as verbal nouns of to advance; but advance represents its intransitive & advancement its transitive sense; the advance of knowledge is the way knowledge is advancing, whereas the advancement of knowledge is action taken to advance knowledge. Apart from this verbal- ‘noun use with of following, & from a technical sense in law, advancement ‘has only the sense of preferment or promotion, never the more general one of progress.

adventurous, venturesome, adven- ‘turesome, venturous. Usage has decisively declared for the first two & against the last two. Adventuresome & venturous, when used, are due ‘to either ignorance or avoidance of the normal.

See POSITION OF AD-

ADVERBS, VERBS.

adverse. Unlike averse, this can be followed only by to; Politicians who had been very adverse from the Suez- Canal scheme is wrong.

advertise. Not -ize; see -ISE)(-IZE.

advisedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY.

advocate. Unlike recommend, propose, urge, & other verbs, this is not idiomatically followed by a thatclause, but only by an ordinary or a verbal noun. In Dr Felix Adler advocates that close attention shall be paid to any experimenis, either urges should be substituted for advocates, or that & shall be paid should be omitted or give place to the paying of.

Æ,Œ. These ligatures, of which the pronunciation is identical (€), are also in some founts of type so much alike that compositors often use one for the other & unlearned readers have their difficulties with spelling increased. It seems desirable that in the first place all words in common enough use to have begun to waver between the double letter & the simple e (as phenomenon now rarely phae- or phz-, pedagogy now rarely pae- or px-, medieval still usually -aeval or -zval, ecumenical still usually oe- or @-, penology now rarely poe- or pe-, Phebe still usually Phoe- or Phe-) should be written with the e alone; & secondly, in words that have not yet reached or can for special reasons never reach the stage in which the simple e is acceptable, ae & oe should be preferred to æ & ce (Caesar, gynaecocracy, paedobaptism, homoeopathy, diarrhoea, Boeotian, Oedipus; the plurals & genitives of classical firstdeclension nouns, as sequelae, Heraclidae, aqua vitae). It is sometimes argued that if Cæsar & Æneas are to be written Caesar & Aeneas it will become necessary to use the diaeresis (aérial) wherever the a & e are pronounced separately, since the present distinction will be lost; that the present distinction, however, is of little use is shown by the frequency with which ærated is printed for aerated; it is not held necessary to write oredid because read is pronounced réd, & the case for aérial is no stronger. In French words like chef-d’cuvre the ligature ce must
