page: 12

+ obviously be kept; whether it is kept or not in manoeuvre, where the pronunciation is anomalous, is of no great importance.

-AE, -AS, in plurals of nouns in -a. Most English nouns in -a are from Latin (or latinized Greek) nominative feminine singular nouns, which have in Latin the plural ending -ae; but not all; e.g., sofa is from Arabic; stanza & vista are from Italian; subpoena is not nominative; drama & comma are neuter; stamina & prolegomena are plural; & with all such words -ae is impossible. Of the majority, again, some retain the Latin -ae in English either as the only or as an alternative plural ending (antennae only, formulae or -las), & some have always -as (ideas, areas, villas). The use of plurals in -ae therefore presents some difficulty to nonlatinists. For most words with which -ae is possible or desirable, the information is given in their dictionary places; for the principle of choice when both -ae & -as are current, see LATIN PLURALS 1, 3.

aeon, zon, eon. The first form is recommended; see Æ, Œ.

aerate, aérate. The first form is recommended; see Æ, œ. The form erated is a mere blunder, but very common.

aerial, aérial. The first form is recommended; see Æ, Œ.

aery, aerie, eyry, eyrie. The first two forms are preferable to the others, which according to the OED & Professor Skeat are due to a theory of the derivation (from egg; eyry = eggery) that is known (though the ultimate origin of aery is doubtful) to be wrong.

aesthetic. The word, which means etymologically concerned with sensuous perception, was introduced into English to supply sense of beauty with an adjective. It is in place in such contexts as a. principles, from an a. point of view, an a. revival occurred, a. considerations do

+ not appeal to him. It is less so in the meanings professing or gifted with this sense (I am not a.; a. people), dictated by or approved by or evidencing this sense (a very a. combination; aesthetically dressed; a. chintzes & wallpapers; flowers on a table are not so a. a decoration as a well-filled bookcase); & still less so when it is little more than a pretentious substitute for beautiful (that green is so a.; a not very a. little town).

aetat., aet. The words, being ~ abbreviations of aetatis suae (of his, her, their, age) must be written with the period, & not asin: The | Die-Hards had as their leader Lord ‘| Halsbury, aetat 86./It was Mr. Chaplin, aetat 70, who./ A mani- © festo from Lord Roberts, aetat 79. . For aet-, zt-, see Æ, Œ.

affaire de cœur.

See FRENCH It does not a. me. It | WORDS.

affect, effect. These verbs are not synonyms requiring differentiation, but words of totally different meaning, neither of which can ever be substituted for the other. Affect (apart from other senses in which it is not liable to confusion with effect) means have an influence on, produce an effect on, concern, effect a change in: effect means bring about, cause, produce, result in, have as result. These measures chiefly a. the great landowners. may seriously a. (i.e. injure) his health. A single glass of brandy may a. (alter for better or worse the prospects of) his recovery. A single glass of brandy may e. (bring about) his recovery. This will not a. (change) his purpose. This will not e. (secure) his purpose. We hope to e. an improvement. I effected my escape.

affectionately. See LETTER FORMS.

affiliate makes -liable; see -ABLE 1,

affinity. The prepositions normally used after this are, according to context, between & with. When the sense is less relationship or likeness than attraction or liking, to or for
