page: 14

+ tion (at with the gerund not being even mentioned) after aim.

aîné. See FRENCH WORDS.

aitch, ache. The original spelling is ache, but aitch (drop one’s aitches) is now universal.

aitch-bone. H-bone, edge-bone, ashbone, & other forms, are due to random shots at the etymology. Aitch-bone, though it does not reveal the true origin of the word (L natis buttock, with loss of n- as in adder &c.), suggests no false one & corresponds to the pronunciation.

-AL NOUNS. When a noun in -al is given in its alphabetical place with a simple reference to this article, the meaning is that its use is deprecated. There is a tendency to invent or revive unnecessary verbal nouns of this form. The many that have passed into common use (as trial, arrival, refusal, acquittal, proposal) have thereby established their right to exist. But when words of some age (as revisal, refutal, appraisal, accusal) have failed to become really familiar & remained in the stage in which the average man. cannot say with confidence off-hand that they exist, the natural conclusion is that there is no work for them that cannot be adequately done by the more ordinary verbal nouns in -ion (revision), -ation (refutation, accusation), & -ment (appraisement). When there is. need on an isolated occasion for a verbal noun that shall have a different shade of meaning from those that are current (e.g. accusal may suggest itself as fitter to be followed by an objective genitive than accusation; cf. the accusal of a murderer, the accusation of murder), or that shall serve when none already exists (there is e. g. no noun beheadment), it is better to make shift with the gerund (the accusing, the beheading) than to revive an unfamiliar accusal or invent beheadal. The use of rare or new -al nouns, however, is due only in part to a legitimate desire for the exactly appropriate form; to some writers the out-of-

+ the-way word is dear for its own sake, or rather is welcome as giving an air of originality to a sentence that if ordinarily expressed would be detected as commonplace; they are capable of writing bequeathal for bequest, agreeal for agreement, allowal for allowance, or arisal for arising; except for this dislike of the normal word, we should have had account instead of recountal in Of more dramatic interest is the recountal of the mission imposed upon Sir James Lacaita, & to recount these in But this ts not the place for a recountal of these thrilling occurrences;_ cf. retiral in There were many retirals at the dissolution. Carousal, surprisal, supposal, decrial, may be mentioned among the hundreds of needless -al words that have been actually. used.

ala. The sex of the person. whose name is introduced by this does not affect the form, la agreeing not with it but with an omitted mode: a la reine;. à la (not au) mattre-@hétel; a Home-rule Bill à la (not au) Gladstone. Au with adjectives, as in au naturel, au grand sérieux, (cf. à la française &c.) is not used in English except in phrases borrowed entire from French.

alarm, alarum. Alarwm is by origin merely a variant of alarm, & the two nouns were formerly used without distinction in all senses. In poetry alarum may still bear any of the senses except that of fear or apprehension; but in ordinary use it is restricted to the senses of alarmsignal, warning-signal, or clock or other apparatus that gives these. This being a clear & useful. differentiation, it is to be regretted that alarm-clock, & alarm in the same sense; should (owing to the trade in alarums from America, where the differentiation has not been made) be reviving. alarmedly. Four syllables if' used; see -EDLY. albeit. See ARCHAISM. albino. PI.

-0s; see -O(E)s 6. Fem. albiness.
