page: 18

+ although. See THOUGH. alto. Pl. -os; see -0(z)s 6. altogether. Confusion between this & all together is not uncommon (Until at last, gathered altogether again, they find their way down to the iurf./A long pull, a strong pull, & a pull altogether./Great efforts have been made... to bring the troops out aliogether in brigades, & even in divisions. All together should have been used in each). Altogether is right only in the senses entirely or on the whole.

alto-velievo. Pl. -os; see -0(£)s 6. Preferable forms are the English high relief & the Italian alto rilievo.

aluminium. See LU.

amalgamate. See -ATABLE.

amateur. The best pronunciation is 4’matur, the next best 4matur’ ; it is high time that vain attempts at giving the French -eur should cease, since the word is in everyday use among the uneducated. Cf. Li- QUEUR, & see FRENCH PRONUNCIA- TION.

Four syllables; see

amazedly. -EDLY.

ambidext(e)rous. Spell without the -€-5 see DEXT(E)ROUS.

ame damnée. See FRENCH WORDS.

ameliorate makes-rable; see-ABLE 1.

amende honorable. See FRENCH WORDS.

amenity. Pronounce -mén-; the restoration of -mén- (Latin amoenus) is pedantic; see FALSE QUANTITY.

America(n). The use of America for the United States & American for (citizen) of the U. S. is open to as much & as little objection as that of England & English(man) for Great Britain (& Ireland), British, & Briton, It will continue to be protested. against by purists & patriots, & will doubtless survive the protests.

a merveille. See FRENCH WORDS.

amid, amidst. 4. Both are LITER- ARY WORDS, subject to the limitations of their kind.

2. As to the alternative forms, the OED states that ‘ There is a ten-

+ dency to use amidst more distributively, e.g. of things scattered about, or a thing moving, in the midst of others’. This may be true, though it is difficult to establish; to take a phrase quoted from Thackeray, amidst the fumes of tobacco would, by the OED tendency, be changed to amid, which is not in fact more natural. Another distinction that may be hazarded is that amid has dropped out of ordinary use still more completely than amidst, & is therefore felt to be inappropriate in many contexts that can still bear amidst. When we find amid in a passage of no exalted or poetical kind (A certain part of his work... must be done amid books), our feeling is that amidst would have been less out of place, though among would have been still better.

among, amongst. There is certainly no broad distinction either in meaning or in use between the two. The OED illustrates under amongst each of the separate senses assigned to among; it does, however, describe amongst as ‘ less usual in the primary local sense than among, &, when so — used, generally implying dispersion, intermixture, or shifting position °. Such a distinction may be accepted on authority, but can hardly be | made convincing by quotations even on the liberal scale of the OED. It is remarkable, at any rate, that | one of the forms should not by this time have driven out the other (cf. on & upon, although & though, while & whilst, amid & amidst). The survival of both without apparent differentiation may possibly be due to the unconscious desire for euphony or ease; few perhaps would say amongst strangers with among to hand, amongst us is easier to say than among us. Some confirmation of this is found by comparing the ratio borne by initial vowels to initial consonants after amongst with the corresponding ratio after among; reckoned upon the nineteenth-century quotations in the OED, this
