page: 31

arrière-pensée, See FRENCH WORDS.

arrive. For the absolute sense

success or recognition see GALLICISMS.

arsis. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

art. For the broad distinction þetween a. & science, see SCIENCE.

articulate, vb, makes -lable; see -ABLE l. to either sex;

artiste. 1. The word is applicable

artists & artistes as a phrase for male & female performers is a mere blunder.

2. In the sense professional singer, dancer, or other public performer, artiste serves a useful purpose; it is best restricted to this use, in which it conveys no judgement that the performance is in fact artistic; if it is desired to intimate that a cook, tailor, hairdresser, &c., or an artiste, makes his occupation into a fine art, artist, & not artistė, is the right word:—He is quite an artist; What an artist!

Arty, -ie. See -EY, -IE, -Y. | placed late. 6. Omission of as. capacity of. a fact.

as. 1. Equally as. 2. Causal as

3. As to. 4. As if, as though.

5. As, relative pronoun.

7, Asin the

8. Case after as.

9. As

10. As well as. follow(s) &c.

11. As

1. For the illiterate equally as (good &c.), see EQUALLY.

2. Causal as placed late, as mean- ‘ing since, because, seeing that, for, &c. To causal or explanatory asclauses, if they are placed before the main sentence (As he only laughed at my arguments, I gave it up) there is no objection. The reverse order (I gave it up, as he only laughed at ‘my arguments) is, except when the fact adduced is one necessarily known to the hearer or reader & present to his mind (I need not translate, as you know German), intolerable to anyone with a literary ear. All good writers instinctively avoid it; but, being common in talk, it is much used in print also by those who have not yet learnt that composition is an art & that sen-

tences require arrangement. The

first passage quoted suggests the

kind of writer most liable to this

mainly illiterate weakness; the

second & third, with their successive

as-clauses, exhibit the total lack of

ear that accompanies it; & a few

other gross offences are added:— One is pleased to find that Mr P. Gannon still maintains his form, as he won the Open Challenge cup in face of such opponents as .. ./The Sunningdale man, indeed, put up a most strenuous fight, as his 154 equalled the total of ... Mr Carlisie’s golf, however, was much more consistent than Mr Gannon’s, as to his two TCs Mr Gannon opposed an 82 & a 72./They strongly advocate a diminution on the petroleum duty, as it would lead to a great increase of work, it being largely used for industrial purposes, as coal is scarce here. /The reduction of the interest on Italian Consols represents a very great event for the young kingdom, as it shows what a large credit it enjoys, especially abroad, as that operation could not be carried out without the assistance of French & German bankers./Frivolous applications are fully guarded against, as there must accompany the application a statutory declaration./The Government have been induced to take this course as they are much impressed by the great value of the discoveries made. / The sketch of Milton’s life is inserted in this volume as it illustrates some points that occur in the Sonnets.

3. As to. This has a legitimate use—to bring into prominence at the beginning of a sentence something that without it would have to stand later (As to Smith, it is impossible to guess what line he will take); it has, for instance, been wrongly omitted in: Whether the publishers will respond to Sir Charles Stanford’s appeal or not it is too early to speak with any confidence. A spurious imitation of legitimacy occurs when as to introduces what would even without it stand at the head of the sentence, as in: As to how far such
