page: 37

+ with its superiors’ personality. The public thinks otherwise, & may be trusted to keep a useful word in existence, even though it has so far failed to bring into existence what it needs much more, a handy feminine for doctor. See FEMININE DESIGNATIONS. autocar, automobile. Now that motor(-car) has fully established its supremacy, it would be well if these rivals could be cleared away.

avail, vb. The constructions be availed of, avail of, illustrated in the following quotations are wrong:— If economical means of transport are availed of (made use of)./ No salvage appliances could have been availed of in time (utilized)./Watt & Fulton bethought themselves that power must be availed of, & not let off & wasted (used)./A desire to avail of the quieter phase of national emotion (take advantage of).

The normal construction is avail oneself of (I shall a. myself of your kind offer). From this are wrongly evolved (‘ with indirect passive, esp. in U.S.’ says the OED) such forms as The offer was availed of; the absurdity of this is patent as soon as the method is applied to similar reflexive verbs; because we can say They busy themselves in politics, You should rid yourself of cant, Many devote themselves to religion, we do not infer that Politics are busied in, Cant should be ridded of, Religion is often devoted to, are English; as little does avail oneself of the offer justify the offer was availed of. It is from the last incorrect form that the non-reflexive active is logically enough deduced, so that avail of the offer takes the place of the original avail oneself of the offer. Available, which perhaps encourages the use of these bad constructions, lends them no real support; its original sense was that can avail, &, apart from the great looseness of usage characterizing these adjectives (see -ABLE), what it would suggest is rather avail the offer than avail of the offer.

+ avenge, revenge, vengeance. Avenge & vengeance are one pair, revenge verb & noun another. The distinction between the two pairs is neither very clear nor consistently observed. This is natural, since the same act done under the same conditions may be described either as vengeance or as revenge according to the point of view from which it is regarded. It may be said, roughly, that vengeance is the making things even by an offender’s being made to suffer something more or less equivalent to his offence, while revenge is the satisfying of the offended party’s resentment by the same means; one act may effect both, but it will be spoken of by one name or the other according to context. It is in harmony with this that the subject of the active verb revenge is ordinarily the wronged party, & its object either himself or a wrong done at least indirectly to him, while the subject of avenge is ordinarily a disinterested party, & its object another person or a wrong done to another. Exceptions are numerous, & too complicated in their nature to be set forth here; but the general principle that personal feeling is the thing thought of when revenge is used, & the equalization of wrongs when avenge or vengeance is used, may assist choice.

Misuses of the verbs other than confusion between them are not frequent enough to require much notice; but it may be worth mention that the wrongdoer is never rightly the object of either, as in: The Russian... will avenge as has been his custom to avenge the birds of prey who swooped down upon him in his helplessness.

averse, aversion. To insist on from as the only right preposition after these, in spite of the more general use of to (What cat ’s averse to fish?— Gray. He had been averse to extreme courses.—Macaulay. Nature has put into man an aversion to misery.— Locke) is one of the pedantries that spring of a little knowledge. If
