page: 40

+ Ay, ay, sir is usually written thus; & aye is probably the commoner spelling now for ever; on the other hand the ayes have ùt is usual, though -es may there be intended for the plural termination. Ay (i) yes, aye (a) ever, seems likely to prevail; but the authority of the OED is on the other side.

B

babe, baby. In the primary sense baby is now the regular form, & babe archaic, poetic, or rhetorical. In figurative use, babe implies guilelessness, innocence, or ignorance, & baby unmanliness. baboo. Pronounce bah’boo. Pl. -00$ ; see -O(E)S 4.

baceara(t). Pronounce ba’karah. The spelling with -t is commoner in English, & that without -t in French.

bacchanal, bacchant(e). Bacchanal & bacchant are both used of males or females, or males & females, but with a tendency to be restrieted to males; bacchante is used of females only. Bacchant is always pronounced ba’kant; bacchante bak&’nt, ba’kant, or baka’nti. Bacchant has bacchants or bacchantés; bacchante has bacchantes (-ts or -tiz).

bacillus. Pl. bacilli; see -us, & LATIN PLURALS. For the meaning, see SCHIZOMYCETES.

BACK-FORMATION. A dictionary definition of the term is: Making from a supposed derivative (as lazy, banting) of the non-existent word (laze, bani) from which it might have come. It is natural to guess that the words scavenger, darkling, & gridiron, are formed from verbs scavenge & darkle & a noun grid, & consequently to use those verbs & noun if occasion arises; those who first used them, however, were mistaken, & were themselves making the words out of what they wrongly took for their derivatives; similarly banting is not formed from bant, but is the name first of a man. & then of

+ his system, out of which the verb to bant was made by back-formation. This will perhaps sufficiently explain the references made here & there to this article. Some back-formations are not generally recognized as such, & have the full status of ordinary words, e.g. diagnose (from diagnosis), drowse (from drowsy), sidle (from sideling = sidelong), grovel (from grovelling, an adverb). But more often they are felt to be irregular, & used only as slang or jocosely; so BURGLE, CHINEE, DONATE, enthuse, locomote, maffick, ORATE, proce’ss (go in procession), resurrect, revolute. Other articles that may be looked at are BRINDLE, COSE, DARKLE, FILTRATE, GRID, GUERILLA, & SALVE,

back of as a preposition is an American, not a British, idiom.

backsheesh. See BAKSHEESH.

bacterium. Pl. bacteria; see -uM. For the meaning, see Scuizomy- CETES.

badge. For synonymy, see SIGN.

badinage. Pronounce ba’dinahzh.

baggage. As applied to the belongings that a person travels with on land, the word is an Americanism for luggage.

bagnio. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 4.

baignoire. See FRENCH WORDS.

bail is right, & bale wrong, in the sense throw water out; the derivation is from French baille bucket.

bailable. For the sense, admitting of bail, see -ABLE 4,

baksheesh is the form recommended.

balance, in the sense rest or remainder, is, except where the difference between two amounts that have to be compared is present to the mind, a SLIPSHOD EXTENSION. We may fairly say ‘you may keep the balance ’, because the amount due & the amount that more than covers it suggest comparison; but in ‘ the b. of the day is given to amusement °’ such a comparison between amounts is, though not impossible, farfetched, & the plain word (rest, or remainder) is called for.

ballad. See TECHNICAL TERMS.
