page: 42

+ metal used over lavishly in decoration; & barbarous gold is the material prosperity that blinds to higher things; a barbarian king is a king of barbarians; a barbaric king one throned in rude splendour; a barbarous king a cruel despot.

barbarism, barbarity, barbarousness. The three nouns all belong to the adjective barbarous, but the first two are now (putting aside intentional archaism & metaphor) clearly distinguished. Barbarism means uncivilized condition, grossly uncultivated taste, or an illiterate expression; barbarity means grossly eruel conduct or treatment, or a grossly cruel act; barbarousness may be substituted for either of the others where the sense quality or degree is to be given unmistakably:— They live in barbarism; The barbarism, or barbarousness, of his style; * Thou asketh’ is a barbarism; He treats prisoners with barbarity; The barbarity, or barbarousness, of the decree is irrelevant; Unheard-of barbarities.

BARBARISMS is a hard word to fling about, apt to wound feelings, though it may break no_ bones; perhaps it would be better abstained from; but so too would the barbarisms themselves. What after all is a barbarism? It is for the most part some word that, like its name, is apt to wound feelings—the feelings, however, of much fewer persons, those who have about Greek & Latin not merely, like the Eton boys of a former generation, ‘ a profound conviction that there are such languages ’, but a sufficient acquaintance with & love of them to be pained by outrages upon their methods of word-formation. In this era of democracy it can hardly be expected that the susceptibilities of so small a minority should be preferred to the comfort of the millions, & it is easier for the former to dissemble their dislike of barbarisms than for the latter to first find out what they are & then avoid them.

+ These are unfortunately two separate difficulties, both serious. One may lack the information that would enable one to decide whether bureaucrat & cablegram & electrocute & pleistocene are or are not barbarisms; it is indeed obtainable for any particular word from a competent philologist; but life is not long enough to consult a competent philologist every time one of the hundreds of dubious words confronts one; nor yet is it long enough for an ad hoc course of Latin & Greek grammar. And then, even if the philologist has been consulted, or the course gone through, what next? are we to talk geology or electricity & abstain from pleistocene & impedance? No; a barbarism is like a lie; it has got the start of us before we have found it out, & we cannot catch it; it is in possession, & our offers of other versions come too late.

That barbarisms should exist is a pity; to expend much energy on denouncing those that do exist is a waste; to create them is a grave misdemeanour; & the greater the need of the word that is made, the greater its maker’s guilt if he miscreates it. A man of science might be expected to do on his great occasion what the ordinary man cannot do-every day, ask the philologist’s help; that the famous eocene-pleistocene nameswere made by ‘a good classical scholar °’ (see Lyell in D.N.B.) shows that word-formation is a matter for the specialist.

It will have been gathered that in this book barbarisms have not been thought of the practical importance that would demand elaborate discussion. What there is on the subject is chiefly in the general articles HYBRID DERIVATIVES & -O-, & under the words Briticism, bureaucrat, cablegram, calmative, climactic, coastal, electrocute, impedance, nounal, & pleistocene.

baresark, for berserker, is a corrupt modern form owing its existence to a probably false etymology.
