page: 43

baritone. See BARYTONE.

bark, barque. The two forms are now usually differentiated, bark being a poetic synonym for ship or boat, & barque the technical term for a ship of special rig.

baronage, barony, baronetage, baronetey. The forms in -age are collectives, meaning all the barons (or peers), all the baronets, list or book of barons &c. Those in -y are abstracts, meaning rank or position or title of a baron or baronet.

baroque. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

barricado. Pl. -os; see -o(z)s 6.

barytone, -ritone. The first is the best spelling. The -y- is the normal English transliteration of the original Greek v, which has been -changed to -i- in the derivative Ttalian baritono. The prevailing though not invariable English practice in adopting words at second hand is to undo such intermediate changes & transliterate the originals consistently. It would be justifiable to take the Italian baritono whole; but if we anglicize the ending we should follow the ordinary English method of transliteration. It is probably true that writers on music usually prefer bari-; but they are not yet irrevocably committed; of ‘two OED quotations from Grove one has bary- & one bari-. French spells baryton; &in the grammatical sense concerned with accentuation ‘barytone is the only form.

basal, basic. These unEnglishlooking adjectives, neither of which ‘existed before the nineteenth cen- ‘tury, were manufactured merely as ‘adjuncts to certain technical uses of ‘the noun base in botany, chemistry, & architecture, where fundamental ‘would have been misleading. But a tendency has lately arisen to allow ‘these upstarts to supplant fundamenial, with its 500-years tradition, in those general & figurative con- ‘texts in which they are unnecessary & incongruous. The native element of basal & basic is seen in:—The

+ elytra have a basal gibbosity; The basal portion of the main petiole; Its capita resting on its basic plinth; Basic salts, phosphates, owides. On the other hand fundamental should be substituted in:— Classification should rest on the most basal characteristics./ This is our basic principle./ The happy thought which is the basic idea of Truth’s Christmas number./ The great basic industry is agriculture. Many of those who use the words are no doubt sensible of the incongruity, but hope that what they have to say will be more convineing if seasoned with a pinch of the up-to-date & scientific.

bas bleu. See FRENCH WORDS.

bashaw is now only an ornamental ARCHAISM, the correct pasha having taken its place.

basin, bason. The first spelling is both commoner & better; the second is probably due to the established pronunciation (ba’sn); but cf. cousin.

basis. Pl, basés; see LATIN PLURALS.

bas-relief, bass-relief, basso-relievo, basso-rilievo. The first form ‘is French, the last Italian, & the other two are corruptions; the plural of the third is basso-relievos, & of the fourth basst-rilievi. It is recommended to use the first & pronounce it ba/sriléf.

bassinet. This, & not bassinetie or berceaunetie, is the right spelling; the wrong forms are pseudo-French.

bastinado. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 3. Batavian. For B.= Dutch, in B. grace &c., see PoLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

bath. Pl. pron. bahdhz; see -TH & -DH. bathetic, bathotic. These are made in imitation of pathetic, chaotic; but pathetic is not analogous, & chaotic is itself irregular. An adjective for bathos is, however, almost a necessity to the literary critic, & the OED states that bathetic is ‘ A favourite word with reviewers’; it is the better of the two.
