page: 45

6. Case of the complement. The rule that the complement must be in the same case as the subject of the copula ( You believed that it was he; You believed it to be him) is often broken in talk (Jt wasn’t me), but should be observed in print, except when the solecism is preserved in dialogue as characteristic. The temptation in its simplest forms is rare, but may occur; Meredith, for instance, writes I am she, she me, till death & beyond it, where the ungrammatical me is not satirically intended; & this should not be imitated. Two special types of sentence, however, call for mention. One is that illustrated by We feed children whom we think are hungry; for this gross but common blunder see WHOM. The other is seen in He has been, & not only passed for, our leader, where it pains the grammarian to find that leader is subjective after has been, but objective after for. We might be tempted to disregard his pain as due merely to a pedantic familiarity with Latin, in which the cases are not so often indistinguishable in form; but if we pass the leader sentence as good enough for English, we are committed also to This plan, which I have often tried & has never failed me; & from that every wellregulated mind will shrink, if only because the step from A man that hates me & I hate to Jones, who hates me & I hate is so fatally easy. Whether resistance is desirable may be better judged froma genuine production of the ill-regulated mind:— It gave a cachet of extreme clericalism to ithe Irish Party which it does not deserve, but must prejudice it not a little in the eyes of English Radicalism. k7. Forms. Those that require notice are (a) awt, ain't, (b) the singular subjunctives, & (c) wast, wert, (a) A(i)n’t is merely colloquial, & as used for isn’t is an uneducated blunder & serves no useful purpose. But it is a pity that a(i)n’t for am not, being a natural

+ contraction & supplying a real want, should shock us as though tarred with the same brush. Though I’m not serves well enough in statements, there is no abbreviation but a(i)n’t I? for am I not? or am not I?; & the shamefaced reluctance with which these full forms are often brought out betrays the speaker’s sneaking affection for the ain’t I that he (or still more she) fears will convict him of low breeding (Well, I’m doing it already, ant 1?; Yes, aiwt La lucky man?; I’m next, aiwt I?). (b) The present subjunctive has be throughout (Be I fair or foul; If thou be true; Be it so), the form beest, originally indicative but used for a time as second singular subjunctive, being obsolete. The singular of the past subjunctive is were, wert, were (If I were you; Wert thou mine; It were wise), were for the second person being obsolete. (c) Wert, originally indicative, was adopted like beest as a subjunctive form, & though it is still sometimes used alternatively with wast as indicative, the modern tendency is to differentiate the two & make wert subjunctive only (When thou wast true; If thou wert true)—a natural development that should be encouraged.

beano. Pl. -os; see -0(£)s 6.

bear, vb. See FORMAL WORDS. For p.p. see BORN(E).

beat. The old p.p. beat, still the only form in dead-beat, lingers colloquially also in the sense worsted, baffied (I won't be beat; Has never been beat), but now suggests ignorance rather than archaism.

beau has pl. beau (or beaus; see -x).

beau geste. See FRENCH WORDS, & GESTURE.

beau-ideal. If the word is to be used it should be pronounced bo-idé’al, & written without accent. But neither in its only French sense of ideal beauty, nor in its current English sense of perfect type or highest possible embodiment of
