page: 46

+ something, is there any occasion to use it, unless as a shoddy ornament. The English sense is based on the error of supposing idéal to be the noun (instead of the adjective) in the French phrase; & the English noun ideal, without beau, is accordingly the right word to use, unless flower, perfection, very type, pattern, pink, or some other word, is more suitable.

beau monde.

See FRENCH WORDS.

beauteous.

See Porrictisms, & PLENTEOUS.

beautiful. But the home b. needs other growing greenery when the festive season arrives./THE BED BEAUTIFUL. To see the Englisk bed of supreme beauty you must take train to... Such vulgarizing adaptations of Bunyan, now common, have upon readers the effect described in IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

beautify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

beaux yeux. See FRENCH WORDS.

because. After such openings as The reason is, The reason why . . . is, the clause containing the reason must not begin with because, but with that. Correct ~accordingly:— The reason was because they had foined societies which became bankrupt./The chief reason why he welcomed this bill was b. he regarded it as .../The reason why he had always avoided the honour of the Garter was because he knew. that it cost £1000. Their joining, his belief, his knowledge, are the reasons; & these can be paraphrased into the nounclauses that they had joined &c., but not into. the adverbial clauses because they had joined &c. For similar mistakes, see HAZINESS.

beceafico. PI. -os; see -o(z)s 6.

bedizen. The OED allows both i & i, but prefers the i, & states that ‘ all English orthoepists ’ do so.

bedouin (bé’d00é’n) serves as noun singular or plural (bedouins being now comparatively rare), or as adjective. The forms bedawy or bedawee (sing.), & bedawin or bedaween

+ (pl.), are also now used as nearer to the Arabic; see DIDACTICISM. beef. For plural see -ve(D). befal(l), befel(1). The second 1l should be kept; see -LL-, -L-, 4. begging the question. See TECH- NICAL TERMS. begin. 1. Past tense began, formerly also (& still rarely) begun. 2. For It was begun to be built &c., see DOUBLE PASSIVES.

behalf & behoof are often confused both in construction & in sense. Modern usage is settling down to a clear differentiation; & those who are not fully conversant with the history of the words would do well to confine themselves to the really, current types here given. On. his &e. behalf, or on behalf of all &c., means as representing. him, all, &c. (1 can speak only on my own behalf; Application was made on behalf of the. prosecutor); on is the normal preposition; the phrase does not mean, except additionally & by, chance, for the advantage of; it is still in common use. For or to his &c. behoof, or for or to the behoof of all &c., means for or to the advantage of him, all, &c. (For the behoof of the unlearned; To the use & behoof of him & his heirs; Taking towns for his own behoof); for & to are the prepositions; the is normally used; the meaning of behoof is simply advantage; the phrases are more or less archaic.

behemoth. Bihé’méth is the correct pronunciation, though bé‘iméth is perhaps commoner.

beholden, beholding. As p.p. of behold, beholden is now obsolete except in poetry. In the sense bound by gratitude (which it got when behold could still mean hold fast) it is still in use, though archaic by the side of obliged; beholding in that sense is an ancient error due to ignorance of how beholden got its meaning, & should be allowed to perish.

behoof. See BEHALF.
