page: 49

+ who prefer the abnormal or are unobservant of the normal. (1) Beside is now only a preposition, besides having all the adverbial uses; besides would have been normal in And what is more, she may keep her lover beside./We talked of thee & none beside. (2) Beside alone has the primary prepositional senses by the side of (Sat down beside her; She is an angel beside you), out of contact with (beside one-self, the question, the mark, the purpose). (8) Besides alone has the secondary prepositional senses in addition to, except; it would have been normal in Other men beside ourselves./I have no adviser beside you.

besom. Pronounce bé’zm. It has two uses only, (1) as the name for a gardener’s twig broom, (2) as a poetic expression for some purifying or destroying agency.

bespeak. The p.p. form bespoke perhaps lingers only, beside the now usual bespoken, as an_attributive adjective meaning made to order (bespoke goods, boots, &c.) in contrast with ready-made.

bestir is now always used reflexively (must b. myself), & never, idiomatically, as an ordinary transitive verb; stirred should have been used in The example of the French in Morocco has bestirred Italy into activity in Africa.

bête noire. See FRENCH WORDS. Those who wish to use the phrase in writing must not suppose, like the male writer quoted below, that the gender can be varied: From the very first, & for some reason that has always been a mystery to me, I was his béte noir.

bethink has constructions & meanings of its own, & can never serve as a mere ornamental substitute for think, as in They will bethink themselves the only unhappy on the earth.

bêtise. See FRENCH WORDS.

bet. Both bet & beited are in idiomatic use as past tense & p.p. He bet me £5 I could not; They betted

+ a good deal in those days; I have bet £500 against it; How much has been bet on him?; The money was all betted away. These examples, in which it will probably be admitted that the form used is better than the other, suggest that bet is preferred in the more usual connexion, i.e. with reference to a definite transaction or specified sum, & betied when the sense is more general. better. The idiomatic phrase had better requires care; the followmg, for instance, contains a violation of usage:—The fact that many moderate men on both sides were disquieted by the incident of the Prince’s presence in the House was enough to satisfy him that he had better been away. Correct forms are He had better be away, He had better have been away. He had better been away, which is not English, is perhaps due, when it occurs, to confusion with the totally different construction, correct though tending to the archaic, He had been better away. In this last, better belongs to he, & the full form is He would have been better (if he had been) away, so that better necessarily follows, & does not precede been. But in He had better have been away, the full form is He would have (i.e. find) (it) better (to) have been away, & better belongs to it, i.e. to to have been away (not, of course, to been).

better, bettor. See -or.

betterment. For the use of the word in general contexts, & apart from its technical application to property, see Saxonism. The late Lady Victoria devoted her entire life to the b. of the crofters & fishermen; if the writer had been satisfied with the English for betterment, which is improvement, he would not have been blinded by the unusual word to the fact that he was writing nonsense; the lady’s effort was not to better or improve the crofters, but their lot. He would reform our methods all round, beginning with increased attention to the milk supply & the consequent b. of infant feeding.
