page: 54

+ as promising fruit; the distinction, as regards literal flowers, is perhaps rather horticultural than literary or general; at any rate it is often neglected; but The roses are in bloom, The apple-trees are in blossom, & other uses, confirm it; and in figurative contexts, the bloomingtime or bloom of a period of art is its moment of fullest development, when its blossoming-time or blossom is already long past.

blouse. Pronounce blowz.

blowzed, -sed, blowzy, -sy.

The OED spells with z.

bluebell. In the south this is the wild hyacinth, Scilla nutans; in the north, & esp. in Scotland, it is the flower called in the south harebell, Campanula rotundifolia, with fewer, larger, & thinner-textured flowers than the other.

blu(e)ish. Spell without e. See MUTE E.

bluey. See -EY & -y.

boatswain. The nautical pronunciation (b6’sn) has become so general that to avoid it is more affected than to use it. See PRONUNCIATION,

bodeful is a modern stylish substitute for ominous; see WORKING & STYLISH WORDS, & SAXONISM.

body, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &e., 6.

bog(e)y, bogie. The OED prefers bogy for the bugbear, & bogie in coachbuilding; the golf word is usually spelt Bogey. ‘bohea. Pronounce bdhé’.

bolt, boult. The word of which the spelling varies is that meaning to sift. Of this the OED says:— The historical spelling of the word is boult: unfortunately the dictionaries have confounded it with ° [the other verb bolt] ‘& authorized the spelling bolt’. It is perhaps, however, not too late to restore the better spelling boulé in literary use at least. bombasine. The OED puts first the pronunciation bémbazé’n. bona fide(s). Bona fide is a Latin

+ ablative meaning in good faith; its original use is accordingly adverbial (Was the contract made bona fide?); but it is also & more commonly used attributively like an adjective (Was it a bona fide, or bona-fide, contract?); in this attributive use the hyphen is correct, but not usual; in the adverbial use it is wrong. Bona fides is the noun (His bona fides was questioned); the mistake is sometimes made by those who know no Latin of using fide instead of fides: The fact that Branting accepted the chairmanship of the Committee should be sufficient evidence of its bona-fide,

bonbon. See FRENCH WORDS.

bond(s)man. ‘The two forms are properly distinct, bondsman meaning a surety & being connected with the ordinary bond & bind, & bondman meaning a villein, serf, or man in bondage, & having (like bondage) nothing to do with bond & bind: but bondsman is now rare in its true sense, & on the other hand is much more used than bondman in the sense proper to the latter. The confusion is not likely to be corrected, & is of no importance.

Bon(e)y. See -ry, -1n, -y. bonhomie. See FRENCH WORDS.

bon mot. See FRENCH WORDS. The plural is bons mots.

bonne. See FRENCH WORDS. bonne bouche. The meaning of the phrase in French is not that which we have given it; but variation of meaning or form is no valid objection to the use of a phrase once definitely established; see A L’OUTRANCE. bonnes fortunes, bon ton, bon Vivant. See FRENCH WORDS. bookease. Pronounce bo0’k-kas, not bood’kas. bookie, -y. See -ry, -IE, -y. bookman. See NOVELTY-HUNTING, SAXONISM. booze, -zy, bouse, -sy, bowse, =Sy. The booz- forms are now established, & the others should be abandoned. born(e). The p.p. of bear in all senses except that of birth is borne
