page: 55

+ Q have borne with you till now; Was borne along helpless); borne is also used, when the reference is to birth, (a) in the active (Has borne no children), & (b) in the passive when by follows (Of all the children borne by her one survives); the p.p. in the sense of birth, when used passively without by, is born (Was born blind; A born fool; Of all the children born to them; The melancholy born of sokttude; Born in 1898).

borné. See FRENCH WORDS.

botanic(al). The -ic form is ‘ now mostly superseded by botanical, except in names of institutions founded long ago, as “ The Royal Botanic Society’’’—OED. See -IC(AL).

both. 1. Both...aswellas. 2.Redundant both. 3. Common parts in both .. . and phrases.

1. Both ...as well as. To follow b. by as well as instead of and, as is often done either by inadvertence or in pursuit of the unusual, is absurd; how absurd is realized only when it is remembered that the as well of as well as is itself the demonstrative to which the second as is relative, & can stand in the place occupied by both instead of next door to as. In the following examples, either omit both or read and for as well as; as weli, it will be seen, can be shifted into the place of both, if the object is to give timely notice that the carters’ strike, the composer, or the adjective, is not the whole of the matter:—He has figured prominently b.in the carters’ strike, in which many of his members were involved, as well as in the more recent railway strike./ The metrostyle will always be of exceeding interest, b. to the composer as well as to the public./Which differs from who in being used b. as an adjective as well as a noun.

2. Redundant both. The addition of both to equal(ly), alike, at once, between, or any other word that makes it needless, is at least a fault of style, & at worst (e.g. with be-

| tween) an illogicality. Im the ex-

+ amples, both should be omitted, unless the omission of the other word(s) in roman type is preferable or possible:—If any great advance is to be at once b. intelligible & interesting./ The currents shifted the mines, to the equal danger both of friend & foe./We find b. Lord Morley. & Lord Lansdowne equally anxious for a workable understanding./To the ordinary Protestant b. Latitudinarian & High-Churchman were equally hateful./The International Society is not afraid to invite comparisons between masters b. old & new.

3. Common parts in both... and phrases. Words placed between the both & the and are thereby declared not to be common to both members; accordingly, B. in India & Australia is wrong; the right arrangements are (a) B. in India & in Australia, (b) In b. India & Australia; of these b sounds formal, & is often shrunk from as a remedy worse than the disease; but there is no objection to'a, which should be used. Similarly, B. the Indians & the Australians is right & unobjectionable; B. the Indians æ Australians is common but wrong; The b. Indians & Australians is theoretically right but practically impossible.

boulevard. See FRENCH WORDS.

boult. See BOLT.

bounden is still used, & bound is not, with duty. It is also used alternatively with bound as the p.p. of bind in the sense oblige (I am much bounden, or bound, to you); but the whole verb, including the p.p., is a mere ArcHAISM in this sense.

bounteous, -iful. See PLENTEOUS.

bourgeois. See FRENCH WORDS. As the name of a printing TYPE, in which sense the word is English, it is pronounced berjoi’s.

bourn(e). There are two words, which were originally burn & borne, but are now not distinguished, consistently at any rate, either in spelling or in pronunciation. The first (which retains in Scotland & the
