page: 60

& should be used by those who use

the phrases.

bury. For inflexions see VERBS IN

-IE &c., 6.

bus is sufficiently established to

require no apostrophe; for the plural, see -s-, -ss-.

business, busyness. The second form, pronounced bi’zinis, is used as the simple abstract noun of busy (the state &c. of being busy) for distinction from the regular business with its special developments of meaning.

buskin.

For the b. meaning the tragic stage &c.

see BATTERED ORNAMENTS.

bustle. See PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

busy, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

but. l. Case after b. = except. 2. Redundant negative after b. 3. Illogical b. 4. Wheels within wheels. 5. B.... however. 6. But which.

1. Case after but = except. The question is whether b. in this sense is a preposition, & should therefore always take an objective case (Noone saw him but me, as well as I saw no-one but him), or whether it is a conjunction, & the case after it is therefore variable (I saw no-one but him, i.e. but I did see him; No-one saw him but I, i.e. but I did see him). The answer is that but was originally a preposition meaning outside, but is now usually made a conjunction, the subjective case being preferred after it when admissible. A correspondent who has collected a large number of examples in which an inflected pronoun follows but informs me that 95 % of them show the conjunctional use; Whence all b. he (not him) had fled exemplifies, in fact, the normal modern literary use. All but him is used (a) by those who either do not know or do not care whether it is right or not—& accordingly it is still good colloquial—, & (b) by the few who, being aware that b. is originally prepositional, are also proud of the knowledge & willing to air it—& accordingly it is still

+ pedantic-literary. It is true that the conjunctional use has prevailed owing partly to the mistaken notion that No-one knows it b. me is the same sort of blunder as It is me; but it has prevailed, in literary use, & it is in itself legitimate; it would therefore be well for it to be universally accepted. A

2. Redundant negative after but. But (now rare), but that (literary), & but what (colloq.), have often in negative & interrogative sentences the meaning that... not. But just as I shouldn’t wonder if he didn’t fall in is often heard in vulgar speech where didn’t fall should be fell, so careless writers insert after but the negative already implied in it. Examples (all wrong):—Who knows b. that the whole history of the Conference might not have been changed?/ Who knows but what agreeing to differ may not be a form of agreement rather than a form of difference?/How can Mr. Balfour tell b. that two years hence he may not be tired of official life?

For similar mistakes, see HAZINESS.

3. Ilogical but. A very common & exasperating use of but as the ordinary adversative conjunction is that illustrated below. A writer having in his mind two facts of opposite tendency, & deciding to give them in two separate & complete sentences connected by but, forgets that the mere presence of the opposed facts is not enough to justify but; the sentences must be so expressed that the total effect of one is opposed to that of the other; he must not be seduced into throwing in an additional circumstance in one (usually the second) of his sentences that will have the unintended effect of neutralizing the contrast:—In vain the horse kicked & reared, b. he could not unseat his rider (if the kicking was in vain, the failure to unseat involves no contrast; either in vain or but must be dropped)./Pole was averse to burning Cranmer, b. it was Mary who decided that his recantation was not genuine & that he must die (The fact in
