page: 62

such accidental recurrences of by as

are hereshown areslovenly (cf. oF):—

The author's attempt to round off the

play by causing Maggie to conquer by

making John laugh by her poor joke

about Eve was not worthy of him./Pal-

merston wasted the strength derived by

England by the great war by his brag.

by, bye, by-. The spelling, & usage

in regard to separating the two

parts, hyphening them, or writing them as one word, are variable. As the noun & adjective are merely developments of the adverb or preposition, it would have been reasonable to spell always by; but bye is now too firmly established in some uses to be abolished; & the question of hyphening, separating, or combining, is difficult. The following scheme might secure consistency without violating any usage that deserves respect.

1. The noun is bye (leg-bye; Jones a bye; by the bye).

2. The adjective (collateral, subordinate, incidental, additional, &c.) should be written by- (by-road, by-election, &c.); the spelling bye is due to the desire to distinguish from the preposition, but is only needed for this purpose if the hyphen (unobjectionable even in words made for the nonce; the by-effects is no worse than the bye effects) is omitted.

3. The adverb should be spelt by & joined on without hyphen (bygone, bystander, &c.).

4. Some special words:—by & by has the adverb or preposition twice, & should follow their spelling; bye-bye sleep, & bye-bye good-bye, are unconnected with by, & have usually the e; by-law is perhaps also unconnected, & is often spelt bye-, but may well be assimilated to words under rule 2.

A list is added for convenience: by & by, by-blow, bye (n.), bye-bye, by-election, by-end, bygone, by-lane, by-law, by-name, by-pass, bypast, by-path, by-play, by-product, by-road, bystander, by-street, by the bye, by-way, by-word, by-work.

&

cabbalist(ic), cabbala, &c. These are the right spellings, not caba-.

cable(gram). The verb cable (transmit, inform, &c., by cable) is both convenient & unobjectionable; cablegram is not only a BARBARISM, but a needless one, since cable (cf. wire vb & n.) serves perfectly as a noun also in the sense submarine telegram.

Pronounce kakā’, & see

cacao. cocoa. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 3.

cache. See FRENCH WORDS.

cachet is mainly a LITERARY CRITICS’ worD (bears the c. of genius &c.), & should be expelled as an alien; stamp, seal, sign manual, are good enough for English readers. See FRENCH WORDS; &, for synonymy, SIGN.

cachinnate, -ation, -atory.

See POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

cacoethes scribendi. See BATTERED ORNAMENTS,

cacophonous,

cacophony. See ANTI-SAXONISM.

cactus. Pl. usually -uses; see -us.

caddie, caddy. The golf-attendant has -ie, see -EY, -IE, -y; the tea-box has -y.

caddis is preferable to caddice. cadet. For this pronounced as French & appended to a name see FRENCH WORDS. cadi. Pronounce kah’di; pl. cadis. cadre, being an established military technicality, should be anglicized in sound & pronounced kah/der, in pl. kah’derz; the French pronunciation is especially inconvenient in words much used in the plural. caduceus. Pl. -cez; see -us. caecum, Caesar, caesious, caesura, &c. See Æ, a. caesura. See TECHNICAL TERMS. café is naturalized in the sense coffee-house or restaurant; in the sense coffee it is a FRENCH WORD. café chantant, café noir. See FRENCH WoRDS. caffeine. Pronounce ki’fiin, Caffre. See KAFIR.
