page: 64

+ lish ka/na-an; ka’na-an passes into ka/nayan, & that into ka’nyan; the pronunciation ka’nan, alone recognized by the OED, but chiefly in clerical use, is a worse evasion of the same difficulty. canaille. See FRENCH WORDS. canard should be anglicized, & have the d of the sing. & the ds of the pl. sounded. cancel makes -lled &c.; see -LL-, -L-. candelabrum. The pl. -bra is still preferred to -brums; the false sing. -bra with pl. -bras should not be used. candid. See -ER & -EST 4. cando(u)r. Keep the u; but see -OUR & -OR. cane makes cany; see -EY & -y. canine. The pronunciation ka’nin (not kani’n, nor ka’nin), though little recognized in dictionaries, is both the commonest & the best. Feline, bovine, asinine, leonine, are enough to show that RECESSIVE ACCENT is natural; &, if kă- is due to dread of FALSE QUANTITY, it is certainly not worth fighting for on that ground.

CANNIBALISM. That words should devour their own kind is a sad fact, but the guilt is perhaps less theirs than their employers’ ; at any rate the thing happens:—The true facts should be made known in regard to whom is actually due the credit of first proving the existence of petroleum in this country. To has swallowed a to./It is more or less—& certainly more than less—a standardized product. More has swallowed a more./ Although the latter were overwhelmingly superior in numbers, the former had the advantage of being under one control, & that of Napoleon himself. That has swallowed a that; the full form would be ‘ & that control the control of’, which gives ‘& that that of’; but this cannibal may perhaps be thought to have consumed rather himself than another of his kind./The less said about the method the insurgents were being dealt with in all too many cases the better. In has swallowed an in,

+ since ‘to deal with the insurgents this method ’ is not English, though ‘this way’ is./The Council of the League shail direct the Members of the League as to which combatant is to be applied the Decree of Nonintercourse. To has swallowed a to, as its way is when employed by AS-to writers. cannon. 1. For plural see CoL- LECTIVES 2. 2. As the natural name for the thing, c. is passing out of use & giving place to gun, which is now the regular word except when context makes it ambiguous.

cahon, canyon. The second is recommended. Pron. ka’nyon.

canorous. See POETICISMS.

cant. For meaning & use, see JARGON.

cantatrice is usually pronounced as . Italian (-écha), sometimes as French (-és); singer should be preferred when it is not misleading; other English substitutes, as songstress, female singer, are seldom tolerable; but see FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

canto. Pl. -os; see -0(£)s 6.

canton(ment). The noun canton is usually kintd’n, sometimes k&’/nton. The verb is in civil use kAnt6’n, but in military use generally kantoo’n. The noun cantonment, which is military only, is generally kantoo’nment.

canvas(s). The material is best spelt -as; so also the verb meaning | to line &c. with c. ; for the plural of the noun, & for canvas(s)ed &c. in this sense, see -s-, -Ss-. The verb meaning to discuss, ask votes, &c., has always -ss; so also the noun meaning the process &c. of canvassing in this sense.

caoutchouc. Pronounce kow’chook.

capercailye, -lzie. The best spelling is the first, with pronunciation kaperka'lyi.

capitalize, -ization, -ist. Accent the first, not the second syllables; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

capsizal. See -AL; capsize is noun as well as verb.
