page: 65

caption, in the sense title or heading ( chiefly used in U.S..—OED), is rare in British use, & might well be rarer.

carabineer, carbine. Though carbine has displaced carabine, the -aremains in The Carabineers as the name of a regiment; cf. WELCH.

carafe is, apart from its use in Scotland, chiefly a GENTEELISM for water-bottle.

caravanserai, -sera, -sary. The first spelling (pronounce -ri) is the best.

carbolic, carbonic. The first is the spelling for the disinfectant, the second for the poisonous gas.

carcass, -ase. The -ss form stands first in the OED.

careful. See -ER & -EST 4.

CARELESS REPETITION. See RE- PETITION OF WORDS & SOUNDS.

caret. Pronounce ka’rét.

cargo. Pl. -oes; see -O(E)s 1.

caricature. See BURLESQUE.

caries is a Latin singular meaning decay; pronounce kar‘iéz.

carillon. Pronounce ka’rilyon, or as in FRENCH WORDS.

cark(ing). The verb is practically obsolete, & the adjective, surviving only as a meaningless epithet of care, should be let die too.

carnelian. See CORNELIAN.

carol makes. -ller, -lling, &c.; see -LL-, -L-.

carotid. Pronounce karé’tid; see FALSE QUANTITY.

earousal. See -AL; carouse is itself a noun. :

carpet. For on the c. (under discussion) see GALLICISMS; a disadvantage peculiar to the phrase is that the sense required for c., viz tablecloth, is obsolete.

carriageable. For such formations see -ABLE 4.

carry. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

Carry, -ie. See -EY, -IE, -Y.

carte, quart(e), in fencing. The first spelling, still the commonest except in technical books following

1351

+ French authorities, should be preferred if only as keeping the pronunciation right.

carte blanche, carte-de-visite.

See FRENCH WORDS.

cartel, in the old senses, is pronounced kar’tl; in the new sense of manufacturers’ combination it represents German Kartell, & is often so spelt; it may therefore be expected to accent the last syllable for some time at least. The manufacturers’ c. is a contract between independent establishments regulating the amount of output for each, & in certain cases also the prices (Enc. Brit.); cf. TRUST.

carven is a REVIVAL, not having been used between the 16th & 18th ce.

caryatid. Pronounce karii’tid.

case. There is perhaps no single word so freely resorted to as a trouble-saver, & consequently responsible for so much flabby writing. The following extract from a legal treatise, in which the individual uses are comparatively justifiable, shows how the word now slips off the pen even of an educated writer:—In the majority of cc. where reprisals have been the object, the blockade has been instituted by a single State, while in cc. of intervention several powers have taken part; this is not, however, necessarily the c.

To obviate the suspicion of an intolerant desire to banish it from the language, let it be admitted that case has plenty of legitimate uses, as in:—If I were in your c.; A bad c. of blackmailing; I am only putting a c.; Circumstances alter cc.; In c. of fire, give the alarm; Take brandy with you in c. of need; The. plaintiff has no c.; What succeeds in one c. may fail in another; Never overstate your c.; Tariffreform is in bad c. ; In no c. are you to leave your post; It would be excusable for a starving man, but that was not your c.; There are seven cc.. of cholera.
