page: 67

+ (anticipate that he would remain)./ This Conference will lay a foundation broader & safer than has hitherto been the c. (been laid)./It is not often worth while harking back io a single performance a fortnight old; but this is not the c. with the Literary Theatre Club’s production of Salome (but it is worth while).

casein. Pronounce k&’siin.

CASES. 1. General. 2. The status of case. 8. Specimens of case mistakes. 4. Temptations.

1. General. The sense of case is not very lively among Englishspeakers because, very few words having retained distinguishable caseforms, it is much more often than not needless to make up one’s mind what case one is using for the purpose of avoiding solecisms. Mistakes occur chiefly, though not only, with (a) the few words having caseforms, mostly personal pronouns, & (b) the relative pronouns. Accordingly, necessary warnings, with illustrations & discussion, are given in the articles 1, ME, HE, SHE, WE, US, THEY, WHO 1, 2, THAT REL. PRON. 5, & WHAT 3; & to these may be added BE 6, LET, & THAN, which words are apt to deceive weak grammarians. To those warnings the reader is referred for practical purposes, & the present article can be devoted to a confession of faith in case as an enduring fact, a miscellaneous collection of quotations showing that it cannot quite be trusted to take care of itself, & a glance at the conditions that make mistakes most likely.

2. The status of case. Is case, then, a notion permanently valuable & inevitably present, or can we, & may we as well, rid our minds of it? We know that grammarians are often accused, & indeed often guilty, of fogging the minds’ of English children with terms & notions that are essential to the understanding of Greek & Latin syntax, but have no bearing on English. We know that the work done by the classical case-

+ endings has been in large part trans- | ferred in English to two substitutes: the difference between the nominative & the accusative (or subject & object) English indicates mainly by the order in which it arranges its words; & the dative, ablative, locative, & such cases, it replaces by various prepositions. We know that English had once case-forms for nouns as well as pronouns, & that nevertheless it found them of so little use that it has let them all disappear. We know that, if the novelists are to be trusted, the uneducated find the case-endings even of pronouns superfluous; ‘Me & my mate likes ends’ said the ruffian who divided the rolypoly between himself & his ally & left their guest the hiatus; he had no use for I, even when the place to be filled was that which belongs to the subject, & the instinct of case, if it exists untaught, might have been expected to act. We know, lastly, that not everyone who has learnt grammar enough to qualify as journalist or novelist is quite safe on his cases when the test is a little more severe than in Me & my mate.

Is the upshot that case is moribund, that our remaining case-forms are doomed to extinction, that there is behind them no essential notion or instinct of case itself, that no fuss whatever need be made about the matter, that the articles of which a list was given above are much ado about nothing, & that the right policy is to let the memory of case fade away as soon as we can agree whether I or me, she or her, who or whom, is to be the survivor of its pair? Possibly itis; SuBsJUNCTIVES are nearly dead; case too may be mortal; but that fight to a finish between I & me & the other pairs will be a lengthy affair, & for as long as it lasts the invisible cases will have their visible champions to muster round. Meanwhile let me confess my faith that case visible & invisible is an essential of the English language, & that the right
