page: 73

centre, center. See -RE & -ER; &, for ceni(e)ring, SPELLING POINTS 4.

century. Each ec. as _ ordinally | named (the 5th, 16th, c.) contains only one year (500, 1600) beginning with the number that names it, & ninety-nine (401-499, 1501-1599) | beginning with a number lower by one. Accordingly 763, 1111, 1300, 1912, belong to the 8th, 12th, 138th, | & 20th, ec.

For the curiously differ- ent Italian reckoning, see TRECENTO.

-cephalic, -cephalous. Compounds (brachy-, dolicho-, hydro-, &c.) accent the -ceph- of -cephalous, but the -alof -cephalic. As there is no difference of meaning, however, & -ic is the commoner, -cephalous should be abandoned as a NEEDLESS VARIANT.

cerement is disyllabic (serm-).

ceremonial, ceremonious, aa. Ceremonial means connected with or constituting or consisting of or fit for a ceremony (i.e. a piece of ritual or formality) or ceremonies (the -al | law; a-al occasion; for -al reasons; -al costume). Ceremonious means | full of or resulting from ceremony i.e. attention to forms (why be so | -ous? ; -ous people; -ous politeness). In these examples the termination not used could hardly be substituted, even with change of meaning. = But with some words -al & -ous are both possible, though not indifferent: a -ous court is a sovereign’s court in which ceremony is much observed; a -al court would be a judicial court set up to regulate ceremonies; A visitor may make a -ous entry into a room, but an army a -al eniry into a town that has , capitulated.

ceriph. See SERIF.

certes. Pronounce ser’téz. See ARCHAISM.

certify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

certitude is now restricted to the single sense of absolute conviction or feeling quite sure; certainty can, but often does not, mean this also, _ & the use of c, may therefore obviate ambiguity. D3

cerulean. See Æ, Œ.

cervical is pronounced servi‘kl by purists, but ser’vikl is commoner; see on doctrinal in FALSE QUANTITY; the Latin for neck is cerviz, -icis.

Cesarevitch or -witch, Cesarevna, are the right forms for the Czar’s eldest son & that son’s wife. Pronounce siz&’riwich. Czarevitch is an obsolete title superseded by Grand Duke.

cess. For synonymy see TAX.

ceterach. Pronounce sé‘terak.

ceteris paribus. Pronounce sé‘teris paribus.

chagrin. Pronounce shagré’n. The pronunciation shagri/‘n, used to avoid improbable confusion with shagreen, would commit us to chagrinned instead of chagrined; see -N-, -NN-.

chagrinedly.

Four syllables; see -EDLY.

chairwoman.

See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

chaldron. Pronounce chawl-.

chalet. See FRENCH WORDS.

chalybeate. Pronounce kali’biat.

cham. Pronounce kim.

chamade. See FRENCH WORDS.

chamois, in or used for c.-leather, is best pronounced sh&’mi.

chamomile. See CAMOMILE.

champaign. The OED pronounces cha’mpan, & rejects shimpa’n & shé’mpan.

chance,

n., makes chancy; see -EY & -Y.

chance, vb, as a synonym for happen (it chanced that .. .; chanced to meet him) stands in the same relation to it as CEASE to stop.

chancellery, -ory, -erie. The first form (accented on the first syllable) is that preferred by the OED.

Change, in on Change, is not an abbreviation of Exchange, & should have no apostrophe. chantage. See FRENCH WORDS; blackmail is generally preferable.

Chanticleer. See SOBRIQUETS. chanty, sh-, sailors’ hauling-song. Spell c-, but pronounce shi-; the
