page: 74

+ anomaly is accounted for by the supposed derivation from French chantez sing ye.

chap, chop, jaw or cheek. In lick one’s cc., fat-cc., c.-fallen, both spellings are common; in Bath c., chap only is used, &, in the cc. of the Channel, chops only.

chaperon. The addition of a final e is wrong. Pronounce shi’peron.

char-a-bane is a word in popular use, & the popular pronunciation (sha’rabang) should be accepted; if the spelling sharabang, or at the least charabanc, could be introduced too, so much the better. See FRENCH WORDS; the French spelling in the singular is char-à-bancs.

character is a valuable & important word with several well-marked senses. The worst thing that can happen to such a word is that it should be set to do inferior & common work, which, while it could be more suitably done by meaner words, has to be done so often that the nobler word is cheapened by famillarity. Character, like case & other good words, now occurs a hundred times as a mere element in PERI- PHRASIS for once that it bears any of its independent senses. The average writer can perhaps not be expected to abstain from the word for the word’s sake; but, if he realizes that at the same moment that he degrades the word he is making his sentence feeble and turgid, he will abstain from it for his own sake. A few slightly classified examples of the abuse are therefore added.

(a) C. is used with adjectives as a substitute for an abstract-noun termination, -ness, -ty, &c. :—The very full c. of the stage-directions indicates . . . (great fullness)./On account of its light C., Purity & Age Usher’s whisky is a whisky that will agree with you (lightness. But this is the kind of literature in which such idioms are most excusable)./ Unmoved by any consideration of the unique & ancient c. of the fabric (uniqueness & antiquity).

t

(b) A simple adjective x is watered into of a x character; the right water for such solutions, which are bad in themselves when not necessary, is kind; but the simple adjective is usually possible:—Employment of a patriotic c. (patriotic employment)./There is no unemployment of a chronic c. in Germany./ The attention which they receive is of a greatly improved c./His influence must have been of a very strong c. to persuade her./The number of mis- | prints is inconsiderable; we have | noticed only one of a disconcerting c. (kind; or one that need be disconcerting)./Payments of the c. in ques- tion (of this kind; or such payments). ||

character, characteristic. For synonymy see SIGN.

char(e). The form chare (part. charing, pron. -ar-) is said by the OED to be the usual one. This is doubtful even now, & the invariable & commoner charwoman is at any rate sure to establish char, charring, before long.

chargé d’affaires.

See FRENCH WORDS.

charivari. Pronounce shav’ivar‘’s. charlatan &c. Pronounce sh-.

Charles’s wain. For -s’s

see POSSESSIVE PUZZLES 1. charm. For the noun in literary criticism see LITERARY CRITICS’ WORDS. chartreuse. See FRENCH WORDS. chasse, chassé, chassis. See FRENCH WORDS. chasten. See PRONUNCIATION, Silent t. chastise is never spelt with z; see -ISE)(-1ZE, chateau, chauffeur, chaussure. See FRENCH WORDS; &, for châteaux or chateaus, -x. cheap(ly). See UNIDIOMATIC -LY. check (draft on bank). See CHEQUE. checker. See CHEQUER. (check)mate. Mate is the usual form in chess, & checkmate in figurative use. cheerful, cheery. The latter has reference chiefly to externals—
