page: 75

+ voice, appearance, manner, &c. Resignation may be cheerful without being cheery; & a person may have a cheerful, but hardly a cheery, spirit without his neighbours’ discovering it. The cheerful feels & perhaps shows contentment, the cheery shows & probably feels it. For cheerful see -ER & -EST, 4. chef, chef-d’ceuvre. See FRENCH WORDS.

chemist &c., chy-. Che- is now esta- ~ blished, though chymist is still sometimes seen over drug-shop windows.

cheque, though merely a variant of check, is in British usage clearly & usefully differentiated from it with the sense bank-draft, check being chiefly American in this sense.

chequer, checker. The first spelling is very much commoner for both the noun & the verb.

cherub, cherubic. Cherub has pl. cherubim chiefly when the Cherubim are spoken of as a celestial order; cherubims is wrong; in figurative use cherubs is usual. Cherubic (see -B-, -BB-) is pronounced -dob-.

ches(t)nut. Spell with & pronounce without the 7.

chevalier d'industrie.

See FRENCH WORDS.

chevaux de frise. See FRENCH WORDS. Cheval de frise is now rare; chevaux de frise is treated either as sing. or as pl. (a wall with a c.d.f., or a wall with c.d.f.).

chevelure. See FRENCH WORDS.

chevy. See CHIVY.

chiaroscuro. Pronounce kyar’oskoor’6.

chiasmus. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

chibouk, -ouque. Pronounce ch- ; spell -k.

chic. See FRENCH WORDS.

chicane. Pronounce sh-.

chick(en). Chicken is the original & still the ordinary form, chick serving as a diminutive & being used chiefly of an unhatched or unfiedged bird, the young of small birds, or (endearingly, in pl.) children. For pl. of chicken see COLLECTIVES 4.

+ chide stands to scold as CEASE to stop. Past chid, p.p. chid(den). chiefest, formerly common, is now felt to be an unnatural form, & used only as an ornament. chiffon. See FRENCH WORDS. chilblain. So spelt; see -LL-, -L-, 4. childish, childlike. The distinction drawn is so familiar that childish is in some danger of being restricted to the depreciatory use that is only one of its functions, while childlike is applied outside its sphere; the face, for instance, that,we like a child to have should be called not a childlike, but a childish face; the rule that childish has a bad sense is too sweeping, & misleads. Childish used of adults or their qualities, & childlike (which should always be so used), have the opposite implications of blame & approval; childish means ‘that ought to have outgrown something or to have been outgrown’, & childlike ‘that has fortunately not outgrown something or been outgrown’; childish simplicity in an adult is a fault; childlike simplicity is a merit; but childish simplicity may mean also simplicity in (& not as of) a child, & convey no blame; childish enthusiasm may be either a child’s | enthusiasm or a man’s silly enthusiasm; childlike enthusiasm is only that of a man who has not let his heart grow hard.

childly. See REVIVALS.

chilli is the right spelling for the capsicum pod (unconnected with | Chili); pl. chillies.

chill(y). The form chill (as adj.) is only a LITERARY WORD, chilly being that in general use.

See Æ, Œ.

chimera, ‘-aera, -zra. | Pronounce kimera.

Chinaman &c. The normal uses are:—A Chinaman (rarely Chinese); three Chinamen (sometimes Chinese); 50,000 Chinese (sometimes Chinamen); the Chinese (rarely Chinamen). Chinee for Chinaman is a BACK-FORMATION from Chinese pl., &, being still felt to be irregular, is
