page: 78

+ incorrect, assigns them different functions:—‘ Mere situation is expressed by “‘ in the circumstances ”’, action affected is performed “ under the circumstances ”’’.

cirque. Pronounce serk.

cirrus has pl. cirri; see -us.

Cissy, -ie. See -ry, -1E, -y.

cit(e)able. Spell -ta-; see MUTE x.

cither(n), cittern, gittern, zither(n). When the forms are distinguished, cither is the general word including the ancient cithara & its more modern representatives, zither(n) is appropriated to the Tyrolese instrument, & cithern, cittern, gittern, all mean that common in the 16th & 17th ce. ; ciliern & gittern might well be dropped as NEEDLESS VARIANTS.

cityless. So spelt; cf. pitiless.

civil. See -ER & -EST, 4.

clad. See CLOTHE.

claim. 1. A vulgarism that has made its way, probably through the advertisement column, into journalism, & is now of daily currency, is the use of claim in the senses of assert, maintain, or represent, with the infinitive construction admissible after them, but not after it (see ANALOGY). The only legitimate infinitive after c. occurs when c. is in the active & also has the same subject as the infinitive (he claims to have proved his case, to be the heir, to be rewarded). Examples of the false idiom are:—This new product, which Mr Sandow claims to be absolutely pure (asserts)./An automatic self-starter, which is claimed to be very reliable (represented)./The gun is claimed to be the most serviceable weapon of its kind (asserted)./ Failure to live up to what we c. to be our most serious convictions (represent)./Usage is not, as it is often claimed to be, the absolute law of language (asserted)./A play by Tolstoy, which is claimed to take the first place among . . . (represented). ff A problem which is claimed to be among the most pressing (maintained). 2. The use of claim n. or vb follow-

+ ed by (or implying) a that-clause, when c. means not demand but assert(ion), is also, though less grossly, contrary to British idiom; I c. (demand) that it should be postponed is English, but hardly Z c. (assert) that it is false:—The c. is made that there are a certain class of men out of work who . . ./The Prusstan franchise, the reform of which, it is claimed by Liberals, the Reichstag will have to take in hand.

clamant in the senses clamorous, shouting, insistent, (a c. crowd, c. appetites) is a Porricism; in the sense flagrant or crying (a c. injustice, scandal) itis due to NovrELTY- HUNTING.

clamour, clamorous. See -our- & -OR-.

clandestine. Pronounce klAndé’stin.

clangour, clangorous. See -our- & -OR-.

claque. See FRENCH WORDS.

Clarenc(ijeux. The OED puts the spelling -ceux first, & pronounces klă’'rensū.

clarify, clarity. The OED pronounces klari-; klari- is also legitimate, but not (see FALSE QUAN- TITY) obligatory. For infiexions of -fy, see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

clari(o)net. The two forms denote the same instrument, but the -onet form is in more general use (& therefore preferable in literature), while musicians & musical connoisseurs affect the other.

classic(al). The adjectives are distinguished rather by suitability to different contexts than by difference of meaning. Classical is the usual word, & it would perhaps never be noticeably the wrong one, even where classic is more idiomatic (e.g., we can say, if we choose, This is classical ground); on the other hand, there are many combinations in which classic would sound ridiculous; classic education, classic allusions, are impossible. Classic, however, is often preferred (1) where the language is of an ornate kind
