page: 82

codlin(g). Spell with the g.

c(o)enobite. Spell coe-; see Æ, Œ.

coercible, -eable. Spell -ible; see -ABLE 2,

coffee. Pronounce k6-, not kaw-.

cog. The phrase cogged dice is due to a misunderstanding of the old io cog dice, which meant not to load them, but to cheat in throwing them; loaded should be used.

cogent. See -ER & -EST, 4.

cogitate makes -itable; see -ABLE 1.

cognate. For the sense in grammar see TECHNICAL TERMS.

cognizance, cognizant, cognizable, cognize. Cognize alone has the -galways sounded. Of the four, cognizance is the word from which the others have sprung, & it had for some time no -g- to be sounded; the introduction of the -g- has affected pronunciation, but kòn- is still common in the first three, & should be maintained at least in cognizance & cognizant; cognizable should be either k6’nizabl or, if it is to be assimilated to cognize, kégni’zabl. For synonyms of -nce, see SIGN.

coiffeur, coiffure. See FRENCH WORDS.

coincidence. The long arm of c. is a HACKNEYED PHRASE. Varying its form, endowing it with muscles, making it throw people about, & similar attempts at renovation, only make matters worse:—The author does not strain the muscles of coincidence’s arm to bring them into relation./Nor does Mrs Moberly shrink from a use of ‘the long arm’ quite unnecessarily. /The long arm of c. throws the Slifers into Mercedes’s Cornish garden a little too heavily. colander, cullender. Both are pronounced kii’lender; the first spelling, which is nearer the Latin stem (cf. percolate), is also more frequent in the 19th-c. quotations in the OED. col-, com-, con-. There is a tendency among the more or less illiterate, on whom spelling exercises an excessive influence, to pronounce words beginning with these syllables

+ & having the word-accent on the second syllable (such as collective, colloquial, combustible, commandment, commercial, concomitant, condition, confederate) with a distinct short o (kéndi’shn, kémah’ndment, instead of the correct kndi’shn, komah‘ndmnt).

colicky. Spell the adj. with -cky; cf. bivouac(ked), & -c-, -cK-.

collapsable, -ible. The first is better; see -ABLE 2.

collate. See -aATABLE.

collation. The reporter who can be content with repast instead wins the moderate gratitude, & he who says meal the fervent admiration, of most of us; see WORKING & STYLISH WORDS.

collectable, -ible. The first is better; see -ABLE 2.

COLLECTIVES. The word is applied to many different things, & in TECHNICAL TERMS an attempt is made to disentangle them. Flock! (a number of sheep or parishioners) is a collective of one kind, & flock? (woollen waste) is of another; flock * may be treated as singular or plural (His f. was attacked by wolves; His f. was without a pastor or were unanimous in disapproval), & can itself be used in the plural with the ordinary difference in meaning from the singular (shepherds tending their flocks); flock? can be used either in the singular or in the plural, the meaning being the same, a material, & flock being treated always as singular & flocks as plural (A flock matiress; A mattress of flock or flocks; the flock has, the fiocks have, not been disinfected). But the word collective is applied to both, as well as to many equally dissimilar kinds of noun, for which see TECHNICAL TERMS.

Reference of a word to this article means that it has the peculiarity indicated by the number of the following table that is given in the reference.

1. Words that have no separate plural form, but are the same in both
