page: 88

+ at certainly is, except perhaps in the case of ‘ Monna Vanna’, not in the matter of the plays to which he has refused a licence, but in regard to a few of the plays which he sanctioned./France is now going through a similar experience with regard to Morocco to that which England had to undergo with reference to Egypt after the occupation.

But so much has been said on the subject, & so many illustrations given, elsewhere (see PERIPHRASIS, & the words in small capitals in the list above) that nothing but a very short general statement need be made here. Of such phrases some are much worse in their effects upon English style than others, in order that being perhaps at one end of the scale, & in the case of or as to at the other; but, taken as a whole, they are almost the worst element in modern English, stuffing up the newspaper columns with a compost of nouny abstractions. To young writers the discovery of these forms of speech, which are used very little in talk & very much in print, brings an expansive sense of increased power; they think they have acquired with far less trouble than they anticipated the trick of dressing up what they may have to say in the right costume for public exhibition. Later, they know better, & realize that it is feebleness, instead of power, that they have been developing; but by that time the fatal ease that the compound-preposition style gives (to the writer, that is) has become too dear to be sacrificed.

comprehend. See APPREHEND.

compress, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

comptroller, cont-. Mhe first spelling is not merely archaic, but erroneous, being due to false association with count (F conter f. L computare).

computable, -ative. The accent now varies, but will probably settle on the first syllables; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

comrade. Pronounce k6-, not ku-.

con-. For pronunciation in continue &c., see COL-.

concavity. Pronounce -kay-.

conceal. See FoRMAL WORDS,

concentrate &c. 1. Accents as in COMPENSATE &¢., 2. See -ATABLE.

concept is a philosophical term, & should be left to the philosophers; the substituting of it for the ordinary word conception as below is due to NOVELTY-HUNTING:—[a_ caricature has been described] Now this point of view constantly expressed must have had its influence on popular concepts. See POPULARIZED TECH- NICALITIES.

concern. In (so far) as concerns or regards, the number of the verb (which is impersonal, or has for its unexpressed subject ‘ our inquiry ’ or some similar phrase) is invariable; the change to plural, as in the quotation that follows, is due, like as FOLLOW, to misapprehension:— Many of these stalks were failures, so far as concern the objective success.

concernedly. Four syllables; see

ee -EDLY.

concernment has no senses that are not as well, & now more naturally & frequently, expressed by the noun concern; the substitution of the latter was censured as affectation in the 17th c., but the boot is now on the other leg, & c. should be dropped as a NEEDLESS VARIANT.

concert, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

concerto. Pronounce konchar’to; pl. -0s, see -0(£)s 6.

concession(n)aire Omit the -n-, & pronounce -sésh-; cf. COMMISSION- AIRE,

concessive. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

concettism. Pronounce -chét-.

conch. Pronounce -k.

concierge. See FRENCH WORDS.

conciliate makes -liable; see -ABLE 1.

conciseness, concision. The first is the English word familiar to the ordinary man; concision is the LITERARY CRITICS’ WORD, more recent in English, used by writers
