page: 89

+ under French influence, & often ‘requiring the reader to stop & think whether he knows its meaning: The writing of verse exacts concision, clear outline, a damming of the waters at the well-spring. See -10N & -NESS.

concolo(u)rous. See HYBRID DE- ‘RIVATIVES.

concomitance, -cy. The second is mow a NEEDLESS VARIANT; see -CE, -CY.

concord. For the sense in gram- ‘mar, see TECHNICAL TERMS.

concordat. Pronounce konkor’dit.

concupiscence, -ent. Accent second, inot third, syllables.

coneur makes concur’ring, but coneu’rrent &c.; see PRONUNCIA- TION, s.f.

condemning. Pronounce -éming.

‘condign meant originally deserved, .& could be used in many contexts, with praise for instance as well as with punishment. It is now used ‘only with words equivalent to ‘punishment, & means deservedly severe, the severity being-the important point, & the desert merely a condition of the appropriateness of the word; that it is an indis- ¡pensable condition, however, is shown by the absurd effect of:— Count Zeppelin’s marvellous voyage through the air has ended in c. disaster.

condolence. Pronounce kond0O’lens.

condottiere. Pronounce -tyari. Pl. -ri, pron. -ré.

eonduct, n. & v.

See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

conductress.

See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

conduit. Pronounce ki’ndit.

coney. See cony.

confection. The French dress- ‘making term properly means no more than a piece of attire not made to measure; but, being applied chiefly to fashionable wraps &c., it is sometimes misunderstood -as expressing in itself (like creation) the speaker’s exclamatory admiration. confederacy, -eration. See FEDERA- TION, confer(r)able.

Of the verbs in -fer

+ accented on the last syllable, two form adjectives in -ble of which the spelling & accent are fixed (pre’ferable & tra’nsferable). The others, for which various forms have been tried (confer, confe’rrable; defer, none; infer, i/nferable & infe’rible & infe’rrable & infe’rrible; refer, re’ ferable & refe’rrable & refe'rrible), should be made to follow these two, & the forms should be co’nferable, inferable, pre’ ferable, re’ ferable, tra’nsferable.

confessedly.

Four syllables; see -EDLY.

confidant, -ante, -ent, nn. Co'nfident was in use as a noun meaning confidential friend or person to whom one entrusted secrets long before the other forms were introduced; but it is now an ARCHAISM, & to revive it is pedantry. Confidant is masculine & confidante feminine; they are indistinguishable in pronunciation, & accent the last syllable.

configuration, configure. For pronunciation, see FIGURE.

confines, n. Accent the first syllable; see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

confiscate &c. 1. Accents as in COMPENSATE &e. 2. C. makes confiscable; see -ABLE 1.

conflict, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT. conformable. For such formations see -ABLE 4, confrére. See FRENCH WORDS. confusedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY. congé, congee. The second, formerly established, is now obsolete or archaic; for the first, see FRENCH WORDS. congeries. Pronounce konjé‘riéz. congratulate makes -lable; see -ABLE 1. congregate. Where ——s most do c. is-a BATTERED ORNAMENT. conjugate makes -gable; see -ABLE 1. conjugation, conjunction. See TECHNICAL TERMS. conjunctive (mood) is a term that had much better be dropped. The forms denoted by c. & subjunctive
