page: 90

+ are the same, & subjunctive is the much better known name. C. might have been useful in distinguishing uses if it had been consistently applied; but it means sometimes the forms however used (subjunctive then being a division under it restricted to the subordinate uses), sometimes the forms when used as main verbs (subjunctive then being a division parallel to it restricted as before), & sometimes merely the forms when used as main verbs of conditional sentences (subjunctive then being, very unreasonably, the name for all uses, dependent or independent, & c. a division under it). This is hopeless confusion; c. should be given up, subjunctive be used as the name of the forms whatever their use, & the differences of function be conveyed by other words (dependent, conditional, optative, &c.).

conjure in the sense bescech is pronounced konjoor’, in other senses kit’njer.

conjuror, -er. In the OED 19th-c. quotations, -or is five times as common as -er, & it might well be accepted as the only form.

connectable, -ible. The first is recommended; see -ABLE 2.

connexion, -ction. 1. The first is the right spelling; see -xION.

2. Inc. with is a formula that every one who prefers vigorous to flabby English will have as little to do with as he can; see PrERripHRasis. It should be clearly admitted, however, that there is sometimes no objection to the words; this is when they are least of a formula & c. has a real meaning (Buses run i.c.w. the trains; The isolated phrase may sound offensive, but taken i.c.w. its context it was not so). In the _ prevalent modern use, however, it is worn down into a mere compound preposition, with vagueness & pliability as its only merits. The worst writers use it, from sheer love of verbiage, in preference to a single word that would be more appropriate (The three outstanding features

+ i.c.w. [i.e Of] our ‘ Batchworth Tinted’, as sample set enclosed, are as follows). The average writer is not so degraded as to choose it for its own sake, but he has not realized that when 7.c.w. presents itself to him it is a sign that laziness is mastering his style, or haziness his ideas. Of the examples that follow, the first two are characteristic specimens of compound-prepositional periphrasis:—The special difficulty in Professor Minocelsi’s case arose — i.c. w. the view he holds relative to the | historical value of . . . (Prof. M. was specially hampered by his views on)./Regulations with regard to the provision of free places i.c. w. secondary education (Regulations for providing free places in secondary schools)./Canvey Island, which is again coming into prominence i.c. Ww. the proposal to establish a great wharf there (to which attention has been | called by)./Mr J. M. is having a l hard time i.c.w. his desire for reelection./Sir S. P. will shortly retire from ihe secretaryship i.c.w. the age limit.

connoisseur. Pronounce kénaser’ ; the modern French spelling (-nat-) should not be used.

connote, denote. This article is | concerned only with the correlated senses of the two words. C., not being really in popular use, has no senses except the correlated ones; but d. has popular uses out of relation to c., as A high pulse denotes | (is a symptom of) fever; Let f d. (be © the appointed symbol for) the force | exerted; This surely denotes (shows) | that the question ts decided.

When c. & d. are in expressed or implied antithesis, the difference is twofold, sense 1 of each correspond- ` ing to sense 1 only of the other, & sense 2 to sense 2 only.

1. A word denotes all the objects having the attributes that it connotes (or implies the joint presence of). Father denotes the first Person of the Trinity, Adam, Edward VII, Eclipse, & all others to whom the
