page: 91

+ | connotation or connotative meaning | of father applies. Ugly denotes

Socrates, Wilkes, the black country,

cowardice, & all other things to | which the connotation of ugly

applies. The whole of the objects | taken together are the word’s de-

notation or denotative meaning. __A word connotes all the attributes

common to the objects that it de-

notes (or is predicable of). Father

connotes fatherhood or having be-

gotten, male sex, prior existence, &

all other attributes common to the | objects included in the denotation

of father. Ugly connotes ugliness or

violation of standards of beauty,

repellent effect on an observer, &c.

The sum of the common attributes

is the word’s connotation or connota-

tive meaning.

2. A word denotes the contents of

its barest adequate definition. Father

denotes one that has begotten. Ugly

denotes violating standards of beau-

ty. The word’s denotation is this

barest definition alone.

A word connotes all or any of the | attributes that, without being de-

noted by it, are associated with it either as deducible from its denota- | tion or as observed to be common to

all normal specimens answering to its denotation. Father connotes | male sex, prior existence, greater

experience, affection, guidance, &c. | Ugly connotes repellent effect, im-

munity from dangers peculiar to | beauty, disadvantage in the mar-

riage market, &c. The whole of

these are the connotation, & any of

them is part of the connotation, of

the word. | conquer(cr), conquest.

Pronounce

ko’ngker(er), k6’ngkwést.

conscience. Write for conscience’ | sake; see SAKE.

conscientious. Pronounce konsi-

or kénshi- ; see -cIATION.

in

consecutive. For the sense | syntax see TECHNICAL TERMS.

consensus means unanimity, or unanimous body, of opinion or testi-

mony. The following, in which it is &"

+ confused with census, is nonsense: Who doubts that if a consensus were taken, in which the interrogated had the honesty to give a genuine reply, we should have an overwhelming majority?

consequential is a word severely restricted in its application by modern idiom; it is unidiomatic in several of the senses that it might have or has formerly borne.

1. Where doubt can arise between it & consequent, the latter should always be used when the sense is the simple & common one of resulting, & -ial be reserved for that of required for consistency with something else. Thus In the consequent confusion he vanished, but The consequential amendmenis were passed. Consequential confusion is not English; the consequent amendments is, but means not (as with -ial) those necessitated by one previously accepted, but those that resulted from (e. g.) the opposition’s hostility or the discovery of a flaw. The right use is seen in A good many of these undiscussed changes were only consequential alterations: but the following sentence (in which consequent would be better, but either is possible) shows that the line is sometimes hard to draw:—Yet whilst he washes his hands of the methods of the Albert Hall, with its consequential campaign of resistance & its cry of ‘ no servant tax’, he declares that the Bill must not be passed.

2. C. does not mean of consequence; ac. person may or may not be important; all we know is that he is self-important; Mr C. bustled about, feeling himself the most c. man in the town would not now be English.

3. C. does not now mean having great consequences. For so desperate & so c. a war as this there should be substituted a war so desperate & so pregnant with consequences. 4. Ac. crime &c. is an act that was not criminal &c. in its own nature, but amounts to a crime &c. in virtue
