page: 92

+ of its consequences:—There is a difference between direct contradiction & merely c. inconsistency.

conservative. Perhaps the most ridiculous of SLIPSHOD EXTENSIONS is the rapidly spreading use of this word as an epithet, in the sense of moderate, safe, or low, with estimates, figure, &c.:—8,000 killed is considered a c. estimate./The damage is placed on ac. estimate at 20,000,000 dollars./Seas that even the c. ship’s logs called ‘ mountainous ’./The figure is probably an. over-estimation, & a more c. estimate is that of Kohler./ At least 6,000,000 dollars an hour; this is a most c. estimate; probably it is too low./Based upon the price of 4id. per ft, & with reasonable care this should be a c. figure./The distributing side of the market takes a more c. & certainly more hopeful view.

conservatoire, conservatory. The French, German, & Italian musical institutions are best called by their native names—conservatoire, conservatorium, conservatorio. Academy or School of Music is better than Conservatory for corresponding English institutions.

considerable, in the sense a good deal of, is applied in British use only. to immaterial things (I have given it c. attention). The use with material things is an Americanism; the following are from definitions in two American dictionaries:—Silk fabric containing c. gold or silver thread./ Certain pharmaceutical preparations similar to cerates, but containing c. tallow.

consideraieness, consideration. Consideration, so far as it is comparable with -ateness, means thought. for others, while -ateness means the characteristic of taking (or implying) such thought; see -ION & -NESS. It is therefore sometimes indifferent which is used (He showed the greatest -ateness or -ation; Thanks for your -aleness or -ation). But more often one is preferable:—His -ateness is beyond all praise; I was treated with

+ -ation; He was struck by the -ateness of the offer.

consist.. C. of introduces a material, & c. in a definition or a statement of identity; we must not say the moon consists in green cheese (noone would), nor virtue consists of being good (many do). ELEGANT VARIATION between the two is absurd:—The exiernal world consisted, according to Berkeley, in idèas; according to Mr Mill it consists. of sensations & permanent possibilities of sensation. Of is wrong in The most exceptional feature of Dr Ward’s book undoubtedly consists of the reproduction of photographs.

consistence, -cy. See -cx, -cy. The -cy form is now invariable in the noun that means being consistent, i.e. not inconsistent (-cy is an overrated virtue). In the noun meaning degree of thickness in liquids usage varies; A -ce something like that of, treacle, & Mud varying in -cy & temperature, are both from Huxley; it would be well if -ce could be made | the only form in this sense, as -cy in the other., It. is doubtful now whether freedom from

vo inconsistency is meant or metaphorical solidity; among: the OED quotations are:—Reporis begin to acquire strength & -ce; A vague rumour daily acquiring -cy & strength. 'The removal of such doubt would be one of the advantages of the limitation proposed above for -cé.

consistory. Accent the first syllable; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

consociation. Pronounce -s6si- ; see -CIATION.

consolatory. Pronounce -s6l-.

console, bracket, table, &c. Accent the first (k6’nsd6l).

consols. Accent the last (kons6‘Iz). .consommé. See FRENCH WORDS.

consort. Pronounce the noun k6’nsort, the verb konsor’t; see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

conspectus. Pl. -uses; see -us.

conspicuity, -ousness. See -TY & -NESS. sometimes-
