page: 97

coryphaeus. Spell -ae-; see Æ, Œ. Pl. -aez; see -us.

cosaque. See FRENCH WORDS.

cose, COZe, COSy, cozy. The established spelling for the adjective (a Scotch word of doubtful origin) is cosy. The verb (& noun) meaning sit (sitting) by the fire &c. is a BACK- FORMATION from this, & therefore best spelt cose. The verb (& noun) meaning gossip or chat is referred to French causer talk, & the spelling coze, which is the usual one, is also desirable, since the senses of the two verbs are very liable to confusion, by way of distinction. The noun cosy or cozy meaning a kind of seat is probably from the adjective, though helped to become a noun by the French causeuse. The spellings recommended, then, are:—cosy, comfortable, seat, teapot-warmer; cose, sit at ease, spell of sitting so; coze, chat (n. & v.).

cosset makes -cting, -eted; see -T-, -TT-.

coster(monger). See CURTAILED WORDS.

costume. The verb is késti’m. This pronunciation is probably commoner, & is preferred by the OED, for the noun also; but k6’sttum (see Noun & VERB ACCENT) is often heard,

cosy, -Zy. See COSE.

cot(e). The word for bed is or was Anglo-Indian, is unconnected with the other words, & is always cot. The poetic word for cottage, & the word for shelter (usually seen in compounds, as sheep-c.), represent allied but separate old-English words; cot is now invariable in the sense cottage, & cote usual in the sense shelter; the latter, however, whether spelt cote or cot, is usually pronounced k6t, especially in the commonest word dovecote. cotemporary. See CONTEMPORARY. co-tenant. See co-. cothurnus. Pl. -ni; see -us. As a word for tragedy, c. is a BATTERED ORNAMENT, co-tidal.

See co-.

1351

E

cotili(ijon. Spell with the -i-.

cottar, cotter, cottier. The words are clearly distinguished from coftager by being applicable not to any one who lives in a cottage, but -to peasants doing so under certain conditions of tenure. As compared with each other, however, there is no differentiation between them that is of value; it is merely that the -tar, -ter, forms are more used of the Scotch variety, & -tier of the Trish. It would be well if cottar were made the sole form, cotter left to the pin or bolt, & cottier abandoned.

cotyledon. Pl. -ns; see -ON 3.

couch, bed, sofa, &c. As a general word for anything that is lain on, bed, lair, &c., the word is poetic only. As a mere synonym for the ordinary word sofa in conversation, it is a GENTEELISM. As the name for a particular shape of sofa, it is a trade word.

couch, the weed. The OED prefers the pronunciation kowch, & describes kooch as that of the southern counties only.

couchant. Pronounce kow’chant.

could. For such forms as Could he see you now, see SUBJUNCTIVES.

couleur de rose, coulisses, couloir. See FRENCH WORDS.

coulomb. Pronounce koolé’m.

co(u)iter. Spell with -u-.

council, -sel, -cillor, -sellor. A board or assembly, & the meeting of such a body, has always -cil, & a member of it is -cillor. The abstract senses consultation, advice, secret (keep one’s c.), belong to -sel, & one who gives advice is, as such, a -sellor, though he may be a -cillor also; my -cillors are the members of my (e.g., the king’s) council; my counsellors, those who advise me officially or otherwise. Counsel, however, has also the semi-concrete sense of the person or persons (never counsels) pleading for a party to a law-suit (The second of our three counsel was the best); the use is originally abstract, as when All the wealth & fashion stands for all the
