page: 98

+ rich &e. people, or as though advice were said for adviser(s).

countenance, face, physiognomy, visage. Face is the proper name for the part; countenance is the face with reference to its expression; phystognomy, to the cast or type of features. Visage is now a LITERARY WORD, used ornamentally for face without special significance.

counterpart means thing exactly similar to, not opposite to or contrasted with, another; the following is nonsense: All this is utterly false, the truth is its very counterpart.

country dance. The form contredance or -se (i.e. counter-dance) is wrong; the words mean native dance or dance of our country.

countryfied, -ified. The first is recommended; see -FIED.

coup. Pronounce k0o; pl. coups, pron. k00z. For c. d'état, de grdce, de main, de theatre, dil, see FRENCH WORDS.

See COLLECTIVES 8.

couple.

couplet. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

coupon. Pronounce k00’pon; see FRENCH WORDS.

course. Of c., as the herald of an out-of-the-way fact that one has just unearthed from a book of reference, is a sad temptation to journalists:—From this marriage came Charles James Fox; his father was, 0. C., created Baron Holland in 1763./Milton o. c. had the idea of his line from Tacitus./He is, 0. c., a son of the famous E. A. Sothern, of ‘ Lord Dundreary’ fame./The House being in Committee, the Speaker would not, o.c., under ordinary circumstances, have been present./Much speculation ~+. as to the precise degree of pageant which will attend Sir howard: Grey’s admission; the full pageant, o. c., is that which is associated with a Chapter of the Order.

court-card is now the established form; see COAT-CARD.

court martial. Write as two words for the noun, & hyphen only for the

+ verb; see HYPHENS, group *Court Martial. Pl. courts martial.

courteous, courtesy, are variously pronounced ker-, kor-, & koor-; the first is recommended.

courtesan, -zan. Spell -san, & pronounce kortiză’n.

YA

courtier. Pronounce kor-.

coûte que coûte. See FRENCH WORDS.

Coventry. The OED prefers kö- to kŭ-.

coverlet, -lid. Both forms are old; the first is better, the ending almost certainly representing French lit bed, & not English lid.

covert, n. The -tis now so seldom sounded, & is so often omitted even in writing, that what distinction remains between covert & cover may be said to be valueless. The only sense in which covert, otherwise a NEEDLESS VARIANT, is worth preserving is the ornithological one (wing-coverts &c.), in which the -t is invariable.

covetous is often, even when read in church, mispronounced -chus on the supposed analogy of rightcous, & sometimes mis-spelt -teous.

coward(ly). The identification of coward & bully has gone so far in the ‘popular consciousness that persons & acts in which no trace of fear is to be found are often called coward(ly) merely because advantage has been taken of superior strength or position; such action may be unchivalrous, unsportsmanlike, mean, tyrannical, & many other bad things, but not cowardly; cf. the similar misuse of DASTARDLY.

cowl-like. For the hyphen see -LIKE.

cowrie, -y. Spell -ie.

cowslip. The true division is cow & slip, not cow’s & lip; & the usual pronunciation with s, not z, is accordingly right.

coxcomb, cocks-.

See cockscomME.

coxswain.

Pronounce k6’‘ksn.
