page: 100

+ the -e, due to the French original, might well be insisted on.

croupier. Pronounce kroo’pier.

crow. The past is now usually crowed (They crowed over us; The baby crowed loudly; Three cocks crowed, or crew, at the same moment); crew is used always in the cock crew when there is reference to the N.T. passage, & alternatively with crowed when cock is the subject in other connexions.

crown. The C. is often used as a phrase for the king or queen regarded not as a person, but as a part of the constitution. It does not follow that pronouns appropriate to king can be used after it, as in these absurdities:—The incontestable fact that the C. nowadays acts, & can only act, on the advice of his Ministers./The people of this country are little likely to wish to substitute for this [rule by Cabinet] rule by the C., for whom the experiment would be most fraught with peril.

crucify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

cruel makes -ller, -llest.

crumby,-my. Where the reference is to actual crumb(s), as in a c. loaf or tablecloth, use -by; in the secondary senses fat, comfortable, rich, &c., use -my. The right spelling for noun & adjective would be crum(my), 6 being due to false ANALOGY merely; but, failing a general reform of spelling, usage is fixed.

eruse, jar. The OED prefers krdds to krooz.

cryptic. For this as compared with mysterious, obscure, hidden, & other synonyms, see WORKING & STYLISH WORDS.

crystalline. In ordinary use, pronounce kri’stalin, see RECESSIVE ACCENT; but in poetice & rhetorical use kristi/lin is common, ef. wind. cubic(al). Cubic is the form in all senses except that of shaped like a cube. So -ic measure, contents, foot, equation; but a -ical box or

+ stone. Cubic, however, is used of minerals crystallizing in cubes, as -ic alum, saltpetre. See -1c(AL).

cuckold. Pronounce kti’kld.

cudgel makes -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

cue, queue. Both are pronounced ki. In billiards, & in the theatrical use (with the transferred applications, as in take one’s c. from), cue is invariable. In the sense string of people &c. waiting their turn, queue is invariable. In the sense pigtail, queue, which is usual, is recommended.

cui bono? As generally used, i.e. as a pretentious substitute for To what end? or What is the good?, the phrase is at once a BATTERED ORNA- MENT & a blunder. The words mean To whom was it for a good?, i.e. Who profited by it or had something to make out of it?, i.e. If you want to know who brought tt about ask yourself whose interest it was that it should happen. Those who do not want it in this sense should leave it alone. The following is an amusing attempt to press the correct translation of the Latin into the service of the ordinary pointless use:—We have had repeated occasion of late to press the question ‘ Cui bono?’ in relation to the proposal to force the Government to a creation of peers. We must ask it again, in reference to the scandal of yesterday. What is the good of it? Who stands to gain? See MISAPPREHENSIONS.

cuirass(ier). Pronounce

kwira’s, kwiraser’ or kiraser’.

cuisine, cul-de-sac.

See FRENCH WORDS.

culinary. Pronounce ki'linari. The word is a favourite with the Pory- SYLLABIC-HUMOURIiSt, who often pronounces it kul-.

cullender. See COLANDER.

cult, as now used, dates only from the middle of last century; its proper place is in books on archaeology, comparative religion, & the like; that it should be ousting
