page: 106

+ same as deep or penetrating insight; consequently a person’s insight may be described indifferently as defective or deficient. Again, deficiency in or of a part constitutes a defect in the whole, & consequently a person may be called either deficient or defective in courage or knowledge or sympathy, & milk may be defective (though deficient is commoner) in fatty matter; compare The dialogue is not defective (or deficient) in ease & grace with Ease & grace are not deficient (never defective) in the dialogue; the following wrongly neglects this distinction:—I wish you had a Fortunatus hat; it is the only thing defective in your outfit; here deficient is required, though there would have been no objection to It is the only thing in which your outfit is defective; a verb or noun of which some part is deficient or wanting is called defective, where deficient would also be possible if the combination had not been stereotyped. Lastly, either word may sometimes be used, but with a difference of meaning from the other; deficient water or light is too little water or light; but defective water is impure &c.; & defective light is uncertain &c. ; similarly, a defective differs from a deficient supply in being irregular or unreliable rather than insufficient in the aggregate.

deficit. The pronunciation difisit is wrong; the OED prefers dé’fisit to dé’fisit, which is however perhaps as common; the Latin quantity (see FALSE QUANTITY) is no guide,

defile (pass n. & v.). See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

defin(e)able. Omit the -e-; see MUTE E.

definite, definitive. -Confusion between the two, & especially the use of definitive for definite, is very common; many writers seem to think the words mean the same, but the longer & less usual will be more imposing; & mistakes are made easy by the fact that many nouns can be qualified by either, though

+ with different effects. Putting aside exceptional senses that have nothing to do with the confusion (as when definitive means of the defining kind), definite means defined, clear, precise, unmistakable, &c., & definitive means having the character of finality; or, to distinguish them by their opposites, that is definite which is not dubious, vague, loose, inexact, uncertain, undefined, or questionable; & that is definitive which is not temporary, provisional, debatable, or alterable. 4 definite offer is one of which the terms are clear; a definitive offer is one that must be taken or left without chaffering; definite jurisdiction is that of which the application or the powers are precisely laid down, & definitive jurisdiction is that from which there is no appeal; either word can be applied with similar distinctions, to answer, terms, treaty, renunciation, statement, result, &c. But with many words to which definite is rightly & commonly applied (a definite pain, accusation, structure, outline, forecast) definitive either is not used except by mistake for definite, or gives a meaning rarely required (e.g. a definitive forecast means, if anything, one that its maker announces his intention of abiding by). The following examples show wrong uses, mostly of definitive:—We should be glad to see more definitive teaching./The fact that Sunday must be altogether omitted from the day-boy’s life, as part of his definitively school career, would alone convince me that . . ./The Bill has: not yet been drawn up, & the Government are not responsible for ‘ forecasts’, however definitively they may be written./The definitive qualities of jurisprudence have not often found so agreeable an exponent as the author of these essays./If Turkey desires peace, she must definitely renounce what she has already lost (here, however, if the sense ewplicitly suffices, & the stronger sense unreservedly is not intended, no change is necessary).
