page: 109

+ (that can be depended upon), see -ABLE 4,

dependant, -ent.

The noun has -ani, rarely -ent;

the adj. -ent, rarely -ant.

dependence, -ency. The first is now usual, though not invariable, in all the abstract senses (a life of -ce; mo -ce can be put upon his word; the -ce of the harvest on weather; the gospel is our -ce; during the -ce of the negotiations), & -cy is almost confined to the concrete sense of a thing that depends upon or is subordinate to another, esp. a dependent territory (the cotton trade & its -cies; India is a British -cy). See -CE, -CY.

depicture, though in fact an old verb, has never established itself in general currency, & perhaps always sets a reader wondering whether it is a blunder due to hesitation between depict & picture; it might well be abandoned as a NEEDLESS VARIANT.

deponent (in grammar). See TECH- NICAL TERMS.

depopulate makes -lable; see -ABLE

depositary, -tory, are properly applied, -tary to the person or authority to whom something is entrusted, & -tory to the place or receptacle in which something is stored; & the distinction is worth preserving, though in some contexts (a diary as the d. of one’s secrets; the Church as the d. of moral principles) either may be used indifferently.

depot. Write without accents or italics, & pronounce dé’po.

deprecate (do the reverse of pray for) & its derivatives -cation, -catory, often appear in print, whether by the writer’s or the compositor’s blunder, in place of depreciate (do the reverse of praise) & its derivatives -ciation, -ciatory:—Mr Birrell’s amusing deprecation of the capacity of Mr Ginnell to produce a social revolution in Ireland./The self-deprecatory mood in which the English people find themselves.

+ deprecate, depreciate, make -cable, -ciable; see -ABLE 1. depreciation. Pronounce -ési- ; see -CIATION. depressedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY. deprival. See -AL NOUNS. deprivation. Pronounce either dépri- or dépri-, not dépri- nor dépri-. Derby(shire). Pronounce dar-. de règle, de rigueur. See FRENCH WORDS. derisory. The OED definitions (dated 1894) make no distinction between this & derisive, being almost in the same words for both. About the meaning of derisive (conveying derision, deriding) there is no doubt; & if derisory means precisely the same it may well be regarded as a NEEDLESS VARIANT, so Clearly is derisive now in possession. But, by the sort of differentiation seen in MASTERFUL & masterly, a distinct sense has lately been given to derisory, & is now common in the newspapers; as derisive means conveying derision, so derisory means inviting or worthy only of derision, too insignificant or futile for serious consideration; it is applied to offers, plans, suggestions, &c. As Larousse illustrates the use of dérisoire by ‘ proposition dérisoire’, the new sense may be a Gallicism, but it would be a natural enough development in English, the word being no longer needed in the sense now nearly monopolized by derisive, even without French influence. If the differentiation is to be satisfactory, derisory should, like masterful, be no longer recognized in its former sense. See also RISIBLE. The following quotation gives the passive meaning unambiguously: They will not cover the absence of those supplies from the Ukraine & Roumania which were promised to the people & have only been forthcoming in derisory quantities. | MUTE E.

deriv(e)able. -€-3 see

Omit the
