page: 110

dernier ressort. See FRENCH WORDS.

derring-do. This curious word,

now established as an archaic noun

meaning desperate courage, is traced

to a misinterpreted passage of

Chaucer, in which Troilus is de-

scribed as second to none ‘ In dor-

ryng don that longeth to a knyght ’, i.e. “in daring (to) do what belongs to a knight’. Spenser, a lover of old phrases, apparently taking it for a noun, as if the line meant ‘ in bold achievement, which is a knightly duty °’, made derring doe in this sense a part of his regular vocabulary. The derivation is a surprise; but, if Spenser did make a mistake, it does not follow that modern poetical writers should abstain from saying ‘deeds of derring-do’; the phrase is part & parcel of an English that is suited to some occasions,

derringer. Pronounce -jer.

descant. Pronounce the noun dé’skant, & the verb disk&/nt; see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

descendable, -ible. Use the first; see -ABLE 2.

describ(e)able. Omit the -c-; see MUTE E.

describeless. See -LESS.

description. The less this is used as a mere substitute for kind or sort (no food of any d. ; crimes of this d. ; every d. of head-covering), the better: see WORKING & STYLISH WORDS.

desery. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

desecrate makes -crable; see -ABLE 1. deservedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY. déshabillé. See dishabille (the anglicized form), & FRENCH WORDS. desiccate. See -ATABLE. desiderate is a word that we should be better without. Readers, outside the small class that keeps up its Latin, do not know the meaning of it, taking it for the scholar’s pedantic or facetious form of desire. Writers are often in the same case (see the sentence quoted below; we do not d. what we cannot be prevented from preserving), &, if they are not,

are ill-advised in using the word

unless they are writing for readers. as learned as themselves:—In this she acts prudently, probably feeling that there is nothing in the Bill that could prevent her, & those like-minded, acting as benevolently towards their servants as before, & so preserving the * sense of family unity’ she so much desiderates.

desiderative. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

desideratum. Pl. -ta;see-um. Pron. disidera’tm.

designate, vb. See -ATABLE.

designedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY.

desist(ance). The OED pronounces -zi-, not -si-, & prefers -ance to -ence.

desolate, vb, makes -lable; see -ABLE 1.

desolated, as polite exaggeration for very sorry &c., is a GALLICISM.

despatch. See DISPATCH.

desperado. Pronounce -ādō. Pl. ~0es, see -O(E)S 1.

desperation never now means, as formerly, mere despair or abandonment or loss of hope, but always the reckless readiness to take the first course that presents itself because every course scems hopeless.

despicable. Pronounce dé’spikabl, not dispi/kabl; see RECESSIVE AC- CENT.

despise, not -ize; see -I$SE)(-IZE. destine. (Who was) destined to be &c., when it means no more than who has since become or afterwards became, is a BATTERED ORNAMENT, detachedly. A bad form; see -EDLY. detail. Pronounce the noun dé’tal, the verb dita’1; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. détente. See FRENCH WORDS. deter. Pronounce the participle diter’ing, but the adj. dité’rent; see PRONUNCIATION s.f. determinately, determinedly. The sense with determination, in a resolute way, does not belong to the first at all, though some writers use it (Thurlow applied himself -ately to the business of life) as an escape from the second. A better escape is to
