page: 111

+ use resolutely, firmly, with determination, or some other substitute. The objection to determinedly, which is very general, is perhaps based on reluctance to. give it the five syllables that are nevertheless felt to be its due (see -EDLY). An example or two will illustrate the ugliness of the word:—In causes in which he was heart & soul convinced no-one has fought more -edly & courageously (with greater determination & courage)./Cobbett opposed -edly the proposed grant of £16,000./However, I -edly smothered all premonitions. /He is -edly opposed to limited enfranchisement.

detestable. Accent the second syllable.

detestation. The OED gives dé-, not dé-.

detour, dé-. Write without accent & italics, & pronounce ditoor’.

de trop. See FRENCH WORDS.

deuteragonist. The pronunciation recommended is diteragd’nist; see PROTAGONIST.

Deuteronomy. The accentuation diiterd’/nomi is better than, dii’teronomi, which is impossible for the ordinary speaker; cf. CONTUMELY.

devastate. See -ATABLE.

device. For synonymy see SIGN.

devil, n. Devil’s advocate is very dangerous to those who like a picturesque phrase but dislike the trouble of ascertaining its sense. In the following example, for instance, the not unnatural blunder is made of supposing that it means a whitewasher, or one who pleads for a person who either is or is supposed to be wicked:—Because the d.’s a. always starts with the advantage of possessing a bad case, Talleyrand’s defender calls forth all our chivalrous sympathy. The real d.’s a., on the contrary, is one who, when the right of a person to canonization as a saint is being examined, puts the devil’s claim to the ownership of him by collecting & presenting all the sins that he has ever committed; far from being the

+ whitewasher of the wicked, the d.’s a. is the blackener of the good. And in this other the writer referred to is in fact devil’s advocate in ‘the rest of his book ’, & something quite different (‘ God’s advocate °’, say) in ‘an early chapter’: He tries in an early chapter to act as ‘ devil’s advocate’ for the Soviet Government, and succeeds in putting up a plausible case for the present régime. But the rest of his book is devoted to showing that this Bolshevist case is based on hypocrisy, inaccuracy, and downright lying. See MisAPPREHENSIONS.

devil, vb, makes -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

devilish. The adjective has three syllables (d. cruelty &c.), but the adverb only two (a d. fine girl; pronounce dé’vlish).

devil(t)ry. The -try form is a mere corruption.

devise, not -ize; see -ISE)(-IZE.

deviser, -sor. Devisor is the person who devises property, & is in legal use only; -er is the agent-noun of devise in other senses; see OR.

devolute, though an old verb in fact, has been dormant for three centuries, & is to be regarded rather as a Back-roRMATION from devolulion than as a REVIVAL; it is unnecessary by the side of devolve, which should have been used in (with on for to):—The House will devise means of devoluting some of its work to more leisured bodies.

dexter. See SINISTER.

dext(e)rous. The shorter form is recommended.

d(h)ow is included by the OED among ‘words erroneously spelt with dh’; dow was common down to 1860, & should be restored.

diabolic(al). Roughly, -ic means of, & -ical as of, the devil:—Horns, tail, & other -ic attributes; He behaved with -ical cruelty. See -1C(AL).

diaeresis. Spell -ac-, not -%-; sec zm, Œ. Pl. -reses (-séZ).

DIAERESIS, See TECHNICAL TERMS.
