page: 117

dislocate. See -ATABLE.

dislodg(e)ment. Keep the -e-; see JUDGEMENT.

dismal. For ‘the d. science’ see SOBRIQUETS, - For comparison, see -ER & -EST, 4.

dismission, the predecessor of dismissal, has been completely dispossessed by it, & must now be regarded as a NEEDLESS VARIANT.

dispatch, des-. The OED gives good reasons for preferring dis-. See also FORMAL WORDS.

dispel means to drive away in different directions, & must have for object a word to which that sense is applicable (darkness, fear, cloud, suspicions), & not, as in the following sentence, a single indivisible thing:— Lord Carrington effectually dispelled yesterday the suggestion that he resigned the Presidency because he feared . . . He might dispel the suspicion, or repel the suggestion, suspicion being comparable to a cloud, but suggestion to a missile.

dispensable. For the sense that can be dispensed with, see -ABLE 4,

dispersedly. Four syllables; see “EDLY.

dispiteous. See REVIVALS.

displeasedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

disposable. For the sense that can be disposed of, see -ABLE 4,

disposal, disposition. In some contexts there is no choice (His -ition is merciful; The -al of the empty bottles is a difficulty); in some either word may be used indifferently (Zhe money is at your -al or -ition); & in some the choice depends upon the sense required (The -ition of the troops is the way they are stationed for action &c., & is general’s work; The -al of the troops is the way they are lodged &c. when not being used, & is quartermaster’s work). When doubt arises, it is worth while to remember that -ition corresponds to dispose, & -al to dispose of. So The -ition of the books is excellent (they are excellently disposed, i.e. arranged), but The -al of the books

+ was soon managed (they were soon disposed of, i.e. either sold or got out of the way); The -ition of the body is stiff (it is stiffly disposed, i.c. arranged), but The -al of the body proved impossible (it could not be disposed of, i.e. destroyed or concealed), The testamentary -ition of property, i.e. the way it is disposed or arranged by will, & The testamentary -al of properiy, i.e. the way it is disposed of or transferred by will, describing the same act from different points of view, are naturally used without much discrimination. The same is true of at one’s -al or -ition; but in this formula -al is now much commoner, just as You may dispose of the money as you please is now commoner than You may dispose it.

disproved, -en. The first is recommended; see PROVE.

disputable. Accent di’spiitabl, not dispt’tabl; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

dissatisfiedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

disseise, -ze, disseisin, -zin.

Spell -se, -SİN; See SEIZE.

dissemble, dissimulate. There is no clear line of distinction between the two. Dissemble is the word in ordinary use, & the other might have perished as a NEEDLESS VARIANT, but has perhaps been kept in being because it is, unlike dissemble, provided with a noun (dissimulation), & a contrasted verb (simulate), & is more convenient for use in connexion with these. disseminate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR. dissimilation. See TECHNICAL TERMS. dissimulate, dissipate, dissociate, make -lable, -pable, -ciable; see -ABLE 1. dissociation. See -CIATION. dissoluble, dissolvable. 1. Pronounce di’soloobl, dizð’'lvabl. 2. Dissoluble is the established word, & may be used in all senses; but dissoluable often represents dissolve when it means make a solution
