page: 120

+ the Unionisis./The ambassador gave them all the assistance which the Imperial nature of his office made it obligatory upon him to do./We have got to make a commission in the Territorial Force fashionable, the right thing for every gentleman to do./ To inflict upon themselves a disability which one day they will find the mistake & folly of doing. In these examples do is in grammatical relation to a noun (dissolution, assistance, commission, disability) that is only a subordinate part of the implied whole (tke forcing of a dissolution, the giving of assistance, the holding of a commission, the inflicting of a disability) to which alone it is in logical relation; we do not do a dissolution, a commission, &c. These sentences, however, in which do is a transitive verb meaning perform, are not properly examples of the substitute do; but the mistakes in them are due to the influence of that idiom.

do (the musical note). Pl. dos; see -O(z)s 8.

doat. See pore.

docile. The OED pronounces d6’sil or d6’sil, with preference to the first.

doctor. See PHYSICIAN.

doct(o)ress. It is a serious inconvenience that neither form (-iress would be the better) has been brought into any but facetious use as a prefixed title; the device of inserting a Christian name after Doctor (Dr Mary Jones) is clumsy, & sometimes (Dr Evelyn Jones) ineffectual. See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS.

doctrinal. The accentuation d6’ktrinal is recommended; see FALSE QUANTITY.

document. It is sometimes forgotten that the word includes more than the parchments or separate papers to which it is usually applied; a coin, picture, monument, passage in a book &c., that serves as evidence, may be a d., & the following remark on ‘ Dd. illustrative of the Continental Reformation’? is ab-

+ surd:—It ts a collection not only (as the title implies) of dd., but also of passages from books & letters. The phrase human d. is more than a mere metaphor. i

dodo. PI. -oes; see -o(E)s 1.

doe. See HART.

do(e)st. In modern, though not in older, use the auxiliary has dost only, & the independent verb doest only.

dogged. See -ER & -EST, 4.

doggy, -je. See -EY, -IE, -y.

dogma. Pl. -mas, formerly -mata; see LATIN PLURALS.

doily, doiley, doyly. The first is the OED spelling.

dolce far niente.

See BATTERED ORNAMENTS.,

dole, grief. See REVIVALS.

dolichocephalic, -ous. See

-CEs PHALIC.

domain. For synonymy see FIELD. See also DEMESNE.

Domesday,dooms-. D. Bookis spelt Domes- but pronounced d60mz-; elsewhere the spelling is dooms-.

domestic, n., though it survives in legal & other formal use, in PEDAN- TIC HUMOUR, & as a GENTEELISM, has been superseded for ordinary purposes by servant taken in a limited sense. Such losses of differentiation may be regretted, but usage is irresistible.

domesticate makes

-cable;, see -ABLE 1. domesticity. The OED pronounces d6-; see FALSE QUANTITY. dominate makes -nable; see -ABLE 1. domino. Pl. -os; see -o(£)s. 1.

don, vb. See FORMAL WORDS. donate is ‘ chiefly U.S”—OED. It is a BACK-FOoRMATION from donation:—He recently donated a site for the proposed Hindu University. donation. See FORMAL WORDS. dossier. Pronounce dd’syer.

See FRENCH WORDS. dost. See po(£)sT. dot (dowry). See FRENCH WORDS. dote, doat. Spell dote. double. The common quotation (Macbeth, rv. i. 83) is ‘ make assurance double sure’ (not doubly).
