page: 124

dum(b)found(er). Write dumbfound; it is probably dumb + confound.

duodecimo. See Fouio. Pl. -os; see -O(E)S 6.

duologue is a bad formation, but there are difficulties in the way of making a good one; dyologue, which is better only in one respect, is indistinguishable in sound from dialogue; dilogy conflicts with trilogy & tetralogy; dittologue suggests ditto; biloquy after soliloquy is less bad than duologue after monologue. The best course is to get along as well as may be with dialogue, duet, & periphrasis; barbarous formation is peculiarly bad in words that are designed only for the use of the educated.

duplex. For plural see -Ex, -1x, 2.

durance, duress(e), 1. Durance now means only the state of being in confinement, is a purely decorative word, & is rare except in the phrases in durance, in durance vile— the latter a BATTERED ORNAMENT. Duress means the application of constraint, which may or may not take the form of confinement, to a person; it is chiefly in legal use, with reference to acts done under illegal compulsion, & is commonest in the phrase under duress.

2. The OED prefers the spelling duress & the accentuation diré’s.

durst. See DARE.

duteous, dutiful. The second is the ordinary word; duteous (a rare formation, exactly paralleled only in beauteous) is kept in being beside it by its metrical convenience (six of the seven OED quotations are from verse), & when used in prose has consequently the air of a POETICISM; see also PLENTEOUS.

dutiable. Forsuch forms see-ABLE 4.

duty. For synonymy see TAX.

duumvir. Pl. -virs, rarely -viri.

dwarf. For pl. see -vE(D).

dwarfen. See -EN VERBS.

dwell, in the sense have oné’s abode, has been ousted in ordinary use by live, but survives in poetic, rhetorical, & dignified use; see WORK- ING & STYLISH WORDS.

dyarchy. See pIARCHY.

dye makes dyeing as a precaution against confusion with dying from die; cf. singeing)(impinging. See VERBS IN -IE &¢., 7.

dynamic(al). Both words date from the 19th c. only, & -ic tends to become more & -ical less common 5; the only use in which -ical seems preferable is as the adjective of dynamics (-ical principles; an abstract -ical proposition). See -1c(AL).

dynamiter, -tard. Use -er.

dynamo. Pl. -os; see -o(£)s 5. It is a CURTAILED WORD (dynamoelectric machine). dysentery. Pronounce di’sentri.

dyspepsia, -sy. The word was formerly anglicized, but -sia is now usual.

E

each. 1. Number of, & with, e. 2. Each other. 3. Between e.

1. Number. E. as subject is invariably singular, even when followed by of them &c.: E. of the wheeis has 12 spokes (not have). When e. is not the subject, but in apposition with a plural noun or pronoun as subject, the verb (& complement) is invariably plural: The wheels have 12 spokes e.; the wheels e. have 12 spokes (this latter order is better avoided); the wheels are e. 12-spokers. But the number of a later noun or pronoun, & the corresponding choice of a possessive adjective,’ depend upon whether e. stands before or after the verb, & this again depends on the distributive emphasis required. If the distribution is not to be formally emphasized, e. stands before the verb (or its complement, or some part of the phrase composing it), & the plural number & corresponding possessive are used: We e. have our own nostrums (not his own nostrum, nor our own nostrum); They are e. of them masters in their own homes. If the distribution is to be formally insisted on, e. stands after the verb
