page: 128

+ usually having, the desired effect. Efficient applies to agents or their action regarded as theirs or (with more or less of personification) to instruments &c., & means capable of producing the desired effect, not incompetent or unequal to a task. Effectual applies to action apart from the agent, & means not falling short of the complete effect aimed at. Effective applies to the thing done or to its doer as such, & means having a high degree of effect.

An efficacious remedy, (now rare) cement; a drug of known efficacy.

An efficient general, cook; efficient work, organization; an efficient bicycle; efficient cause is a special use preserving the original etymological sense * doing the work ’.

Effectual measures; an effectual stopper on conversation; effectual demand in Political Economy is demand that actually causes the supply to be brought to market.

An effective speech, speaker, contrast, cross-fire; effective assistance, cooperation. An effective blockade, effective capital, effective membership, preserve a now less common sense “not merely nominal but carried into action °.

effervescence, -cy. The -ce form means the act or process, or the product (bubbles &c.), of effervescing; the -cy form (now rare) means the tendency or capacity to effervesce (has lost its -cy), though in this sense too -ce is now more frequent. See -CE, -cy.

e.g. is short for exempli gratia, & means only ‘for instance’. Nonlatinists are apt to think that it does not matter whether e.g. or I.E. is used; so Mr —— took as the theme of his address the existence of what he called a psychic attribute, e.g., a kind of memory, in plants. Italics, & a following comma, are unnecessary, but not wrong.

ego(t)ism. The two words are modern formations of about the same date. Etymologically, there is no difference between them to

+ affect the sense, but egoism is correctly & egotism incorrectly formed —a fact that is now, since both are established, of no importance. Egotism is, or was till recently, the more popular form, & is (perhaps consequently) restricted to the more popular senses—excessive use of £ in speech or writing, & self-importance or self-centredness in character. Egoism shows signs of ousting egotism even in these senses, but is also used in metaphysics & ethics as a name for the theory that a person has no proof that anything exists outside his own mind, & for the theory that self-interest is the foundation of morality. However arbitrary the differentiation may be, it serves a useful purpose if it can yet be maintained.

egregious. The etymological sense is simply eminent or of exceptional degree (e grege, out of the flock). The use of the word has been narrowed in English till it is applied only to nouns expressing contempt, & especially to a few of these, as ass, coxzcomb, liar, impostor, folly, blunder, waste. The e. Jones &c. is occasionally used in the sense that notorious ass Jones; & with neutral words like example e. is the natural antithesis to shining—a_ shining example of fortitude, an e. example of incapacity. Reversion to the original sense, as in the following, is mere pedantry: There is indeed little aforethought in most of our daily doings, whether gregarious or egregious.

eighteenmo. Pl. -os;

See FOLIO. see -0(E)S 6.

eighth. Spell thus, but pronounce atth, not ath.

eighties, ’ei-.

See TWENTIES.

eirenicon, ir-. Usually spelt eir-, & pronounced iré’‘nikén. As it is chiefly in learned use, it is odd that the spelling should be anomalous. Irenicum would be the Latinized & normally transliterated form; irenicon the normally transliterated Greek form; etrenikon the Greek written in English letters. All these
