page: 129

+ have been rejected for the now established mixture eirenicon.

either. 1. The pronunciation i-, though not more correct, is displacing ē- in educated speech, & will probably prevail.

2. The sense each of the two, as in the room has a fireplace at e. end, is archaic, & should be avoided except in verse or in special contexts.

3. The sense any one of a number (above two), as in e. of the angles of a triangle, is loose; any or any one should be preferred.

4. The use of a plural verb after e., as in if e. of these methods are successful, is a very common grammatical blunder.

5. Hither ...or. In this alternative formula e. is frequently misplaced. The misplacement should be avoided in careful writing, but is often permissible colloquially. There are two correct substitutes for You are e. joking or have forgotten; some writers refuse one of these, You e. are joking or have forgotten, on the ground that it looks pedantic; but there is no such objection to the other, E. you are joking or you have forgotten; in conversation, however, the incorrect form is defensible because a speaker who originally meant (are) forgetting to answer to are joking cannot, when he discovers that he prefers have forgotten, go back without being detected (as a writer can) & put things in order. See UNEQUAL YOKEFELLOWS; some examples follow of the slovenliness that should not be allowed to survive proof-correction.

>. . . unless it sees its way to do something effective e. towards keeping the peace or limiting the area of conflict.

Their hair is usually worn e. plaited in knots or is festooned with cocks’ feathers.

It is not too much to say that trade unions e. should not exist, or that all workers should join compulsorily.

The choice before the nations will be e. that of finding a totally different &

1351

F

+ far better method of regulating their affairs, or of passing rapidly from bad to worse.

Either , . . or is sometimes not disjunctive, but equivalent to both... and or alike .. . and: The continuance of atrocities, the sinking of the Leinster, the destruction of French & Belgian towns & villages, are a fatal obstacle either to the granting of an armistice or to the discussion of terms. In such cases, alike (or both) .. . and should be preferred, or else proper care should be taken with either; * an obstacle to either granting an armistice or discussing terms ° would do it.

eke, adv.

See PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

eke out. The meaning is to make something, by adding to it, go further or last longer or do more than it would without such addition. The proper object is accordingly a word expressing not the result attained, but the original supply. You can eke out your income or (whence the SLIPSHOD EXTENSION) a scanty subsistence with odd jobs or by fishing, but you cannot eke out a living or a miserable existence. You can e. o. your facts, but not your article, with quotations. You can e. o. ink with water or words with gestures, but not a rabbithutch with or out of wire-netting. The first quotation below illustrates the right use, & the others the wrong ones.

Mr Weyman first took to writing in order to €. 0. an insufficient income at the Bar./These disconsolate young widows would perforce relapse into conditions of life at once pitiful & sordid, eking out in dismal boardinghouses or humble lodgings a life which may have known comfort./Dr Mitford eked out a period of comparative freedom from expense by assisting the notorious quack, Dr Graham./A man the very thought of whom has ruined more men than any other influence in the nineteenth century, & who is trying to e. o. at last a spoonful of atonement for it all.
