page: 138

emmesh. See EM- & IM-.

emolument. See FORMAL WORDS.

emotion. The tendency to restrict the word to the display of feeling as opposed to the feeling itself, or at least to manifested as opposed to unmanifested feeling, is illustrated in The total absence of e., combined with an intensity of feeling & simplicity, left an impression upon all attendants. The restriction is unwarranted; e. includes ‘a mental “ feeling” or “ affection’ (e.g. of pleasure or pain, desire or aversion, surprise, hope or fear, &c.) ’—OED.

emotive, by the side of emotional, which means of the emotions as well as given to emotion, is a SUPER- FLUOUS WORD.

empanel, impanel. See EM- & IM-. Hither makes -lled &c. 3 see -LL-, -L-.

Empire City. See SOBRIQUETS.

employee, employé. ‘The case for the English form is stronger than with most such pairs. One of them is needed, not for literary but for purely business purposes; & a good plain word with no questions of spelling & pronunciation & accents & italics & genders about it is therefore best. Moreover the -ee termination is becoming more & more a living suffix in English. The OED twenty-seven years ago labelled employee ‘ rare exc. U.S? ; but it is high time it was naturalized. The native words men, hands, workmen, siaff, &c., are still, however, preferable where they give the meaning equally well.

emporium. For this as a synonym for shop, see Pomposities. “Pl. -ms, -4 5; see -UM. empressement. See FRENCH WORDS. empty, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6. emulate makes -lable; see -ABLE 1. -EN ADJECTIVES. The only adjectives of this type still in ordinary natural use with the sense made of so-&-so are earthen, flaxen, hempen, wheaten, wooden, & woollen; we actually prefer earthen vessels, flagen

+ thread, hempen rope, wheaten bread, wooden ships, & woollen socks, to earth vessels, flax thread, hemp rope, wheat bread, wood ships, & wool socks. Several others (brazen, golden, leaden, leathern, oaken, oaten, silken, waxen) can still be used in the original sense (made of brass &c.) with a touch of archaism or for poetic effect, but not in everyday contexts:—the brazen hinges of Hellgate, but brass hinges do not rust; a golden crown in hymns & fairystories, but a gold crown in an inventory of regalia; a lead pipe, but leaden limbs; a leathern jerkin, but a leather portmanteau; silken hose, but silk pyjamas; an oaken staff, but an oak umbrella-stand; an oaten pipe, but oat bread; the comb’s waxen trellis, but wax candles. Their chief use, however, is in secondary & metaphorical senses— brazen impudence, golden prospects, leathern lungs, silken ease, wagen skin, & the like. When well-meaning persons, thinking to do the language a service by restoring good old words to their rights, thrust them upon us in their literal sense where they are out of keeping, such patrons merely draw attention to their clients’ apparent decrepitude—apparent only, for the words are hale & hearty, & will last long enoughif only they are allowed to confine themselves to the jobs that they have chosen.

There are other words of the same formation (ashen, bricken, cedarn, silvern, &c.) that are solely archaic (or pseudo-archaic) & ornamental. The exceptional OLDEN will be found in its place.

en- & in-. See EM- & IM-.

encage, incage. See EM- & IM-.

encase, incase. See EM- & IM-.

enclitic. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

enclose, inclose. See EM- & IM-.

encomium. Pl. -ms, -a; see -UM.

encrust, incrustation. See EM- & IM-.

endeavour. A somewhat ponderous jibe has been endeavoured to be levelled at the First Lord of the Admiralty because he... For this use of endeavour,
