page: 140

+ engaged in mutual destruction, she would be materially enhanced. A dangerous word for the unwary. Her material prosperity may be enhanced, but she cannot be enhanced even in material prosperity, though a book may be enhanced in value as well as have its value enhanced. E. (& be enhanced) with a personal object (or subject) has long been obsolete. See CAST-IRON IDIOM.

enjambment. See TECHNICAL TERMS,

enjoin. The construction with a personal object & an infinitive (The advocates of compulsory service e. us to add a great army for home defence to... .) is not recommended. The OED quotes Steele, They injoined me to bring them something from London, & Froude, The Pope advised & even enjoined him ta return to his duties; but the archaic sound of the first will be admitted, & in the other ‘advised’ takes most of the responsibility. The ordinary modern use is e. caution &c. upon one, not e. one to do or be.

en masse. See FRENCH WORDS,

enmesh. See EM- & IM-.

ennui. Pronounce O6nwé’; see FRENCH WORDS.

ennuied, ennui’d. See -ED & ’p.

enormous, enormity. The two words have drifted so far apart that the use of either in connexion with the limited sense of the other is unadvisable. Enormous sin & The impression of enormity produced by the building are both etymologically possible expressions; but to use the first lays one open to suspicion of pedantry, & to use the second to suspicion of ignorance.

enough & sufficient(ly). 1. In the noun use (=adequate amount), the preference of s. to e. (have you had s.?, s. remains to fill another) may almost be dismissed as a GENTEEL- ISM; besides being shorter, e. has the grammatical advantage of being a real noun, 2. In the adjective use (is there e., or s., butter?) s. has the advantage of being a true adjective, while e. is

140

+ only a quasi-adjective; for e. evidence is an abbreviation (as with a hundred men, much difficulty, &c.) for e. of evidence; the consequence is that a s. supply is possible, & an e. supply is not. In spite of the fact, however, that s. is always & e. only sometimes available, e. is to be preferred as the more natural & vigorous word wherever mere amount can be regarded as the only question: is there e. butter, or butter e., for the week?; he has courage e. for anything. But where considerations of quality or kind are essential, s. is better; compare for want of s. investigation with there has been investigation e.; the first implies that it has not been thorough or skilful, the second that the time given to it has been excessive.

3. In the adverbial use, neither word suffers from a grammatical handicap, e. being as true an adverb as sufficiently. Choice is dictated (often without the chooser’s knowledge) in part by the feeling that a plain homely word, or a formal polysyllable, is appropriate (he does not idle e.; he does not indulge s. in recreation), & in part by the limitation of e. pointed out above to mere amount or degree (the meat is not boiled e.; he does not s. realize the consequences); often, however, e. is so undeniably more vigorous that it is worth while to help it out with clearly, fully, far, deeply, &c., rather than accept the single word s. ; compare he has proved his point clearly e. with he has s. proved his point.

en passant. See FRENCH WORDS.

enquire, enquiry, in-. See EM- & IM-.

en règle. See FRENCH WORDS.

enrol(l). Spell enrol, but -lling &c. 3 see -LL-, -L-.

en route, ensemble.

See FRENCH WORDS,

ensure, insure, assure.

For e. & i., see EM- & IM-;

for e. & a., see ASSURE 2.

entail. In spite of the increasing
