page: 141

+ tendency to differentiate (see NOUN & VERB ACCENT) the noun keeps the accent on the last syllable. entente. See FRENCH WORDS. enteric (fever). Newspaper readers who have noticed the disappearance of typhoid & the increase of e. may be glad to learn the relation between them. ‘ Typhoid fever: a specific eruptive fever (formerly supposed to be a variety of typhus), characterized by intestinal inflammation & ulceration: more distinctively, & now more usually, called enteric fever "—OED.

enterprise, not -ize4 see -ISE)(-IZE.

entertain. A guest is entertained at a meal, not to it. The OED quotes for the right form, & gives no example of the other; that, however, is because letter E was published in the 19th century; since then e. to has become stock reporters’ English; Dr Page was entertained to a banquet, Mr Lloyd George to a supper, & the members of the French Free Trade League to luncheon & to dinner. The question is whether the complaint can be confined, like phossy jaw & such things, to the trade; that the reporters themselves are beyond cure is plain when one of them states that The Chairman suggested that the missing M.P. had been trapped by suffragists, & followed this up by entertaining the waiting audience to a song.

enthral(1). Spell enthrall; see -LL-, -L-.

enthuse. See BACK-FORMATION.

entire. There is not a single county in the e. of Ireland in which. . . This, which sounds like a foolish modern use comparable with that of VARIOUS, is in fact an old one, become ‘ somewhat rare’ (OED). It may as well become rarer, for all that.

entitled means having a right (to do something) or a just claim (to some advantage); it does not mean bound (to do) or liable (to a penalty); but it is now being badly misused:— Germany has suffered bitterly, is 141

+ suffering bitterly, & Germany is entitled to suffer for what she has done./If these people choose to come here [into court] & will not learn our heathen language, but prefer their gibberish or jargon, I consider they are entitled to pay for it.

entity. The word is one of those regarded by plain people, whether readers or writers, with some alarm & distrust as smacking of philosophy. Its meaning, however, is neither more nor less recondite than that of the corresponding native word, which no one shies at; e. is being, & an e. is a being. The first or abstract sense is comparatively rare; e. is better than nonentity means the same as it is better to be than not to be. In the second or concrete sense, an e. differs only so far from a being that the latter as used by others than philosophers has come to exclude, while e. includes, any non-sentient or impersonal but actually existing thing; a plant or a stone or a State may be called an e., but is not, outside of philosophy, called a being; e. therefore has a right to its place even in the popular vocabulary.

entourage, entr’acte. See FRENCH WORDS.

entrench, in-. See EM- & IM-.

entre nous, entrepôt. See FRENCH WORDS.

entresol. See FLOOR.

entrust. Modern idiom allows only two constructions: to e. (a task, a charge, a secret) fo someone; to e. (someone) with a task &c. The verb no longer means to put trust in simply (that is to trust, not e.), nor to commission or employ or charge to do (for which those verbs, or again to trust, will serve). The obsolete uses are seen in: King Edward entrusted him implicitly, & invariably acted upon his advice. /By victory the fighting men have achieved what their country has entrusted them to do. See CAST-IRON IDIOM.

entrust, entwine, entwist, in-. See EM- & IM-.
