page: 144

+ haps shy at it & reluctantly prefer deteriorate in the intransitive sense, is quoted from Milton, George Eliot, & others.

environs. The OED recognizes the two pronunciations énvir’onz, é’nvironz, in that order.

envisage. A 19th-century word only, & a surely undesirable GAL- LICISM. Face, confront, contemplate, recognize, realize, view, & regard, seem equal between them to all requirements. See WORKING & STYLISH WORDS.

envoy (in prosody).

See TEcH- NICAL TERMS.

envy, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

enwrap, in-. See EM- & IM-.

epaulet(te). ‘ The anglicized spelling epaulet is preferable, on the ground that the word is fully naturalized in use; but the form in -eite is at present more common ’— OED.

epergne. This odd word, which seems to challenge one to show that one can pronounce French, but will be vainly sought in the French dictionary, is pronounced iper’n by the OED.

epexegetic. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

epic, adj. An increasingly popular use is e. laughter, combat, contest, struggle, siege, &c.; being barel recognized in the OED, it is probably new; as the meaning is mainly such as we read of in Homer, the word HomeEnic is perhaps better.

epicene. For the grammatical semse, See COMMON. Having no real function in English grammar, the word is kept alive chiefly as a more contemptuous synonym for effeminate, implying physical as well as moral sexlessness; for this purpose it is better suited than common or neuter owing to their familiarity in other senses.

epid(e)ictic. See GREEK G.

epidemic. See ENDEMIC.

epidermis. See POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR. 144

epigram. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

epigrammatic. So spelt; see -M-, -MM-. Pron. épigrama‘tik.

epigraphy. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

epistle. See PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

epoch, epoch-making. Under TOIS, the meaning of the word epoch is explained. If an epoch were made every time we are told that a discovery or other event is epochmaking, our bewildered state of ceaseless transition from the thousands of eras we were in yesterday to the different thousands we were in today would be pitiful indeed. But luckily the word is blank cartridge, meant only to startle, & not to carry even so imponderable a bullet as conviction. Cf. UNIQUE, & UNTHINKABLE.

epode. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

epopee. The OED states that the word is ‘ now somewhat rare °, summarizes its meaning as ‘=epic B°, i.e. the noun epic, & shows no reason why it should still exist. That it was formerly commoner than now was due to the fact that the competition between the Greek epos, the French épopée, & the naturalized adjective epic, for the post of English noun was not yet decided in favour of the last. Today e.’s only function is to enable learned writers to puzzle unlearned readers who know an epic but never heard of epopee. A SUPERFLUOUS WORD.

e pur si muove.

See HacKNEYED PHRASES,

equable. The quality indicated is complex—not merely freedom from great changes, but that as well as remoteness from either extreme, a compound of uniformity & moderation. A continuously cold climate or a consistently violent temper is not e.; nor on the other hand is a moderate but changeable climate or a pulse that varies frequently though within narrow limits.

equal. 1. The verb makes equalling &e.; see -LL-, -L-.

2. The navy is not e. in numbers or
