page: 151

+ they cannot have too much of it. But they think it is going too far to translate words into action. That is not, in thetr e., playing the Parliamentary game.

estop is a useful word so long as it is restricted to the special sense that has secured its revival; but to revive its wider sense convicts one of pedantry. The special legal sense is (in the passive) ‘ to be precluded by one’s own previous act or declaration from alleging or doing something ’. Two quotations will show the right & the wrong use:— (a) No one defended more joyously the silencing of Mr Asquith last July, & Mr Magxse is estopped from complaining, now that his own method has been applied to himself; (b) The road winds along the side of a barren mountain till it appears to be estopped by a high cliff.

esurient.

See POLYSYLLABIC HUM- OUR.

etacism. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

ete. To resort to &c. in sentences of a literary character (His faults of temper &c. are indeed easily accounted for) is amateurish, slovenly, & incongruous:—A compliment of this kind is calculated to increase their enthusiasm, courage, &c., to do their utmost./The Covenanted Civil Service with its old traditions & its hereditary hatred of interlopers, be they merchants, journalists, doctors, etc. On the other hand, in the contexts to which it is appropriate, it is needless PurisM to restrict its sense to what the words could mean in Latin, i.e. (a) & the rest as opposed to & other things, (b) and the like as opposed to or the like, (c) & other things as opposed to persons; the first restriction would exclude His pockets contained an apple, a piece of string, &c.; the second would exclude ‘ Good’, ‘ fair’, ‘ excellent’, &c., is appended to each name; the third would exclude The Duke of A, Lord B, Mr C, &c., are patrons.

The reasonable punctuation with &c. is to put a comma before it when

+ more than one term has preceded, but not when one term only has preceded: toads, frogs, &c.; but toads &c.

eternal. For ‘the E. City’ see SOBRIQUETS.

ethic(al), ethics.

1. ethic)(ethical. 2. ethic dative. 3. ethic)(ethics. 4. ethics, number. 5. ethics)(morals. 6. ethical)(moral.

1. ethic)(ethical. The short form has now been almost displaced as an adjective by the long; it is occasionally still used, but is noticeably archaic; the only exception to this is in

2. The ethic dative. This, in which the word means emotional or expressive, is the name for a common Greek & Latin use in which a person no more than indirectly interested in the fact described in the sentence is introduced into it, usually by himself as the speaker, in the dative, which is accordingly most often that of the first personal pronoun. As the construction was formerly English also (Come knock me at that door =knock at the door, I tell you; Kills me some six or seven dozen of Scots = Kills, they tell me, &c.), the grammatical name for it is still heard on occasion; but its place has been taken by various modern colloquialisms, as Knock, can’t you?, Kills, if you please. See also under TECHNICAL TERMS.

8. cthic)(ethics. Of the two nouns the second is the one for ordinary use. It means the science of morals or study of the principles defining man’s duty to his neighbours, a treatise on this, or a prevailing code of morality (Ethics is, or are, not to be treated as an exact science; That is surely from the Ethics, i.e. Aristotle’s; Our modern ethics are not outraged by this type of mendacity). Ethic in any of these senses has a pedantic air; it is chiefly in technical philosophic use, & its special meaning is a scheme of moral science (The attempt to construct an ethic apart from theology).
