page: 164

+ Jeanie; Jemmy; Jenny; Jerry; Jessie; Johnny; Katy (-ie); kiddy; kilty = Highlander (-ie); Kitty; laddie; lassie; looby; lovey=my love; mammy; Marie, French name; Mary, English name; maty=mate (-ey); Milly (-ie); Minnie; Missy; Molly; mummy =mother; Neddy; Nelly (-ie); nicy; nighty; Nosy= big-nosed one (-ey); munky = uncle; nursy (-ie); Paddy; Patsy; Patty; Peggy; piggy (-te); pinny; Polly; puppy; Reggy (-ie); Robby (-te); rooty=bread; Sammy; Sandy; Sawney; shimmy; sissy =sister; slavey; sonny; Sophy (-ie); spooky (-ey); Sukey; Susy (-te); sweety; Teddy; toddy; Tommy; tommy= bread; tummy; Watty = Walter; wifie; Willy (-te); Winnie.

eyot. Pronounce at; the OED calls it ‘ a more usual variant of ait’, & ‘an artificial spelling ’,

eyrie. See AERY.

F

fabricate makes -cable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

facetiae, in booksellers’ catalogues, is a euphemism for obscenities; the following extract from such a catalogue is vouched for by the Westminster Gazette:—FACETIAE,. 340

Kingsley (C.) Phaethon; or Loose Thoughts for Loose Thinkers, 2nd ed., 8vo, boards, 1s., 1854.

facetious. For

synonymy see JOCOSE,

FACETIOUS FORMATIONS,

A few specimens may be

collected in groups illustrating

more or less distinct types.

Pun or parody: anecdotage (anecdote, dotage); gigmanity (gigman, humanity); correctitude (correct, rectitude); judgematical (judge, dogmatic); goloptious (voluptuous); sacerdotage.

Mock mistakes: underconstumble, mischevious, splendiferous, Eyetalian, Popular etymology, real or sup-

+ posed: highstrikes (hysterics); jawbation (jobation).

Mock Latin: bonus, bogus, hocuspocus, hi-cocalorum (hic, hoc, horum?).

Portmanteau words: galumph (gallop, triumph); chortle (snort, chuckle).

Incongruity of Latin trimmings to common English words: absquatulate; circumbendibus; omnium gatherum; fistical; babyolatry; disgruntled; contraption; squandermania, !

Irreverent familiarity: blimy (God blind me); crikey (Christ).

Onomatopoeia, obvious or obscure: | bubblyjock; collywobbles; ram- | shackle; pernickety; rumbustious.

Long & ludicrous: galligaskins; antigropelos; cantankerous; daddle; panjandrum; spiflicate.

facile. Its value as a synonym for easy or fluent or dezxtrous lies chiefly in its depreciatory implication. A f. speaker or writer is one who needs to expend little pains (& whose product is of correspondingly little import); a f. triumph or victory is easily won (& comes to little). Unless the implication in brackets is intended, the use of f. instead of its commoner synonyms (a more economical & f. mode; with a f. turn of the wrist) is ill-judged & usually due to AVOIDANCE OF THE OBVIOUS.

facile princeps. Pronounce fi‘sili; Latin adv. = easily (first).

facilitate. The officer was facili- | tated in his search by the occupants. We f. an operation, not the operator, A SLIPSHOD EXTENSION.

facsimile. Pronounce faksi/mili.

fact is well equipped with idiomatic phrases. There are unquestionably established in f., in point of f., as a | matter of f., the f. is, & the f. of the matter is. It is a pity that the recent invention as a f. (of which no example is recorded in the OED) should be thrust upon us in addition to all these. It will be seen that in each of the few quotations that ske- f
