page: 167

+ Milner had fixed these prices because the Food Controller & the Board of Agriculture both disagreed as to what they should be, & he had at least the wisdom to fix a price that they both disliked (the first both is needless & misleading; the second is right). An instance at once more excusable & more fatal, both for the same reason, that hard thinking is necessary to get the thing disentangled, is: This company has found that the men they employ in America can be depended on to produce a minimum of 40%, more output than the men they employ abroad, & yet these men both in America & elsewhere may be of the same race & nationality at birth. The point is not that in America, & just as much in (say) Italy, these men may be (say) Czechs, but that of any two men or any two sets of which one is employed in America & the other in Italy both may be (say) Italians; it is not that America & Italy are in some matter alike, but that the difference between the employee in one & the employee in the other is constant; both, inserted where it is, hopelessly disguises this; read these men of whom one is employed in America & one elsewhere. falsehood, falseness, falsity. Differentiation has been busy with the three, but has perhaps not yet done with them. At present A falsehood is a lie; falsehood is lying regarded as an action, but it is also a statement or statements contrary to fact or the truth. Falseness is contrariness to fact regarded as a quality of a statement, but it is also lying & deception regarded as an element in character. falsity is interchangeable with falseness in its first but not in its second sense. In the following examples the word used is, except where an alternative is shown, the only one of the three consistent with modern usage: That is a falsehood; You told a falsehood; He was convicted of falsehood; Truth would be suppressed

+ together with falsehood; Truth exaggerated may become falsehood; The falseness, or falsity, of this conclusion is obvious; A falseness that even his plausibility could not quite conceal.

FALSE QUANTITY. The phrase should be banished from the discussion of how to pronounce English words. The use of it betrays the user’s ignorance that standard English teems with what are in one sense or another false quantities. Its implication is that, with some limitations or other, the sound of vowels in English words derived from Greek & Latin is decided by the sound in the words from which they come; but these limitations are so variously conceived, when their existence is not ignored, that mere mention of false quantity is valueless. Take a score of words about the pronunciation of which opinions differ, & on which classical quantities might be expected to throw light; the classical quantities are marked where they matter, & accents are added when acceptance of the classical quantity would naturally result in a particular stress:—amenity, apparent, cănľřne, ciné’ma, commii‘nal, déficit, doctri‘nal, gla’didlis, idyl, inter’nécine, patriot, pro’tagd’nist, rition, sali’vary, Saloni’ca, sēmaphore, simian, Socrates, tribunal, vertigo. It will be clear from this list that the following of classical quantity may operate singly or doubly, i.e. on the sound of a vowel only, or through it on the word’s balance, & that the secondary is much more noticeable than the primary effect; the difference between pătriot & patriot, apparent & apparent, is slight, but that between doctri‘nal & d0’ctrinal, verti‘go & ver’tigo, pro’tagd’nist & prota’gonist, is very great. How little weight is to be attached to classical quantity as an argument merely for one vowel sound against another will be plain from another score of examples, some of them actual Latin words, in which the unquestioned
