page: 168

+ pronunciation is a false quantity:— agent, Alien, bona fide, cdmic, corroborate, décent, écho, éthics, et cétera, fastidious, idéa, jocésity (& all in -osity), military, minor, mitigate, odour, pathetic (& most in -etic), sénile, solitary, variety (& all in -iety). It is useless to call out ‘false quantity’ to someone who says ration or idyl or tribu’nal or aménity when he can answer you with agent, fastidious, minor, or écho. The simple fact is that in determining the quality of a vowel sound in English classical quantity is of no value whatever; to flout usage & say Socrates is the merest pedantry.

With regard to its secondary effect, as an influence in selecting the syllable in English words that shall bear the stress, classical quantity is not so negligible. A variation of stress being a much more marked thing than a vowel difference, the non-latinist’s attention is arrested when a neighbour whom he credits with superior knowledge springs doctri’‘nal upon him, & doctri’nal gets its chance. Whether doctri’‘nal is right is another question; the superior-knowledged one knows that doctrina has a long i; but has he satisfied himself that a long i, not in doctrina but in doctrinalis, i.e. with no stress on it, has any right to affect the stress of doctrinal? Or again, has the Grecian who knows kinéma & objects to ci’nema reflected that cinema does not represent kinema itself, butis a shortening of ci’nemd'tograph, which again has passed through French & indeed been there ‘ assembled ’ on its way from Greek to English? if he had, he would probably have held his peace. In many words, such as canine & saline, vertigo, the latinist’s first thoughts (kani’n, sali’n, verti’g6) do not need modification on his own part as doctri’nal & ciné’ma do; but he has still to reckon with the recessive-accent tendency, which has as good a right to a voice in the matter as his erudition, & will fight

+ hard & perhaps victoriously for ka/nin, sa’lin, & ver’tigo.

After all deductions, however, a small province is left in which the false-quantity principle may fairly reign; if clematis is pronounced klima’tis, enema iné’ma, & gladiolus gladio/lus, what has been done is this: in Greek & Latin words adopted without modification, a syllable that in the original is neither long in quantity nor stressed has been made the stressed syllable in English; they should be klé’matis, énima, & gla’dyolus (with indulgence to gladi’olus on the analogy of variety). But on such disputes as those between proti’gonist & prd’tagd’nist, cé’mmunal & commii’nal, i‘nterné’cine & inter’nécine, s&/livary & salivary, ma’rital & mari‘tal, cer’vical & cervi’cal, A’nthropoid & anthro’poid, its decision is not final; it is not judge, but a mere party to the suit. Let the scholar plead his case; but since the ailment that he long insisted on our calling Angi’na pectoris was discovered to be A’ngina after all, his pleadings are suspect.

FALSE SCENT. The laying of false scent, i.e., the causing of a reader to suppose that a sentence or part of one is taking a certain course, which he afterwards finds to his confusion that it does not take, is an obvious folly—so obvious that no-one commits it wittingly except when surprise is designed to amuse. But writers are apt to forget that, if the false scent is there, it is no excuse to say they did not intend to lay it; it is their business to see that it is not there, & this requires more care than might be supposed. The reader comes to a sentence not knowing what it is going to contain; the writer knows; consequently what seems to the latter, owing to his private information, to bear unquestionably one sense & no other may present to the former, with his open mind, either a choice of meanings or even a different one only. Nor has the writer even the
