page: 171

+ Vhomme—Littré), is obscured by association (‘the connexion is untenable ’—OED) with ferocious; see TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

farrow, litter. only, l. of any quadruped producing several young at a birth.

farther, further. The history of the two words appears to be that further is a comparative of fore & should, if it were to be held to its etymology, mean more advanced, & | that farther is a newer variant of | further, no more connected with far than further is, but affected in its form by the fact that further, having come to be used instead of the obsolete comparative of far (farrer), seemed to need a respelling that should assimilate it to far. This is intended for a popular but roughly correct summary of the OED’s etymological account. As to the present use of the two forms, the OED says:—‘ In standard English the form farther is usually preferred where the word is intended to be the comparative of far, while further is used where the notion of far is altogether absent; there is a large intermediate class of instances in which the choice between the two forms is arbitrary ’.

This seems to be too strong a statement, or a statement of what might be a useful differentiation rather than of one actually developed or even developing. The fact is surely that hardly anyone uses the two words for different occasions; most people prefer one or the other for all purposes, & the preference of the majority is for further; the most that should be said is perhaps that farther is not common except where distance is in question. The three pairs of quotations following are selected for comparison from the OED stores.

1. Comparative of far:—If you can bear your load no farther, say s0.— Ht Martineau. It was not thought safe for the ships to proceed further in the darkness.—Macaulay. 171 F. is used of swine |

+ 2. No notion of far:—Down he sat without farther bidding.—Dickens. I now proceed to some further instances. —De Morgan. 3. Intermediate:— Punishment cannot act any farther than in as far as the idea of it is present in the mind.—Bentham. Men who pretend to believe no further than they can see.—Berkeley.

On the whole, though differentiations are good in themselves, it is less likely that one will be established for farther & further than that the latter will become universal. In the verb, further is very much more common.

fascinate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

fascine. Pronounce fasé’n.

fascist &c. The Italian words— fascista pl. -ti, fascismo—are pronounced (roughly) fahshé’stah -te, -é’sm6. In English they should be fashi’sta,-té, -i’zm, or else anglicized to fascist pl. -s, -ism, pronounced fa’si-. Whether this full anglicization of the words is worth while cannot be decided till we know whether the things are to be temporary or permanent in England.

fasten. Pronounce fah’sn; see PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

fasti. Pronounce fa’sti.

fatalism)(determinism. The philosophical distinction between the words cannot here be more than roughly suggested, & is itself more or less arbitrary. F. says: Every event is pre-ordained; you cannot act as you will, but only in the preordained way. D. says: You can act (barring obstacles) as you will; but then you cannot will as you will; your will is determined by a complex of antecedents the interaction of which makes you unable to choose any but the one course. That is, f. assumes an external power decreeing irresistibly every event from the greatest to the least, while d. assumes the dependence of all things, including the wills of living beings, upon sequences of cause & effect
