page: 173

+ fay. See FAIRY 2. feasible. With those who feel that the use of an ordinary word for an ordinary notion does not do justice to their vocabulary or sufficiently exhibit their cultivation (see WORK- ING & STYLISH WORDS), f. is now a prime favourite. Its proper sense is ‘capable of being done, accomplished, or carried out’ (OED). That is, it means the same as possible in one of the latter’s senses, & its true function is to be used instead of possible where that might be ambiguous. A thunderstorm is possible (but not f.). Irrigation is possible (or, indifferently, f) A counter-revolution is possible; i.e. (a) one may for all we know happen, or (b) we can if we choose bring one about; but, if b is the meaning, f. is better than possible because it cannot properly bear sense a & therefore obviates ambiguity.

The wrong use of f. is that in which, by SLIPSHOD EXTENSION, it is allowed to have also the other sense of possible, & that of probable. This is described by the OED as ‘ hardly a justifiable sense etymologically, & ... recognized by no dictionary ’. It is however becoming very common; in all the quotations, it will be seen that the natural word would be either probable or possible, one of which should have been chosen:— Continuing, Mr Wood said: ‘ I think it is very f. that the strike may be brought to an end this week, & it is a significant coincidence that. . .’./ Witness said it was quite f. that if he had had night binoculars he would have seen the iceberg earlier./We ourselves believe that this is the most f. explanation of the tradition./This would appear to offer a f. explanation of the scaffold puzzle./The reason given for the refusal was quite different &

more f./It is f. that the airship was

struck by lightning & totally destroyed.

feast. For ‘ f. of reason ’ see HACK-

NEYED PHRASES.

feature, vb. The use of this in

cinema announcements instead of

+ represent or exhibit is perhaps from America; at any rate, while British dictionaries give no meanings that support it, the American ‘ Standard’ gives as normal ‘ The newspapers feature aviation’. Wherever it comes from, it is to be feared that from the cinema bills it will make its way into popular use, which would be a pity. (Yes! 1924: Boys’ school & college outfits, men’s footwear & under-garments, as well as . «+, are also featured.)

fecund. The OED gives precedence to fé’- over fé’-.

-rable, -tor; see

federate makes -ABLE 1, -OR.

federation, confederation, confederacy. Writing in 1918, one may say that the Entente Powers are now a confederacy, that the proposed League of Nations would be a confederation, & that if that were further developed into a United States of Europe, that would be a federation. The following extracts from the OED bear this out:—

< Confederacy now usually implies a looser or more temporary association than confederation, which is applied to a union of States organized on an intentionally permanent basis.’/* In modern political use, confederation is usually limited to a permanent union of sovereign States for common action in relation to externals ... The United States of America are commonly described as a Confederation (or confederacy) from 1777 to 1789 ; but from 1789 their closer union has been considered a “ federation” or federal republic.’/[On federation] ‘* Now chiefly spec. the formation of a political unity out of a number of separate States, so that each retains the management of its internal

affairs °’.

fee, n. For synonymy see TAX.

fee, vb. The past & p.p. are best

written feed; see -ED & ’D.

feint, adj. See FAINT.

feldspar, not felspar. The first part

is German Feld field, not Fels rock.
