page: 176

+ word that does the work of two or more by packing several notions into one is a gain (the more civilized a language the more such words it possesses), if certain conditions are observed: it must not be cumbersome; it should for choice be correctly formed; & it must express a compound notion that is familiar enough to need a name.

Secondly, with the coming extension of women’s vocations, feminines for vocation-words are a. special need of the future; everyone knows the inconvenience of being uncertain whether a doctor is a man or a woman; hesitation in establishing the word doctress is amazing in a people regarded as nothing if not practical. Far from needing to reduce the number of our sex-words, we should do well to indulge in real neologisms such as teacheress, singeress, & danceress, the want of which drives us to cantatrice, danseuse, & the like; authoress & poetess & paintress are not neologisms.

But are not the objectors, besides putting their own interests above those of the public, actually misjudging their own? Their view is that the female author is to raise herself to the level of the male author by asserting her right to his name; but if there is one profession in which more than in others the woman is the man’s equal it is acting; & the actress is not known to resent the indication of her sex; the proof of real equality will be not the banishment of authoress as a degrading title, but its establishment on a level with author. Nor, after all, does an authoress, a doctress, a lioness, a votaress, a prophetess, or a Jewess, cease to be an author, a doctor, a lion, a votary, a prophet, or a Jew, because she ends in -ess; she should call herself, & still more allow us without protest to call her, by the common or the feminine title according to the requirements. of the occasion; but George Eliot the authoress would then be as much more frequent than

+ G. E. the author as the prophetess Deborah than the prophet D.

It may perhaps aid consideration of the subject if short selections are given, A, of established feminine titles, B, of recent or impugned ones, &, C, of words unfortunately not provided with feminines.

A

Abbess, actress, administratrix, adultress,adventuress, ambassadress, deaconess, duchess, enchantress, executrix, giantess, goddess, governess, horsewoman, hostess, huntress, Jewess, lioness, mother, murderess, priestess, princess, procuress, prophetess, quakeress, queen, shepherdess, songstress, sorceress, stewardess, votaress, waitress, wardress.

B

Authoress, chairwoman, conductress, directress, doctress, draughtswoman, editress, inspectress, jurywoman, manageress, paintress, patroness, poetess, policewoman, protectress, tailoress.

C

Artist, aurist, clerk,cook, councillor, cyclist, lecturer, legatec, martyr, motorist, oculist, palmist, president, pupil, singer, teacher, typist.

Artist, in list C, illustrates well the need of feminines, since ignorant writers are often guilty of artists & artistes, meaning male & female performers.

feminineness, feminism, &c. The words on record in the OED are: feminacy, feminality, femineity, feminicity, feminility, feminineness, femininism, femininity, feminism, feminity. Of these feminacy, feminality, feminicity, & feminility, may be put out of court as mere failed experiments. Femineity, -ineness, -inity, & -ity, remain as competitors for the sense of woman’s nature & qualities, none of them perceptibly differentiated in meaning. Feminineness is a word that does not depend on usage or dictionarymakers for its right to exist; it can
