page: 179

+ to some readers: What, then, about a very few? may we not say In a very few years all will be changed? The answer is, first, that a very few is no doubt the origin of the mistaken constructions, & secondly that very is here not an adverb, but an adjective, as in She is a very woman or devil, or in Living on a very minimum of food; just as we can say a poor or a wretched few, so we can Say a mere or a very few, with very an adjective; but because very is now more familiar as an adverb, it is wrongly concluded that words that can only be adverbs will do.

It may be added that. Very few people were there is better than A very few people were there, because few means some & not many, while a few means some & not none, so that few is better fitted than a few for combination with words expressing degree like very.

2. Fewer number(s) is a solecism, obvious as soon as one thinks, but becoming common; correct to smaller in:—Fortunately the number of persons on board was fewer than usual./The fewer number of days or hours we are . . ., the beiter it will be./ The bird seems to have reached us in fewer numbers this year.

fez. Pl. fezzes, adj. fezzed.

fiancé, -ée. See FRENCH WORDS, & INTENDED.

fiasco. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

fibre, -ber. See -RE & -ER.

fibroma. Pl. -omata (-6’-).

fibula. Pl. -lae or -las. Pron. fi’-.

fictitious. See FACTIOUS.

fiddle. If the word is, as the OED says, ‘now only in familiar or contemptuous use’, it is matter for regret, & those who defy this canon deserve well of the language. We all learn the word fiddle as babies, & at a later age when we find ourselves expected to understand & use another word for it we explain violin to ourselves as ‘ the same as fiddle’; it is a case of WORKING & STYLISH WORDS in which, unfortunately, the majority has yielded to

+ the seductions of stylishness. Even now, She fiddles divinely (as compared with playing the violin in that manner) surely supplies a felt need; & as to the noun, a violin is a fiddle & a fiddle a violin, &, when an alternative is to hand, exotics like violin with accents on their last syllables should not be allowed to upset the natural run of English sentences.

fidget, vb, makes -eting &c.; see -T-, -TT-.

fiducial, fiduciary. The second is the ordinary form, fiducial being used only in some technical terms in surveying, astronomy, &c.

fidus Achates.

Pronounce fidus aka’téz.

-FIED. The spelling of the jocular compounds in which a verb in -fy hardly exists is unsettled (countrified or countryfied &c.). It seems best to use -i- when the noun or adjectiv~ does not provide a convenient connecting syllable, but, when it does, not to alter it; so cockneyfied, countryfied, dandyfied, Frenchified, ladyfied, townified, yankeefied.

field, in the sense of space proper to something (f. of action, each in his own f., &c.). The synonyms for this are remarkably numerous; the distinctions & points of agreement between these are fortunately obvious enough not to need elaborate setting forth; but a list not pretending to completeness, & a characteristic phrase or so for each word, may be useful.

Area, branch, compass, department, domain, field, gamut, last, limit, line, locale, point, province, purview, question, radius, range, realm, record, reference, region, register, scale, scene, scope, sphere, subject, tether, theme.

A debate covering a wide area, Unsurpassed in his own branch. Egpenses beyond my compass. In every department of human activity. Belongs to the domain of philosophy. Distinguished in many fields; is
