page: 180

+ beyond the field of vision. In the whole gamut of crime. Stick to your last. Unconscious of his limits. Casuistry is not in my line. A very unsuitable locale. Talking beside the point. Jt is not our province to inquire. Comes within the purview of the Act. Constantly straying from the question. Outside the range of practical politics. Operating within a narrow radius. In the whole realm of Medicine. Don’t travel outside the record. Such evidence is precluded by our reference. In the region of metaphysics. Any note in the lower register. Whatever the scale of effort required. A scene of confusion. Find scope for one’s powers; limit the scope of the inquiry. Useful in his own sphere. Wanders from the subject. Get to the end of one’s tether. Has chosen an ill defined theme.

field officer. See OFFICER.

fiery. Two syllables (firi).

fifteen. ‘The ’°15’,‘ the 45’. The Jacobite risings of 1715 & 1745 are so remote that there is now some affectation in speaking of them by these names except in historical novels.

fifth(ly). Both the -f- & the -th should be, but are often not, clearly sounded; cf. apophthegm, diphtheria, diphthong, sixth.

fifties, ’fif-. See TWENTIES.

figure, figurant, figurative, &c. While it is pedantic to pronounce figure otherwise than as fi’ger, it is slovenly to let the natural English laxity go to this extreme with the less familiar figuration, figurative, figurant, figurine, &c. (figira’shn &c.); see PRONUNCIATION,

filial. The OED recognizes only fil- ; fil- is however often heard, but possibly only from latinists obsessed by the fear of FALSE QUANTITY.

filigree, -agree. The OED gives precedence to the first spelling.

fille de chambre, de joie.

See FRENCH WORDS.

fillip, vb, makes -iped &c.; see -P-, -PP-.

fils. See FRENCH WORDS.

filthy lucre. See HACKNEYED PHRASES, & IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

filtrate, vb, by the side of filter, vb, is a SUPERFLUOUS WORD suggesting Back-FORMATION from filtration; see LONG VARIANTS.

finable, not fineable; see MUTE E.

final (in syntax). See TECHNICAL TERMS.

Three syllables (finah‘li).

finale.

See Noun &

financier, n. & v. VERB ACCENT.

fine, adj. Not to put too f. a point upon it is an apology for a downright expression, & means ‘to put it bluntly °.

fine, n. In fine, a phrase now seldom used except in writing of a rather formal kind, has entirely lost the sense, which it once had, of at last. It is still sometimes used for finally or lastly, i.e. to introduce the last of a series of parallel considerations; but in the interests of clearness it is better that it should be confined to its predominant modern use, = in short or in fact or to sum up, introducing a single general statement that wraps up in itself several preceding particular ones.

finger. The fingers are now usually numbered exclusively of the thumb—/first (or index), second (or middle), third (or ring), & fourth (or little); but in the marriage service the third is called the fourth.

fingering, as a name for stockingwool, is not from finger, but represents French jin grain fine grain; see TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

finical, finicking, finikin. All that can be said with certainty about the derivation of the words & their mutual relations seems to be that -al is recorded 70 years earlier than the others. As to choice between them, the English termination -ching is best calculated to express a hearty British contempt for the tenuity
