page: 184

fluvial, fluviatile. There is no difference in meaning, & no reason why both should exist; fluvial is recommended, even if the longer form is slightly commoner. See LONG VARIANTS.

fly. 1. The noun is used as a CoL- LECTIVE in the sense plant-disease due to kinds of f. (there ts a good deal of f.)- ;

2. The verb makes ts flown as well as has flown; see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

3. Fly a kite means (a) raise money by bill, (b) make an announcement or take a step with a view to finding out whether a plan has a chance of success.

4. Fly-leaf is a blank leaf forming part of something printed, especially one between the cover & the titlepage of a book, or at the end of a circular or leaflet; it is not another name for a leaflet, which is, however, sometimes called a fly-sheet.

5. A fly-wheel is one whose sole function is by its inertia & momentum to make the movement of the shaft that works it continuous & regular; hence its metaphorical use.

6. For flyer see FLIER.

foal, colt, filly. Foalis of either sex, c. male, & filly female.

foam, froth. The natural definition of foam would be the froth of the sea, & that of froth the foam of beer. That is to say, foam suggests the sea, froth suggests beer, & while one word is appropriate to the grand or the beautiful or the violent, the other is appropriate to the homely or the ordinary or the dirty. One demands of foam that it be white; froth may be of what colour it pleases. Froth may be scum, but foam, though it may become scum, ceases to be foam in the process. It is perhaps also true that froth is thought of mainly as part of a liquid that has sent it to the top, & foam as a separate substance often detached in the act of making from its source. But the difference is much less in the meanings than in the suitable contexts. focus. 1. The noun has pl. -cuses or

184

+ -ci (pron. -si); the verb makes focused, -cusing (‘in England commonly, but irregularly, written focussed, -ing "—OED); see -S-, -SS-.

2. The verb is liable to loose application, as in: At one moment it seemed to be quite near, & at the next far away; for the ears, unaided by the eyes, can but imperfectly focus sound or measure its distance. The f. of a sound being ‘ the point or space towards which the sound-waves converge °’ (OED), ears cannot f. sound except by taking their owner to the right point; the eyes do measure distance by focusing, having an apparatus for the purpose; the ears do not.

foetid. See FETID.

foetus, fetus. ‘ The etymologically preferable spelling with e in this word & its cognates is adopted as the standard form in some recent dictionaries, but in actual use is almost unknown.’—OED.

fogy, -gey. The OED gives precedence to -gy.

föhn. See WIND, n.

foist. The general public is much too easily foisted off with the old cry of the shopman that ‘ there’s no demand for that kind of thing’. The public can be fobbed off with something, or the something can be fobbed off on the public; but foist has only the second construction; see ANALOGY & OBJECT-SHUFFLING.

folio. Pl. -os; see -o(£)s 4. The following account from a dictionary may be useful:—Leaf of paper &c. numbered only on front; two opposite pages, or single page, of ledger used for the two sides of account; number of words (72 or 90) as unit of length in document; (Bookbinding) once-folded sheet of printing-paper giving two leaves or four pages (in f., made of ff.), (also f. volume &c.) a book or volume in f., (similarly of smaller sheets & books resulting from various foldings & named after the number of leaves to the sheet: quarto or 4to, folded twice into four leaves; sexto or 6to, thrice into 6
