page: 185

+ (rare); octavo or 8vo, thrice into 8 ; duodecimo or 12mo, 4 times into 12 ; 16mo or sextodecimo or decimo sexto; 18mo or octodecimo; 20mo, 24mo, 32mo, 64mo; the last seven are or may be spoken twelvemo &c.). folk has passed out of the language of the ordinary educated person, so far as he talks unaffectedly. It is still in provincial use, & is besides a favourite SAxONISM, whether in the singular or in the plural form (folk, a people, or people; folks, people); there is also its use, imitated from German, in which the word is not archaic as in English, in such learned compounds as folklore, folksong, & folk-etymology. Neither Saxonism nor Germanism is a recommendation.

follow. As follows. The main regulations of Mr Gladstone’s new Order are as follow:—VFirst .. ./ The principal items of reductions made since 1904-5 stand as follow:

In all such contexts, as follows should be written. The OED ruling is: ‘The construction in as follows is impersonal, & the verb should always be used in the singular 2A And among its quotations is one from a Rhetoric of 1776: ‘A few late writers have inconsiderately adopted this last form’ [as follow] ‘through a mistake of the construction’. However, persons who are pluming themselves on having detected a vulgar error that they can amend are not likely to admit that it is a mare’s-nest on the unreasoned ipse dixit of an eighteenth-century rhetorician, or even of a twentiethcentury OED; & some discussion will be necessary. Unfortunately, full demonstration is hardly possible; but several considerations raise separate presumptions in favour of follows:—

1. It is certain that we all say as follows by the light of nature; it is only to the sophisticated intelligence that as follow occurs (or would the reformers prefer occur?).

2. Similar but more obvious mal-

+ treatment of other phrases suggests that the correctors of this too may be, though it does not prove that they are, mistaken:—(id est or i.e.) Section 15 (4), which deals with persons (ea sunt, all present & future members of societies) entitled to receive medical attendance; the author of this (why, by the way, does he stop short of iù sunt or eae sunt?) would presumably like Byron to have said Arcades ambo, ea sunt blackguards both; but id does not mean that Arcadian or those Arcadians, it means that phrase. (Concerns) Many of these stalks were failures, so far as concern the objective success; what the writer means is not so far as the stalks or the failures concern success, but so far as our discussion concerns it; the familiar as regards is liable to the same mutilation.

3. The phrase as follows, which is very old, no doubt originated in sentences where there was no plural in the neighbourhood to raise awkward questions. The OED quotes (1426) Was done als her fast folowys (=as here directly follows), & (1548) He openly sayde as foloweth. He spoke as follows may be taken as the type; that is obviously not a piece of normal grammar; what would be the normal way of putting it? He spoke thus, which is, at full length, He spoke so as I shall tell you, or He spoke so as it shall be told, or He spoke so as the tale follows, whence, by ellipse, He spoke as follows. This progress is surely natural; but it is equally natural in His words were so as I shall tell you, or His words were so as it shall be told, or His words were so as the tale follows, whence His words were as follows. It is true that, when the idiom was being evolved, it was open to its makers to say, instead of were so as the tale follows, were so as words follow; but they chose otherwise, hundreds of years ago, & the idiom is now fixed; no-one would want to change it except under the impression that it was ungram-
