page: 191

+ too much trouble to proceed; the slightly antique turn of the phrase acquits him of unceremoniousness 3; & so on is in this respect midway between & so forth & &c.

2. So far forth has occasionally the advantage over so far of limiting the sense to extent & excluding the literal idea of distance; more often its only claim to preference is what is always the only claim of so far forth as against so far as—its superior - pomposity. confused with fortunate,

forties, for-. See TWENTIES.

fortieth. So spelt.

fortify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

fortuitous means accidental,

un-

That it is sometimes designed, &c.

perhaps _ through mere sound, perhaps by the help of lucky, is plain from:—All’s well that ends well, & his divorced wives, whom the autobiographer naively calls Divorcées Nos 1, 2, & 3, _ seem to have borne no kind of ill-will to their more fortunate successor. | Reviewing my own Algerian experi- ences, I must say that I should not have expected so fortuitous a ter- mination of a somewhat daring eg- _ periment./When first produced, its popularity was limited. Nevertheless later reputation. it may now sail into a more fortuitous harbour on the strength of its author’s

For such mistakes see MALAPROPS.

fortune. 1. For the question between -tin & -chodon, see PRONUN- CIATION.

2. The verb (it fortuned that, I fortuned upon) is an ARCHAISM.

forty. For ‘the Forty-five’ see | FIFTEEN. ©The

forward(s), adv. The OED says:—

resent distinction in usage between forward & forwards is that the latter expresses a definite direction viewed in contrast with other directions. In some contexts either form may be used without perceptible difference of meaning; the following are examples in which only one of them can now be used:

+ “ The ratchet-wheel can move only forwards”; “the right side of the paper has the maker’s name reading forwards”; “if you move at all it must be forwards”; ‘‘my companion has gone forward’; ‘to bring a matter forward”; ‘from this time forward’ To this it must be added that there is a tendeney, not yet exhausted, for forward to displace forwards, & that even in the less than twenty years since the publication of that statement there has been change. The reader will notice that, while he can heartily accept the banishment of forwards from the last three examples, it is quite doubtful whether forward is not possible in some or all of the first three.

fossil. Pronounce f6’sl; see Pro- NUNCIATION.

fostress. So spelt.

foul, adv. See UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

foulard. The OED gives precedence to foolahr over foolar’d.

foully. Pronounce both ls.

See UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

foundress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS. ;

fount(ain). Fount (apart from the sense in typography, which is another word, connected with found) is the poetical & rhetorical form of fountain; to use it in ordinary contexts (e.g. in fount-pen for fountain-pen) is VULGARIZATION.

four. On or upon all fours, apart from its literal application to a person crawling, has now for its chief use the meaning of correspondence at all & not merely some points between two things (The cases are not o. a. f.; The analogy suggested is not o. a. f. with the actual facts). This seems due to a misunderstanding of the earlier but now less familiar metaphorical use by which a theory, tale, plan, &c., was said to run or be o. a. f. when it was consistent with itself or proof against objections or without weak points— in fact did not limp like a dog on three legs or rock like a table with
