page: 192

+ one leg too short. The step is easy, though illegitimate, from The comparison is o. a. f. (i.e. complete at all points) to The things compared are o. a. f. (i.e. alike at all points), & thence to o. a. f. with. Whether this is or is not its origin, o. a. f. with is now an established idiom.

fowl. The collective use of the singular (see COLLECTIVES 4 ; all the fish & f. in the world) still exists, but is not common.

fox. Fem. vigen, bitch-fox, she-fox.

foyer. See FRENCH WORDS.

fracas. Pronounce fr&’kah; pl. spelt fracas, & pronounced fri&’kahz.

fraenum, frenum. The second is recommended; see Æ, Œ. Pl. -na.

fragile. 1. Only -il is recognized by the OED, but -il is perhaps as common, & the choice rests entirely (see FALSE QUANTITY) with usage.

2. fragile)(frail, Frail is wider both in application & in sense. Whatever is fragile is also frail, but a woman may be frail (i.e. weaker than others in moral strength) who cannot be called fragile (i.e. weaker in physical strength). Where, as in most cases, either word is applicable, there is a certain difference of sense between (fragile) liable to snap or break or be broken & so perish & (frail) not to be reckoned on to resist breakage or pressure or to last long; that is to say, the root idea of break is more consciously present in fragile owing to its unobscured connexion with fragment & fracture. fragmentary. Accent on the first. framboesia. For spelling see x, Œ. frame, vb, makes -mabdle; see MUTE E. franc-tireur. See FRENCH WORDS. Frankenstein. J tell you this countru may have to pay a long price for Carsonism, & if Toryism returned to power tomorrow the Frankenstein of its own creating will dog its steps from the first hour of its existence as a Government. A sentence written by the creatrix of the creator of the creature may save some of those whose acquaintance with all three is

192

+ indirect from betraying the fact:— ‘Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature’s formation; but on this point he was impenetrable ’. Frankenstein is the creator-victim; the creature-despot & fatal creation is Frankenstein’s monster. The blunder is very common indeed— almost, but surely not quite, sanctioned by custom:—If they went on strengthening this power they would create a F. they could not resist./In his belief they were in the miserable position of having created a F. which they could not control./Thus the | Prime Minister has created a F. in his new forces in Ireland, which may in the end destroy the Government.

frantic. 1. MFrantically)(franticly. | The first is recommended; -ically is | almost universal as the adverbial: form of adjectives in -ic, & there is no gain (as with politicly & politically, where two meanings have to be distinguished) in keeping up two forms.

2. Synonyms are frenzied, furious, mad, passionate, rabid, raging, raving. wild. Of these: frantic & frenzied both mean beside oneself or driven into temporary madness by a cause specified or apparent from context (frantic with pain, excitement, &e. ; the frenzied populace refused him a hearing); in mere exaggerations, e.g. when joy is the cause, frantic is the word. Furious implies no more than anger that has got out of hand—or, of inanimate things, a degree of force comparable to this. Passionate applies primarily to persons capable of strong emotions, especially if they are also incapable of controlling them, & secondarily to the sort of action that results. Rabid now usually implies the carry- || ing to great excess of some particular || belief or doctrine, religious, political, | social, medical, or the like (a rabid | dissenter, tory, teetotaller, faddist; rabid virulence). Raging chiefly describes the violence in inanimate | things that seems to correspond to madness in man (cf, furious; a
