page: 209

+ including Welsh-Celtic, Cornish-Celtic, & Breton-Celtic, is Brythonic. gag. See CLOSURE for the Parliamentary sense. gainsay is a LITERARY WORD, & now little used except in negative contexts such as There is no gainsaying it, Without fear of being gainsaid, That can scarcely be gainsaid. gala. Pronounce ga-. galaxy. Pronounce ga‘laksi. galimatias. See FRENCH WORDS.

gallant. The ordinary pronunciation is gălant. Certain senses, ‘politely attentive to women’, ‘amorous’, ‘amatory’, are traditionally distinguished by the pronunciation gala’nt; but these senses, & still more the special accent, are perhaps moribund.

gallery. Que diable allait-il faire dans cette galére? is a famous line, & so often applicable that it is often applied. It is not possible for anyone who has seen it in its original place to be unaware that galère means galley; & therefore to put it, or an allusion to it, into English with gallery betrays infallibly the jackdaw with borrowed plumes. To write galerie (Mr McKenna, who has at least escaped being mixed up in that galerie) is to say ‘ Yes, I know the French ’, & so to add the sin of lying to the peccadillo of pretension. But then, whether one is caught out with gallery or galerie, one can always explain ‘It was the printer; I wrote galley, or galère’. See GALLICISMS, & FOREIGN DANGER.

galley. Pl. -eys.

Gallic, Gallican, Gaulish, French. Gallican is a purely ecclesiastical word, corresponding to Anglican. Gaulish means only ‘ of the (ancient) Gauls’, & is, even in that sense, less usual than Gallic. The normal meaning of Gallic is the same as that of Gaulish, but it is also much used as a synonym in some contexts for French. Jt means not simply ‘French’, but ‘ characteristically ’, < delightfully ’, ‘ distressingly °, or ‘amusingly ’, ‘French ’, ‘so French,

+ you know’, &c.; or again not ‘ of France ’, but ‘ of the typical Frenchman’. We do not, or should not, speak of Gallic wines or trade or law or climate, but we do of Gallic wit, morals, politeness, & shrugs; & the symbolic bird is invariably the Gallic cock. So far as Gallic is used for French without any implication of the kind suggested, it is merely a bad piece of ELEGANT VARIATION or AVOIDANCE OF THE OBVIOUS. gallice, -cé. See LATINE.

GALLICISMS. By Gallicisms are here meant borrowings of various kinds from French in which the borrower stops short of using French words without disguise.

1. One form consists in taking a French word & giving it an English termination or dropping an accent or the like, as in actuality, banality, & redaction.

2. Another in giving to an existent English word a sense that belongs to it only in French or to its French form only, as in intrigue (v.t.,= interest, perplex, &c.), impayable (= priceless for absurdity, impudence, &c.), arrive (=attain success &c.), exposition (=exhibition), & actual (=concerned with the present, as in The most actual & instructive article is on broadcasting).

3. Another in giving vogue to a word that has had little currency in English but is common in French, such as veritable & envisage.

4, Another in substituting a French form or word that happens to be English also, but in another sense} for the really corresponding English, as when brave is used for honest or worthy, or ascension for ascent.

5. Another in translating a French word or phrase, as in jump or leap to the eyes, to the foot of the letter, give furiously to think, knight of industry, daughter of joy, gilded youth, living pictures (=tableaux vivants), the half-world, rose-colour, curtain-ratser, do one’s possible, castle in Spain, goes without saying, suspicion (= soupçon), dean (=doyen), marriage
