page: 210

+ of convenience, on the carpet, & success of esteem.

To advise the abandonment of all Gallicisms indiscriminately would be absurd; there are thousands of English words & phrases that were once Gallicisms, but, having prospered, are no longer recognizable as such; & of the number now on trial some will doubtless prosper in like manner. What the wise man does is to recognize that the conversational usage of educated people in general, not his predilections or a literary fashion of the moment, is the naturalizing authority, & therefore to adopt a Gallicism only when he is of opinion that it is a Gallicism no more. To use Gallicisms for the worst of all reasons—that they are Gallicisms—,, to affect them as giving one’s writing a literary air, to enliven one’s dull stuff with their accidental oddities, above all to choose Gallicisms that presuppose the reader’s acquaintance with the French original, these are confessions of weakness or incompetence. If writers knew how ‘leap to the eye’ does leap to the eye of the reader who, in dread of meeting it, casts a precautionary glance down the column, or how furious is the thinking that ‘give furiously to think °’ stirs in the average Englishman, they would leave such paltry borrowings alone for ever.

Some of the Gallicisms here mentioned, as well as others, are commented upon in their dictionary places. Words for which the reader is simply referred without comment to this article are to be regarded as undesirable Gallicisms, Gallio. Pl. -os, see -o(£)s 8. gallivant. See FACETIOUS FORMA- TIONS. gallop makes -oped, -oping; see -P-, -PP-, gallows, though originally a plural form, is now singular (set up a g. &c.); the plural is usually avoided, but when unavoidable is gallowses. galop, the dance, is so spelt; used

+ as a verb, it does not double the p in inflexions, see -P-, -PP-.

galore, an Irish or Gaelic word, & no part of the Englishman’s natural vocabulary, is chiefly resorted to by those who are reduced to relieving dullness of matter by oddity of expression. Like anent, it is a favourite with the writers of letters to the press.

galosh, golosh. The OED gives precedence to the first spelling.

galumph. See FACETIOUS FORMA- TIONS.

gambado. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

gamboge. Pronounce -bōözh.

gamin. See FRENCH WORDS.

gammon)(ham. The ordinary modern meaning of g. is the hinder end of a side of bacon including the ham; in the sense of a cured h. alone it is now rare & old-fashioned.

gamp. See SOBRIQUETS.

gamut. For synonyms,

in the extended sense, see FIELD.

gamy, not gamey; see -EY & -Y.

gang agley is a BATTERED ORNA- MENT.

ganglion. PI. -lia.

gangway. Below the g., as a parliamentary phrase, is applied to members whose customary seat does not imply close association with the official policy of the party on whose side of the House they sit.

gantry, gaun-. In the modern engineering sense the first spelling is usual.

Ganymede. See SOBRIQUETS.

gaol, gaoler, jail, jailor, &c. ‘In British official use the forms with G are still current; in literary & journalistic use both the G & the J forms are now admitted as correct, but all recent Dictionaries give the preference to the latter.—OED. It may be added that the very anomalous pronunciation of g soft before other vowels than e, i, & y (only in mortgagor & in the popular mispronunciation of margarine?) is a strong argument for writing jail. The spellings of the agent-nouns to
