page: 213

+ in which they are not genteel, but natural. Ale is at home in historical novels, ere & save in poetry, mirrors in marble halls, the military in riots, dentifrices in druggists’ lists, & so forth; but out of such contexts, & in the conditions explained above, the taint of gentility is on them. To illustrate a little more in detail, t He went out without shutting the door ’ is plain English; with closing substituted for shutting it becomes genteel; nevertheless, to close the door is justified if more is implied than the mere not leaving it open:— t Before beginning his story, he crossed the room & closed the door ’, i.e. placed it so as to obviate overhearing; ‘Six people sleeping in a small room with closed windows ’, i.e. excluding air. Or again, ‘ The schoolroom roof fell in, & two of the boys (or girls, or children) were badly injured’; scholars for boys &c. would be a genteelism, & a much more flagrant one than closing in the previous example; yet scholar is not an obsolete or archaic word; it is no longer the natural English for a schoolboy or schoolgirl, that is all.

The reader may now be left to the specimen list of genteelisms, which he will easily increase for himself. The point is that, when the word in the second column is the word of one’s thought, one should not consent to displace it by the word in the first column unless an improvement in the meaning would result.

Genteelisms Normal words ale beer anent about assist help carafe water-bottle cease stop chiropodist corn-cutter close shut coal-vase coal-scuttle college school couch sofa dentifrice toothpowder distingué striking domestic servant

+ edifice building endeavour try ere before exclusive select expectorate spit hither here inquire ask kinema cinema lady-dog bitch lady help servant lingerie underclothing military, the soldiers mirror looking-glass odour smell paying guest boarder perspire, -ration sweat peruse read place put preserve jam proceed go recreation amusement save except scholar boy &e. serviette napkin step come, go stomach belly sufficient enough woolly sweater tipsy drunk

gentle. The gentle art. This phrase, long a favourite with anglers as an affectionate description of their pursuit, was cleverly used by Whistler in his title The Gentle Art of Making Enemies. The oxymoron was what made it effective; but the journalist, aware that Whistler made a hit with the gentle art, & failing to see how he did it, has now, by rough handling on inappropriate occasions, reduced it to a BATTERED ORNAMENT (cf. IRRELEVANT ALLUSION). Thus: We have not the smallest doubt that this is what will actually happen, & without any undue exercise in the gentle art of intelligent anticipation, we may discuss the sttuation./In a Committee the gentle art of procrastinating may prove very deadly to progress.

gentlemanly, gentlemanlike. If the ugly -like form were understood to suggest, while the other did not,
