page: 216

a verb equipped for noun-work,

or the name of an action. Being the

name of an action, it involves the

notion of an agent just as the verb

itself does; He went is equipped for

noun-work by being changed to

his going, in which his does for going

the same service as he for goes, i.e.

specifies the agent. With the verb,

the agent is usually specified, but

not always; it is seldom, e. g., used

with the imperative (go, not go you

or you go) because to specify the

agent would be waste of words.

With the gerund it is the other way; the agent is usually not specified, but sometimes must be, i.e. a possessive must sometimes be inserted; & failure to distinguish when this is required & when it is superfluous leads to some ugly or unidiomatic writing. Scylla is omission of the possessive when the sense is not clear without it; Charybdis is the insertion of it when it is obvious waste of words; but these are only the extremes, rarely run into. Jones won by Smith’s missing a chance; if you omit Smith’s, & say Jones won by missing a chance (as in fact he did, only the missing was not his), Scylla has you. If you say He suffers somewhat, like the proverbial dog, from his having received a bad name, you & your his are in Charybdis. The second is a real extract; of Scylla it was necessary to invent an illustration; but even Charybdis is rare. What is not rare is something between the two. It will be noticed that the reason why that his (with having received) was felt to be so intrusive is that the receiver is the same person as the subject of the sentence; compare Smith’s missing, where Smith’s was indispensable just because the misser

| was not the subject of the sentence. Hence has come a subconscious assumption that the possessive will be omitted if, & only if, the agent it would have specified is the same as the agent in the action denoted by the main verb, i.e. either the subject, or, if the verb is passive,

an agent following by or perhaps not

even expressed. The following sen-

tences are bad because they flout

this assumption; &, though they

escape both Scylla & Charybdis,

neither leaving out an essential

possessive nor using a superfluous

one, they offend against idiom by jumping from one agent to another without giving notice:—By conniving at it, it will take too deep root ever to be eradicated (By our conniving would give the necessary notice. We shall root it too deeply would avoid the jump. But better abandon the gerund & write If connived at)./Why should not the punishment for his death be confined to those guilty of it, instead of launching expeditions against three tribes? (Why should we not confine, or instead of our launching or instead of expeditions’ being launched. The first is best)./By allowing month after month to pass without attempting to defend our trade, von Tirpitz had some excuse for supposing that we recognized it ta be indefensible (By our allowing— clumsy—, or—better—we gave von Tirpitz some excuse).

‘ The agent in the action denoted by the verb’ was spoken of above, & not simply ‘the subject’; this complication was necessary because there is a common type of sentence in which the possessive is regularly omitted, & which would have seemed to contradict the rule if ‘ the subject > had been allowed to pass as sufficient; that type is seen in This danger may be avoided by whitewashing the glass; the agent of the whitewashing is not the same as the subject i.e. danger, but is the same as the agent in avoiding, i.e. the owner of the plants that are not to be scorched; consequently the possessive is not required. A few wrong forms are added without comment:—Swure as she was of her never losing her filial hold of the beloved./Mr Chamberlain has no warrant for his limiting the phrase to - - ./I cultivated a cold & passionless exterior, for I discovered that by
