page: 217

+ assuming such a character certain persons would talk more readily before me./After following a country Church of England clergyman for a period of half a century, a newly appointed, youthful vicar, totally unacquainted with rural life, comes into the parish.

gesticulation)(gesture. The usual relation between the two is that of abstract to concrete: gesticulation is the using of gestures, & a gesture is an act of gesticulation. On the other hand, gesture also is sometimes used as an abstract, & then differs from gesticulation in implying less of the excited or emotional or theatrical or conspicuous. Similarly, if a gesticulation is preferred to a gesture, it is in order to imply those characteristics. The use of gesture in political & diplomatic contexts,=advance, manifestation of willingness to treat or compromise or make concessions, exhibition of magnanimity or friendliness, &c., is so recent that the OED (1901) has no example of it. It dates from the war, & is apparently a GALLICism, having been substituted for the French beau geste; that, after having a great vogue in the newspapers for a year or two, has now ceased to puzzle us, & bequeathed its vogue to gesiure; see VOGUE-WORDS.

get. 1. Have got for possess or have is good colloquial but not good literary English.

2. Gotten still holds its ground in American English. In British English it is in verbal uses (i.e. in composition with have, am, &c.) archaic & affected; but as a mere participle or adjective it occurs in poetical diction (On gotten goods to live contented) & in mining technicalities (The hewer is paid only for the large coal gotten; There is no current wage rate per ton gotten).

8. Get-at-able. See COME-AT-ABLE,

geyser. The pronunciation ga’ser is given precedence in the OED.

-G-, -GG-. Words ending in g preceded by a single vowel (a, e, i, O, U,

+ or y) double the g before a suffix beginning with a vowel: waggery, priggish, froggy, sluggard, sandbagged, xigzagging, nutmeggy, periwigged, leapfrogging, humbugged. ghastlily. See -LILY. ghaut, ghat, ghat. The first has precedence in the OED. Pronounce gawt. ghetto. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 6. ghoul. Pronounce gool. giaour. Pronounce jowr. gibber, gibberish. The first is usually pronounced with soft g, & occasionally spelt ji- ; the second is pronounced with hard g, & was sometimes spelt gui- or ghi- to mark the fact. It is doubtful whether one is derived from the other. For gibberish, lingo, &c., see JARGON.

gibbous. Pronounce with hard g.

gibe, jibe. The OED gives precedence to g-.

gibus. Pronounce ji-.

gild, n. See GUILD.

gild, vb. For Gilded Chamber see SOBRIQUETS. Gild the lily is a Mis- QUOTATION.

gill, ravine, has g hard; gill, the measure, & Gill, lass, have g soft. In Jack & Gill, Gill (for Gillian) is the right form.

gillie has g hard; gilly-flower has g soft.

gimbal has g soft; the OED gives that only, & older spellings (often ji-) & the etymology (gimmal, gemellus) confirm it; but in modern use the hard g is common.

gimp, gymp, guimp. gi- is best.

gingerly. The word, which is at least four centuries old, has probably no connexion with ginger; see TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

See ITALIAN

Giotto, Giovanni. SOUNDS.

gipsy. See GYPSY.

gird, encircle, has past & p.p. girded or girt.

girl rhymes with curl, whirl, & pearl, with the first syllable of early, not of fairly. But a pronunciation gairl (gml), not very easily dis-
