page: 218

tinguished from gal (gil), is much

affected by persons who aim at

peculiar refinement. Novelists who

write gurl as a representation of

coarse speech are presumably of this

refined class.

girlie, -ly. See -ry, -IE, -y.

gist has soft g.

give. 1. Give one right, in the sense justify him or allow that he is in the

right, is both French (donner droit à quelqwun) & German (einem Recht geben); but it is not English, & the OED appears to quote no example of it. In the first passage below it has been resorted to under the ELEGANT-VARIATION impulse, justify having been already used up:—The local Liberals & the Chief Whip who supported them from headquarters are abundantly justified in their belief that a radical candidate had a better chance of winning this particular constituency than a Labour one, & the working-class voters have themselves given them right./M. Millerand is much praised in France for having resisted Mr Lloyd George’s efforts, & M. Clemenceau apparently gives him right.

2. Give to think, The phrase is commented on in the article GAL- LICISM as one of the two or three that surpass all other Gallicisms for ineptitude. It has, however, had a lamentable vogue, & a few examples follow; others will be found under FURIOUSLY. This is a powerful impressionistic sketch, true to life, which gives to think. /In every chapter the author has that to say which arrests attention & gives to think./ The Labour Party has made a clean sweep of the Transvaal Provincial elections, & the result is certainly one calculated to give furiously to think. Hf But what we are told as to coal & cotton gives furiously to think, as they sayin France. This last gentleman seems to think he has got hold of a striking novelty; he is mistaken. glacé. See FRENCH WORDS. glacial, glacier, glacis. The pro-

nunciations preferred by the OED

are gla’shial, glă’sier, gla’sis.

glad(den). See -EN VERBS for the distinction.

gladiolus. The pronunciation recommended is gli’dyolus, or, if that is too difficult, gladiolus; for further discussion see FALSE QUAN- TITY. Pl. -luses or -li; see LATIN PLURALS,

gladsome. See -somz.

glamour makes glamorous;

see -OUR- & -OR-.

glass. 1. Glass-case)(glass case; the latter is better; see HYPHENS.

2. Glass eye)(glass-eye; a person has a g. e.; a horse has g.-e. (a disease); see Hyrurns. 3. Glassfuls)(glassesful; see -FuL.

glimpse. Glance & g. are synonyms only in a very loose sense; the g. is what is seen by the glance, & not the glance itself; you take or give a glance at something, but get a glimpse of it; the following sentences are not English:—Was there a member of either House who gave a glimpse at this schedule to see for himself whether all these documents deserved to be destroyed?/A glimpse at the map will show why Turkey was not receiving munitions from Germany or Austria at that time.

glissade. Pronounce glisah’d.

globe. In their primary sense sphere, globe, orb, & ball, do not differ, except with regard to the contexts they suit. And their particular applications (a sphere of action, circumnavigate the globe, his sightless orbs, a ball of wool, &c.) are too familiar to need setting forth. glorify, glory vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6. gloss. The two nouns (a,=comment; b,=lustre) are of different origins, the first Greek, the other Teutonic; but the meaning of the first, & of its derived verb gloze, has no doubt been considerably affected (see TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY) by ignorance of this fact. Greek glossa tongue had as secondary senses:
