page: 219

+ word or locution; word needing explanation; marginal word serving as explanation; comment. The notions of falsity or misrepresentation or imputation or explaining away by which it (& still more gloze) is now so often coloured are not essential to it; & though the development of explanation into misrepresentation is not unnatural without assistance, the confusion of the two nouns has had the effect that in popular as opposed to learned speech the first gloss is seldom without the suggestion of something sophistical.

glossary)(vocabulary. Both are partial dictionaries, & so far synonymous; but the g. is a list to which a reader may go for explanation of unfamiliar terms (see GLOss), while the v. is a stock in which he may hope to find words to express his meaning. The g. selects what is obscure, & the v. what is serviceable. V. has also the meaning of the whole stock of words used by a nation, by any set of persons, or by an individual. For lexicon &c. see DICTIONARY.

gloze. The original sense of simply commenting (see GLOss) is obsolete.

gluey. So spelt; see -EY & -y.

glycerin(e). In pharmacy, manuals of chemistry, &c., -in is preferred; in everyday use -ine is much commoner, & -in something of an affectation; see -IN & -INE.

gnaw has p.p. gnawed or gnawn. The OED examples from the 17th & later centuries show -ed eleven times, & -n six; half the six are 19th-c. (Jefferies, Southey, Browning), but the -n form may nevertheless be regarded as an archaism.

See TECHNICAL TERMS,

gnomic.

go, n. Pl. goes; see -O(E)S 2. _

go, v. 1. Goes without saying 1s a gallicism (see GALLICISMS 5), but _perhaps one of those that are nearing „naturalization, ceasing to serve as meretricious ornaments, & tending to present themselves as first & not second thoughts. Still, the English

+ stalwart has ‘ needless to say °’, ‘ need hardly be said’ or ‘stated’, ‘ of course ’, & other varieties to choose from. 2. Go phut, fut(l), or foot. The first spelling seems best, as suggesting by its obvious want of connexion with any English word that the point lies in the mere sound (that of a collapsing bladder).

gobe-mouches. The word is not common enough in English to be regarded as naturalized or subject to such liberties as we have legitimately taken with the spelling of morale, locale, commissionaire, & others. It should be treated as real French, printed in italics, & allowed its final -s in the singular (a gobe-mouches; the literal sense is a gorge-flies) as well as in the plural.

godlily. See -LiLy.

God’s acre, as a name for churchyard or cemetery, though its beauty may be admitted, has not succeeded in establishing itself in English. It is not a phrase of home growth, but a translation from German; & it is interesting that of four quotations for it in the OED only one shows it used simply without a reference to its alien nationality; such a preponderance may be accidental, but remains significant.

Goidelic. See GAELIC.

golden. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

golden syrup. At table, as a synonym for treacle, this is a GEN- TEELISM; at the grocer’s, as denoting a particular quality of treacle, it is a good business name.

golf. The OED gives precedence to the natural pronunciation (g6lf), & remarks:—‘ The Scotch pronunciation is (gōf); the pronunciation (g6f), somewhat fashionable in England, is an attempt to imitate this’.

golosh. See GALOSH.

goloptious, golup-. See FACETIOUS FORMATIONS.

G.O.M. See SOBRIQUETS.

goodness knows has two curiously divergent senses. In Goodness knows
