page: 220

who it can have been it means God

only knows, & I do not; in Goodness

knows it wasn’t I it means God

knows & could confirm my state-

ment. Ambiguity is unlikely, but

not impossible.

goodwill, good will, good-will. Ex-

cept in the attributive use, which

happens to be rare (as a good-wiil token, that is, as a token of good will), the choice should be between the unhyphened forms, since the accent falls on the second syllable; see HyPHENS. Good will is required when the notion is virtuous intent &c., & goodwill is better when it is benevolence &c.

goody, -ie. The first is better; see -EY, -IE, -y.

goosy, -ey, -ie. See -ry, -IE, -y.

gormandize, gourmandise. The first is the English verb, the second the French noun, for which see FRENCH WORDS.

gorse. Compare FURZE.

gossip makes gossiped, gossiping; See -P-, -PP-.

gotten. See GET.

gouge. Pronounce gowj.

gourd. The OED gives precedence to the sound gord over goord.

gourmand)(gourmet. The first ranges in sense from greedy feeder to lover & judge of good fare; the second from judge of wine to connoisseur of delicacies. The first usually implies some contempt, the other not. See FRENCH WORDS. gourmandise. See GorMANDIZE. governance has now the dignity of incipient archaism, its work being done, except in rhetorical or solemn contexts, by government & control. governor, -nour. The second is almost obsolete; see -OUR & -or. grace. For pronouns after your g. &e€., see MAJESTY. graduate makes graduable (see -ABLE 1), graduator (see -or). graece, -cé. See LATINE. Gr(a)ecism, gr(a)ecize, Gr(a)eco-, &c. The spelling grec- is recom. mended; see Æ, Œ.

graffito. Pronounce grafé’td; pl. -ii, pronounce -té.

grammar, syntax, &c. G. is the general term for the science of language. The following list gives the’ chief parts of it, in their logical (not actual) order of development:— Phonology—How sounds are made

& depicted. Morphology—How words are made, Accidence—How words are in-

flected. Orthoepy—How words are said. Orthography—How words are writ-

ten. Composition—How words are fused

into compounds. Semantics—How words are to be

understood. Syntax—How words are arranged

in sentences. Etymology—How words are tested

by reference to their source.

Of these, orthography, accidence, & syntax, as the bare essentials for writing & reading, represent for most of us the whole of grammar; & morphology, orthoepy, phonology, & semantics, are meaningless terms to the average person.

gram(me). There seems to be no possible objection to adopting the more convenient shorter form, except that the -me records the unimportant fact that the word came to us through French. gramophone. A bad formation; but incurable, & established. GRAND COMPOUNDS. The separating, hyphening, or fusing, of the chief compounds is as follows in the OED:—

grandam(e); grand-aunt;

grandchild; grand-dad 3

grand-daughter; Grand Duke 3

Grand Duchess; grandfather 3

grandfatherly; grandmamma:

Grand Master; grandmother;

grandmotherly; grand-nephew;

grand-niece; grandpapa;

grandparent; Grand Signior;

grandsire; grandson;

grand-uncle.
