page: 223

Guebre. The OED gives precedence to the pronunciation gé’ber.

guer(r)illa. The true spelling is with -rr-, not -r- ; & the true meaning is not a person, but a kind of fighting, guerrillero being the word for the person. But the -r- is four times as common as the -rr- in the OED quotations, & we should assert our right to spell foreign words as we choose when we have adopted them (cf. MORALE). And as to the meaning, the phrase g. warfare is now so firmly established in place of g. itself that the use of g. as a personal noun may be considered almost an inevitable Back-rorma- TION from it. The best course is to accept the spelling guerilla, & the sense (as old as Wellington’s dispatches) irregular fighter.

guest. For paying g., see GEN- TEELISMS.

guide makes guidable; see MUTE E.

guidon. Pronounce gi’dn.

g(u)ild. Though the form guild dates back only to 1600, it became so vastly predominant in the 17th & 18th ce. that the Revivan gild usually puzzles the reader for a moment, & should be abandoned as an affectation.

guiliemot. Pronounce gi’limot.

guilloche. Pronounce gild’sh.

guillotine. For the parliamentary sense, see CLOSURE.

guimp. See GIMP.

guipure. See FRENCH WORDS.

gulden. Pronounce gool-.

gulf, bay. Apart from the fact that each has some senses entirely foreign to the other, there are the differences (1) that g. implies a deeper recess & narrower width of entrance, while b. may be used of the shallowest inward curve of the sea-line & excludes a landlocked expanse approached by a strait; & (2) that 6. is the ordinary word, while g. is chiefly reserved as a name for large or notable instances. gullible. For the form, which should have had -able, see -ABLE 2. gulosity. A bad ANTI-SAXONISM.

gumma. PI. -as or -ata.

gunwale, gunnel.' The pronunciation is always, & the spelling not infrequently, that of the second.

gurgoyle. See GARGOYLE.

Gurkha. So spelt.

gusset makes gusseted &c.; see -T-, -TT-.

gutta-percha. Pronounce -cha.

guttural. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pronounce -ter-.

guy, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 5.

gybe. The nautical term is usually spelt thus.

gymnasium. Pl. -ums or -a; as the name of a German place of education, pl. Gymnasien.

gymp. See GIMP.

See

gynaeceum, gynaecocracy. GREEK G.

gyp, as name of a college servant, belongs to Cambridge & Durham, not Oxford (cf. scour).

gypsy, gipsy. In contrast with the words into which y has been introduced instead of the correct i, apparently from some notion that it has a decorative effect (sylvan, syphon, syren, tyre, tyro, &c.), there are a few from which it has been expelled for no better reason than that the display of two ys is thought an excessive indulgence in ornament, In gypsy & pygmy the first y is highly significant, reminding us that gypsy means Egyptian, & pygmy foot-high (Gk pugmē elbow to knuckles). It is a pity that they should be thus cut away from their roots, & the maintenance of the y is desirable. The OED’s statement is:—‘ The prevalent spelling of late years appears to have been gipsy. The plural gypsies is not uncommon, but the corresponding form in the singular seems to have been generally avoided, probably because of the awkward appearance of the repetition of y’. See Y & I. gyves. The old pronunciation was with the g hard, as indicated by a former spelling gui- ; but the g is now soft.
