page: 228

+ from an excursion is not common in modern writing; it belongs rather to the old days of the formal period.

When a journalist of today does try his hand at it, he is apt, being a novice in the period style, to overdo things; the subject & verb are here italicized for the reader’s assistance:— A stockbroker friend of the Z—s & of the Y—s, & then Lord Z— himself, passed through the box before the interest of the audience, which had languished as Lady Z— resumed her place at the Solicitors’ table, & “ Babs ”, in her demure grey hat, with the bright cherries, & her deep white fichu, struggled through the crowd from the body of the Court in answer to the call of “* Miss Z— X— ”’, revived.’

haply. See WARDOUR STREET.

happening(s). As all those whose reading days go back to the last century are probably aware, it is only in the last ten years or so that the word has set up for itself—i.e., has passed from a mere verbal noun that anyone could make for the occasion if he chose, but very few did choose, into a current noun requiring a separate entry in the dictionaries. To younger readers, who do not know how well we got on without ‘ happenings’ till about 1905, this may be (such is its vogue nowadays) asurprise. It isa VoGur- WORD, which has had a startlingly rapid success, & which many of us hope to see wither away as quickly as it has grown. There is nothing to be said against it on the score of correctness; but it is a child of art & not of nature; may it prove sickly, & die young! It comes to us not from living speech, but from books; the writers have invented it, how far in Saxonism (event is the English for it), & how far in NoveL- TY-HUNTING, is uncertain. We cannot help laughing to see that, while the plain Englishman is content that events should kappen, the Saxonist on one side requires that there should be happenings, & the anti-

+ Saxonist on the other that things should eventuaie. The purpose of the long string of quotations appended is to suggest that the use of the word (still not common in talk) is an unworthy literary or journalistic affectation:—The coal happenings of the last few hours are not without their significance./There was, first of all, one litile happening which I think began the new life./The evening newspapers turn their backs & stop their ears upon the incessant march & clang of happenings./Mr William Moore (who has up to now played singularly little part in recent happenings) said . . ./So clear & vivid are his descriptions that we can almost see the happenings as he relates them./The silence from Tripoli continues, but we may be thankful that another day has passed without any serious happening elsewhere./There have been fears expressed of terrible happenings to crowded liners./Clearly there is strong resentment in the electorate at recent happenings./In his well written summary of happenings in the art world for the past year Mr .. ./From 1908 onwards we have lived in a chronic anwiety about the neat happening.

hara-kiri. Pronounce -ki’ri.

harass. So spelt; cf. embarrass.

harassedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

harbour. See PORT.

hardly. 1. Hardly)(hard. 2. Hardly... than. 3. Without h., no — hardly.

1. Hardly)(hard. Except in the sense scarcely, the idiomatic adverb of hard is hard, not hardly: * We worked hard, lodged hard, & fared hard ’—DeFoe. It is true that in special cases hardly may or must be substituted, as in What is made is slowly, hardly, & honestly earned— Macaulay; if Macaulay had not wanted a match for his two other adverbs in -ly, he would doubtless have written hard; but there is now a tendency, among those who are not conversant enough with gram-
