page: 231

+ loss of power & privilege of which they were deprived by the last General Election (loss & deprived overlap; that power & privilege is not the antecedent of which is proved by the absence of the before power)./The rather heavy expense of founding it could have been more usefully spent in other ways (spend money; incur expense)./Hitherto the only way of tackling the evil was by means of prohibiting the exportation from certain places (way & means overlap; the only way of tackling was to prohibit; it could only be tackled by means of)./With the one exception of Sir Alfred Lyall, who chequers praise wiih somewhat tentative criticism, all these tributes are naturally eulogistic (gap; Sir Alfred is not a tribute).

Certain words seem to lend themselves especially to this sort of haziness, as AGO (It is five years ago since I saw him); REASON with BECAUSE (The only reason his wages have not been higher is because—i.e. that—the profits of the industry have been miserably low), or with due (The reasons of his success were due not only to ...); the illogical roo (We need not attach too much importance io...) 3; PREFERABLE with more (the former alternative being, in our view, on every ground the more preferable); BUT with superfluous negatives (Who knows but what this memorial exhibition may not prove the starting point?); THAT conj. with questions or commands (Crises arise so rapidly in these days that who can say what a few years may bring forth?/Your correspondent suggests that if we lend money let us send it to...); REMAIN with continue (And yet through it all I continue to remain cheerful); SEEM with appear (These conclusions, it seems to me, appear to be reached naturally).

Additional examples will be found under the words referred to by being printed in small capitals.

he. In spite of the frequency with which we all claim, by quoting The Jackdaw of Rheims, to know the

+ grammar of he & him, an illegitimate him occasionally appears even in less colloquial placings than ‘ That ’s him’; thus: Jt might have been him & not President Wilson who said the other day that... The tendency to use he where him is required is, however, much commoner in print. The mistake occurs when the pronoun is to stand in some out-of-theway or emphatic position; it looks as if writers, pulled up for a moment by the unusual, hastily muttered to themselves ‘ Regardless of grammar, they all cried ** That’s him!” ’, & thanked God they had remembered to put * he °? :—The bell will be always rung by he who has the longest purse & the sirongest arm./The distinction between the man who gives with conviction & he who is simply buying a title./And the severance then was followed four years later by the creation of yet another Secretary of State, æ he for India./One of ilis most notable achievements was the virtual ‘warning off’? Newmarket Heath, though not in so many words, of a Prince of Wales, he who was afterwards George the Fourth./The character of Bismarck is of an intrinsic greatness & completeness, which enables the spectator, even he who is most repelled by the results of Bismarck’s appearance in the world, 10...

headmaster, headmistress, headquarters. Write cach as a single unhyphened word, the accent being on the second element; see Hy- PHENS.

heap. There are heaps more to say, but I must not tax your space further. Are, or is? see NUMBER.

hearths. For pronunciation see TH & DH.

heave. Past & p.p. heaved or hove.

Hebe. See SOBRIQUETS.

hebraism, hebraist, hebraize, are the usual forms, not hebrewism &c.

Hebrew, Israelite, Jew, Semite. Persons to whom all these words are applicable are thought of by the modern Englishman as Jews; if he
