page: 236

mon. It has, however, a real use as a single word for the phrase historical existence, i.e. the having really existed or taken place in history as opposed to mere legend or literature. To this sense, in which it makes for brevity, it should be confined. The historicity of St Paul should mean the fact that, or the question whether, St Paul was a real person; the following quotation shows the word in a quite different sense; in that sense it would not have been worth inventing (why not accuracy?); & as soon as it has two or more senses liable to be confused, it has lost the only merit it ever had—that of expressing a definite compound notion unmistakably in a single word:—He is compelled to speak chiefly of what he considers to be exceptions to St Paul’s strict historicity & fairness; & he tells us that he is far from intending to imply that the Apostle is usually unhistorical or unfair.

hither, described by the OED as ‘now only literary’, is even in literature, outside of verse, almost disused. It is still tolerable, perhaps, in one position, i.e. as the first word in an inverted sentence following a description of the place referred to —RHiiher flocked all the . . Elsewhere, it produces the effect of a ForMAL worD, being used mainly by the unpractised writers who bring out their best English when they write to the newspapers. The same is true of thither; but, as often happens with stereotyped phrases, hither & thither retains the currency that its separate elements have lost.

hoarhound. See HOREHOUND. hobbledehoy, hobbadehoy. The elements of the word being quite uncertain the best spelling is whichever is most used; that is kobbledehoy,& the OED gives it precedence. hob-nob makes -bbed, -bbing; see -B-, -BB-. hock, hough. Hough, the older Spelling, is now pronounced like hock, which * has largely superseded °

+ it (OED) im spelling also; it is better to abandon the old spelling.

hocus. For inflexions see -ss-, -s-.

hodge-podge. See HOTCHPOT(CH).

hoe, v., makes hoeable, hoeing; exceptionally, see MUTE E.

hoi polloi. These Greek words for the majority, ordinary people, the man in the street, the common herd, &c., meaning literally ‘the many ’, are equally uncomfortable in English whether the ( = hot) is prefixed to them or not. The best solution is te eschew the phrase altogether.

holey, holy. See -EY & -y.

holily. See -iny.

holla, holler, hollo(a), hollow. See HALLOO, ;

holy. Write holy day or holy-day according as an accent is or is not desired on day; this depends on context.

home, n., makes homy, not homey 3 see -EY & -Y.

home, vb, makes homing; see MUTE E£.

homelily. See -LILY.

homely. For ‘to use a h. phrase’ see SUPERIORITY.

homoeopathic. Spell thus; see Æ, Œ. For the use of the word as a substitute for tiny, small, diminutive, &e., see PEDANTIC HUMOUR, WORN-OUT HUMOUR.

Homeric.

For H. laughter, see LAUGHTER,

homonym, synonym. Any. confusion between the two is due to the fact that s. is a word of rather loose meaning. Broadly speaking, homonyms are separate words that happen to be identical in form, & synonyms are separate words that happen to mean the same thing. Pole, a shaft or stake, is a native English word; pole, the terminal point of an axis

? is borrowed from Greek; the words, then, are two & not one, but being identical in form are called homonhyms; on the other hand cat, the animal, & cat, the flogging instrument, though they are identical in form & mean different things, are
