page: 240

high-strikes for mischievous, under-

stand, & hysterics. It is in fact a

good old word, & corresponds rather

to vasty & stilly by the side of vast

& still; but it is practically obso-

lete, &, as its correctness robs it of

its facetious capabilities, it might be

allowed to rest in peace.

huguenot. Pronounce hii’gendt.

hullo. See HALLOO.

human makes humanness.

humanist. The word is apt to

puzzle or mislead, first, because it is applied to different things & a doubt of which is in question is often

possible, & seeondly because in two of these senses its relation to its parent word human is clear only to those who are acquainted with a long-past chapter of history. The newspaper reader sometimes gets the impression that humanist means a great classical scholar; Why? he wonders, & passes on. Another time he gathers that a humanist is a sceptic or an agnostic or a freethinker or something of that sort, you know; again he wonders why, & passes on. Another time he feels sure that a humanist is a Positivist or Comtist, & here at last, since he knows that Comte founded the Religion of Humanity, there seems to be some reason in the name. And lastly he occasionally realizes that his writer is using the word in the sense in which he might have invented it for himself—one for whom the proper study of mankind is man, the student, & especially the kindly or humane student, of human nature.

The original humanists were those who in the Dark Ages, when all learning was theology, & all the learned were priests or monks, rediscovered pre-Christian literature, turned their attention to the merely human achievements of Greek & Roman poets & philosophers & historians & orators, & so were named humanists as opposed to the divines; hence the meaning classical scholar, But this new-old learning

had, or was credited with, a ten-

dency to loosen the hold of the

Church upon men’s beliefs; hence

the meaning free-thinker. The third

meaning—Comtist—was a new de-

parture, unconnected in origin with

the first two, though accidentally

near one of them in effect, but

intelligible enough on the face of it.

As to the fourth, it requires no

comment.

humanity. For the Humanities, or Litterae humaniores, as an oldfashioned name for the study of classical literature, see HUMANIST.

humanize has -zable; see MUTE E.

humble-bee. See suMBLE-BEE,

humbug. The verb makes -gged, ~E8ing, &C.; see -G-, -GQ

humerus. PI. -ri (-ri).

humiliate makes humiliable; see -ABLE 1.

humour, n., makes humorous, but humourist; see -our- & -OR-. Humour is still often or usually pronounced without the h sound 3; the derivatives now being rarely without it, humour itself will probably follow suit. The spelling -our is better than -or; but see -OUR & -or.

humour, wit, Satire, sarcasm, invective, irony, cynicism, the sardonic. So much has been written upon the nature of some of these words, & upon the distinctions between pairs or trios among them (wit & humour, sarcasm & irony & satire), that it would be both presumptuous & unnecessary to attempt a further disquisition. But a sort of tabular statement may be of service against some popular misconceptions. No definition of the words is offered, but for each its motive or aim, its province, its method or means, & its proper audience, are specified. The constant confusion between sarcasm, satire, & irony, as well as that now less common between wit & humour, seems to justify this mechanical device of parallel classification; but it will be of use only to those who wish for help in determining which is the word that they really want.
