page: 243

+ opinion, improperly formed for a reason connected with the making of words from different languages, but not necessarily specified in so slight a sketch as this. The words in the list that have not been already referred to are now repeated with the briefest possible indication of the objections that are rightly or wrongly made to them: CL, E, F, Gk, L,=classical, English, French, Greek, Latin; h.=hybrid; w. f.= wrongly formed. Amoral, Gk+L h.; amusive, non-L+L h.; backwardation, E+L h.; bi-daily, L+H h.; bureaucracy, spurious h. ; cablegram, E+Gk h.; climactic, w. f. ; colouration, spurious h.; dandiacal, E+Cl. h.; floatation & funniment, E+Lh.; gullible, E+L h. ; pacifist, w.f.; sendee, E+F h.

hybridize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

hyena, -aena. The OED gives preeedence to the first; see also Æ, a.

hygiene, hygienic. Pronounce hi’jien, hijiénik. As the form of hygiene often puzzles even those who know Greek, it is worth while to mention that it is the French transliteration of Gk hugieiné (tekhne) (art) of health.

hypallage. See TECHNICAL TERMS; pronounce -aji.

hyperbaton. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pl. -ta, -ns.

hyperbole. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pronounce hiper’boli.

hypermetre. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

HYPHENS. The chaos prevailing among writers or printers or both regarding the use of hyphens is discreditable to English education. Since it sufficiently proves by its existence that neither the importance of proper hyphening nor the way to set about it is commonly known, this article may well begin with a dozen examples, all taken faithfully from newspapers, in which the wrong use or wrong non-use of hyphens makes the words, if strictly interpreted, mean something different from what the writers intended. It is no adequate answer to such

+ criticism to say that actual misunderstanding is unlikely; to have to depend on one’s employer’s readiness to take the will for the deed is surely a humiliation that no decent craftsman should be willing to put up with:—

(In a List of Beauty Recipes) 5. An infallible wrinkle-remover. 6. A superfluous hair-remover (i.e. a hairremover that no-one wants)./The financial record of the Lloyd George- Winston Churchill Government (i.e. of the Government composed of Lloyd, Churchill, & George Winston)./Mr Scott Dickson, the ex-Tory Solicttor-General for Scotland (i.e. the Solicitor-General who formerly was but no longer is a Tory)./The Unionist Housing of the Working- Classes Bill was read a second time yesterday (i.e. the way the Unionists house the Working-Classes Bill; poor ill-housed Billy!)./Grieving, as a Nonconformist, over the sins of his fellow-Free Churchmen (i.e. of his Churechmen who are unhampered by companions). /(Heading) PEACE MEETING RIOT (i.e. the way peace deals with riot; what is meant is riot at a peace-meeting)./ Even the most bigoted anti-trade unionist (i.e. the unionist who is most opposed to trade)./The Chancellor plans to reconstruct the Biilow (Conservative-National-Liberal) Block (i.e. that of Conservatives, Nationals, & Liberals; what is meant is that of the Conservatives & the National Liberals)./Last April the Acting- British Consul at Shiraz was attacked (i.e. the Consul who was pretending to be British)./And Sir Henniker-Heaton is more fortunate than many of those who cry in the wilderness (If Henniker is Christian name, no hyphen; if it is surname, a Christian name is wanted; see wON.)./If lay-writers can publish what they please, are naval officers to remain compulsorily silent? (i.e. writers of lays)./(A Reichstag party) intent on introducing an anti-English & strong Navy agitation into the elections (i.e. a strong agitation
