page: 257

+ in the quotations:—The machine must be crushed before any real reforms can be initiated, much less carried./It is a full day’s work even to open, much less to acknowledge, all the presents. See MUCH 2.

A stray variety or two may now bring this subject, which might be treated at much greater length, to anend: The Dukes of Grafton in the old days were almost invariably Lords- Lieutenant of Suffolk & Northamptonshire, but though the deceased held neither office his influence in Northamptonshire & West Suffolk was considerable (i.e., previous Dukes were Lords Lieutenant, but this one had much influence; have Lords Lieutenant, then, no influence?)./ The schedule we shall have to face will be a much longer one than it would have been if we had undertaken the work this year, & longer still than it would have been if we had been able to do the work last year. We may deeply sympathize with a writer who has brought himself to the pass of having to choose between saying still more longer & being illogical, but we cannot let him off that more./ That would quite easily & fairly redress what he admitted to be the only grievance he could see in Establishment. The he is a supporter of the Established Church; he would maintain, not admit, that it is the only grievance, & should have said * what he admitted to be a grievance, though it was the only one he could see’.

Other examples or remarks will be found on BECAUSE, BUT 8, -ER & -EST 7, 8, HAZINESS, REASON, THOUGH, TOO, YET, & passim.

ilith. See -TH NOUNS. ;

illuminate makes -nable, -ior 5; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

ilumine &c. See LU.

illusion. See DELUSION for the differences between the two words.

illustrate should make illustrable, & though that form is called obs. by the OED it seems better than -tratable; see -ABLE. Agent noun

1351 257

+ -trator. The pronunciation i/lustrat (as opp. ilt’strat) has been slowly arrived at, but is now general; see RECESSIVE ACCENT. For illustrative the OED gives ilu’strativ only; but the fixing of i/lustrat may before long produce i’lustrativ.

im-. For spelling of words with variants in em-, see EM- & im-. The following, not there mentioned, should have im-, & not the rarely used em-: imbrue, imbrute, impale, imparadise, impark, impawn, imperil.

image, vb., makes imageable; see MuTEE. ,

imaginary)(imaginative. The meanings of the two are quite distinct, & never interchangeable. That is imaginary which exists only in someone’s imagination; he, or his powers or products, is imaginative who is able or apt to form mental pictures. Any confusion between the two is due to the fact that there are things to which either can be applied, though in different senses, & with some such things the distinction is not always apparent. The difference between an imaginary & an imaginative person is clear enough, but that between imaginary & imaginative distress is elusive; the begging impostor exploits the former; the latter is created & experienced (Such a price The Gods exact for song, To become what we sing) by the tragic or lyric poet. The place is described with such wealth of detail as to lead one to the conclusion that tt must have existed; but, of course, on the other hand, it may have been purely imaginative; justifiable, or not?

imagine makes imaginable; see MUTE E.

imago. PI. imagos or imagines, pronounce -ëz; see LATIN PLURALS.

ima(u)m. The form without the u is recommended; pron. imah’m.

imbed, em-. Em- better; see EM- & IM-.

imbibe makes -bable, see MUTE E. See also FORMAL WORDS.
