page: 259

+ impanel, em-. EM- & IM-. Past &c., -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-. imparadise, impark, em-. Im- is better; see I™M-. imparisyliabic. See TECHNICAL TERMS. impassable, impassible. The two are different in derivation, spelling, pronunciation, & meaning. The first is ultimately from Latin pando stretch, the second from Latin patior feel; in the first the second syllable is (at least in Southern use) pronounced pahs, while in the other itis always pas; the first means that cannot be passed, the second that cannot feel.

impasse. See FRENCH WORDS. The wordis now becoming very common, but is still so little really at home with us that it is often printed impassé in newspapers.

impawn,em-. Im- better; see IM-.

impayable. There is perhaps no other word that is so indisputably an undesirable alien in English as this. It has a false air, since it is a not impossible English formation, of being intelligible at first hearing to an Englishman; but if we did make the word, we should certainly not mean by it what the French word means; & in point of fact the vast majority of people who hear it are completely puzzled by it. Incredible as, under these circumstances, it seems, we have the precise notion ready to our hands in plain current English; when someone does a thing absurd enough to enlarge our idea of what humanity is capable of in perverse or obstinate or capricious folly, we express our gratitude for this enlightenment by saying that he or his action is * priceless °’. The sentiment may be cynical, & the idiom may be, after all, a translation of impayable; the OED does not illustrate or give the sense, so that it is hard to tell whether it is native or not; but at any rate everyone has heard it, & Em- is better; see |

+ from the French. It may be worth while to give the synonyms used in French dictionaries to convey the particular sense of impayable that is here referred to; Littré has eætraordinaire, très-plaisant, très-bizarre, & Larousse ridicule ou comique. A newspaper example is:—The results were discouraging in each case, but the Tariff-reformers are impayable, & have still a thousand arguments to prove that if the Tariff dose had only been stronger, disaster would have been turned into victory on either or each of these occasions.

impeachment. For own the soft i., see [IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

impedance. For the formation, see HYBRID DERIVATIVES. In the interests of both Electricity & English, the word should be strictly confined to the former.

impedable; see

impede makes MUTE E.

impel makes -lled, -ilable, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

impenitence, -cy. There is no perceptible difference of meaning; -ce is recommended; see -CE, -CY.

imperil, not em-; see IM-. Past &e. -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

impersonate makes -nuble,

-tor; see -ABLE l, -OR.

impetigo. Pronounce impiti’go, Pl. -gines, pronounce -jineéz.

impetus. Pl. -tuses, not -ti; see -us.

impinge makes -ging; see MuTE E.

implement, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT. The verb, meaning to carry out (a contract &c.), is chiefly Scotch. Newspaper uses like the following cannot be acquitted of the charge of pedantry: But it comes after long & disastrous delays which have greatly lowered the prestige of the Allies & diminished their chance | of getting their peace terms implemented by any authority that can speak for Russia./Increased taxation will be inevitable if Labour’s promises to the electorate are to be implemented.

A correspondent has favoured me with the following quotation: (David
