page: 261

imprecate makes -cable; see -ABLE 1.

impregnate makes -natable (exceptionally, see -ATABLE), since impregnable would be inconvenient.

impresario. Pronounce -zar‘id, not -sar’id; pl. -os, see -O(E)S 4.

imprescriptible is one of the words that are often used without a clear conception of their meaning. That right or property or grant is i. which is ‘not subject to prescription’. What then is prescription? If we exclude doctors’ prescriptions, most people take it to mean ‘ uninterrupted use or possession from time immemorial, or for a period fixed by law as giving a title or right; hence, title or right acquired by virtue of such use or possession: sometimes called positive prescription’—OED. But clearly ‘not subject to prescription ’ in this sense does not give us the meaning we want, but something very like the opposite of it. The reading of the riddle requires a piece of legal knowledge that most of us have not, viz, that there is another kind of prescription ‘now commonly called negative prescription’, defined as ‘ Limitation or restriction of the time within which an action or claim can be raised ’—OED. An imprescriptible right, then, is a right not subject to negative prescription, i.e., a right that is not invalidated by any lapse of time.

impress,n. Forsynonymy see SIGN.

impressible, impressionable. It is singular that the second form, adapted from the French, should have displaced the first, which might have done the work quite well, although the French verb impressionner has failed to produce a current English verb to impression. Whatever the reason, impressionable is undoubtedly the established form, & impressible rare.

imprint. See Noun & VERB AC- CENT.

impromptu, n. PI. -us.

impropriate makes -priable; see . -ABLE 1.

+ improve makes improvable; see MUTE E. improvisator. Pronounce impro’vizator. Italian form -vvisatore pron. -ahtor’i, fem. -vvisatrice pron. -ahtre’cha, pl. -ori pron. -or’é, -ici pron. -é’ché. improvise, not -ize, see -ISE; i. makes -isable, see MUTE E. impuissant. For pronunciation see PUISSANT.

in. The combinations inasmuch as, in order that or to, in so far, in that, & in toto, are taken separately in their alphabetical places.

inacceptable. Un- is better; see IN- & UN-.

inadequate. Since otherwise the number of troops available might be inadequate to those which might be brought into the field against her. Though it is true that adequate & inadequate originally meant made & not made equal, & therefore might be & were followed by to with any suitable noun or infinitive, modern usage has restricted the words to the notion (un)equal to requirements, so effectually that it may now be regarded as unidiomatic to express the particular demand; vague additions like to the need, to the occasion, to the task, are still possible, though felt to be pleonastic; but specifications like that in the above extract, or like His revenues were found inadequate to his expences (Gibbon) or Is language adequate to describe it? (W. Collins) are abandonments of the differentiation that has taken place between adequate & equal, inadequate & unequal. His resources were inadequate, or inadequate to the occasion, but not inadequate to those of his opponent, nor to take or taking the town.

inadvertence, -cy. The first is recommended; see -CE, -CY.

inadvisable, inalterable. Un- is better; see IN- & UN-.

-IN & -INE. The distinction in Chemistry between the two terminations is outside the scope of
