page: 263

+ unmelodious but inharmonious, are examples of apparent caprice fixed by usage.

A list is now given of the words about which doubt is most likely, with a statement of the prefix recommended for each; the recommendations are sometimes supported by special reasons, but sometimes merely based on a general impression that one form is more likely than the other to prevail:— acceptable un- In- form labelled rare

in OED advisable un- As acceptable alterable unappeasable un- Delatinized by -easapt un- Inept is the Latin

tificial fun- in sense natural area cla lin- in sense unskilful communicative uncompleted un- The only indisputable

in ed word is in-

experienced consolable in- Established controllable un- Much delatinized decipherable undigested un- As completed discriminating un- Wordsin-ingabhorindistinguishable in- Established edited un- See completed; French

inédit has kept the

in- form in being effaceable in- Established escapable un- Much delatinized essential unexpressive un- Danger of confusion

with znexpressible frequent in- Most -ent words so navigable unpractical un- As acceptable; & con-

fusion w. impractic-

able recognizable unresponsive un- Danger of confusion

with irresponsible retentive ir- Most words in re- so substantial unsupportable in- Established susceptible in- Most -ible words so

1 2 one Un- is better; see IN- & UN-.

inapt(itude). Unapt is better (but inaptitude); see IN- & UN-.

inartificial, un-. See IN- & UN-.

inasmuch as has two meanings: one the original, now rarely met with, i.e..to the same extent as or to

+ whatever degree or so far as’ (God is only God inasmuch as he is the Moral Governor of the world); & the other worn down, with the notion of a correspondence between two scales gone, & nothing left but a foursyllable substitute for since (I am unable to reply that I am much the better for seeing you, inasmuch as I see nothing of you); this is the ordinary modern use, & its only recommendation as compared with since is its pomposity. On the other hand the old sense has been supplanted by so far as & in so far as, & is now unfamiliar enough to be misleading when a literary-minded person reverts to it. At any rate, Mr Chamberlain’s proposals, inasmuch as they were intended to secure continued loyalty & union amongst the Australian people, were considered aliogether unnecessary. Do we gather that the proposals were in fact rejected, & the reason for this was that their intention was so-&-so? or that, whether rejected or accepted on other grounds, that intention was not held to justify them? in other words, does inasmuch as mean since, or so far as? we cannot tell, without extraneous information. A word that in one sense is pompous, & in another obscure or ambiguous, & in both has satisfactory substitutes, is better left alone.

inaugurate makes -aior; see -OR.

incage, en-. The second is better; see EM- & IM-.

incapacitate, incarcerate, make -itable, -rable, -ator; see -ABLE 1, -oR.

incarnate. Pronounce the verb V/nkarnat, & the adjective inkar‘nit. For adj. in -able, see -ATABLE.

incarnation. This unfortunately is not the prisoner’s first lapse from honesty, for when the Chief Consiable of Peterborough said ‘he was the very quintessence of cunning & the incarnation of a book-thief’, he was not speaking without knowledge. Either the C.C. has been misreported or he was playfully suggesting that a book-thief is not a human being,
