page: 264

+ but a fiend or possibly a Platonic Idea; for so eminent a person must be aware that incarnation of what is incarnate already is as idle as painting the lily, & much more difficult. Some of us, however, do need to be reminded that while a person may be an incarnation of folly, or Folly clothed in flesh, it is meaningless to call him the incarnation of a fool, because all fools are flesh to start with & cannot be fitted with a new suit of it. See POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES.

incase. Wn- better; see EM- & IM-.

incense makes -sable; see MUTE E.

incensedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

inceptive, inchoative. See TECH- NICAL TERMS.

incident adj.) (incidental. Two tendencies may be discerned; one is for the shorter form with its less familiar termination to be displaced by the longer; thus we should more usually, though not more correctly, now write incidental in such contexts as (shortened from OED examples): All the powers incident to any government; Those in the highest station have their incident cares & troubles; The expedition & the incident aggressive steps taken; The incident mistakes which he has run into; A bank note, more than sufficient to defray any incident charges. The other tendency, cutting across the first, is a differentiation of meaning, based on no real difference between the two forms, but not the less useful on that account; while incidental is applied to side occurrences with stress on their independence of the main action, incident implies that, though not essential to it, they not merely happen to arise in connexion with it but may be expected to do so. A consequence of this distinction is that incident is mostly used in close combination with whatever word may represent the main action or subject, & especially with to as the link; Youth & its incident perturbations, or The enthusiasms incident to youth. It would be well if the

+ dental could be checked, & a continued existence secured to it at least in the special uses indicated. Half the money has gone in incidental expenses, & Our failure brought us an incidental advantage; but Office & the incident worries, & The dangers incident to pigsticking.

incidentally is now very common as a writer’s apology for an irrelevance. Naturally, those who find it most useful are not the best writers.

incinerate makes -rable, -ator; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

incise, not -ize; see -ISE.

incise, incite, make -sable, -table; see MUTE E.

incline. See Noun & VERB ACCENT. For ‘seriously incline’, see HACE- NEYED PHRASES.

inclose. En- better; see EM- & IM-.

include makes -dable; see MUTE E.

include) (comprise. As used in the newspapers, these may be called a pair of WORKING & STYLISH WORDS. The one used in ordinary life is include; the inferior kind of journalist therefore likes to impress his readers with comprise. The frequent confusion between comprise & compose, illustrated under COMPRISE, is an indication that include, which writer & compositor alike know all about, would be in general a safer word. Given the two, however, it would be possible to turn our superfluity to much better purpose than as a chance for the stylish journalist. When two words have roughly the same meaning, examination will generally reveal a distinction; & the distinction in meaning between the present two seems to be that comprise is appropriate when the content of the whole, & include when the admission or presence of an item, isin question; good writers say comprise when looking at the matter from the point of view of the | whole, include from that of the part. With include, there is no presumption (though it is often the fact) that swallowing up of incident by inciall or even most of the components
