page: 265

+ are mentioned; with comprise, the whole of them are understood to be in the list. The Guards, for instance, include the Coldstreams or the Life Guards, but comprise the Life Guards, Horse Guards, Dragoon Guards, & Foot Guards. Comprise is in fact, or would be if this partly recognized distinction were developed & maintained, whereas include is not, equivalent to be composed of. The following extracts show comprise in contexts where include would be the right word:—The German forces . . . exceed twenty-three corps; this number does not comprise the corps operating in the Masurian Lakes./Lhe Commission points out that the ample crop of information it has gathered only comprises irrefragably established facts.

incognito. The inflexions are of no great importance, being now little used, but should be done right if at all. Of the personal noun incognito, incognita, incogniti, are the masculine, feminine, & plural,=man, woman, people, of concealed identity. The abstract noun, = anonymity &c., is incognito only, with possible plural incognitos (never dropping their incognitos, or usually incognito). The adverb or predicative adjective (travelling i.) is usually -to irrespective of gender & number; if declined, it is like the personal noun.

incognizable &c. For pronunciation see COGNIZANCE.

incommunicative. Un- is better; see IN- & UN-.

INCOMPATIBLES. Under this heading are collected some phrases each consisting of ill-assorted elements. They differ greatly both in degree of badness & in kind; neither point is here discussed, & each phrase is set down in as few words as will enable the usage to be identified. Discussion of any particular misuse will be found on reference to one or other of the terms composing the phrase. The object of this list is first to give

K the reader, when referred here, a

+ conspectus of mistakes similar to the one he was investigating, & secondly to give the mistakes themselves an extra advertisement. The reader confronted with these things baldly set down, stripped of the surroundings that would in many of them distract attention from the actual fault, will naturally doubt whether they really appear in print; but the doubt will be set at rest by a few minutes devoted to looking up the words italicized:—almost quite

we we we ve without scarcely; scarcely... than finally scotched; decimate by 50% rather unique; somewhat amazing quite all right; more preferable; prefer to die than yield; ago since; he aims to secure it; neither of them were there; ought to be availed of; between death or disgrace; methods honest or otherwise; both complex as well as simple causation; but that however is doubtful; on a conservative estimate; it depends whether we get rain; disagree from; did not have time; I doubt that it ever happened; six feet between each post; a comparatively few; hardlyearned wages; with a view of deciding; a line worth while pursuing; people seemed to have been bolder in those days; will write you soon 5; shouldn’t wonder if it wasn’t true; lest it will come true; do like he does; the major portion; mutual friend; neither good or bad; oblivious to; onto; makes one forget his manners; in order that the peace will be a lasting one; was promoted to admiral; the reason is because God willed it; I regard it monstrous; the Hon. Smith;$ Rev. Smith; I would like; those sort of; butter must be substituted by margarine; were issued with two gasmasks each; superior than; those persons interested; tinker with the constitution; no reason for undue alarm; very changed.

incompetence, -cy. The form recommended is -ce, cf. COMPETENCE 3 in legal use, however, -cy seems to be preferred. 3
