page: 266

incompleted. Un- is the right form; see IN- & UN-.

incondite. Pronounce ink6’ndit. The word is of the learned kind, & should be avoided except in what is addressed to a definitely literary audience. It may not be out of place to mention that conditus composed, not conditus seasoned, is the Latin source, & that artless, rude, rough, unpolished, come near the sense.

INCONGRUOUS VOCABULARY. Austria-Hungary was no longer in a position, an’? she would, to shake off the German yoke. Be in a position to is a phrase of the most pedestrian modernity; shake off the yoke, though a metaphor, is one so well worn that no incongruity is felt between it & the pedestrianism; but what is an’ she would doing here? why not the obvious even if she had the desire? or, if an? she would is too dear to be let go, why not Austria now could not, an’ she would? The goldfish an’? cannot live in this sentence-bowl unless we put some water in with it, & gasps pathetically at us from the mere dry air of be in a position. Only a child would expect a goldfish to keep his beauty out of his right element; & only the writer who is either very inexperienced or singularly proof against experience will let the beauties of a word or phrase tempt him into displaying it where it is conspicuously out of place. Minor lapses from congruity are common enough, & a tendency to them mars the effect of what a man writes more fatally than occasional faults of a more palpable kind, such as grammatical blunders; but they do not lend themselves to exhibition in the short form here necessary; a few of the grosser & more recurrent incongruities, connected with particular words, must suffice by way of illustration; the words out of their element are printed in roman type, & under most of them, in their dictionary places, will be found

+ further examples:—M. de Bille has spent eighteen years in London as Denmark’s Minister (see °S INCON- GRUOUS)./Christmas books are put in hand long ere the season comes round./ It is really very difficult to imagine that the reply of the ballot can be aught but an answer in the affirmative./ Having in mind the approaching General Election, it appears to me that the result of same is likely to be as much a farce as the last./There are, it may be noted, fewer marquises than any other section of the peerage save dukes./The Covenanted Civil Service with its old traditions & its hereditary hatred of interlopers, be they merchants, journalists, doctors, &c. (be they is nothing if not stiff, cc. | nothing if not slack).

inconsiderateness, -eration. For the distinction, see CONSIDERATE- | NESS.

inconsolable, un-. Jn- is better; | see IN- & UN-.

incontinently, =straightway, is ar- | ehaic & now literary only. Its | connexion with incontinent =libidi- | nous, which is apt to suggest wrong guesses, is not a close one; the OED explains that it is from Latin in continenti tempore (in unbroken time), so that the in- of incontinently

preposition meaning in, whereas that of incontinent is the prefix meaning not.

incontrollable.

Un- is better; see IN- & UN-.

incorporate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE l, -OR.

increase. See Noun & VERB AC- | CENT, incredible. See POSITIVE WORDS. inerust, en-. Encrust, encrusiment, but incrustation; see EM- & IM-, incubate makes -ior, see -OR; for adj. in -able, see -ATABLE. incubus. Pl. -bi, or -buses. inculcate makes -tor (see -OR); for adj. in -able, see -ATABLE. A curious mistake often occurs, shown in the three quotations following:—A passer-by saved him, formed a close | is the friendship with him, & inculeated
