page: 267

+ him with his own horrible ideas about murdering women. / An admirable training-place wherein to inculeate the young mind with the whys & wherefores of everything which concerns personal safety./The Germans are chiefly busy in inculcating Americans with the idea that British Marinismus is more dangerous than German Militarismus. Whether the explanation is that inculcate is one of the words liable to the maltreatment called OBJECT-SHUFFLING (i. one with a doctrine being substituted for i. a doctrine upon one), or whether the compositor has each time found inoculate & printed inculcate, is impossible to determine; if the latter, writers should take warning that inoculate is a word to keep an eye on (or inoculate in a new sense) in proofs. See MISPRINTS,

inculpate. See -ATABLE.

incur makes -rred, -rring; see -R-, -RR-. For incurring see PRONUN- CIATION S.f.

indecipherable. Un- is better; see IN- & UN-.

indecorous. Accent the third syllable (indikor’us).

indefeasible) (indefectible. The distinction between the two, not always very carefully observed, may perhaps best be kept in mind by associating them respectively with defeat & deficit. That is indefeasible which is not liable to defeat, i.e. to being impaired or annulled by attack from outside; the word is therefore applied to rights, titles, possessions, & the like. That is indefectible which is not liable to deficit, i.e. to failing for want of internal power; the word is therefore applied to qualities such as holiness, grace, vigour, resolution, affection, or abundance; the sense faultless, suggesting the noun defect rather than deficit, & not quoted for in the OED from before the 19th c., seems to be a modern change of meaning, & one not to be countenanced. Neither word lends itself to the sort of everyday use seen in:

+ And yet Mr. Barnstaple had the most subile & indefeasible doubt whether indeed Serpentine was speaking, indent. See Noun & VERB ACCENT. independence, -cy. The -cy form retains only some special senses— Congregationalism, an independent State, & an independent income— ; & in these, though still preferred to -ce, is now usually displaced by Congregationalism, sovereign or independent State, & competency.

indescribable. Sospelt; see MUTEE.

index. For pl. see -Ex, -1x. 4. & LATIN PLURALS. For synonymy see SIGN.

For the I, weed see SOBRI-

Indian. QUETS.

indicate makes -cable, -tors see -ABLE 1, -OR.

indication. Forsynonymy see SIGN.

indicative. The grammatical term is pronounced indi’kativ; in other uses i’‘ndikativ is not uncommon,

indict, -able, -ment. Pronounce -it-. Indict means accuse, & indite compose or write.

indifference, -cy. Though the -cy form tends to disappear in all senses, its slower disappearance in one suggests a distinction that might usefully be maintained. That sense is the one corresponding to the objective sense of indifferent; a person is indifferent (subjectively) who feels no preference for either of a pair of things over the other; things are indifferent (objectively) for neither of which a preference is felt; the relation of the person to the things is indifference; the relation of the things to the person is still often, & might well be always, called indifferency. The following quotations from the OED show the word so used, & readers will perhaps agree that it is better in these contexts than indifference:—You have arrived at an equivalence & indifferency of all actions./Ceremonies . . . how indifferent soever they are in themselves, when they are once commanded, the indifferency ceases./I still believe in the indiffer-
