page: 268

+ ency of customs, so long as they do not make void the Divine word. See -CE, -CY, & DIFFERENTIATION,

Un- is the right form;

indigested. see IN- & UN-.

indireet.. object.

See TECHNICAL TERMS.

INDIRECT QUESTION is the grammarian’s name for a modification of what was originally a question, such that it does not stand by itself as a sentence, but is treated as a noun, serving for instance as subject or object to a verb outside of it. Thus: direct question, Who are you?; indirect question, I asked who he was, or Tell me who you are, or Who you are is quite irrelevant. Two points arise, one of grammar, & one of style.

1. It must be remembered that an indirect question is in grammar equivalent to one noun in the singular; the number of its internal subject has no influence on the number of the external verb; to disregard this fact, as when rest is written instead of rests in the following extract because terms happens to be plural, is an elementary blunder— What terms Bulgaria may be ultimately given rest with the Peace Conference.

2. The point of style is of much greater interest. How far is it legitimate to substitute in an indirect question the order of words that properly belongs to direct questions? The lamentable craze for INVERSION among writers who are fain to make up for dullness of matter by verbal contortions is no doubt responsible for the prevailing disregard of the normal order in indirect questions; for inversion, i.e. the placing of the subject later than its verb, is a mark of the direct, but not of the indirect question. Take these five types:— A. How old are you? B. Tell me how old you are

or Tell me how old are you? C. He wondered how old she was

or He wondered how old was she?

+ D. He doesn’t know how old I am

or He doesn’t know how old am I? E. How old I am is my affair

or How old am I is my affair. A is the direct question; in B, C, D, & E, the first form contains the normal, & the second the abnormal form of. the indirect question. It will be seen that the abnormal form is progressively disagreeable as we recede from interrogative governing verbs, until in E it might fairly be thought impossible. To contortionists, however, all things are possible; readers possessed of the grammatical sense, or of literary taste, will find the following examples of the abnormal order repugnant in the same degree as the types to which the letters B, E, &c., assign them; it is only the encroachments of inversion in general that palliate this special abuse in indirect questions. JI have been asked by the Editor to explain what are the duties of the Army towards the civil power, how is it constituted, to whom does it owe allegiance, by whom is it paid, & what is the source of its authority (B. The reason why the first & last clauses here are less distasteful than the others is explained later)./It shows inferentially how powerless is that body to carry out any scheme of its own (D. Normal order—how powerless that body is)./Eaperience has taught in what a restricted region can the State as trader or owner act to the general advantage (D. Normal order—the State can act to the general advantage as trader)./How bold is this attack may be judged from the fact that ...(E. Normal order— How bold this attack is)./Why should we be so penalized must ever remain a mystery (E. Normal order —Why we should).

The further remarks promised on the first example are these: three of the five indirect-question clauses in that are clear cases of abnormal order—how is it instead of how it is, to whom does it owe instead of to whom it owes, & by whom is it paid instead of by whom it is paid—;
