page: 269

+ but about the other two, which whether designedly or not act as advance-guard & rearguard covering those between & almost preventing us from discovering their character, it is not so easy to say whether they are abnormal or not. That is a characteristic of the special type of question consisting of subject, noun complement, & the verb be; in the answer to such questions, subject & complement are transposable. Question, What are the duties? ; answer, indifferently, These are the duties, or The duties are these; to the first form corresponds in the indirect question Explain what are the duties, & to the second, Explain what the duties are; & it can therefore hardly be said that one is more normal than the other. But to questions made of other elements than subject -+be +noun complement, e.g. How is it constituted?, the two answers (It is constituted thus, & Thus is it constituted) are far from indifferent; one is plainly normal & the other abnormal. This minor point has been discussed only because sentences like Eaplain what are the duties might be hastily supposed to justify all other uses of directquestion order in indirect-question constructions.

indiscreet, indiscrete, should be distinguished in accent—indiskre’t, indi’skrét; cf. DISCRETE.

indiscriminating. Un- is the right form;!see IN- & UN-.

indistinguishable, un-. The first is recommended; see IN- & UN-.

indite. See inpicr; îi- makes inditable, see MUTE E.

individual, n. The remarks to be made concern the noun only, not the adjective. ‘ Individual, which almost made the fortune of many a Victorian novelist, is one of the modern editor’s shibboleths for detecting the unfit’; so it has been said, but editors seem to relax their vigilance occasionally, & the word slips through on its sad old errand of soliciting a smile in vain; here 269

+ are a couple of passages in which the choice of it can have been dictated by nothing but WORN-OUT HUMOUR:—It is a most spirited episode, with a supernatural ending according to Tom Causey; this wily individual is the hero of some highly diverting stories./Taking a leaf out of the book of the individual who some years ago put forth his recollections under the title ‘ Reminiscences of a Young Man’.

The test for the right use of the word as opposed to the ‘ colloquial vulgarism ° (OED) is the question whether the writer means or not to contrast the person he calls an individual with society, the family, or some body of persons; if he does, he may say individual with a clear conscience; if not, he must expect us to like his evocation of this ghost of 19th-century jocularity as little as we enjoy the fragrance of a blownout candle that just now gave us light, or of the smoking-room visited early next morning. A pair of examples will make the difference clear; in the first, the individual is directly contrasted with, though a member of, the House of Commons, & is therefore rightly so called; in the second it is true that there is a body of persons in question, but the individual is so far from being contrasted with this body that he is it; the right way to have written the sentence is added in brackets, & the efficiency with which his does all the work of of this longsuffering individual (19th-century perfume excepted) reveals the writer’s style as one not to be imitated:—The House of Commons settled down very quietly to business yesterday afternoon; all trace of the preceding sitting’s violent protestation appeared to have been obliterated from the political mind; the only individual who attempted to revive the spirit of animosity was Mr ./We are little inclined to consider the urgency of the case made out for the patient agriculturalist; it would seem at first sight as if the needs of this long-suffering
