page: 270

individual were such as could be supplied by . . . (as if his needs could).

indorsation, but endorse(ment); see EM- & IM-.

induce makes -cible; see -ABLE 2.

induct makes -tor; see -or.

induction) (deduction. The first is the drawing, from observed or known cases, of the conviction that something established of them is true either of all similar cases, or of any particular similar case, that ma: afterwards be met with. The child who, having observed that all the persons known to him have two legs, confidently expects two legs on the newborn brother he has not yet seen, has made an induction, Deduction is the drawing from a general principle, however derived, of the conviction that a particular fact is true because if it were not the general principle, which has been accepted as undeniable, would not be true. The child who, being told that if you take a seed & sow it you may expect thirtyfold or so of what you took it from to spring up, sows a caraway seed & awaits the thirty copies of the seedeake from which he saved it is acting on a deduction. Whether the conclusion reached by induction or deduction is true depends on many conditions, which it is the province of Logic to expound; but the broad difference between the two is that induction starts from known instances & arrives at a generalization, or at the power of applying to new instances what it has gathered from the old, while deduction starts from the general principle, whether established by induction or assumed, & arrives at some less general principle, or some individual fact, that may be regarded as being wrapped up in it & therefore as having the same claim to belief as the general principle itself, indue.

En- better; see EM- & IM-. indulge.

1. J. makes indulgeable; see MUTE E.

2. But here & there

+ flashes out a phrase or a sentence that strikes the note of emotion & pride in the achievements of our armies which ihe most reticent of men may indulge. That passes the limit of what even this very elastic verb can be stretched to. You may i. your emotion, or i. in emotion, ori. yourself in emotion; | further, you may i. in, or i. yourself in, a note of emotion; but you cannot i. a note, whether of emotion or of anything else, but only strike or utter or blow it; & no-one who knows any grammar would deny that which represents note, not

The object of i. as a transitive verb must be either | a person or at least something that | can be credited with a capacity for being pleased or gratified; a passion, a fancy, an emotion, may be gratified, but not a note. The mis- | take is less a misunderstanding of the meaning of 7. than an example of Haziness, note of emotion being confused with emotion, & the confusion escaping notice under cover of which.

industrialize makes -izable, -ization; see MUTE E.

-ine. For glycerin(e) &c. see -IN & -INE.

inebriate makes -riable; see -ABLE 1,

inedited, un-. The second is recommended; see IN- & UN-.

ineffaceable, un-. The first is recommended; see IN- & UN-.

ineffective, -fectual, -ficacious, -ficient. For distinctions see EFFEC- TIVE.

inescapable, inessential.

Un- is þetter; see IN- & UN-.

inevitable(ness), -bly. To. those of us who read reviews of books & picture-shows & acting & music it has been apparent for some time that these words have been added to what may be called the apparatus criticus, making up, with distinction, charm, meticulous, intrigue veS banal, sympathetic, & a few other LITERARY CRITICS’? WORDS, the reviewing outfit. A search through | emotion & pride. all the English & French diction-
