page: 271

+ aries within reach shows them all ignorant of the specialized modern use; the OED in particular, dated 1901 for the letter I, has no inkling of it. An example or two may therefore be ‘welcome:—And even when a song is introduced, such as Aries Where the bee sucks there suck I, its effect is so great because it seems dramatically inevitable./The mere matters of arrangement, of line therein, show how great was his power, how true his perception; he has the inevitableness of the Japanese./Inevitably he led up to the unanswerable case for giving to all women the vote, & one felt he spoke, as he declared he did, wiih all sincerity, with all his heart, of what he believed in./Both: themes are well, that is to say inevitably, worked out./Miss may not always sing inevitably & spontaneously, simply for the love of beauty.

Better examples than these might be desired for the purpose of extracting the words’ sense; they are the ones that happen to be at hand, recorded possibly for the very reason that they were open to objection. What the literary critic does mean by inevitable is perhaps this: surveying a work of art, we feel sometimes that the whole & all the parts are sufficiently consistent & harmonious to produce on us the effect of truth; we then call it, for short, convincing; thus & thus, we mean, it surely may have been or may be; nothing in it inclines us to doubt; to be convincing is a step short of being inevitable; when the whole & the parts are so far in a concatenation accordingly that instead of Thus & thus it may have been we find ourselves forced to Thus & thus tt must have been or was or is, when the change of a jot or tittle would be plain desecration, when we know that we are looking at the Platonic idea itself & no mere copy, then the tale or the picture or the music attains to inevitableness. This is an outsider’s guess at the meaning; whether the guess is a good one or not, the meaning seems to be one 271

+ deserving expression in a single word—but only on the condition that that word shall be strictly confined to the works or parts of works that are worthy of it. Now it is, in fact, so often met with that one is compelled to infer the existence of a great deal more inevitability in twentieth-century art of all kinds than one at all suspected; so many things seem inevitable to the reyiewer in which the reader could contemplate extensive alterations without a pang. The question is whether convincing or true to nature, phrases for whose interpretation we should not search the dictionaries in vain, would not be nearer the critic’s private meaning than inevitable, & indeed whether he does not choose inevitable just because the reader would understand the other words too easily & miss being impressed by his command of mysterious terms.

inexactitude. For terminological i. =lie, see POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR

inexpressibles. See POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

inexpressive, un-. The second is recommended; see IN- & UN-.

infantile) (-ine. The OED does not lay down any distinction, giving as its sole definition of -ine * =infantile’. But its quotations for the two words do on the whole bear out one that might well (see DIFFERENTIATION) be encouraged, something like that between CHILDISH & childlike, though less established: -ile means of or in infancy, & -ine infantlike or as of an infant. If this is accepted, each of the following quotations from the OED would be the worse if -ile & -ine were to change places:—The interest which his story first impressed upon her infantile imagination./The countenance is so innocent & infantine, you would think this head belonged to a child of twelve. It may be said roughly that -ile records a fact, & -ine an impression.

infatuate makes -wable; see -ABLE 1.

infer makes -rred &c. 3 see -R-, -RR-.
