page: 273

+ der:—At least the worst evils of the wage system would never have inflicted this or any other present-day community./The misconception & discussion in respect of the portraits of Shakespeare with which the world is in such generous measure inflicted are largely due to . . ./Lively young girls are inflicted with stout leather hand-bags.

infold. En- better; see EM- & IM-.

informedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

infringe. 1. J. makes infringeable, but infringing; see MUTE E. 2. I.) (i. upon. Many of those who have occasion for the word must ask themselves before using it what its right construction is: do you i. (or i. upon) a rule? do you i. (or 2. upon) a domain? is the verb, that is, transitive, or intransitive, or sometimes one & sometimes the other? Latin scholars, aware that both frango & infringo are transitive only, will probably start with a prejudice against upon; but Latin is not English, as some of them know. A study of the OED examples leaves no doubt about which construction has predominated from the 16th to the 19th century; there are 25 quotations for the transitive verb to four for on or upon; but 20thcentury newspaper columns give a very different impression, viz that infringe can no longer stand at all without upon:—The Lords would have the choice of either a General Election or a Referendum for any Bill that even inadvertently infringed on their powers./Is it wise to i. upon their rights & susceptibilities?./You are infringing on our prerogative & trespassing on some of the ground that we intend taking up later./It is suddenly desired to i. upon & restrict my Sovereign rights./Terms which have unfortunately been infringed on by the Bolsheviks.

The view here taken of what has been happening is that (1) an imperfect knowledge of Latin has suggested that infringo means break in =intrude, whereas it does mean 273

+ break in=damage or violate or weaken; (2) it has therefore been identified in sense with trespass & encroach & assimilated to them in construction, this being further helped by confusion with impinge upon; (8) pretentious writers like to escape from encroach & trespass, familiar words, to 7., which will better impress readers with their mastery of the unfamiliar. And the advice tendered is (1) to conceive i. as a synonym rather of violate & transgress than of encroach & trespass; (2) to abstain altogether from i. upon as an erroneous phrase; (3) to use i. boldly with right, rule, privilege, patent, sovereignty, boundary, restriction, constitution, or the like, as object; & (4) when the temptation to insert on or upon becomes overpowering, as it chiefly does before words like domain & territory, to be contented with trespass or encroach rather than say i. Upon.

infuriate makes -riable; sec -ABLE 1.

infuse. 1. Infusable) (infusible. Fusible being the word for that can be fused, & infusible being therefore (see -ABLE 8a) the word for that cannot be fused, it is convenient as well as allowable (see -ARLE 2 s.f.) to make from’ the verb infuse not infusible but infusable. Infusable, then, =that can be infused; infusible =that cannot be fused.

2. Infuse) (imbue. Infuse is one of the verbs liable to the OBJECT- SHUFFLING mistake. You can i. courage into a person, or imbue or inspire him with courage, but not infuse him with courage. Examples proving the need of the caution:— The work he did at one school has been repeated at others, until young Australia has been infused with the spirit of games./One man, however, it has not affected; say, rather, it has infused him with its own rage against itself./He infused his pupils with a lively faith in the riches that were within.

-ING. 1. I would also suggest that,
