page: 275

+ have no such repugnance to rather than surrendering after a participle if the relation to be expressed were a quite different one; compare acquiring rather than surrendering with dying rather than surrendering; one must have its -ing, & the other must not. Well, the justification is the same as with raise: I will die rather than surrender; it is true that the form of surrender there is decided by will, like that of die, so that, when will die is changed to dying, surrender is left depending on air; but meanwhile die-rather-than-surrender has become a single verb of which die is the conjugable part: they died rather than surrender; dying rather than surrender

ingeminate. The often used phrase ingeminate peace means to say Peace, peace! again & again (Latin geminus double); the following sentence looks as if i. were in danger of confusion with germinate or generate or some such word:—We have great hopes that the result [of a discussion on a Royal Commission’s report] will be to i. peace & to avoid the threatened recurrence of hostilities.

ingénue. See FRENCH WORDS.

ingraft. En- better; see EM- & IM-.

ingrain(ed), not en- ; see EM- & IM-.

ingratiate has one sense & one construction only in modern English; it is always reflexive & means only to make (oneself) agreeable; even in older English, the use shown below is, to judge from the OED, unexampled: He set himself energetically to the art of ruling his island & ingratiating his new subjects./ Even if it does i. the men, it will only be by alienating the women.

inhale makes -lable; see MUTE E.

inherit makes -tor, with fem. inheritress or (in technical use) -trig (for pl. see -TRIX).

initiate. 1. J. makes initiable, -ator; see -ABLE l, -or. 2. I. is liable to the OBJECT-SHUFFLING mistake; you i. persons or minds in knowledge, not knowledge into persons or minds asin: The Russian

+ Review, a quarterly which is doing so much to i. into the minds of the British public what is requisite for them to know about the Russian Empire. Instil is perhaps the word meant. initiative. 1. After take the i., the construction is in doing, not of doing as in:—The Diet should leave to the Tsar the i. of taking such measures as may be necessary./M. Delcassé took the i. of turning the conversation to Moroccan affairs.

2. The sense of i. has been narrowed down by modern usage. Taking ‘the first step’ as the simple-word equivalent, we might understand that of the first step as opposed to later ones, or of the lead as taken by one person & not another or others; the latter is the only current sense, & it appears in all the special uses; (a) the military, where the i. is the power of forcing the enemy to conform to your first step, so deciding the lines of a campaign or operation; (b) the political, where the i., technically so called, is the right of some minimum number of citizens to demand a direct popular vote on any constitutional question; (c) the two phrases in which 7. is chiefly used, ‘take the i.’, i.e. act before someone else does so, & ‘of (or on) one’s own i.’, i.e. without a lead from someone else.

inject makes injector; see -onr.

injure makes injwrable; see MUTE E.

inlay. See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

inmesh. En- better; see EM- & IM-.

inmost. See -MOST.

innate & instinct (adj.) have complementary uses, e.g. Courage is innate in the race, & A race instinct with courage. To exchange the words (The leisurely solidity, the leisurely beauty of the place, so innate with the genius of the Anglo- Sagon) is the same sort of mistake as OBJECT-SHUFFLING.

innavigable, un-. The second is recommended: see IN- & UN-.

inner. For the inner man, see HACKNEYED PHRASES.
