page: 276

innermost. See -MOST.

innings. The pl. inningses is col-

loquial only, winnings (originally

plural) being used for either number

—an innings, or several innings.

innocence, -cy. The latter is an archaism, chiefly kept alive by Ps. xxvi. 6.

innocent of, in the sense without (windows innocent of glass) is a specimen of WORN-OUT HUMOUR. ‘ She might profitably avoid such distortions as “ windows i. of glass” & trays “ guiltless of any cloth ” ’— says a Times review.

innovate makes -tor; see -or.

innuendo. For pl., -os is recommended. The OED gives precedence to -oes, & a count of the plurals in its quotations shows -0es 4, -0S 2, -0°S 2; but see -o(£)s 6 on the principle.

inobservance, but wnobservant, are perhaps best; see IN- & UN-.

inoculate makes -lable, -lator; see -ABLE l, -orn. For danger of misprints, see INCULCATE.

in order that is regularly followed by may & might; i. o. t. nothing may, or might, be forgotten. In archaic writing, the subjunctive without a modal verb may be used instead; 7. o. t. nothing be forgotten. In some contexts, but not in most, shall & should may pass instead of may & might; i. o.t. nothing should be forgotten; but certainly the second, & perhaps the first also, of the shall examples below is unidiomatic. The other examples, containing can & could, will & would, are undoubtedly wrong:—The effort must be organized & continuous i. o. t. Palestine shall attract more &: more of the race./To influence her in her new adolescence i. o. t. we shall once more regain the respect & admiration we enjoyed under the old Russia./Those who have supported Mr Chamberlain’s programme in its entirety are now prepared to waive a portion of iti. o.t. by so doing they can assist the complete union of the Unionist Party./Farmers object to

+ portions of their farms being taken i. o. t. small holdings can be created./ It will conclude before lunch-time i.o.t. delegates can attend a mass meeting in London./If the .2/- per quarter duty had been kepi on wheat i. o.t. the farmers could have purchased the offals at a reasonable price - - -./Lo supplement the work of the doctors on the panel i.o.t. every insured person in London will be able to obtain the very best medical attention./Insisted on the need of a special method of representation i.o. t. the aviator would be able to grasp the correct measure of the obstacles to free progression.

These solecisms are all due to ANALOGY, in order that being followed by what could properly have followed so that.

in petto.

See FOREIGN DANGER.

inquire.

See FORMAL WORDS.

inquire, -ry, en-.

In- is better; see EM- & IM-.

insanitary. The established form; but see UNSANITARY.

inscribe makes -bable; see MUTE E.

insinuate makes -uable, -ator; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

in so far. He must have a long spoon that sups with the devil; & the safest way of dealing with in so far is to keep clear of it. The dangers range from mere feebleness or wordiness, through pleonasm or confusion of forms, & inaccuracy of meaning, to false grammar. The examples are in that order, & the offence charged against each is stated in a word or two, & left undiscussed for the reader to decide upon; if he is sufficiently interested to wish for fuller treatment, he should turn to FAR 4, 5, where different uses of so far are considered; the prefixing of in is for the most part not dictated by reasons either of grammar or of sense, so that much of what is there said applies to in so far also:— He did not, with such views, do much to advance his object, save in so far that his gracious ways everywhere
