page: 277

+ won esteem & affection (Wordy. Read though for save i.s.f. that)./ The question . . . is not in any way essentially British, save i.s.f. as the position of Great Britain in Egypt makes her primarily responsible (Wordy. Read except that for save i. s.f. as)./ Some of the defects are inevitable, ai least i. s. f. as that no one can suggest an improvement (Pleonastic. Omit in & as)./The large majority would reply in the affirmative, i.s.f. as to admit that there is a God (Confusion between so far as to & i. s. f. as they would)./ No such department under present conditions is really requisite, i. s. f. as the action of the Commander-in-Chief is thwarted in cases where he should be the best judge (Wrong sense. Read since for i%.s.f.as)./ The officials have done their utmost to enforce neutrality, & have i. s. f. succeeded as the Baltic fleet keeps outside the threemile limit (Wrong sense. Read have so far succeeded that)./These resources have pulled him through i.s.f. as they have made his name popular, but an artist & a realist have been lost (Wrong sense. Read so far that for i. s. f. as)./It has the character of a classic i.s.f. as the period it covers (Ungrammatical. In so far as is not a preposition, & cannot govern period).

insouciance, -ant. See FRENCH WORDS; the adjective, however, is usually, & the noun often, anglicized in pronunciation to ins00’s-.

inspan makes -nned &c.; see -N-, -NN-.

inspect makes -tor, -tress; for the latter see FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

inspire makes -rable; see MUTE E.

instance. The abuse of this word in lazy periphrasis has gone far, though not so far as that of CASE. Here are two examples:—The taxation of the unimproved values in any area, omitting altogether a tax on improvements, necessarily lightens the burden in the instance of improved properties./The stimulation to improve land, owing to the appreciable

+ rating of the same, is more clearly established whenever the outgo is very direct & visible, such as in the instance of highly priced city lands. In the first, in the instance of should be simply on; & in the second such as in the instance of should be as on. There is some danger that, as writers become aware of the suspicions to which they lay themselves open by perpetually using case, they may take refuge with instance, not realizing that most instances in which case would have damned them are also cases in which instance will damn them. The crossing out of one & putting in of the other will not avail; they must rend their heart & not their garments, & learn to write directly instead of in periphrasis. Instance has been called case’s understudy; in the articles CASE, & ELEGANT VARIA- TION, will be found many examples of the substitution.

instance, v., makes -ceable; see MUTE E.

instant, proximo, & ultimo, appended to numbers from Ist to 31st & meaning of this, next, last, month, are usually written & even said in the abbreviated forms inst., proz., & ult. Why it should be laid down, as it is in some printing manuals, that the abbreviations should not be printed, but the full forms, is a mystery.

instigate makes -gable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

instil(1). The OED gives precedence to -il. In any case, -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-. The word is liable to the OBJECT-SHUFFLING confusion. The Tsars words will undoubtedly instil the Christians of Macedonia with hope. You can inspire men with hope, or hope in men; but you can only instil it into them, not them with it. See ANALOGY. instinct) (intuition. See INTUITION. institute makes -tutable, -twtor. institute) (institution. The two nouns have run awkwardly into &
