page: 278

+ out of one another. The neat arrangement would have been for -ution to mean instituting, & -ute a thing instituted; but -ution has seized, as abstract words will, on so many concrete senses that neatness is past praying for. Institution is in fact the natural English word capable of general use, & -ute a special title restricted to, & preferred for, certain institutions. An -ute is deliberately founded; an -ution may be so, or may have established itself or grown. A man leaves his fortune to institutions, but perhaps founds a parish or a mechanics’ -ute, i.e. an -ution designed to give instruction or amusement to a special class of people. Whether a particular -ution founded for a definite purpose shall have -ute or -ution in its title is a matter of chance or fashion—The Royal -ute of Painters in Water Colours, but The -ution of Civil Engineers; The Royal -ution, but The Imperial -ute. A child is to be got into some -ution, & is placed in the National -ute for the Blind or the Masonic -ution for Boys.

Cricket, five-o’clock tea, the House of Lords, Eton, the Workhouse, a hospital, the National Gallery, marriage, capital punishment, the Law Courts, are all -utions & not -utes.

instruct makes -tor, -tress; see FEMININE DESIGNATIONS. insubstantial. Un- is better; see IN- & UN-. insufficient. But Austria also excludes altogether a food-product like meat, of which she produces insufficient. This noun use (=not enough or too little) is worse than the corresponding use of SUFFICIENT, insulate makes -lable, -tor; see -ABLE l, -OR. insupportable, un-. The first is recommended; see IN- & UN-. insure. See ENSURE. J. makes -rable; see MUTE E. insusceptible, not un-. See IN- & UN-, & -ABLE 3 a.

intaglio. Pronounce -ălyð. PL -08, see -O(E)S 4. Intaglio is opposed to relief as a name for the kind of carving in which the design, instead of projecting from the surface, is sunk below it (carved in i.); & to cameo as the name for gems of the same kind but carved in i. instead of in relief.

integrate makes -grable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

intelligent) (intellectual. While an intelligent person is merely one who is not stupid or slow-witted, an intellectual person is one in whom the part played by the mind as distinguished from the emotions & perceptions is greater than in the averageman. An intellectual person who was not intelligent would be, though not impossible, a rarity; but an intelligent person who is not intellectual we most of us flatter ourselves that we can find in the looking-glass. Intelligent is usually a patronizing epithet, while intellectualis a respectful one, but seldom untinged by suspicion or dislike.

intelligentsia, -tzia. Both forms are current.

intended, n. It is curious that betrothed people should find it so difficult to hit upon a comfortable word to describe each other by. ‘My intended’, ‘my engaged”, “my fiancé(e)’, ‘my sweetheart oe “my love(r) ’—none of these is much to their taste, too emotional, or too French, or too vulgar, or too evasive. The last two objections are in fact one; evasion of plain words is vulgarity, & ‘my intended’ gives the impression that the poor things are shy of specifying the bond between them, an ill-bred shyness; so too with ‘my engaged’, & in jiancé(e) they resort to French instead of to vague English for their embarrassing though futile disguise. Is it too late to suggest that ‘ my betrothed °, which means just what it should, i.e. pledged to be married, & is not vulgarized but only out of fashion, & would be a dignified word
