page: 282

treatment at the hands of persons

who choose it not because it is the

natural thing for them to say, but

because, being unfamiliar, it strikes

them as ornamental. So:—This

influence was so far indirect in that

it was greatly furthered by Le Sage./

The legislatwe jury sat to try the

indictment against Mr Justice Grant-

ham in that during the Great Yar-

mouth election petition he displayed

political bias. In the first, two ways

of saying the thing are mixed (was

so far indirect that, & was indirect in

that); & in the second in that is

used in a quite suitable context, but

wrongly led up to; a man is guilty in that he has done so-&-so, but an indictment against him is not in that anything. After the less, the more, the clause that responds to the should not begin with in that, but with plain that; omit the in in:—Nor are they any the less pleasing in that the colourings are of the rich not gaudy type./Whose presence is none the less welcome in that he serves to provide the only element of humour.

intimate, v., makes -mable, -tor; See -ABLE 1, -or.

intimidate. 1. 7. makes -dable, -tor; See -ABLE 1,-or. 2. Similar threats were uttered in the endeavour to i. Parliament from disestablishing the Irish Episcopal Church. From is idiomatic after deter & discourage, but not after i. or terrify; see ANALOGY,

into) (in to. The two words should be written Separately when their sense is separate. The doors of the great Opera-house let out the crowd y when we went into the opera, the streets had been swept, but when we came out the snow was inches deep again. Opera-house shows that opera means not the building, but the performance, & you do not Z0 into that, but go in to it. Correct similarly:—Lord Rosebery took her into dinner./All the outside news came into us immediately. intone makes -nable; see MUTE E.

282

in toto means not on the whole, but

wholly, utterly, entirely, absolutely,

& that always or nearly always with

verbs of negative sense—condemn,

decline, deny, reject, disagree, i.t.

The following is nonsense: Nor do

we produce as much in toto as we

might if we organized.

intoxicate makes -cable, -ior; see

-ABLE 1, -OR.

intransigent dates in England from

about 1880 ; but, being now estab-

lished, it should neither be pro-

nounced as French nor spelt -eant

any longer.

INTRANSITIVE P.P. This article is less severely practical than most in the book, & is addressed to those few enthusiasts only who find grammatical phenomena interesting apart from any rules of writing that may be drawn from them. As grammatical terminology is far from fixed in English, it must be premised that p.p. (past participle) is here taken as the popular name for the singleword participle that does not end in -ing, i.e., by the p.p. of hear is meant heard, not hearing nor having heard nor being heard. All verbs, with negligible exceptions such as must & can, have this p.p., though in many it is used only as an element in making compound parts like has climbed or will have died. That function of the p.p. is familiar to everyone & needs no comment. Further, the p.p. of all transitive verbs can be used as an adjective (a broken jug). What is not so fully realized is the part played by the adjectival p.p. in many intransitive verbs. It is in the first place much commoner than is supposed. Most of us, perhaps, would reply if asked that p.p. adjectives were all passive, i.e. were only made from transitive verbs. A moment’s search is enough to correct that notion— fallen angels, the risen sun, a vanished hand, past times, the newly arrived guest, a grown girl, a gone coon, absconded debtors, escaped prisoners, the deceased lady, the dear departed,
