page: 284

introspect makes -tor.

introvert makes -versible; -ABLE 2.

intrude makes intrusible; -ABLE 2.

intrust. En- better; see EM- & IM-.

intuition & instinct. The word

intuition being both in popular use

& philosophically important, a slight

statement of its meaning, adapted

from the OED, may be welcome.

The etymological but now obsolete sense is simply inspection (Latin tueor look): A looking-glass becomes spotted & stained from their only intuition (i.e., if they so much as look in it). With the schoolmen it was The spiritual perception or immediate knowledge ascribed to angelic & spiritual beings, with whom vision & knowledge are identical: St Paul’s faith did not come by hearing, but by intuition & revelation. In modern philosophy it is The immediate apprehension of an object by the mind without the intervention of any reasoning process: What we fecl & what we do, we may be said to know by intuition; or again (with exclusion of one or other part of the mind) it is Immediate apprehension by the intellect alone, as in The intuition by which we know what is right & what is wrong, or Immediate apprehension by sense, as in All our intuition takes place by means of the senses alone. Finally, in general use it means Direct or immediate insight: Rashness if it fails is madness, & if it succeeds is the intuition of genius.

How closely this last sense borders on instinct is plain if we compare A miraculous intuition of what ought to be done just at the time for action with It was by a sort of instinct that he guided this open boat through the channels. One of the OED’s definitions of instinct, indeed, is: ‘ intuition; unconscious dexterity or skill’; & whether one word or the other will be used is often no more than a matter of chance. Three points of difference, however, suggest themselves as worth keeping in mind: (1) an intuition is a judgement issuing in conviction, & an

instinct an impulse issuing in action; (2) an intuition is conceived as something primary & uncaused, but an instinct as a quintessence of things experienced in the past whether by the individual or the race; & (8) while both, as faculties, are contrasted with that of teason, | intuition is the attribute by which gods & angels, saints & geniuses, are superior to the need of reasoning, & instinct is the gift by which animals are compensated for their inability to reason.

intwine, intwist. En- is better; see EM- & IM-.

inundate. See -ATABLE.

inure, enure. Both the connexion between the verb’s different senses (The poor, inured to drudgery & disiress; The cessions of land enured to the benefit of Georgia), & its derivation, are so little obvious that many of us, at any rate when minded to use the less common sense, feel some apprehension that we may be on the point of blundering, & that, again, there is a tendency to spell in- & en- for the two meanings as if they were different words. The origin is the obsolete noun ure (We will never enact, put in ure, promulge, or execute, any new canons), which is from French œuvre, which is from Latin opera work. To inure a person you set him at work or practise him; a thing inures that comes into practice, or operates, in such & such a direction. Variant spellings are therefore unnecessary, & in- is preferred by the OED. invade makes -dable; see MUTE E. invalid. The word meaning not valid is pronounced invi/lid. For the noun & adjective meaning sick (person), & the verb made from these, the pronunciation recommended is i‘nvaléd, but neither the place of the stress nor the sound of the second 2 is yet fully fixed. invalidate makes -dable, -tor; see -ABLE 1], -OR. inveigle. The OED pronunciation
