page: 285

+ is invé’g] without the alternative of eva’gl. invent makes -tor. inventory. Pronounce i’nveniori.

INVERSION. . By this is meant the abandonment of the usual English sentence order & the placing of the subject after the verb as in Said he, or after the auxiliary of the verb as in What did he say? & Never shall we see his like again. Inversion is the regular & almost invariable way of showing that a sentence is a question, so that it has an essential place in the language; & there are other conditions under which it is usual, desirable, or permissible. But the abuse of it ranks with ELEGANT VARIATION as one of the most repellent vices of modern writing. Inversion & variation of the unealled-for kinds are like the fashionable high heels placed somewhere below the middle of the foot—ugly things resorted to in the false belief that artificiality is more beautiful than nature—; but as heels of the right kind are useful or indispensable, so too is inversion. Its conditions & motives are various, & cannot be set forth in a sentence; it seems better to postpone analysis, & to try first to persuade the reader, by an exhibition of specimens, that inversion is often practised when it serves no useful purpose, that such inversion is ugly, & that resort to it is a mark of the unskilful „writer. Here, then, are some bad inversions; the uninverted form is indicated by a word or two in brackets, & the reader is invited to decide for himself whether it would not have been in all these instances clearly better:— Then to the resident Medical Officer of. the Brompton Hospital for Consumption for an authoritative opinion on the subject went the inquirer (The inquirer then went, as the beginning of the sentence)./Suffictent is it to terminate the brief introduction to this notice by stating ... (It is sufficient)./ Appropriately does the author pre- Jude his recollections with the story

+ of . . . (The author appropriately preludes)./Somewhat in the nature of a blow is it, therefore, to find that... (It is therefore somewhat)./Hard would it be to decide which of his many pursuits in literary study he found most absorbing (It would be hard)./By diligent search in sunny & sheltered places could some shortstalked primroses be gathered (primroses could be gathered)./Little by little are these poor people being hemmed in & ground down by their cruel masters (people are being)./ Gloomy though is the precedent, the only thing left for a War Lord to do is to follow the example of Ahab at Ramoth Gilead (the precedent is)./ These were persons to be envied, as might be someone who was clearly in possession of a sixth sense (as someone might be)./With good peripheral railways, such as have our invaders, the front can be strengthened at any point (our invaders have)./ A frigate could administer roughly half the punishment that could a '74 (a 74 could)./Carrying far more than can the steam-driven vessel (vessel can)./He looked forward, as do we all, with great hope & confidence to... (we all do)./He laid down four principles on which alone could America go further (America could)./ “I couldn’t help liking the chap” would shout Lingard when telling the story (Lingard would shout)./Not only is it so necessarily bounded by that moving veil which ever hides the future, but also is it unable to penetrate more than a paltry hundred thousand years or so inio the darkness that now enshrouds the past (it is unable)./An undefeated Prussia is ultimately the end of England, &, in particular, is it the end of fortune & security for ... (it is the end).

Whether all of these inversions are bad, as they were said to be, or not, they can hardly fail to convince anyone who reads them one after another that inversion is not an achievement to be aimed at for its own sake, as some of these writers evidently take it to be, but a means
