page: 286

needed. Such a reader may now be

willing to examine the occasions that demand it. The result will be

something of this kind:—

Inversion is the deferring of the subject till after (especially in older English) the verb, or till after (especially in modern English) the verb’s auxiliary only; What saith he?, What does he say?, are both inversions, the uninverted forms being he saith, he says.

In questions & commands, as contrasted with the commoner form of sentence, the statement, inversion is the rule: Doth Job fear God for nought?/Hear thou from heaven thy dwelling-place. The subject being usually omitted in commands, these do not much concern us; but in questions the subject regularly follows the verb or its auxiliary except when, being itself the interrogative pronoun or adjective, it has to stand where that pronoun almost invariably stands (Browning’s W. anting is —what? supplies an exception): Who did it? What caused it? In the other exceptional sentence-form, the exclamation, inversion is not indeed the rule as in questions, but is, & still more used to be, legitimate: How dreadful is this place!/What a piece of work is a man!/O bonnie was the rosy brier!/Few & evil have the days of the years of my life been./ Bitterly did he rue it.

Inversion, then, is the natural though not universal order of words in sentences other than statements; in exclamations particularly, when they do not contain a special exclamatory word such as how or what, the inversion is what announces their nature; & one form of bad inversion arises from inability to distinguish between an exclamation & a mere statement, so that the latter is allowed the order that marks the former (Hard is it to decide, on the pattern of Hard, very hard, is my fare!). To these forms of sentence must be added the

i hypothetical clause in which the

+ in its absence by inversion: Were I Brutus./Had they known in time.

Interrogative, Imperative, Exclamatory, & Hypothetical Inversions form a group in which inversion itself serves a purpose. With statements it is otherwise; inversion is there not performed for its own significance, but comes about owing to the writer’s wish to place at the beginning either the predicate or some word or phrase that belongs to it. He may have various reasons for this. The usual reason for putting the whole of the predicate at the beginning is the feeling that it is too insignificant to be noticed at all after the more conspicuous subject, & that it must be given what chance the early position can give it; hence the There is idiom; not No God is, but There is no God. That is Balance Inversion in its shortest form, & at greater length it is seen in: Through a gap came a single level bar of glowing red sunlight peopled with myriads of gnats that gave it a quivering solidity; if came through a gap is experimentally returned to its place at the end of that, it becomes plain why the writer has put it out of its place at the beginning. Another familiar type is Among the guests were A, B, Cc Z

Often, however, the object is not to transfer the predicate bodily to the beginning, but to give some word or words of it first place. Such a word may be meant to give hearer or reader the connexion with what precedes (Link Inversion), to put him early in possession of the theme (Signpost Inversion), or to warn him that the sentence is to be negative (Negative Inversion):—On this depends the whole course of the argument./By strategy is meant something wider./Never was a decision more abundanily justified. On this, by strategy, never, are the causes of inversion here; each belongs to the predicate, not to the subject; & when it is placed first it tends to
