page: 288

+ tion; so unnatural & so ungraceful are many of them. It follows that the motive must have been a severe sense of duty, a resolve to be correct, according to their lights, at any sacrifice. And from this again it follows that no demonstration that the inversions are incorrect is called for; the task is only to show cause why non-inversion should be permitted, & these idolaters will be free of the superstitions that cramped their native taste. The quotations are arranged in batches, with a number attached to that one in each batch which is to be discussed below. The reader will perhaps be kind enough to translate each specimen into the uninverted order & pass a preliminary judgement upon it.

1. A frigate could administer roughly half the punishment that could a 74./ With good peripheral railways, such as have our invaders, the front can be strengthened.

2. It costs less than did administration under the old companies./Ships without funnels, carrying far more than can the steam-driven vessel.

3. It is unlikely that a conflict can be localized, as were the previous struggles in 1908 & 1909./He looked forward, as do we all, with great hope & confidence to Monday’s debate./It represents the business interests of Germany as does no other organization./. . . his fondness for the game, which he played as should an Aberdonian./These were persons to be envied, as might be someone who was clearly in possession of a sixth sense./The French tanks have had their vicissitudes, as have had ours.

4. Each has proven ably that the other’s kind of Protection would be quite as ruinous as would be Free Trade./We are unable to . . . without getting as excited over the question of funds as is a cat on a hot iron./He was as far removed as are the poles asunder from the practices which made the other notorious./The lawntennis championships will be attracting as much attention as has the golf championship. / Thirteen divisions

+ taken from reserve is now as serious as would have been some fifty f divisions four months ago./Judge Parry’s interest in ephemeral drama | is known, of course, as well as are his | views on the law of...

5. Bad as has been our record in the treatment of some of the military inventions of the past, it may be | doubted whether the neglect of the obvious has ever been more conspicuously displayed than in . . ./And, hopeless as seem the other divisions of Belfast, progress is being made in them. 6. It is not all joy to be a War Lord |. in these days, & gloomy though is the precedent, the only thing left for a War Lord to do is to follow the — example of Ahab at Ramoth Gilead. ‘|

7. The work stands still until comes the convenient time for arranging an | amicable rupture of the old engagement ` & contracting of the new.

Comments on these groups.

1. Comparesome everyday sentence: You earn twice the money that I do, never that do I. The misconception is perhaps that the putting of the object first (here that) should draw the verb; but this is not true of relative clauses; the people that I like, not that like I.

2. A simple parallel is I spend less than you do, for which no-one in talk would substitute than do you. Many, however, would write, if not say, I spend less than do nine out of ten people in my position. The difference must lie in the length of the subject, & the misconception must be that it is a case for balance inversion, i.e. for saving the verb from going unnoticed; but so little does that matter that if the verb is omitted no harm is done; did in the quotation should in fact either be omitted or put in either of its natural places, after administration, or after companies. 3. As, in such sentences, is a relative adverb; it & the unexpressed so to which it answers are equivalent to (in the way) in which, & what was
