page: 289

+ said above of relatives & inversion holds here also. Try to pronounce it as I do, not as do I; & when the subject is longer, e.g. the native Frenchman, though as does the native Frenchman becomes defensible, it does not become better than as the native Frenchman does, nor as good.

4. The as of this batch differs from that of batch 3 in that its fellow as of the main sentence belongs to an adjective (ruinous, excited, &c.) or adverb (far, well). This allows the inversionista different defence, which he needs, since balance inversion is clearly not available for as would be Free Trade with its short subject. He might appeal here to exclamatory inversion. When the compound sentence is reduced to its elements, they are either (a) Free Trade would be ruinous; Protection would be equally ruinous (the first clause being a statement); or (b) Ruinous would Free Trade be! Protection would be equally ruinous (the first clause being an exclamation). He chooses, how reasonably let the reader judge, the (b) form, & retains its order in the compound sentence. The truth is that in three of these sentences the verb should have been omitted, & in the others kept in its ordinary place—as the poles are asunder, as the golf championship has attracted, as 50 would have been.

5. The meaning of this as idiom is clear; it is Though our record has been so bad, or However bad our record has been; but how it reached its present shape is less apparent. Some light is thrown by the presence in earlier English of another as, now dropped; Swift writes The world, as censorious as it is, hath been so kind ...; this points to (Be our record as) bad as our record has been (bad) for the unabbreviated form. Omission of the bracketed words gives the uninverted order, which will only be changed if exclamatory inversion (Bad has been our record!) or balance inversion is needlessly applied.

6. Gloomy is the precedent! is a not

1351

+ impossible exclamatory inversion; &, if the words were kept together with the effect of a quotation by having though before instead of in the middle of them, the exclamatory order might be tolerable, though hardly desirable, even in the subordinated form; but not with though where it is. This may be tested by trying a familiar phrase like Bad is the best. Though bad is the best, yes; but not Bad though is the best; instead of that we must write Bad though the best is.

7. There is no doubt about the motive. It is a balance inversion, & one that would be justified by the great length of the subject if the only place for the uninverted comes were at the end of the whole sentence. But what is too often forgotten in such cases is that there is usually a choice of places for the verb; here comes would be quite comfortable immediately after time.

The conclusion suggested is that, so far as relative clauses, & especially those containing as, are concerned, the writer whose taste disposes him to use the natural uninverted order is at the very least free to indulge it. INVERSIONS OF THE LITER-

ARY PARAGRAPHIST

The gentlemen who provide newspapers with short accounts of newly published books have an inversion. form all to themselves. The principle seems to be that the title of the book is to be got to a place where the reader shall be able to find it; at the same time the catalogue look is to be avoided that results if the title is printed at the head before the description; & a literary air is to be so given to the paragraph.. The title is therefore worked to the end, by the use of odd inversions that editors would do well to prohibit. But, once broken in to inver-. sion by this special use of it, the minor literary critics learn to love their chains, & it is among them that the false exclamatory inversions dealt with in the next section.
