page: 295

+ e.g. being equivalent either to abstracting or to abstract notion—, to subject -ness to that treatment is to do it violence; we can call virtue an abstraction, but not an abstractness; in compensation for this disability, the -ness words should be secured as far as possible the exclusive right to the meaning of state or quality; e.g. we should avoid talking of the abstraction or the concision of a writer’s style, or of the consideration that marks someone’s dealings, when we mean abstraciness, conciseness, & considerateness. Concision means the process of cutting down, & conciseness the cut-down state; the ordinary man, who when he means the latter says conciseness, shows more literary sense than the literary critic, who says concision just because the French, who have not the advantage of possessing -ness, have to say it, & he likes Gallicizing. It is not always easy to prove that writers do not mean the process rather than the quality, but appearances are often against them; in the following examples, if the epithet shortwinded, & the parallel pungency, are taken into account, it is pretty clear that the quality of the style was meant, & conciseness would have been the right word:—ZI really think any Muse (when she is neither resting nor flying) ought to tighten her girdle, tuck up her skirts, & step out. It is better than Tennyson’s short-winded & artificial concision—but there is such a thing as swift & spontaneous style./But then as a writer of letters, diaries, & memoranda, Mr Gladstone did not shine by any habitual concision or pungency of style. Ifit were not for this frequent uncertainty about what is really meant, it would be as bad to say concision for conciseness as to use correction (which also could be defended as a Gallicism) for correctness, or indirection (for which Hamlet 11. i. 66 might be pleaded) for indireciness.

+ that there is a tendency for it to usurp the functions of the noun in -ness. Irene. Three syllables (iré’ni); as a Christian name it has now been largely adopted by those who take it for a disyllable & account to themselves for the third syllable when they hear others say it as an optional addition like those in Johnny & Jeanie. irenicon. See EIRENICON.

Iricism. See Inisuism. iridescent. So spelt, not zrri-; the origin is Greek iris rainbow, not Latin irrideo laugh.

Irishism, Iricism. The first is the right; see Briricism.

iron. For the i. Chanceilor, Duke, horse, see SOBRIQUETS.

jronist. For the form, see -1ST.

irony. For a tabular comparison of this & other words, see HUMOUR.

Irony is a form of utterance that postulates a double audience, consisting of one party that hearing shall hear & shall not understand, & another party that, when more is meant than meets the ear, is aware both of that more & of the outsiders’ incomprehension. 1. Socratic irony was a profession of ignorance. What Socrates represented as an ignorance & a weakness in himself was in fact a non-committal attitude towards any dogma, however accepted or imposing, that had not been carried back to & shown to be based upon first principles. The two parties in his audience were, first, the dogmatists moved by pity or contempt to enlighten this ignorance, &, secondly, those who knew their Socrates & set themselves to watch the familiar game in which learning should be turned inside out by simplicity. 2. The double audience is essential too to what is called dramatic irony, i.e. the irony of the Greek drama. That drama had the peculiarity of providing the double audience—one party in the secret & the other not—in a special man-
