page: 296

ner. The facts of most Greek plays

were not a matter for invention, but

were part of every Athenian child’s

store of legend; all the spectators,

that is, were in the secret beforehand

of what would happen. But the

characters, Pentheus & Oedipus &

the rest, were in the dark; one of

them might utter words that to

him & his companions on the stage

were of trifling import, but to those

who hearing could understand were

pregnant with the coming doom.

The surface meaning for the dramatis personae, & the underlying for the spectators; the dramatist working his effect by irony. 3. And the double audience for the irony of Fate? Nature persuades most of us that the course of events is within wide limits foreseeable, that things will follow their usual course, that violent outrage on our sense of the probable or reasonable need not be looked for; & these * most of us’ are the uncomprehending outsiders; the elect or inner circle with whom Fate shares her amusement at our consternation are the few to whom it is not an occasional maxim, but a living conviction, that what happens is the unexpected.

That is an attempt to link intelligibly together three special senses of the word irony, which in its more general sense may be defined as the use of words intended to convey one meaning to the uninitiated part of the audience & another to the initiated, the delight of it lying in the secret intimacy set up between the latter & the speaker; it should be added, however, that there are dealers in irony for whom the initiated circle is not of outside hearers, but is an alter ego dwelling in their own breasts.

For practical purposes a protest is needed against the application of ‘ the irony of Fate’, or of ‘irony ’ as short for that, to every trivial oddity:—But the pleasant note changed to something almost bitter as he declared his fear that before them lay a ‘fight for everything we hold

dear ’—a sentence that the groundlings

by a curious irony were the loudest in

cheering (oddly enough)./It would be

an irony of fate, according to many

members, tf Mr Chamberlain were

elected to succeed Mr Balfour, for it

was his father who dealt the first blow

at Mr Balfour's ascendency (inter-

esting)./* The irony of the thing’ said the dairyman who now owns the business ‘lies in the fact that after I began to sell good wholesome butter in place of this adulterated mixture, my sales fell off 75 per cent.’ (‘It’s a rum thing that. . . seems almost adequate). The irony of fate is, in fact, to be classed now as a HACK- NEYED PHRASE.

irrecognizable, un-. The second is recommended; see IN- & UN-.

irrefragable. Accent the second (iré’fragabl).

irrefutable. For pronunciation see REFUTABLE.

irrelevance, -cy. The first is recommended 3 see -cr, -cy.

irrelevant. It is stated in the OED, which does not often volunteer such remarks, & which is sure to have documentary evidence, that ‘a frequent blunder is irrevalent’; that form, however, does not get into print once for a hundred times that it is said; but it is not difficult, with a little fishing, to extract it from ladies; cf. ANEMONE. The word is one of those that we all know the meaning of, but seldom trouble to connect with their derivations—a state of mind commoner with Englishmen than with other people because so many of our words are borrowed that we are accustomed to apparently arbitrary senses. It is worth remembering that relevant & relieving are the same word; that, presumably, is irrelevant which does not relieve or assist the problem in hand by throwing any light upon it. IRRELEVANT ALLUSION. We all know the people—for they are the majority, & probably include our particular selves—who cannot carry
