page: 297

+ on the ordinary business of everyday talk without the use of phrases containing a part that is appropriate & another that is pointless or worse; the two parts have associated themselves together in their minds as making up what somebody has said, & what others as well as they will find familiar, & they have the sort of pleasure in producing the combination that a child has in airing a newly acquired word. There is indeed a certain charm in the grownup man’s boyish ebullience, not to be restrained by thoughts of relevance from letting the exuberant phrase jet forth. And for that charm we put up with it when one draws our attention to the methodical by telling us there is method in the madness, though method & not madness is all there is to see, when another’s every winter is the winter of his discontent, when a third cannot complain of the light without calling it religious as well as dim, when for a fourth nothing can be rotten except in the state of Denmark, or when a fifth, asked whether he does not owe you 1/6 for that cabfare, owns the soft impeachment. Other phrases of the kind will be found in the article HACKNEYED PHRASES. A slightly fuller examination of a single example may be useful. The phrase to leave severely alone has two reasonable uses—one in the original sense of to leave alone as a method of severe treatment, i.e. to send to Coventry or show contempt for; & the other in contexts where severely is to be interpreted by contraries—to leave alone by way not of punishing the object, but of avoiding consequences for the subject. The straightforward meaning, & the ironical, are both good; anything between them, in which the real meaning is merely to leave alone, & severely is no more than an echo, is pointless & vapid & in print intolerable. Examples follow: (1, straightforward) You must show him, by leaving him severely alone, by putting him into a moral Coventry,

+ your detestation of the crime; (2, ironical) Fish of prey do not appear to relish the sharp spines of the stickleback, & usually seem to leave them severely alone; (8, pointless) Austria forbids children to smoke in public places; & in German schools & military colleges there are laws upon the subject; France, Spain, Greece, & Portugal, leave the matter severely alone. It is obvious at once how horrible the faded jocularity of N° 3 is in print; &, though things like it come crowding upon one another in most conversation, they are not very easy to find in newspapers & books of any merit; a small gleaning of them follows:— The moral, as Alice would say, appeared to be that, despite its difference an degree, an obvious essential in the right kind of education had been equally lacking to both these girls (as Alice, or indeed as you or I, might say)./Resignation became a virtue of necessity for Sweden (If you do what you must with a good grace, you make a virtue of necessity; without make, a virtue of necessity is meaningless)./I strongly advise the single working-man who would become a successful backyard poultrykeeper to ignore the advice of Punch, & to secure a useful helpmate./The beloved lustige Wien [merry Vienna} of his youth had suffered a sea-change. The green glacis . . . was blocked by ranges of grand new buildings (Ariel must chuckle at the odd places in which his sea change turns up)./ Many of the celebrities who in that most frivolous of watering-places do congregate./When about to quote Sir Oliver Lodge’s tribute to the late leader, Mr Law drew, not a dial, but what was obviously a penny memorandum book from his pocket (You want to mention that Mr Bonar Law took a notebook out of his pocket; but pockets are humdrum things; how give a literary touch? call it a poke? no, we can better that; who was it drew what from his poke? why, Touchstone. a dial, to be sure! & there you are). L3
