page: 298

irremovabie.

So spelt, not -vea- ;

see -ABLE.

irrespective(ly), adv. When of does

not follow, the adverb still takes

-ly: Mercy that places the marks of

its avour absoluiely & irrespectively

upon whom it pleases. When of

follows, the modern tendency is to

drop -ly in the adverb (cf. regard-

less), as in All were huddled together, irrespective of age & sex; see Un- IDIOMATIC -LY; but good writers perhaps retain the -ly in sentences where irrespective might be taken for an adjective agreeing with the subject & meaning not taking account, whereas what is desired is an adverb meaning without account taken; so He values them, irrespectively of the practical conveniences which their triumph may obtain for him (quoted from Matthew Arnold, who would doubtless have refused to drop the -ly here). This rather fine (if not imaginary) point of idiom does not practically affect the meaning of a passage, but does imply a view of the exact meaning & construction of the word irrespective—the view, namely, that it does not mean careless & does not agree with a person.

irresponsive, un-. The second is recommended; see IN- & UN-.

irretentive, un-. The first is recommended; see IN- & UN-,

irridescent. A wrong spelling for IRIDESCENT.

irrigate makes

-gable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

is. 1. Is & are between variant numbers. 2. Is & are in multiplication table. 3. Is auxiliary & copulative. 4, Is after compound subject. 5. Is, or has, nothing to do with. 1. Is & are between subject & complement of different numbers. What are wanted are not small cottages, but larger houses with modern conveniences./The plausible suggestions to the contrary so frequently put forward is an endeavour to kill two birds with one stone./In the first

example the two ares should be is;

in the second, is should be are; for

discussion see ARE, Is. Mistakes are especially common with the word what: What is really at issue are not questions of . . ./What is needed are a few recognized British corporations. For these wrong forms, see WHAT.

2. Is & are in the multiplication table. Five times siæ is, or are, thirty? The subject of the verb is not times, but siz, the meaning of the subject being ‘six reckoned five times’. Before we know whether is or are is required, then, we must decide whether siz is a singular noun, the name of a quantity, or a plural adjective agreeing with a suppressed noun; does it mean ‘the quantity six’, or does it mean ‘six things’? That question each of us can answer, perhaps, for himself, but no-one for other people; it is therefore equally correct to say twice two is four & twice two are four. Moreover, as the two are equally correct, so they appear (OED, s.v. time) to be about equally old; four times six was plural as long ago as 1380, & ten times two was singular in 1425.

3. Confusion between auxiliary & copulative uses. The risk of cards being lost or mislaid under such circumstances is considerable, & great inconvenience A experienced by any workman to whom this accident occurs. This mistake of leaving the reader to supply an is of one kind out of a previous ts of another kind is discussed under BE 5.

4. Is after compound subjects. The Allies are prepared to retire if & when proper pledges & security is given./Their lives, their liberties, & their religion is in danger. In both these is should be are; they seem to point to a mistaken theory that, when the parts of a compound subject differ in number, the verb follows the nearest; that might reasonably, though it hardly does in fact, hold for or-groups (whether we or she is right); but it is entirely
