page: 299

+ wrong for and-groups, which always require a plural verb unless they are, like bread & butter, compound words rather than mere groups. See also NUMBER. 5. Is, or has, nothing to do with. Sir,—Why do I see today, in a celebrated morning contemporary, the following sentence: * The trouble is nothing to do with education’ (Italics mine)? The facts are, first, that has nothing to do with requires no defence, secondly, that is nothing to do with is said by many to be indefensible, & thirdly, that is nothing to do with is nevertheless, if not far commoner than the other, yet very common. When a form of speech that one regards as a corruption gains wide currency, the question whether one should tilt at it is not quite simple. If it is an obvious outrage on grammar, yes; if, on the other hand, its wrongness is of the kind that has to be pointed out before it is noticed, & its hold on the public strong enough to take a good deal of loosening, then perhaps it is better to buttress it up than to tilt at it. This, then, is an attempt to justify 7s.

Most of us, when we have occasion to repel an impertinent question, & are not in the mood for weighing words in the scales of grammar, feel that That is nothing to do with you expresses our feelings better than That has &c.; that is to say, the instinctive word is is, not has. But, says the champion of grammar, instinctive or not, it is a mere wrong mixture of two right ways of saying the thing: That is nothing to you, & That has nothing to do with you. He is very likely right, but it is not quite so certain as he thinks; & the popular phrase that is on its trial for impropriety should always be given the benefit of the doubt if there is one. Now it does not seem impossible that It is nothing to do with may have arisen from sentences in which to do has acquired the status of an adjective meaning concerned or connected; such sentences would

+ be: There is nothing to do with prisons that he cannoi tell you. A Wife’s Secret’ (nothing to do with the old play of that name)./ Anything io do with spiritualism is interesting. In the first of those nothing to do means not a single thing concerned, nothing being a noun; & in the second it means not at all connected, nothing being an adverb. No doubt this use of io do is elliptical for having to do; but the point is that it gives us a different construction for nothing or any corresponding word, which here is not the object of the omitted having, as it is of has in Jt has nothing to do with, but is either the noun with which the supposed having agrees or an adverb negativing it. On this theory, the two forms may be paraphrased thus: Ii has nothing to do with you = It has no function to perform with you; & Ii is nothing to do with you=It is not a matter concerned with you; the first is simpler to arrive at than the second, but the second is not impossible. The precisian who likes an easily analysable sentence, & the natural man who likes to say the thing that springs to his lips, had better agree to live & let live; & that they will do the more readily if the first can believe that the two ways of putting the thing differ not only in the visible distinction between has & is, but also in the invisible one between two or more constructions of nothing. It may fairly be maintained that there are three right ways of saying the thing: It is nothing to you; It has nothing to do with you; It is nothing to do with you: instead of two right ways & a wrong.

For pronunciation see

isagogic. GREEK G.

-ISE) (-IZE. On the general question of the spelling of verbs ending in the sound -iz, see -1zz. If -ize is accepted as the normal form, there are still a number of verbs in which the question between the two spellings does not arise, but -ise is
