page: 300

for various reasons necessary. The

more important of these are here

given: advertise, apprise, chastise,

circumcise, comprise, compromise,

demise, despise, devise, disfranchise,

disguise, enfranchise, enterprise, excise, exercise, improvise, incise, premise, supervise, surmise, surprise.

island, isle. The two are etymologically unconnected, the first being native & having no right to its -s-, & the second being Latin by origin.

-ISM & -ITY. Many adjectives have each ending appended & give two words of different meaning. Occasionally choice between the two is doubtful. Roughly, the word in -ity usually means the quality of being what the adjective describes, or concretely an instance of the quality, or collectively all the instances; & the word in -ism means the disposition to be what the adjective describes, or concretely an act resulting from that disposition, or collectively all those who feel it. A few of the more notable pairs follow, to enable the reader to judge how far this rough distinction will serve him in deciding where the difference is less established:— BARBARITY & barbarism; catholicity & catholicism; deity & deism; fatality & fatalism; Yormauiry & formalism; humanity & HUMANISM; ideality & idealism; latinity & LATINISM; liberality & liberalism; modernity & modernism; reality & realism; spirituality & spiritualism; universality & universalism. isolate makes

-lable,

-tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

Israelite. See HEBREW. issue, v. 1. I. makes issuable; see Mure E. 2. The military construction, to i. a person with a thing (The Company was issued with two Sas-masks per man), on the analogy of supply & provide, though much popularized by the war, is not to be recommended; see ANALOGY, -IST, -ALIST, -TIST, -YIST, &c. The use of the suffix -ist in English

is so wide & various that any full

discussion of it is not here possible.

But there are (A) some words whose

exact form is still uncertain &

should be fixed, & there are (B)

others that are both established &

badly formed, so that there is

danger, unless their faultiness is pointed out, of their being used as precedents for new formations.

A

agricultur(al)ist, constitution(al)ist, conversation(al)ist, education(al)ist, & others of the kind. Either form is legitimate; the shorter, besides being less cumbersome, usually corresponds more naturally to the sense; expert in agriculture (-turist), for instance, is simpler than expert in the agricultural (-turalist); but in constitution(al)ist, perhaps, knowledge of or devotion to what is constitutional, rather than of or to the constitution, is required. Unless there is a definite advantage of this kind in the -al- form, the other should be preferred: agriculturist, constitutionalist, conversationist, educationist.

accompan(y)ist. Neither form is satisfactory; the adding of -ist to verbs other than those in -ize is unusual (conformist is an example), & it is a pity that accompanier was not taken; but of the two -nyist (cf. copyist) is better than -nist: accompanyist.

voluntar(y)ist. The -y- should be retained. The analogy of militarist is deceptive, because that has the Latin militaris to justify it; there is no Latin voluntaris, & the Latin voluniarius objects to losing two syllables instead of one: voluntaryist. pacif(ic)ist. It is perhaps oversanguine to class this among those still awgóting decision, the barbarous pacifistthas taken so strong a hold; but there are still a faithful few who resist it. It is formed on pacific, meaning believer in pacific methods; the -f- in pacifist, with -ic- left out, has no meaning, & pacist would have
