page: 301

+ been a better word. The omission of an essential syllable by what is called syncope (as in idolatry, syncopated from idololatria) belongs in English to the primitive stages of the language, & is not now practised; symbology, for symbolology, is an unprepossessing exception; to change pacificist to pacifist is no better than to change deteriorate & authoritative, as is often done by the uneducated, to deteriate & authoritive, & to acquiesce in such corruptions at a time when general education is equal to realizing their nature is to introduce a principle of swift decay into the language. Pacifist has been defended on the formula pacifist: pacific:: philanthropist: philanthropic; philanthropist, however, is formed not from philanthropic, but from philanthropia, the Greek for philanthropy; & actual or possible Greek & Latin nouns in -ía are among the commonest bases for -ist nouns; there is no possible Latin pacifia nor English noun pi’cify¥ to account similarly for pacifist. Another plea, that pacifist is from French pacifiste, is equally unsound; the word, which is not in a popular French dictionary dated 1911, is one of the international kind to which each language gives its own normal form; the responsibility cannot be deported across the Channel.

ego(t)ist. The -t- is abnormal; but both forms are established, & a useful differentiation is possible if both are retained; see EGO(T)ISM.

B

analyst, tronist, separatist, & tobacconist, are open to objection, though they are all, except perhaps the

least offending of them, aronist,

firmly established.

analyst results from the mistaking

of analyse for one of those -ize verbs

from which so many nouns in -ist

are formed; analyse, derived from

analysis, should itself have been

analysize, & then analysist would

have been correct; given analyse,

+ analyser should have been the noun. ironist supplies the need of a word to match satirist & humourist. The choice, if it was to end in -ist, lay between ironicalist, tronicist, ironyist, & ironist, of which the last is technically the least justifiable. If regarded as made on the English noun irony, the -y ought not to be omitted; if Greek is to be called in, the Greek verb & noun ought to have been etronizo & eironia, whereas they are eironeuo & eironeia; philanthropist & telegraphist do not obviate the objection, because they are made not on philanthropy & telegraphy, but on Greek philanthropia & English telegraph.

separatist, like all -ist words made on other verbs than those in -ize (conformist, computist, controvertist, speculatist, are the best of the few quoted by the OED), is at once felt to be an uncomfortable & questionable word; butit & (non)conformist, having attained to real currency, may unfortunately be imitated. Separationist would have been the right form.

tobacconist, like egotist, has no right to the consonant inserted before -tst.

isthmus. PI. -uses; see -US.

it. 1. Omission of anticipatory it owing to confused analysis. 2. Other mistakes with anticipatory 7%. 3. Obscure or wrong pronoun reference. 4. Its) (its.

The pronoun is so much used in various idiomatic constructions that considerable knowledge, instinctive or acquired, of the ins & outs of syntax is needed to secure one against lapses. The collecting of a few specimens, & comments on them, may put writers on their guard.

1. First, there is a present tendency to omit in relative clauses the anticipatory it, i.e. the it that heralds a deferred subject as in It is useless to complain. An example is: The House of Commons is always ready to extend the indulgence which Ais a sort of precedent that the mover &

seconder of the Address should ask for.
