page: 302

If we build up this sentence from its

elements, the necessity of it will

appear, & the reader can then apply

the method to the other examples.

That the mover should ask for indul-

gence is a precedent; that, rear-

ranged idiomatically, becomes It is

a precedent that the mover should ask

for indulgence; observe that it there

does not mean indulgence, but means

that the mover should ask for indul-

gence, it being placed before the

predicate (is a precedent) as a har-

binger announcing that the real

subject, which it temporarily repre-

sents, is coming along later. Ii is

a precedent that the mover should ask for indulgence; the House extends

the indulgence; there are the two elements; to combine them we substitute which for indulgence in the clause that is to be subordinate, & place this which at the beginning instead of at the end of that clause: the House extends the indulgence which ...3 now, if it had meant indulgence, i.e. the same as which now means, it would have become superfluous; but, as has been mentioned, it means something quite different, & is just as much wanted in the compound sentence as in the simple one. A parallel will make the point clear: A meeting was held, & it was my duty to attend this; whether which or & this is placed at the beginning of the second member instead of the present arrangement, no-one would dream of dropping it & writing which was my duty to atiend, or & this was my duty to aliend, After this rather laboured exposition it will suffice to add to the more or less similar examples that follow mere hints of the essential construction:—The debate on the Bill produced a tangle of arguments which N required all Mr Chamberlain’s skill to untie. Which means tangle; the missing it means to untie which. Here, however, if an it had been inserted after untie, which would have been subject to required instead of object to untie, so that the sentence as it stands is perhaps a

muddle between two possibilities./

It has already cost the 100 millions

which A was originally estimated

would be the whole cost. The missing

it means that which would be the whole

cost (that the conjunction, not the

pronoun)./Faith in drugs has no

longer any monetary motive such as A

has been asserted was formerly the

case. Without it, this implies as one

of the elements 4 monetary motive has been asserted was the case./The great bulk of the work done in the world is work that is vital should be done. Elements: (a) That certain work should be done is vital, or It is vital that certain work should be done 3 (b) Most work done is that work. The missing it means not work, as that does, but that whi’ch work should be done./What N was realized might happen has happened. Elements: It was realized that a thing might happen; that thing has happened.

At the end of the article Horr the common omission of it with is hoped is illustrated.

2. Secondly, certain points have to be remembered about the anticipatory it besides the fact that it may be wrongly omitted:—Jn connexion with the article by » it may be worth recalling the naive explanation given to Dickens by one of his contributors. Anticipatory it heralds a deferred subject; it cannot be used when there is no subject to herald; where is the subject here? explanation is engaged as object of recalling; recalling is governed by worth; worth is complement to may be; it neither has any meaning of its own nor represents anything else, The author might possibly claim that the construction was a true apposition like that in ‘ He’s a good fellow, that °’, & that a comma after recalling would put all to rights; but anyone who can read aloud can hear that that is not true. The real way to correct it is to write worth while instead of worth, which releases recalling to serve as the true subject; see WORTH for other such mistakes. fs It is such wild statements as that Mr
