page: 303

+ Sandlands has made that does harm to the Food Reform cause. By strict grammatical analysis does would be right; but idiom has decided that in the it . . . that construction, when that is the relative, it takes its number not from its actual antecedent it, but from the word represented by it—here statements./He was a Norfolk man, & it was in a Norfolk village where I first ran across him. There is no doubt that idiom requires that instead of where, & the sense of the idiomatic form is plain; i that I ran across means my running across; my first running across him was in a village; the use of where, besides being unidiomatic, is also less reasonable; where is equivalent to in which, & if in which or its equivalent is used we require a Norfolk village & not in a Norfolk village: & it was a Norfolk village in which I &c. The use of in a village together with where is analogous to the pleonasms discussed under Haziness./It is impossible to enter on the political aspects of Mr ——’s book, but A must suffice to say that he suggests with great skill the warring interests. The reader of that at once thinks something is wrong, & on reflection asks whether the anticipatory if, which means fo enter &c., can be ¢ understood ’ again before must suffice with the quite different meaning of to say &c. It cannot; but some more or less parallel types will show that doubts are natural. Here are (A) two in which the understanding of it, though the subjects are different, is clearly permissible: Tt is dangerous to guess, but humiliating to confess ignorance./It must please him to succeed & pain him to fail. And here are (B) two that will not do: It is dishonest to keep silence, & may save us to speak./It cannot help us to guess, & is better to watt & see. The distinction that emerges on examination is this: in the A examples is, & must, are common to both halves; in the B examples it is otherwise, is being answered to

+ by may, & cannot by is; it appears that it may be understood, even if the real subject is changed, when the verb or auxiliary is common to both parts, but not otherwise. Tf, in the sentence we are criticizing, & sufficient were substituted for but must suffice, all would be well. 3. Examples of it & its used when the reference of the pronoun is obscure or confused, or its use too previous or incorrect. These faults occur with it as with all pronouns, & are discussed generally under Pronouns; a few examples are here printed without comment:— This local option in the amount of outdoor relief given under the Poor Law has always operated inequitably & been one of the greatest blots on the system. To extend it to the first great benefit under the Insurance Act will greatly lessen its usefulness./ Again, unconsciousness in the person himself of what he is about, or of what others think of him, is also a great heightener of the sense of absurdity. It makes it come the fuller home to us from his insensibility to it./Viscount Wolverhampton has resigned the office of Lord President, & his Majesty the King has been pleased to accept it./ Where a settlement is effected a memorandum of the same, with a report of its proceedings, is sent by the Board to the Minister of Labour./ Both these lines of criticism are taken simultaneously in a message which its special correspondent sends from Laggan, in Alberta, to the Daily Mail this morning.

4. The possessive of it, like that of who, & the absolute forms in -s of her, their, our, & your, has no apostrophe: its, hers, theirs, ours, yours, not it’s &e.

itacism. See TECHNICAL TERMS,

ITALIAN sounps. A rough notion of how Italian words should be said is sometimes needed. Certain consonant peculiarities are all that require notice; for the vowels it suffices that they have the continental values, not the English.
