page: 304

The letters or letter-groups with

which mistakes may be made are:

c, ce, ch, ci; g, gg, gh, gi, gli, gn, gu;

sc, sch, sci; Zz, zz. If a few words,

most of them to be met in English

writing, are taken as types, the

sounds may easily be remembered:—

cicerone (chiche-); c, & cc, before

e & 1,=ch

Chianti (ki-); ch always=k

cioccolata (ch6k-); ci before a, 0, U,

often=ch, the i merely showing

that c is soft Gesu (ja-); g, & gg, before e or C= ghetto (gé-); gh always=g Giotto (j6-); gi before a, o, u, often =

j, cf. ci above. intaglio (-ahlyd); gli often=ly bagni (bah’nyé); gn=ny Guelfo (gwé-); gu always= gow fascista (-shis-); sc before e or i=sh scherzo (sk-); sch always=sk sciolto (shél-); sci before Ok, Os. UB

often=sh, cf. ci above scherzo (-tsd); z=ts pizzicato (pitsi-) 3 zz usually = ts mezzo (mě’dzō); zz rarely = dz

ITALICS. During the war many persons less conversant with the art of writing than with strategy or artillery or surgery or aeronautics or blockade law or food supply have, to our great advantage, occupied much space, instructively, in the magazines & newspapers. But a regrettable by-product of their activities has been a relapse into primitive methods of soliciting attention. Newspaper columns filled with a mosaic of roman & italic type that would have horrified the prewar editor have grown familiar. The practised writer is aware that his business is to secure prominence for what he regards as the essence of his communication by so marshalling his sentences that they shall lead up to a climax, or group themselves round a centre, or be worded with different degrees of impressiveness as the need of emphasis varies; he knows too that it is an insult to the reader’s intelligence to admonish him periodically by a change

304

of type, like a bad teacher imploring

his boys to attend for a moment,

that he cannot safely go to sleep

just now. But to those who, how-

ever competent on their special sub-

ject, have not had enough experience

of writing to have learnt these rudi-

ments it comes as natural to italicize

every tenth sentence or so as it

comes to the letter-writing school-

girl to underline whatever she enjoys

recording. These mosaics have on

discreet readers exactly the repellent

effect that interjections had on

Landor: ‘I read warily; & when-

ever I find the writings of a lady,

the first thing I do is to cast my

eyes along her pages to see whether

I am likely to be annoyed by the traps & spring-guns of interjections, & if I happen to espy them I do not leap the paling ’.

Space cannot be afforded for what would be the only adequate illustration, the reproduction of a whole mosaic article; a few short extracts must suffice; but it should be borne in mind that these are mostly taken from long articles that contain several other examples of the same trick. The right uses of italics will be afterwards classified & illustrated.

EXAMPLES OF ILL-ADVISED

ITALICS

In comparison with this welding of valour with justice, the so-called ideal of total disarmament is shallow. There is a way of peace that is at once manly & sure. By far the deeper change lies in turning military institutions to nobler & saner ends./All human effort that creates values is Labour, & the highest values are not created by muscle. The highest values are created, always have been created, & always will be, by Mind. And working men as well as others recognize that fact./It is not merely that the Allied Powers are pledged to the reconstitution of Serbia because of her signal services to their cause & the sufferings of her intrepid people; their interest emphatically demands that past amor-
