page: 305

+ celments by Turk & Austrian should be wiped out, & wiped out once & for all. And this is the Allies’ interest because .. ./The change in the point of view is fundamental. The primary necessity is to recognize the change, & to realize that the proposed function of a League of Nations, at once grand & simple, is something quite distinct from the function of a Power-group formed under the conditions of the Old Order./It is not, however, the length of the road that matters so much as the rate at which the road is covered. And the rate depends mainly upon the impetus, & on the extent to which the impetus may become general. An impetus of this kind does not spring from party programmes. It springs from change in underlying social philosophy. Such a change has been initiated by the War./A great military menace cannot again rise in Central Europe so long as the inland seas are kept open. Any steps, however insidious or gradual, again to close them must be vetoed. In the past neglect of this precaution was a profound oversight in British naval policy.

RIGHT USES

The true uses of italics are very different from this of recommending to attention whole sentences whose importance, if they are important, ought to be plain without them. And these real uses are definite enough to admit of classification. Some of them may be merely mentioned as needing no remark: a whole piece may be in italics because italics are decorative; text & notes may be distinguished by roman & italic type just as they may by different-sized types; quotations used as chapter-headings, prefaces, dedications, & other material having a special status, are entitled to italics. Apart from such decorative & distinctive functions, too obvious to need illustration, italics have definite work to do when a word or two are so printed in the body of a

+ roman-type passage. They pull up the reader & tell him not to read heedlessly on, or he will miss some peculiarity in the italicized word. The particular point he is to notice is left to his own discernment; the italics may be saying to him:—

a. ‘This word, & not the whole phrase of which it forms part, contains the point’: It is not only little learning that has been exposed. to disparagement.

b. ‘< This word is in sharp contrast to the one you may be expecting’: It would be an ultimate benefit to the cause of morality to prove that honesty was the worst policy.

ec. ‘ These two words are in sharp contrast’: But, if the child never can have a dull moment, the man never need have one.

d. ‘If the sentence were being spoken, there would be a stress on this word’: The wrong man knows that if he loses there is no consolation prize of conscious virtue awaiting him.

e. ‘ This word wants thinking over to yield its full content’: Childenvy is only a form of the eternal yearning for something better than this (i.e., the adult’s position with all its disillusionments).

f. ‘This word is not playing its ordinary part, but is a word as such’: Here will is wrongly used instead of shall.

g. ‘ This is not an English word or phrase’: The maxim that deludes us is the progenies vitiosior of one to which the Greeks allowed a safer credit.

h. ‘ This word is the title of a book or a newspaper, or the name of a fictitious character’: The Vienna correspondent of The Times reports that . . ./The man in Job who maketh collops of fat upon his flanks/A situation demanding Mark Tapley.

Such are the true uses of italics. To italicize whole sentences or large parts of them as a guarantee that some portion of what one has written is really worth attending to is a
