page: 308

nautical parlance, in the parlance of

the literary critics, &c.

patois, as used in English, means

nothing different from dialect, &

therefore, like argot, should not be

used except about France. The

French distinguish two stages;

dialects exist until a common liter-

ary language is evolved from them,

after which, if they still linger, they

become patois; but in English we let them retain their title.

shop describes business talk indulged in out of business hours, or any unseasonable technical phraseology, & is thus distinct, in the special-vocabulary sense, from jargon, cant, & slang.

slang is the diction that results from the favourite game among the young & lively of playing with words & renaming things & actions; some invent new words, or mutilate or misapply the old, for the pleasure of novelty, & others catch up such words for the pleasure of being in the fashion; many slang words & phrases perish, a few establish themselves; in either case, during probation they are accounted unfit for literary use. S. is also used in the sense of jargon (1), & with two distinctions: in general it expresses less dislike & imputation of ugliness than jargon; & it is naturally commoner about sporting vocabularies golf s. &c.) than jargon, because many of the terms used in sports are Slang in the main sense also. vernacular describes the words that have been familiar to us as long as we can remember, the homely part of the language, in contrast with the terms that we have consciously acquired. The vernacular was formerly common, & is still occasional, for English as opposed to any foreign language; & by an unessential limitation, it is often applied specially to rustic speech & confused with dialect. jarl. Pronounce y-. Jasmine, jessamine. The OED describes the 2nd as ‘ another form of jasmine’; jasmine is recommended.

jaundice, jaunt. Of the two pro-

nunciations (jah-, jaw-), the OED gives precedence to the first in both

words, |

jaunty. The OED recognizes only jah-, & not jaw-, for the sound. French gentil is the source.

jawbation. See JOBATION.

Jeames. See SOBRIQUETS.

Jeanie. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Ye

jehad. See JIHAD.

Jehu. See SOBRIQUETS.

jejune. Accented on the last by the OED, but often now jëē’jõon by RECESSIVE ACCENT. |

Jemmy. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -y.

je ne sais quoi. See FRENCH WORDS.

Jenny. So spelt; see -Ey, -IE, -y. |

jeopardy. Pronounce jé’pardi.

Jerry. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -y.

jessamine. See JASMINE.

Jessie. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -y.

jetsam, jettison. See FLOTSAM. Jetsam is the goods, jettison is, as a noun, the action.

jeu &c. See FRENCH worps.

jeunesse dorée. See FRENCH WORDS.

Jew. For J., Israelite, &c., see HEBREW.

jewel makes -lled, -lling, -ller; see -LL-, -L-.

jewel(le)ry. The longer is the commercial & popular form, the shorter the rhetorical & poetic. The pronunciation is always jōo'ŭri.

jibe. See GIBE.

jihad, je-. Until recently the second spelling was usual; but the OED gives the first as the right. Jill. See cr. JINGLES, or the unintended repetition of the same word or similar sounds, are dealt with in the article REPETITION OF WORDS & SOUNDS. A few examples of the sort of carelessness that, in common courtesy to his readers, a writer should remove before printing may be given here:—

The sport of the air is still far from free from danger./Mr Leon Dominian has amassed for us a valuable mass of statistics./The situation had so far developed so little that nothing useful can be said about it, save that
