page: 309

+ so far the Commander-in-Chief was satisfied./We can now look forward hopefully to further steps forward./ Market stability is a necessary condition of industry under modern conditions./The figures I have obtained put a very different complexion on the subject than that generally obtaining./Most of them get rid of them more or less completely./The observation of the facts of the geological succession of the forms of life./He served his apprenticeship to statesmanship./I awaited a belated train./Their invalidity was caused by a technicality./In such a union there is no probability of stability./The earliest lists, still so sadly & probably irretrievably imperfect (for this commonest form of the jingle, see under -ty)./Hardworking folk should participate in the pleasures of leisure in goodly measure.

jingo. PI. -oes, see -o(£)S 1.

jinn(ee). See GENIE.

jiu-jitsu. See JU-JUTSU.

job, v.,=prod &c. See JAB. _jobation, jawb-. The first is the right form; from Job came the verb jobe to reprove, common in the 17th & 18th centuries, & from that jobation.

jockey, n. Pl. -eys.

jockey, v. Forinflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 2.

jocko, chimpanzee. PI. -os, see -O(E)s.

jocose, jocular, &c. These & several other words—arch, facetious, flippant, jesting, merry, pleasant (in the archaic sense), & waggish—are difficult to separate from each other; the dictionaries establish no very clear or serviceable distinctions, tending to explain each by a selection of the rest. They are marked off from funny, droll, & others, by the fact that in the latter the effect, but in these the intent, is the main point; that is funny &c. which amuses, but that is jocular &c. which is meant (or, if a person, means) to amuse. In the following

+ remarks no definition of the whole meaning of any word is attempted; attention is drawn merely to the points of difference between the one in question & some or all of the others. All of them are usable in contrast with serious, but for some an opposite may be found more appropriate than that for the present purpose, & that word is given in brackets.

arch (opp. severe) implies the imputation of roguery of some sort; the imputation is ironical, or the offence is to be condoned; the meaning is conveyed chiefly by look, tone, or expression. An arch look, girl, insinuation. facetious (opp. glum) implies a desire to be amusing; formerly a laudatory word, but now suggesting ill-timed levity or intrusiveness or the wish to shine. A facetious remark, fellow, interruption. flippant (opp. earnest) implies mockery of what should be taken seriously, & want of consideration for others’ feelings. A flippant suggestion, young man; f. treatment. jesting (opp. serious) differs from the rest in having perhaps no distinctive implication. A jesting mood, parson, proposal. jocose (opp. grave) implies something ponderous, as of Adam & Eve’s elephant wreathing his lithe proboscis to make them mirth. A jocose manner, old boy, description. jocular (opp. literal) very commonly implies the evasion of an issue by a joke, or the flying of a kite to test the chances. A jocular reply, writer, offer.

merry (opp. melancholy) implies good spirits & the disposition to take things lightly. A merry laugh, child, tale. pleasant (arch. ; opp. stiff) implies rallying, especially addressed by superiors to inferiors, as a means of establishing genial relations. Now rare, except in pleasantry. waggish implies on the one hand willingness to make a fool of oneself & on the other fondness for making
