page: 310

+ fools of others. A waggish trick, schoolboy, disposition.

Johnny. So spelt; see -ry, -IE, -y.

jollify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

jollily, jolly adv. As a slang substitute for very (a j. good hiding; you know j. well) the adverb is jolly; in other uses (he smiled j. enough) it is jollily. See -LILY.

jongleur. See FRENCH WORDS.

jonquil. The OED gives precedence to the older pronunciation ji’ngkwil.

jostle has ¢ silent; see PRONUNCIA- TION, Silent t. journal. Objections are often made | to the extension of this to other periodicals than the daily papers. But ‘Our weekly journals o’er the land abound °’ (Crabbe, 1785) shows that it is much too late to object. Those who do so have presumably just learnt the connexion of journal with L. dies; for, if it had been long familiar to them, they would surely have been aware also that language is full of such extensions. May a woman not be said to cry till she howls? are there no clerks but those in Holy Orders? is a milliner’s box no longer to be a band-box? And, to come back to dies, is it a blunder to call London to Moscow a journey, or a pedantry to call it anything else

journey, n. PI. -eys.

journey, v. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 2. ' joust, just. Though just (ju-) is ‘the historical English spelling ’ (OED), joust (j00-) was preferred by Johnson & used by Scott, & is consequently now more intelligible & to be preferred. jubilate. Pronounce -lah’ti. Judenhetze. Pronounce ydo’denhétze (four syllables). judgematical. See Facrerious FORMATIONS, judg(e)ment. See Mure x for the principle governing the retention &

omission of e in derivatives, viz, that it is dropped only before vowels. Modern usage, however, favours judgment; but we are all familiar with judgement in the Bible (R.V. as well as A.V.), & the OED prefers the older & more reasonable spelling. Judgement is therefore here recommended, & the similar but slightly less important words abridg(e)ment, acknowledg(e)ment, fledg(e)ling, & lodg(e)ment, would naturally conform & keep the e. The question is complicated by the omission of the e in several proper names —Sedgwick, Hodgkin, Edgecumbe, &e.

judicial, judicious. The first has to do with judges & lawcourts & legal judgements, the second with the mental faculty of judgement. Judicial murder is murder perpetrated by means of a legal trial; judicious murder is murder that is well calculated to serve the murderer’s interests. The distinction is clear enough, except that judicial has one use that brings it near judicious; this use is impartial or such as might be expected of a judge or a lawcourt, applied to such words as view, conduct, care, investigation, to which judicious is also applicable in the sense of wise or sagacious or prudent. In the following example, one may suspect, but cannot be sure, that the writer has meant one word & written the other: The chapter on the relations between Holland & Belgium after the war in connexion with a suggested revision of the treaty of 1839 is fairly written in a judicious spirit. Roughly, judicial = of a judge or lawcourt, judicious = exhibiting judgement. For other such pairs, see Pairs & SNARES, jugular. The large dictionaries (OED, Century, Standard) all want us to say joog-; but for ordinary mortals, familiar from childhood with the jugular vein, it is as much out of the question as to make k6’kain out of cocaine.
