page: 311

+ ju-jutsu, jiu-jitsu. The first is preferred in the OED & the Enc. Brit. jumbal, -ble. The name of the sweetmeat, an old word, is -al. Jumbo. Pl. -os, see -0(£)s 3.

jump. J. to the eye(s) is a bad Gauuicism (5). Examples:—The desperate discomfort of these places as living houses judged by our standards jumps to the eyes./How little there is essentially in common between Virgil & Isaiah jumps to the eye as we read the elever & tasteful paraphrase into Biblical language of the 4th Eclogue.

Junker. Pronounce yoo’ngker.

Juno. Pl. -os, see -0(E)s.

junta, junto. The first is the Spanish form, which is used in English also. Junto, pl. -os, see -0(E)s, is a corruption more used in English than -ta.

jupe. See FRENCH WORDS.

jurywoman. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

just, v. & n. See JOUST.

just, adv. 1. Just exactly is bad tautology. Mr Gladstone’s dearest friend in political life, who himself passed away just exactly half a century ago.

2. Just how many & similar indirect-question forms are Americanisms. Just what makes the best lodgement for oyster spawn has been greatly diseussed.

3. Frequent repetition of just is a danger. A running hand was just what the name says, handwriting at a run, written in a hurry, as so many people write today. The letters were at first, we might say, just like those capital letters.

4. Pronounce jist; a warning against the vulgarism jést is not superfluous.

justiciable. The word not being very common, those who use it should take care it is not printed justifiable.

justify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

juvenile makes juvenilely.

K kadi, C- is the usual spelling. Kaf(f)ir, Caffre. Kaffir is the now usual form, Caffre a more or less disused one, & Kafir (pron. kah-) is a more correct spelling. Kaiser. Pronounce kiz-. kale, kail. The first is treated by the OED as the standard form, & kail as a Scotch variant. The corresponding Southern-English word is borecole. kalendar, kalends. See CALENDAR.

kangaroo. For the parliamentary sense, See CLOSURE.

kaolin. Pronounce kah’-olin.

kartell. See CARTEL.

Katy, -ie. See -EY, -IE, -¥.

kedgeree. This is now the usual spelling.

keenness. So spelt.

kelpie, -py. The -ie is usual.

kelson, keel-. Pronounce kěl-; kel- is the older, & keel- a recent, speiling.

Kelt(ic). See CeLT(IC).

kennel makes -lled;

see -LL-, -L-.

kerb. See CURB.

kernel. As KENNEL.

kerosene, paraffin, petrol, petroleum. The popular use of the words is all that is here in question. Petroleum is the crude mineral oil; petrol, or petroleum spirit, is refined petroleum as used in motors; kerosene & paraffin (oil) are oils got by distillation from petroleum or coal or shale, kerosene being the usual name in America, & paraffin in England.

ketchup is the established spelling; formerly also catchup & catsup, of which the second at least is due to popular etymology. A Chinese or Malay word is said to be the source.

key, v. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 2. Khedive. Pronounce kidé’v.

khilafat. ISLAM AND THE KHILAFAT (headline). These formidable learned newspapers have no regard for the things which belong
