page: 312

to our peace; can they not leave us

our caliphate? See Dipacricism.

kiddy. So spelt; see -ry, -1n, -y.

kidnap makes -pped, -pping; see

-P-, -PP-,

kidney. Pl. -eys.

kiln. The OED puts first the pro-

nunciation without -n.

kilo-, milli-. In the metric system, kilo- means multiplied, & ° millidivided, by 1000; kilometer 1000 metres, millimeter 1/1000 of a metre; cf. DECA-, CENTI-.

kilty, Highlander,

So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

Kind, n. The irregular uses—Those k. of people, k. of startled, a k. of a shock—are easy to avoid when they are worth avoiding, i.e. in print; & nearly as easy to forgive when they deserve forgiveness, i.e. in hasty talk. Those k. of is a sort of inchoate compound, = those-like (Giz, such,=so-like); k. of startled= startled, like, or startied-like. A k. of a shock is both the least criticized & the least excusable of the three.

Kindly. Authors are kindly requested to note that Messrs only accept MSS. on the understanding that... Messrs may be kind in making the request, but did they really mean to boast of it? This misplacement is very common; for the ludicrous effect, compare the confusion between It is our PLEA- SURE & We have the pleasure. kindly, -lily. See -LILY. kinema(tograph). See CINEMA. king. Under King-of-Arms, the OED says ‘less correctly King-at- Arms’; but, as both phrases are shown by its quotations to have been in use at all periods, & as the at form is certainly the one familiar to people without special knowledge, insistence on the other seems pedantic. For the King of Beasts, Terrors, see SOBRIQUETS. kinglily. See -LILY. kinsfolk is plural without the addition of -S; cf. FOLK.

kirsch(wasser). Pronounce keér’sh-

(vahser).

Kitty. So spelt; see -ry, -IE, -y.

knee. The adjective from knock-

knees, broken knees, &c., is best

written with an apostrophe— knockknee’d &.; see -ED & ’p.

kneel. For kneeled & knelt, see -T & -ED.

knick-knack, nick-nack. The k. form is better, as preserving the connexion with knack, the parent word.

knife. For the verb &c., see -vE(D).

knight. For k. of industry, see Gaxuicisms; for k. of the rueful countenance, SOBRIQUETS.

knit(ted). Both forms are still in use for both the past tense & the past participle, but the short form is now unusual in the special sense of making with knitting-needles. She knit(ted), or had knit(ted), her brows, but she knitted or had knitted a pair of socks; a well-knit frame, but knitted goods in ordinary use, though knit goods survives in the trade. Knitten is a pseudo-archaism.

knock-knee’d. See KNEE.

knoll. Pronounce nōl. The word being chiefly literary, so that most of us have to guess its sound from its spelling, & the sound of final -oll being very variable (déll, 1ðll, MOll, NOU, Poll, against droll, roll, stroll, toll, & trail, among clear cases), it is regrettable that the rival spelling knole has not prevailed, but -ll seems now established. knout. The dictionaries give only nowt or noot; but the k- is sometimes sounded. knowledge. Pronounce nél-. The OED says that ndl- ‘ used by some, is merely a recent analytical pronunciation after know’; it is on the same level as often with the t sounded; see PRONUNCIATION, knowledgeable. So spelt. kopje. Pronounce ké’pi. koran. The OED gives korah’n precedence over kor’an, & has no
