page: 313

+ doubt chosen the winner. It quotes from Byron, however, And less to conquest than to Korans irust.

kosher. Pronounce k6-. kotow, ko-tow, kowtow. The dictionaries pronounce this kōtow’, & it is often printed ko-tow by way of showing that the first syllable is not to be weakened in the normal way, which would give kotow’. The real choice lies between both writing & pronouncing kowtow, & allowing the weakening to kotow’; for the word is now fairly common, & cannot possibly maintain under popular wear & tear the full vowel sound in the unaccented syllable; kotow (kotow’) is recommended.

kraal. Pronounce krahl.

kukri. Pronounce kòó’kri.

kyrie eleison. Of many competing pronunciations the OED prefers ker’ii ilā’ïson (seven syllables).

L

laager. Pronounce lah’ger.

label makes -lled &c. 3 see -LL-, -L-.

labial. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

labium. PI. -bia.

laboratory. The orthodox pronunciation -is J&’boratori; those who find four successive unaccented syllables trying do better to say labO’ratori than to cut down the orthodox to JA’bratri.

labo(u)r. Keep the -u-; but see -OUR &-or. L. makes labourite; see -ouUR- & -OR-.

Three syllables; see

labouredly. -EDLY.

lac, lakh. In its 15 quotations the OED shows 9 different spellings, but choice now lies between these two; & of the two it treats lac as preferable.

lace. The noun makes lacy, the verb laceable, but lacing; see MUTEE.

lacerate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE l, -OR.

laches is a singular noun, pronounced 1A’chiz, meaning negligence of certain kinds, rarely used with

+ a but often with the & no, & not requiring italics. Its formation is similar to that of riches (formerly lachesse, richesse), but not having become a popular word it has escaped being taken for a plural. lachrym-. The true spelling for all the words would be lacrim-, & it would be at least allowable to adopt it; but the k & the y are still usual. lackey, lacquey. Pl. of noun, -eys; for inflexions of verb, see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 2. The -key form is recommended.

The first is estab-

lacquer, lacker. lished.

lacrim-. See LACHRYM-.

lacteal. See POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

lacuna. Pl. -nae; see LATIN PLURALS.

laddie. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

lade, apart from the passive use of the p.p., is now almost restricted to the loading of ships. Even laden, though still in use, tends to be displaced by loaded & to sound archaic except in particular phrases & compound words: heavy-laden buses, but loaded rather than laden buses 3 sin-laden, sorrow-laden; a hay-laden rather than a hay-loaded cart, but loaded, rather than laden, with hay; on the other hand a soul laden, rather than loaded, with sin, because the dignity attaching to slight archaism is in place.

ladleful. PI. ladlefuls; see -FUL.

lady. 1. L. Jones, L. Mary Jones, L. Henry Jones. The first form is proper only for a peeress or a baronet’s or knight’s wife or widow; the second for one called L. because she is a peer’s daughter; the third for a courtesy lord’s wife or widow.

2. L. by itself in the vocative is a wrong substitute, now common among the uneducated, for madam.

3. L. prefixed to names indicating vocation as a mark of sex (l. doctor, author, clerk, &c.) is a cumbrous substitute for a FEMININE DESIGNA- TION, which should be preferred. when it exists or can be made; in
