page: 314

default of that, woman or female would be better than l., not confusing the essential point with irrelevant suggestions of social position, as in 4.

4. L. prefixed to vocation words to indicate social pretensions (l. cook, nurse, companion, help, &c.) is, it may be hoped, a GENTEELISM that will not last long.

5. For l. as undress substitute for marchioness, countess, viscountess, baroness, see TITLES.

ladyfied. So spelt; see -FIED.

lager. Pronounce lah’ger.

lagoon, -gune. The first is now the established spelling.

laid, lain. See LAY & LIE.

laissez aller, laissez faire. See FRENCH WORDS,

lakh. See Lac.

lam, thrash &c. So spelt, not lamb.

lama, llama. La- for the Thibetan priest; Ua- for the animal.

lame. The adj. makes lamish, the verb lamable; see MUTE E.

lamentable. Pronounce lA’m-.

lamia. Pronounce la’mia; pl. -ae or -as.

lamina. Pl. -ae.

lammergeyer. Pronounce -gier.

lampoon, libel, pasquinade, skit, squib. There is often occasion to select the most appropriate of these words, & the essential point of each may be shortly given. A lampoon is a bitter published attack; a libel is a defamatory statement made publicly or privately (see also LIBEL); a pasquinade is a published attack of unknown or unacknowledged authorship; a skit is a making game of a person or his doings especially by parody; a squib is a casual published attack of no elaboration. lamprey. PI. -cys. lance makes lanceable; see MUTE E. lancet makes lanceted; see -T-, -TT-. land, n. UL. of the leal means heaven, not Scotland. For the L. of cakes see SOBRIQUETS. land, v. See INTRANSITIVE P.P. landgrave. Fem. -avine, pron. -ēn.

languor, languorous, languid, languish. The pronunciation is anomalous: languid & languish have always the -gw- sound (-gwi-); for languorous the OED gives only that sound (-gwor-); but for languor it prefers the -g- sound (-gor), though -gw- (-gwor-) is allowed as alternative; & this probably represents | general usage, except that perhaps most people would make languorous follow whichever sound they prefer for languor. On the merits, la’nggor by the side of li’nggwid & 14’nggwish seems unreasonable, & is perhaps — due to misapprehension; either -uor is confused with the -our of vigour, honour, &c.; or else the -uis mistaken for one of the kind seen in guest, guile, guess, guild, where its function is to show that g is not as usual soft before e or i. Liquor & liquid, conquer & conquest, show similar inconsistencies, universal in the first & at least dominant in the second pair; but in languor the omission of the -w- sound is hardly so general that its restoration, which would be reasonable, might not be brought about.

lank(y).

The short form is almost only literary,

the long chiefly colloquial. lansquenet. See FRENCH WORDS. lantern, -thorn. The second, now seldom seen, is a corruption due to the use of horn for the sides of old lanterns. lapel. Pronounce lapé/l; adj. lapelied. lapis lazuli. Pronounce 14 ’pis 1a’zuli. lappet makes -eted; see -T-, -TT-. lapsus. Pl. lapsus pronounce -is, not -si; see -US. larboard. See PORT. large. For a comparison of this with great & big, see Bic. L. makes largish; see MUTE E. large(ly). After the verbs bulk & loom, the idiomatic word is large; not largely; cf. UNIDIOMATIC -LY. Examples of the wrong form are: The Monroe doctrine of late years has
