page: 316

LATINIZE idiom that imitates a Latin one;

the second is the quality of Latin

(classical, debased, &c.) that charac-

terizes a person’s or a period’s style.

See -ISM & -1Ty.

latinize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

LATIN PLURALS (or latinized-

Greek) Of most words in fairly

common use that have a Latin as well

as or instead of an English plural

the correct Latin form is given in the

word’s alphabetical place. A few

general remarks may be made here.

1. No rule can be given for preferring or avoiding the Latin form.

Some words invariably use it; nobody says specieses, thesises, opuses, or basises, instead of the Latin species, theses, opera, & bases (ba’séz). Others nearly always have the Latin form, but occasionally the English; bacilluses, lacunas, & genuses, are used at least by anti-Latin fanatics instead of bacilli, lacunae, & genera, More often the Latin & English forms are on fairly equal terms, context or individual taste deciding for one or the other; dogmas, formulas, indexes, hiatuses, & gladioluses, are fitter for popular writing, while scientific treatises tend to dogmata, formulae, indices, hiatus (hia’tis), & gladioli. Sometimes the two forms are utilized for real differentiation, as when genii means spirits, & geniuses men. All that can safely be said is that there is a tendency to abandon the Latin plurals, & that when one is really in doubt which to use the English form should be given the preference.

2. Latin plurals in -i should be pronounced distinctly -i, & not -é or -i like the Italian dilettanti, pococuranti, &c.; the reformed pronunciation of Latin does not obtain in naturalized Latin words, & to say glA’diolé reveals that one is ignorant either that the word is Latin or how Latin words are pronounced. Latin plurals of words in -is (theses, metamorphoses, neuroses) should be plainly pronounced -éz, not -iz like English plurals.

3. In Latin plurals there are

naturally some traps for non-

Latinists; the termination of the singular is no sure guide to that of Most Latin words in -us |

the plural.

have plural in -i, but not all, & so

zeal not according to knowledge

issues in such oddities as hiati, octopi, omnibi, & ignorami; as a.

caution the following list of varia-

tions may be useful: gladiolus, -li;

hiatus, -tūs; Venus, -neres; octopus,

-podes; corpus, -pora; genus, -nera;

ignoramus, no Latin plural. Simi- larly most Latin nouns in -a have . plural in -ae, but not all: lacuna, -nae; dogma, -mata; Saturnalia, not singular but plural. And, though -us & -a are much the com- ; monest Anglo-Latin endings, the same danger attends some others (-cx, -er, -0, &c.). 4. The treatment of a Latin noun | as an English plural because it ends in -s is, when of modern introduction, surprising. The Latin plural of forceps is forcipes, & the English plural should be forcepses; a forceps, a set of forcipes or forcepses; & both these were formerly in use. But shears & scissors & pincers & pliers have so convinced us that no such word can have a singular that instead of a forceps we usually say a pair of forceps, & forceps has to serve for both singular & plural.

-latry. For words like lordolatry & babyolatry, see FACETIOUS FORMA- TIONS, & HYBRID DERIVATIVES.

latter survives almost solely in the l, which provides with the former a pair of pronouns obviating disagreeable repetition of one or both of a pair of previously mentioned names or nouns. Such avoidance of repetition is often desirable; for the principles, see ELEGANT VARIA- TION, and REPETITION. But the l. is liable to certain special-misuses:— (1) The l. should not be used when more than a pair are in question, as in: The difficult problems involved in the early association of Thomas Girtin, Rooker, Dayes, & Turner are LATTER |
