page: 317

+ well illustrated by a sct of drawings that ...; & what was undoubtedly the best period of the latter artist is splendidly demonstrated by... (2) Neither should it be used when less than two are in question; the public & its shillings cannot be reasonably regarded as a pair of things on the same footing in: The mass of the picture-loving public, however, may be assured of good value | for the shillings—whatever be the ultimate destination of the latter. (3) The true elegant-variationist, who of course works the l. very hard, should observe that a mere pronoun will not do for the antecedent of the l., even though there may be a name in the background; a writer who varies Gordon with the hero of Khartoum & his relative naturally does not shrink from picking up him with the l.; it is all of a piece, & a bad piece: Mr Hake was a cousin of the late General Gordon, of whom he entertained a most affectionate remembrance. On one occasion, when the hero of Khartoum was dining with him, the latter invited his relative to take wine with him, but Gordon imperiously declined. (4)The true use of it is not to mystify, asin: The only people to gain will be the Tories & the principal losers will be the working-class voters whose interests the Labour Party is supposed to have at heart. It is a very poor compliment to the intelligence of the latier [which, in heaven’s name?] to believe, as many Labour members seem to do, that their support of the Labour cause will be all the more ardent if their interests are thus disregarded.

laudable means praiseworthy; the quotation shows it confused with laudatory: see PAIRS & SNARES: He speaks in the most laudable terms of the work carried out by Captain Thompson in the Anglo-Egyptian Soudan.

Jaudanum. Pronounce 16’dnum.

laugh. For the laughing philosopher, see SOBRIQUETS.

laughable. For the peculiar forma-

+ tion, see -ABLE 4. For ‘ would be laughable if it were not tragic’ &c., see HACKNEYED PHRASES. laughter. Homeric l. is a now common phrase whose meaning must be vague to many readers. It is especially the laugh that runs round a circle of spectators when a ludicrous or otherwise pleasing incident surprises them. In Olympus, when Zeus & Hera have had words, the limping Hephaestus counsels his mother to deal in soft answers; when he, in that former quarrel, had tried to protect her, had he not been flung forth & fallen nine days through air till he landed in Lemnos? & were not nectar & ambrosia in Olympian halls better than such doings? And therewith he hastened round & filled the cups of all the gods; ‘ & inextinguishable was the laughter of the blessed gods as they watched Hephaestus bustling about the hall ’.

And again, when Penelope’s suitors set the beggar-bully Irus to box with the seeming beggar Odysseus, ‘then the twain put up their hands, & Irus struck at the right shoulder, but the other smote him on his neck beneath the ear, & crushed in the bones, & straightway the red blood gushed up through his mouth, & with a moan he fell in the dust, & drave together his teeth as he kicked the ground. But the proud wooers threw up their hands, & died outright for laughter °.

Such is Homeric |.; but whether the frequent use of the phrase is justified by present-day familiarity with Homer is doubtful. See Popu- LARIZED TECHNICALITIES.

launch. The OED prefers the prenunciation law- to lah-.

laurel makes -lled; see -LL-, -L-.

laurustinus. So spelt; tinus, a Latin plant-name, not a suffix, was used in apposition to laurus; lauresis a corruption.

Pl. -os; see -0(£)s 6.

lavabo.

The euphemistic use,

lavatory.
