page: 319

+ leasing. The biblical

word, = lying, is pronounced lé’zing. least. The common confusion between much less & much more is mentioned & illustrated in the article ILLOGICALITIES; least of all & most of all get mixed up in the same way: If that is the case, what justification exists for the sentences, least of all for the way in which they were carried out?

leastwise, -ways. The OED labels the first ‘somewhat rare’, & the second ‘dialectal & vulgar’; see -WAYS & -WISE.

leather. 1. For leather & leathern, see -EN ADJECTIVES. 2. In l. or prunella (usually misquoted l. and prunella) the meaning is not two worthless things, but the contrast between the rough |. apron of a cobbler & the fine gown of a parson. It is true, however, that this difference is slighted in comparison with that between worth & the want of it: ‘ the rest is merely a question of whether you wear rough or fine raiment’. 38. For the leather see SOBRIQUETS.

lecher &c. Pronounce léch-.

lectureship, -turership. The first is | of irregular formation, as a parallel for which the OED quotes clergyship (though a person can be clergy better than he can be a lecture); but it is long-established, & those who use the second instead perhaps make it in momentary forgetfulness that the irregular form exists.

leeward. Pronounce lū'ard.

left. 1. The I. bank of a river is that to its l. if it is imagined as a person walking downwards, & may therefore be north, south, east, or west, of it; as this is often in conflict with the idea of I. (=westward) acquired from maps, some care is needed. 2. L. hand has no hyphen except when used attributively (the l.-hand drawer); see HYPHENS. 3. For lefiward(s), see -WARD(S).

+ legalism, legality. For the distinction, see -ISM & -ITY. legalize makes -zable; see MUTE E. legend. Pronounce lé-. LEGERDEMAIN WITH TWO SENSES, or the using of a word twice (or of a word & the pronoun that represents it, or of a word that has a double job to do) without observing that the sense required the second time is different from that already in possession. A plain example or two will show the point:—The inhabitanis of the independent lands greatly desire our direct government, which government has, however, for years refused to take any strong measures./ Although he was a very painstaking & industrious pupil, he never indicated any signs of developing into the great naval genius by which his name will in future be distinguished. / Mark had now got his first taste of print, & he liked it, & it was a taste that was to show many developments. In the first of these, government means successively governance, & governing body—either of them a possible synonym for it, but not both to be represented by it in the same sentence. In the second, genius means a singularly able person, but which, its deputy, means singular ability. In the third, whereas the taste he got was an experience, the taste that showed developments was an inclination. Such shiftings from one sense to another naturally occur sometimes in reasoning, whether used by the disingenuous for the purpose of deceiving others, or by the overingenuous with the result of deceiving themselves; but we are here concerned not with their material, but with their formal, aspect; apart from any bad practical effects, they are faults of style.

The examples that follow presently are less flagrant than the typical specimens above; what leads to them is a want of clear thinking on small points, & in this they resemble the contents of the article HAzINESS;
