page: 320

+ other examples will be found under I, and WE.

If the statements made are true, they constitute a crime against civilization. Whereas the statements means the things alleged, they means the things done./Even where it includes within its borders no important aifferences of nationality, which has no serious jealousies among its people, a completely unitary organization is becoming impossible. Whereas nationality means an abstract property (the belonging to one or another nation), which & its, both representing it, mean a concrete nation. / The vital differences of their respective elders make none to their bosom friendship. Whereas the differences are quarrels, none is (no) alteration. / Admission is by ticket, which can be obtained from Mr . . . Whereas ticket means a system, which means a piece or pieces of paper. /It has the advantage, of all mountain places T have known, of being on a ridge which gives you views in all directions. Whereas advantage of means the first time superiority over, it means the second time merit consisting in./ Is he, however, correct in ascribing this misnomer to confusion between the English terms ‘ bend’, & ‘ bar’? Is it not rather due to a mistake in spelling, which should be the French form ‘barre sinistre’? Spelling is an art, but which is a correct wordform.

legible, readable. See ILLEGIBLE.

legislation, legislature. By a longestablished & useful differentiation, the first is the making of laws, & the second only the body that makes them; there should be no going back upon such distinctions, as in: fi is physical science, & experience, that man ought to consult in religion, morals, legislature, as well as in knowledge & the arts. legitimate, adj. The l. drama: the OED’s definition of the phrase is: ‘the body of plays, Shaksperian or other, that have a recognized theatrical & literary merit °.

|

legitimate vb., legitimatize, legitimize. The second & third are mere substitutes without difference of meaning for the first, which has a longer history by two or three centuries, & is neither obsolete nor archaic; it may be guessed that they exist only because -ize, now so common, saves a moment’s thought to those who want a word & forget that there is one ready to hand; they might well be placed among SUPERFLUOUS WORDS. The -able adjective should be legitimable (-atizable, -izable); see -ABLE 1, & MUTE E.

leisure. The OED puts the pronunciation lézh- (not lézh-) first. U.-S. dictionaries reverse the preference; but in England the lē- is now rare.

leit-motiv, -f. The right (German) spelling is with -v. Pronounce litmōtē’f.

lengthways, -wise. See -ways, -WISE.

lenience, -cy. The second is recommended; see -CE, -cy.

lens. Pl. lenses; see SINGULAR -S.

lése-majesté. See FRENCH WORDS. The English lese-majesty is not now a legal term, treason having taken its place; the French form is often used of treason in foreign countries, & either is applied jocularly (cf. PEDANTIC HUMOUR) to anything that can be metaphorically considered treason.

less. 1. Nothing l. 2. Much & still l. 3. L., lesser, smaller, lower, fewer.

1. For the two meanings of nothing l. than, a possible source of ambiguity, see NOTHING.

2. The illogical use of much l. instead of much more is discussed under ILLOGICALITIES, & MUCH. Here are two examples of still l. for still more, interesting in different ways:—Of course social considerations, still less considerations of mere wealih, must not in any way be allowed to outweigh purely military efficiency. Here, if still . . . wealth had been placed later than must not,
