page: 323

+ or ‘ I remain ’, used to precede most of the following forms, but they are now more often omitted.

Your obedient servant, or Yours obediently: From or to officials; letters to the Editor in newspapers.

Yours respectfully, or (old-fashioned) Your obedient servant, or (oldfashioned) Yours to command: Servant to master &c.

ee: To newspaper (affected).

Yours &c.:

To newspaper (now common).

Yours faithfully:

To unknown person on business.

Yours truly: To slight acquaintance.

Yours very truly; Ceremonious but cordial.

Yours sincerely: In invitations & friendly but not intimate letters.

Yours ever, or Ever yours, or Yours: Unceremonious between intimates.

Yours affectionately: Between relations &c.

lettuce. Pronounce -tis.

levee. Write without an accent, & pronounce lé’vi.

level makes -lled &c. ; see -LL-, -L-. Do one’s l. best, originally American, has lived long enough in England to be no longer slang.

lever makes levered &c.; see -R-, -RR-.

lever de rideau. See FRENCH WORDS.

levigate, levitate, make -gable, -itable; see -ABLE 1.

levy, n. For synonymy see TAX.

levy, ve For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

lexicon. See DICTIONARY. Pl. -ns, -ca; see -ON 2.

Leyden. Pronounce li-, not lā-.

liable, possibly because it is a more or less isolated word lacking connexions to keep it steady, constantly has its meaning shifted. For its proper use, see APT, with which there is much excuse for confusing it. The first quotation illustrates that confusion; in the second, l. to assert should be capable of

+ asserting; in the third, zs l. to demand should be may demand or is likely or not unlikely to demand; & in the last the sporting reporter should have stuck to his last & said in the running for instead of l. to win:—Political & religious bias are also 1. to operate./The President having a Cabinet, & having to take note of the relics of the Tzu Cheng Yuan, still not officially made nonexistent, & of the Nanking Assembly inferentially superseded, but still 1. to assert itself, can hardly be held as invested with dictatorial power./W alking through England must have been stripped of most of tis charms, when at every inn you have to fill up forms about the colour of your wifes hair, & every policeman is l. to demand the production of a variety of tickets./ Duncan has been for several years 1. to win one of the big prizes of golf.

liaison. Pronounce as English (lia’zn); the military use during the war has completed its naturalization.

liana. Pronounce liah’na.

libel makes -lled, -llous, &c.; see -LL-, -L-.

libel & some synonyms. The much-quoted saying ‘The greater the truth the greater’ (or * worse ’) ‘ the libel °’ makes us all occasionally curious about what a l. is. It & its synonyms, several of which have separate meanings in legal & in popular use, also differ from one another according as they imply or do not imply falsity, malice, & publication. The synonyms meant are calumny, defamation, scandal, & slander. The definitions that follow are taken verbatim from the OED; distinctions between legal & popular use are shown; & in the brackets are notes of the OED or, with inverted commas, illuminating sentences quoted by it. The presence or absence in the definitions of the words false, malicious, published, &c., should be carefully noticed.

Calumny: False & malicious mis- | representation of the words or
