page: 327

+ likely, adv. Yet it was not easy to divine the thought behind that intentness of gaze; likely it was far from the actual scene apparently holding iis attention. In educated speech & writing the adverb is never used without very, most, or more, except by way of poetic archaism or, as presumably in the extract, of stylistic NOVELTY-HUNTING. American usage, however, may be different:—The climate in America is so severe in winter that stocks will l. die oui. /It will l. be financed largely by capital raised in the United States. For likelily, see -LILY; for likelier adv., -ER & -EST 3.

likewise. The use as a conjunction (Its tendency to wobble & its uniformity of tone colour, l. its restricted powers of execution) is, like the similar use of ALSO, an ILLITERACY; the OED quotes no example.

likin. Pronounce lēkē’n.

-LILY. Avoidance of the adverbs in -lily, i.e. adverbs made regularly from adjectives in -ly, is merely a matter of taste, but is very, & increasingly, general. Neither the difficulty of saying the words nor the sound of them when said is a serious objection so long as the three syllables are not passed; holily & statelily & lovelily are not hard to say or harsh to hear; but with heavenlily & ruffianlily hesitation is natural; & the result has been that adverbs in -lily, however short, are now with a few special exceptions seldom heard & seldomer seen. Methods of avoidance are various:—

1. It is always possible to say in a masterly manner, at a timely moment, & the like, instead of masterlily, timelily; or again to be content with decorously &c. instead of mannerlily; the method of periphrasis or synonym.

2. A large number of adjectives in -ly are established as adverbs also. So early, (most or very) LIKELY, & the adjectives of periodical recurrence like daily & hourly. A single quotation will show the consequences of

+ making one’s own adverbs of this kind: External evidence, however, is rare; & its rarity gives value to such work as Mr — here masterly does. 3. Before adjectives & adverbs the -ly adjective often stands instead of the -lily adverb, making a kind of informal compound. ‘Though we should say horribly pale & not horrible pale, we allow ourselves ghastly pale rather than use ghastlily; so heavenly bright, beastly cold, jolly soon, &c.—all without the hyphen that would mark regular compounds.

4. In sentences where it is just possible, though not natural, for a predicative adjective to stand instead of an adverb, that way is sometimes taken with an adjective in -ly though it would not be taken with another: it happened timely enough, though not opportune enough; she nodded queenly, though not she nodded significant.

5. Perhaps any adjective formed by appending -ly either to an adjeetive (kind, kindly; dead, deadly) or to a noun of the kind that is easily used in apposition like an adjectival epithet (cowardly, cf. the coward king; soldierly, cf. a soldier colonist) is sometimes, though always consciously & noticeably, allowed to pass as an adverb: ù was ruffianly done; a kindly thought, & kindly uttered.

On the other hand, avoidance is not always called for; some -lily words are current, though not many. Those that naturally present themselves (he laughed jollily; sillily complacent; live holily; dodged it wilily) seem to be all from adjectives in which -ly is not the usual adjectival ending, but the lis part of the word-stem; & though we are most of us not conscious of that fact nowadays, it may have had its effect in separating these from the others.

limb. When we first come across an eclipse in the newspapers & read of the sun’s lower limb, we suspect
