page: 330

+ instanced; but literary words are reckoned by thousands.

lithesome is, between lithe & lissom, a SUPERFLUOUS WORD.

lithontriptic. See Barsarisms.

litotes. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pronounce li’totéz.

litre, -ter. See -RE & -ER.

litter, brood. See rarrow.

littérateur. See FRENCH WORDS.

little. See smatzt. Comparison less(er) (for limitations of sense see LESS 8), least, or more usually smaller, -est.

littoral, n., has a technical sense in which it is doubtless of value; marine life being distributed into abyssal, pelagic, & littoral, the l. (sc. zone or region) is the shallow waters near the shore. But that is not the sense in which most of us know it; it meets us as a name for the land region bordering & including the shore; in that sense it may be important in treaties & the like to have a word that does not mean strictly the mere line of coast or shore; but in ordinary contexts it should never be preferred to coast, & its present popularity is due to pretentiousness. Why not coast in The towns along the Mediterranean littoral, The Russian settlements on the Eastern Caspian littoral? See FORMAL WORDS.

liturgy. See Lrrany. livable. So spelt; see MUTE E. -lived. In long-l. &c. the right pronunciation is livd, the words being from life (cf. -leaved from leaf &c.) & not from live; but livd is often heard, liven. See -EN VERBS. lama. See LAMA. -LL-, -L-. Final / is treated differently in British, but not American, usage from most final consonants, the rule being to double it, if single, in inflexions & in some derivatives irrespective of the position of the accent, 1. When verbs in -1 (except those in which a compound vowel sound, as

+ ai, ea, ee, oi, ow, ur, precedes the -l) make inflected or derived words in -able, -ed, -en, -er, or -ing, -ll- is written—controllable, carolled, befallen, traveller, equalling; but failed, boiling, curled, &c., & before -ment l is not doubled; see also PARAL- LELED, WOOL,

2. When nouns or adjectives in -l (with exceptions as in 1) make adjectives by addition of -ed, -er, or -y, the l is doubled: flannelled, jeweller, gravelly; but see UNPARAL- LELED. Before -ish & -ism & -ist, l isnot doubled: devilish, liberalism, naturalist. Irregular superlatives vary, most using one l, but words in -ful always two: brutalest, loyalest, civil(ljest, joyfullest.

3. The simple form of a good many verbs vacillates between -l & -li, & no rule is possible that will secure the best form for all words & not conflict with strong usage for some; but it is perhaps safe to say that where such vacillation exists -ll is better if a precedes (appall, befall, enthrall, install), & -l if another vowel, especially i (distil, instil, enrol, annul); verbs in -ll, however, take single l before -ment (enrolment, enthralment, instalment).

4. Derivatives & compounds of words in -Il sometimes drop one l; so almighty, almost, already, altogether, always, but not alright; chilblain; fulfil; skilful; thraldom; wilful. This is perhaps helped by some apparent but not real examples such as belfry, bulrush, bulwark, & walnut, which are not from bell, bull, & wall. Dul(l)ness & ful(l)ness are debatable; the older & much commoner spelling, but (according to the OED) the one less ‘in accordance with general analogies’ has only one l. Lloyd’s, underwriters.

So written, stone & star it is usual to spell load- ` not -ds or ds’. load, lode. In the compounds with stone, but lodestar. The first element is the same, & is the ordinary load, of which the original sense was way,
