page: 331

+ connected with the verb lead; the spelling distinction is accidental, & both lodesione & loadstar are some times used. loafed, -ved.. See -vE(D). loan. The verb has been expelled from idiomatic southern English by lend, but was formerly current, & survives in U.S. & locally in U.K. lo(a)th. Loth is recommended. The OED gives precedence to loath, & it is true that that spelling avoids obscuring the connexion with the verb loathe; but in its 19th-c. quotations the proportion is 7 : 1 for loth, a fair proof of establishment. The verb is always loathe, & loathly & loathsome have always the a.

lobby, v. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

lobular. See -ULAR.

local(e). 1. The ‘ erroneous form’ (OED) locale is recommended; see MORALE, & A L’OUTRANCE. 2. Pronounce the noun lokah‘’l, whichever way it is spelt. 3. The word’s right to exist depends on the question whether the two indispensable words locality & scene give all the shades of meaning required, or whether something intermediate is useful. The defence of l. would be on these lines: A locality is a place, with features of some sort, existing independently of anything that may happen there. If something happens in a locality, the locality becomes that something’s locale, or place of happening. If the something that happens is seen or imagined or described in connexion with its locale, the locale becomes its scene or visible environment.

localize, locate, make -zable, -atable; see MUTE E, -ABLE l.

locative. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

loch. See LOUGH.

locomote. See BACK-FORMATION.

loculus. PI. -li (-li).

Pronounce

locum tenens, -ncy.

word is 16’kum té’-. The -ncy usually -ency, not -ancy.

locus. PI. -ci (-si). |

+ locution is a potentially convenient word as equivalent to word or phrase; not more than potentially, because it so far smacks of pedantry that most people prefer to say word or phrase on the rare occasions when expression is not precise enough for the purpose, & l. gets left to the pedants. His style is comparatively free from locutions calculated to baffle the English reader; does anyone really like that better than expressions?

lode. See LOAD.

lodge makes lodgeable; see MUTEE.

lodg(e)ment. Retention of the -eis recommended; see JUDGEMENT.

logan. Pronounce 16’gan(-berry), but 16’gan(-stone).

logaoedic. Pronounce légaeé’dik.

loggia. Pronounce 16’ja; pl. loggie, pronounce 16’ja.

logic. For the l. of facts or evenis, see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

logion. Pron. 16’gidn; pl. -ta.

loiter has -ered &c.; see -R-, -RR-.

lollop has -oping &c.; see -P-, -PP-.

Lombard(y). The OED gives precedence to l6m- over the probably more usual liim-.

lonelily. See -LILY.

long butt (billiards) should not be hyphened; see Hypnrns on the relation of stress to hyphen.

long-lived. See -LIVED.

FRENCH

longue haleine. See WORDS.

LONG VARIANTS. ‘The better the writer, the shorter his words ’ would be a statement needing many exceptions for individual persons & particular subjects; but for all that it would, & especially about English writers, be broadly true. Those who run to long words are mainly the unskilful & tasteless; they confuse pomposity with dignity, flaccidity with ease, & bulk with force; see LOVE OF THE LONG WORD. A special form of long word is now to be illustrated; when a word for the notion wanted exists, some people (1) forget or do not know that word, & make up another from the
