page: 333

+ toiled to our prudence through a forest of delusions./Their behaviour in church was anything but reverential./ The matter is of transcendental importance, especially in the present disastrous state of the world.

It only remains to say that nothing in this article must be taken to eountenance the shortening of such words as pacificist & quantitative. Examples of pacifist are needless; but it is worth while to record quaniitive & authoritive; & see INTERPRE{TA)TIVE. It is as if the quantitive theory of naval strategy held the field./ Her finely finished authoritive performance was of great value.

longways, -wise. See -wAys.

looby. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

loom, v. For l. large(ly) see LARGE(LY).

loony, lunatic. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

loose, loosen, vv. For the distinction, see -EN VERBS.

loquitur, Pronounce 16’kwiter. L. is singular = speaks; cf. exit for danger to non-latinists.

lord. Younger sons of Dukes & Marquises are spoken of by the title of Lord followed by Christian & family name, as Lord Arthur Smith. Omission of the Christian name is wrong; the permissible shortening is not Lord Smith, but Lord Arthur. For l. as an undress substitute for marquis, earl, viscount, see TITLES.

Lord Bacon is a mixture; the possible correct styles are Bacon, Francis Bacon, Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, Lord or Viscount St Albans, of which the first is usually the best.

Lord Justice. Pl. Lords Justices.

lordlily. See -LILy.

lordolatry. See -LATRY.

lorgnette. See FRENCH WORDS.

lose. L. no time in is a notoriously ambiguous phrase: No time should be lost in exploring the question. L. makes losable; see MUTE E.

lot. A lot of people say so, Lots of paper is wanted, &c. ; see NUMBER.

+ loth. See LOATH. Lothario. Pl. -os, see -o(z)s 8. lotto. Pl. -os; see -o(£)S 3. lotus. Pl. -uses. louden. See -EN VERBS. lough. The Irish l. & the Scotch loch are pronounced alike, i.e. either anglicized as lok, or with the breathed guttural instead of the -k. For l cf. HOUGH. Louis, l-. See FRENCH WORDS. lour, lower. The meaning is frown. Spell lour & pronounce lowr. The word is not connected with low & the other verb lower (l0’er), & it is a pity that it should be confused with that verb by the second spelling (the oldest forms are lour & lure) & so have its meaning narrowed & its pronunciation altered. The confusion is due chiefly to the word’s being often applied to clouds.

louse, lousy. Pronounce lows, low’zi.

love. 1. Ł. makes lovable; see Mure E. 2. For the scenes he loved so well &c., see I" \cKNEYED PHRASES, & STOCK PATHOS.

lovelily. See -Lity.

LOVE OF THE LONG WORD, It need hardly be said that shortness is a merit in words; there are often reasons why shortness is not possible; much less often there are occasions when length, not shortness, is desirable; but it is a general truth that the short words are not only handier to use, but more powerful in effect; extra syllables reduce, not increase, vigour. This is particularly so in English, where the native words are short, & the long words are foreign. I open Paradise Lost & The Idylis of the King, & at each first opening there face me:— ‘Know ye not, then’ said Satan, fill’d with scorn; < Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar.’ / And in those days she made a little song And call’d her song * The Song of Love & Death’, And sang tt; sweetly could she make & sing. | Fifty-six words, of which fifty-twe
