page: 335

+ diplomacy & preoccupation with domestic issues have rendered his participation in external negotiations gravely detrimental to the public welfare °’. Vigorous indeed; a charging hippopotamus hardly more so. lovey. So spelt; see -ry, -IE, -y. lower, adj. 1. L. case, upper case, are printers’ names for small letters, capitals.

2. L. Empire is a name for the Roman Empire from the time of Constantine (A.D. 323-337), when the seat of empire was shifted from Rome to Constantinople, & Christianity became the State religion. Also called Later, Greek, Byzantine, & Eastern, Empire.

lower, lour. See LouR.

lowlily. See -LILy.

loyal. For loyalest see -ER & -EST 4, -LL-, -L- 2.

LU (pronunciation). There is clearly a movement going on in the pronunciation of this as li (ly00)) or 160. It was formerly de rigueur to put in the y sound; a lute, & even a flute, had to be called lūt (i.e. lyoot) & flüt (i.e. flyoot), not loot & floot, or the speaker was damned in polite circles. And great numbers of good people count the victorious progress of 100 one of the vulgarities of modern speech; among these must be the OED, which goes so far as to prefer gli or glyd0 to gloo for the pronunciation of glue, though it reverses this order for blue (bl00, bli); for most of us anything but bloo & glo is surely now impossible, however refined we like to be where the trials of articulation are less severe.

On a question of this sort anyone who is not entirely illiterate is sure to think that the line he is accustomed to draw between pedantic refinement & acceptance of popular tendencies is the right line; & the individual view here given is subject to that discount; a view, however, must be given, for what it is worth; & it is that 100 is slowly but surely 335

+ displacing li. It forces its way especially into accented syllables, as may be seen by comparing ludicrous, voluminous, lubricate, salute, & dilute vb, in which 100 now prevails, with interlude, volume, lubricity, salutation, & dilute adj., in which lū is either the only possible sound (as in volume, salutation) or the usual one. And again into common words more than into less used ones; compare salute (usually -00t) with volute (usually -iit); it is noticeable how the great currency of absolutely (& the emphasis on -ute-) due to its adoption as a colloquial counter has hastened the change to 100. The corresponding fastnesses of li are the unaccented syllable & the less used word. Points of a more special kind are: when a consonant precedes the J, 100 is almost universal (blue, fluent, &c.); when r follows, it helps to preserve la (lure, lurid); a following syllable with a iin it naturally produces lgo by dissimilation even in the unaccented syllable of a not very common word (lugubrious, lucubration).

Some specimen lists follow, going from undisputed la to undisputed 100. 1 (always lai). Volume, salutary, cellulose, pilule, 2 (usually lu). Lure, lurid, aluminium, interlude, lubricity, volute, dilute adj. 3 (usually 160). _Voluminous, lute, lupin, lunatic, illumine, lunar, Lucifer, collusion, delude, dissolute, evolution, lubricate, luminous, Lucy, absolute, salute, ludicrous, dilute vb, Lucian, Luke, lucre, lucubration, lugubrious, lukewarm, Lutheran. 4 (always 100). Blue, clue, glue, fluent, Pluvius, exclude, sluice.

Readers will differ about the assignment of these to the various groups; but, whether that is right or wrong, a glance at the words collected may help them to clear their minds on the point, & even possibly persuade some of them that the change to 100 has gone too far to be now stemmed. The advice offered is to accept 160 for all words in list 3 at least, & (these being

; LU
