page: 336

+ merely specimens) for others on the same level.

lubricate, lubricity. See LU.

lucent. Pronounce 100-; see LU.

lucerne. Pronounce lū- or 160-; see LU. lucid, Lucifer, lucrative, lucre. Pronounce lð- ; see LU. lucre. For filthy l., see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

Lucretia. Pronounce lū- or lōð-; see LU.

lucubrate, luculent. Pronounce 106- ; see LU.

ludicrous, lugubrious, Luke, lukewarm. Pronounce 100-; see LU.

lumbago. Pl. -os; see -o(£)s 3.

luminary, luminous, lunacy, lunar, lunatic. Pronounce 160-; see LU.

luncheon. See FORMAL WORDS.

lung(e)ing. See Mure E; omit the e.

lupin, lupine, lupus.

Pronounce donment, desires; luxuriant vegeta- | 100- ; see LU.

lure, lurid. Pronounce lūī- ; see LU.

lustre, -ter. See -RE & -ER.

lustrum. Pl. -tra, sometimes -fTUMS 3 see -UM.

lusus naturae. Pronounce 1d0’sus natur’é, see Lu. Pl. lusus n., pronounce -ts, see -us.

lute, Lutheran. Pronounce 100- ; see LU.

luxe. See FRENCH WORDS.

luxuriant, luxurious. Luxurious is the adjective that belongs in sense to luxury & conveys the ideas of comfort or delight or indulgence; luxuriant has nothing to do with these, implying only rich growth, vigorous shooting forth, teeming; as luxurious to luaury, so luauriant to exuberance. Luxurious houses, habits, life, people, climate, idleness, times, food, cushions, dreams, abantion, crops, hair, imagination, invention, style. The points at which they touch & become liable to confusion are, first, that abundance, essential to luxuriance or exuberance, also subserves luxury, though not essen- | tial to it; &, secondly, their common property in the verb luguriate,

+ which means both to enjoy luxury & to show luxuriance. A luxurious fancy is one that dwells on luxury; a luxuriant fancy one that runs riot on any subject, agreeable or other.

-LY. 1. For the tendency among À writers & speakers who are more ' conscientious than literary to suppose that all adverbs must end in -ly, & therefore to use hardly, largely, | strongly, &c., where idiom requires hard, large, & strong, see UNIDIO- | MATIC -LY.

2. For participial adverbs like determinedly, see -EDLY.

3. It was said in the article JINGLES that the commonest form of ugly repetition was that of the -ly adverbs. It is indeed extraordinary, when one remembers the feats of avoidance performed by the elegantvariationist, the don’t-split-yourinfinitivist, & the anti-prepositionat-ender, to find how many people have no ears to hear this most obvious of all outrages on euphony. Not indeed on euphony pure & simple, but on euphony & sense in combination; for as many -ly adverbs as one chooses may be piled on each other if one condition of sense is fulfilled—that all these adverbs have the same relation to the same word or to parallel words. We are utterly, hopelessly, irretrievably, ruined; It is theoretically certain, but practically doubtful; He may probably or possibly be in time. These are all irteproachable; in the first, each of the three adverbs expresses degree about ruined; in the second, each limits the sense of an adjective, the two adjectives being contrasted; in the third, the two give degrees of likelihood about the same thing; that is to say, in all cases the -ly adverbs are strictly parallel. Euphony has nothing to say against repetition of -ly if there is point in it, which there is if the adverbs are parallel; but, when parallelism is not there to comfort her, Euphony at once cries out in pain, though too often to deaf ears.
