page: 337

Russian industry is at present practically completely crippled. Practically is not marching alongside of completely, but riding on its back; read almost./He found himself sharply, & apparently completely, checked. Sharply & completely, by all means; but not apparently completely; read as it seemed./It is probably generally known that every individual plaice evolves from the original symmetrical form. Probably qualifies not (like generally) known, but generally known; read perhaps./The earliest lists, still so sadly & probably irretrievably imperfect. Whereas irretrievably qualifies imperfect, probably qualifies irretrievably; read perhaps, or it is to be feared./Maeterlinck probably & wisely shrank from comparison with ‘ Hérodias’. Though probably & wisely both apply directly to the same word shrank, their relation to it is not the same, probably telling us how far the statement is reliable, & wisely how far the course was justified; read Jt is probable that Maeterlinck wisely shrank./It was only relatively recently that it had reached its present development.

lycée. See FRENCH WORDS.

Lyceum. Pl. -ms; see -um. For the meaning in Greek Philosophy see ACADEMY.

lychgate &c. See LIcHGATE.

lyric(al). Lyric is now the established adjective for most uses; we speak of lyric poets, poetry, verse, drama, muse, elements, & not lyrical. Lyrical is in some sort a parasite upon lyric, meaning suggestive of lyric verse. Lyric classifies definitely, while lyrical describes vaguely. With some words either can be used, but with different effect; a lyric rhapsody is one actually composed in lyric verse; a lyrical rhapsody is talk full of expressions, or revealing a mood, fit for lyric poetry. Lyrical emotion, praise, sorrow, &c. s Or again, a person may grow lyrical. See also -Ic(AL).

lyrics. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

M macabre. Pronounce makah’ber. macaco. Pronounce -ā'kō. Pl. -0S, see -O(E)S 6. macaroni. Pl. of the 18th-c. dandy, -nies; pl. of the food-stuff, -nis. macerate makes -rable; see -ABLEI. Machiavel(li(an(ism. The formerly current shortening Machiavel is now less common than Machiavelli not only as the personal but even as the generic name; a very Machiavel, once much used, has become rare. The adjective is accordingly now spelt Machiavellian, not -elian. For the -ism noun, choice lies between Machiavellianism & Machiavellism; in spite of greater length, the first is the better; the clipping of the word to which -ist & -ism are to be added is always disagreeable, & yet Machiavelliism is clearly impossible; see on voluntar(y)ist in -IST A. machicolate.

Pronounce machi’kolat, not mak-.

machination. Pronounce mak-.

mackerel, mackintosh. So spelt.

macula. Pl. -lae.

mad, v. For this & madden, & the madding crowd, see -EN VERBS.

Madagascar has adj. Malagasy (malaga’si).

madam(e). In the English word, whether as appellation (I will inquire, Madam; Dear Madam; What does Madam think about it?), as common noun (the City madams), or as prefix (Madam Fortune, Madam Venus), there should be no -e. As a prefix to a foreign lady’s name instead of Mrs, Madame is right, with plural Mesdames. Madam, the appellation, suffers from having no plural, Ladies being the substitute, for which Mesdames is sometimes jocularly used. The shopgirls’ odd pronunciation (m6’dam) is perhaps due to a notion that French Madame is more in keeping with haunts of fashion than English Madam.

Madeira. So spelt.

mademoiselle. See FRENCH WORDS.
