page: 339

+ two further on the path of truth, which at present seems likely to end in Muhammad with a dot under the h; see Drpacricism, PRIDE OF KNOWLEDGE. The literary, as distinguished from the learned, surely do good service when they side with tradition & the people against science & the dons. Mukammad should be left to the pedants, Mohammed to historians & the like, while ordinary mortals should go on saying, & writing in newspapers & novels & poems & such general reader’s matter, what their fathers said before them.

The fact is that we owe no thanks to those who discover, & cannot keep silence on the discovery, that Mahomet is further than Mohammed, & Mohammed further than Muhammad, from what his own people called him. The Romans had a hero whom they spoke of as Aeneas; we call him that too, but for the French he has become Enée; are the French any worse off than we on that account? It is a matter of like indifference in itself whether the English for the Prophet’s name is Mahomet or Mohammed; in itself, yes; but whereas the words Aeneas & Enée have the Channel ‘between them to keep the peace, Mahomet & Mohammed are for ever at loggerheads; we want one name for the one man; & the one should have been that around which the ancient associations cling. It is too late to recover unity; the learned, & their too docile disciples, have destroyed that, & given us nothing worth having in exchange.

mahout. Pronounce -owt.

maieutic. Pronounce miii’tik or (OED) mai’tik. The word means performing midwife’s service (to thought or ideas); Socrates figured himself as a midwife (maia) bringing others’ thoughts to birth with his questionings; educative contains the same notion, but much overlaid with different ones, & the literary critic & the pedagogue consequently find m.

;

+ useful enough to pass in spite of its touch of pedantry. Majesty, Highness, &c. When your Majesty, her Grace, &c., has been used, & need arises for a pronoun or possessive adjective to represent it, grammar would require it, its; but instead of these either the full title is repeated (Your Majesty can do as your Majesty will with your Majesty’s ships), or you, your, she, her, &c., is ungrammatically substituted for it or its (Her Grace summoned her chef). Stevenson indeed writes: Your Highness interprets my meaning with his usual subtlety; but this is doubtless a mistaken imitation of the French son or sa, meaning its (i.e. highness’s), not his. The English idiom, differing from & less correct than the French, requires either your Highness’s, or your, usual subtlety.

major means greater, & those who like PomposiTIEs are within their rights, & remain intelligible, if they call the greater part the major portion; they can moreover plead that major part & portion have been used by good writers in the times when pomposity was less noticeable than it now is. Those who do not like pomposities will call it the greater part, & deserve our gratitude, or at least escape our dislike. J, who had described myself as ‘ sick of patriotism’... found myself unable io read anything but a volume the major portion of which consisted of patriotic verse.

major (in logic).

See TECHNICAL TERMS.

majordomo. Pl. -os; see -0(r)s 6.

major general. Hyphened when used as a prefix; properly written as two words (cf. court martial) when used as an independent noun: tke Major General; Major-General Jones, See HYPHENS (C, & on court martial &c.); but the prefix use, being very frequent, naturally corrupts the rarer noun form, and the hyphen is used indiscriminately.

majority. 1. Distinctions of mean-
