page: 341

+ stitute & replace, instil & inspire, afflict & inflict, are specimens. And a long list might be made of words commonly so used as to show misapprehension of their meaning; a few, under which quotations will be found, are: asset, comity, e.g., cke out, glimpse, oblivious, polity, proportion, proposition, protagonist, prototype, qua.

But it is perhaps hardly decent to leave the subject without a single concrete illustration. Here are one or two less staled by frequent occurrence than those mentioned above: He thought it desirous that the House of Lords should determine the tests to be applied./Mr has circulated what portends to be a reply to a letter which I had previously addressed to you./His capacity for continuous work is incredulous./It was a great humility to be kept waiting about, after having bec asked to come.

malapropos. Pronounce malapropo’.

male. 1. M.) (masculine. The distinction drawn between female & feminine is equally true for m. & masculine; the reader will perhaps be good enough to look through the article FEMALE, FEMININE, & make the necessary substitutions; the only modification needed is in the statement about the original part of speech of female; male was not, like that, a noun before it was an adjective; but this difference does not affect present usage.

2. M. &c. in prosody. M. & masculine, female & feminine, are used to distinguish rhymes & lineendings having a final accented syllable (m. or masculine: Now ts the winter of our disconte’nt) from those in which an unaccented syllable follows the last accented one (female or feminine: To be or not to be, that is the que’stion).

malign. 1. For the difference between m. & malignant, see BENIGN. 2. Pronounce the verb, as well as the adjective, mali’n.

malignancy, -nity. These nouns

+ almost reverse the relation between the adjectives to which they belong. The general distinction between malignant & malign is that the first refers rather to intention & the second rather to effect (see BENIGN); it would therefore be expected that malignancy would be the word for spitefulness, & malignity for harmfulness; but the medical use of malignant (see BENIGN 8) has so strongly affected malignancy that malignity has had to take over thé sense of spite, & almost lost that of harm.

malinger. Pronounce mali’ngger.

Mall Pronounce mal; the Mall (mal), but Pall Mall (pélmé’l).

malnutrition. A word to be avoided as often as underfeeding will do the work; see ANTI-SAXONISM.

Mameluke. Three syllables (mă’milook).

mamilla. Pi. -lae.

mam(m)a, mother. Spell mamma.

mamma, breast. Pl. mammae.

man. For the inner, outer, m., see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

manageable. So spelt; see MUTE E.

manageress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

mandamus. Pl. -uses; see -US. Pronounce manda’mus.

mandatary, -tory. ‘The -ary form is noun only, =one to whom a mandate is given; the -ory form is primarily adjective, =of the nature of a mandate, & secondarily a noun, =mandatary. A distinction in spelling between the personal noun & the adjective is obviously convenient, & the form mandatary is therefore recommended for the holder of a mandate from the League of Nations. Similar personal nouns, some of them with associated forms in -ory of more or less different sense, are ACCESSARY, adversary, commissary, DEPOSITARY, emissary, notary, registrary (Cambridge form of registrar), reposttary (person confided in, cf. repository storeplace), secretary (cf. the adjective secretory), tributary.
