page: 343

+ some were States of great magnitude./ A man like Walpole, or a man like Louis Napoleon, is protected by an unsensitive nature.

Meredith has a circumvention system for ‘ said so-&-so ° :— Now that is too bad,’ she pouted./‘ I must see Richard tomorrow morning, Mrs Doria ended the colloquy by saying./ € She did all she could to persuade me to wait, emphasized Richard. /* Singular child!’ she mentally apostrophized the girl./* At your age,’ Adrian relieved his embarrassment, ‘it is natural.’ /* You breakfast with us,’ she freshened off again.

Mr Kipling has ‘ But that is another story’.

Mr Wells has a Came: Came a familiar sound./Came the green flash again./Came that sense again of unendurable tension.

And so on, & so on. Perhaps few of those who write much escape from the temptation to trade on tricks of which they have learnt the -effectiveness; & it is true that it is a delicate matter to discern where a peculiarity ceases to be an element in the individuality that readers associate pleasantly with the writer they like, & becomes a recurrent & looked-for & dreaded irritation. But at least it is well for every writer to realize that, for his as for other people’s mannerisms, there is a point at which that transformation does take place.

mannikin. See MANIKIN.

manceuvre, vb, makes -vred, -vring; see Mute E. For the n. & vb, see -RE & -ER.

manqué. See FRENCH WORDS.

mantel(piece, -shelf). So spelt.

mantle, vb. The common use in which the subject is face, cheek, brow, flush, blush, colour, blood, &c., appears to come not directly from the original sense to clothe as with a mantle, but from the special application of that to liquor that covers itself with foam &c.; otherwise the natural construction would be (as idiom does not make it) 4

+ blush mantled her cheek &c., & not (as idiom does make it) A blush or The blood mantled in her cheek or Her cheek mantled with a blush. manumit makes -tied, -tting; see -T-, -TT-. manuscript. The abbreviation is MS. in singular, & MSS. in plural. many. While there have been m. a good-humoured smile about the Cody ‘Cathedral’, we may yet shortly witness the advent of a flyingmachine which... M. a requires always a singular verb. For similar questions, see NUMBER.

Maori. Pronounce mowr‘’i; pl. -is.

maraschino. Pronounce măraské’no; pl. -os, see -o(&)s 3.

margarin(e). The pronunciation marj- instead of marg- is clearly wrong, & is not even mentioned in the OED as an alternative. It was nevertheless prevalent before the war, when the educated had little occasion to use the word; but now that we all know the substance, its gis coming to its own. Perhaps the only English words in which g is soft before a or o or u are gaol (with its derivatives) & mortgagor. See -IN & -INE for the termination.

marginalia is plural; see LATIN PLURALS.

mariage de convenance, So spelt. See FRENCH WORDS.

Marie, Mary. See -EY, -IE, -¥.

marital. The OED gives mi‘rital, without even permitting marital. This is no doubt a shock to those— & they are many—who know the sound of maritus in Latin better than that of m. in their own language; see, however, FALSE QUAN- TITY for a batteryful of such shocks.

mark. For synonymy see SIGN.

markedly. Three syllables; see -EDLY.

market, vb, makes -eted, -eting, -etable; see -T-, -TT-.

Spell -try, &

marquetry, -eterie. pronounce mar’kitri.

marquis, -ess. The spelling recommended is -is; pl. -ises. The OED
