page: 344

+ note is: ‘The prevailing spelling in literary use appears to be marquis. Some newspapers, however, use marquess, & several English nobles bearing the title always write it in this way’.

marquise (pronounce -kéz) is French for marchioness, not for marquis.

marquois. Pronounce mar’quoiz.

marriage. For m. of convenience, see GALLICISMS.

marriageable. So spelt; see MUTE E.

marron glacé. See FRENCH WORDS.

marry. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

Marseillaise. Pronounce marsela’z.

marshal, vb, makes -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

martello. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

marten, -in. The beast has -en, the bird -in.

marvel, makes -iled, -lling, -llous; see -LL-, -L-.

Mary, Marie. See -ry, -1n, -y.

masculine. See MALE.

mashie, -y, golfclub. Usually -ie.

Masorah, Masorete, &c., Mass-. The OED gives the single -s- forms as the standard ones.

massacre, vb, makes massacring.

massage, -eur, -euse. Pronounce masah’zh, maser’, midser’z.

masterful) (masterly. Some centuries ago both were used indifferently in either of two very different senses: (A) imperious or commanding or strong-willed, & (B) skilful or expert or practised. The DIFFER- ENTIATION is now complete, -ful having the A & -ly the B meanings; & disregard of it is so obviously inconvenient, since the senses, though distinct, are not so far apart but that it may sometimes be uncertain which is meant, that it can only be put down to ignorance. Masterly is not misused; but masterful often appears, especially in the sporting reporter’s productions, instead of masterly. A few examples follow, in all of which masterly should have been the word:—The Australians did not collapse in the ordinary cricketing

+ acceptance of the word; they were simply the occasional victims of the always masterful attack./When he began to outplay the Englishman & picked up hole after hole the crowd was carried away by his masterful work & driven to applauding./The book is packed with characters masterfully managed, the most telling of whom are not the most virtuous but the most worldly./The influence of the engineering & mechanical triumphs of the staff of the canal zone has been dealt with by masterful writers./ Yates played a truly masterful game in defeating Rett.

masiicate makes -cable, -ior; see | -ABLE 1, -OR.

mastodon. PI. -ns; see -ON 3.

mat, lustreless. So spelt; it is a French adjective. The form matt is no doubt due to an instinct of differentiation; cf. SET(T).

mate, checkmate. The full form is now chiefly in metaphorical use, while the shortened one is preferred in chess.

mate (match), vb, makes matable; see MUTE E. materfamilias. Pl. matresfamilias or materfamiliases.

material, adj. There are at least. four current antitheses in aid of any of which m. may be called in when an adjective is required: there is matter & form (m. & formal); there is matter & spirit (m. & spiritual); there is matériel & personnel (m. & personal); & there is what matters. & what does not matter (m. & trifling). Before using m., therefore, with reference to any of these, the writer should make sure that there is no risk of confusion with another. Agriculture, though the most m. of all our pursuits, is teaching ws truths: beyond its own direct province./The: old bonds of relationship, & community of m.interests./A comparison between the French peasant-proprietor & the English small-holder as he might conceivably become under a freehold system, a comparison, be it:
