page: 345

+ said, to the m. advantage of the former. materialize. 1. M. makes -zable; see MUTE E. 2. The word has uses enough of its own (Those who would m. spirit. A soul materialized by gluttony. Virgil having materialized a scheme of abstracted notions. Ghosts or promises of ghosts which fail to m.) without being forced to do the work of happen or be fulfilled or form:— There would seem to be some ground for hope that the strike will not m. after all./Year after year passed & these promises failed to m./Out of the mist of notes & protocols a policy seems gradually to be materializing). In these latter senses m. is on the level of transpire (happen), proposition (job), eventwate (happen), negotiate (pass), unique (notable), individwal (man), & such abominations.

matériel. See FRENCH WORDS; in antitheses with personnel, expressed or implied, the French spelling & pronunciation should be kept, & not replaced by those of the English material.

mathematics. For the grammatical number, see -ICs 2.

matinée. As morning performance has the double disadvantage of being very long & suggesting a wrong time of day, m. is likely to prevail.

matins, matt-. The OED treats matins as the standard form. For m. & morning prayer, see MORNING.

matriculate -lable;

makes see -ABLE 1.

matrix. For pl. see -EX, -IX, 4, & -TRIX.

matter. The distribution shows that, as exceptional bravery ts confined to no rank in the Army, so recognition is given to it by no matter whom it is displayed. If elliptical phrases like no matter who are to be treated freely as units, care must be taken that the ellipsis can be filled in correctly. By it is no matter whom it is displayed is wrong, & it is no matter by whom it is displayed is right; accordingly the order should

+ be no matter by whom. The principle is—by all means save your reader the trouble of reading more words than he need, but do not save yourself the trouble of rehearsing the full form by way of test. The real cause of the mistake here is the superstition against prepositions at the end; no matter whom it is displayed by would have been correct; but the writer was frightened at his final preposition, made a grab at it, & plumped it down in a wrong place; see SUPERSTITIONS, & OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN. The offence is aggravated by the inevitable impulse to connect by with is gwen.

mattress. So spelt, not -ass.

matutinal. Chiefly in POLYSYL- LABIC HUMOUR. Here they were found by a m. gardener.

maty, comrade. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

maudlin. So spelt, not -ing; the origin is the name MAGDALEN.

maugre. See WARDOUR STREET.

maulstick. The OED gives this, not mahl-, as the standard form.

maunder, meander. Though the etymology of maunder is uncertain, it is clear that it is not a corruption of meander, its earlier sense being definitely to complain, growl, grouse. But it is also clear from the way some people use meander that they take the two words to be merely variant pronunciations. Meander means to follow a winding course, was originally used of rivers, is still often so used, describes frequent but not violent change of direction rather than aimlessness, & is applied more often to actual locomotion than to vagaries of the tongue, Maunder is best confined to speech. & suggests futility rather than digression, dull discontent. rather than quiet enjoyment, & failure to reach an end rather than loitering on the way to it.

Mauser. Pronounce mow“zer.

mauvais sujet, quart d'heure, mauvaise honte. See FRENCH WORDS.

maxilla. Pl. -llae.
