page: 347

+ -ums are both in use, & -a seems to be the commoner. See -UM. medlar (fruit). So spelt. meerschaum. So speit. meet. For we are met together &c., see INTRANSITIVE P.P. mein Herr. See MYNHEER.

meiosis. PI. -oses (-éz). For the meaning, see TECHNICAL TERMS.

mélange. See FRENCH WORDS.

mêlée (mé1a). So spelt, accented, & pronounced.

meliorate, -ation, are common in American usage; the British forms are amel-.

melodeon, «dion, -dium. The first appears to be the prevalent spelling.

melodrama is a term generally used with some contempt, because the appeal of such plays as are acknowledged to deserve the title is especially to the unsophisticated & illiterate whose acquaintance with human nature is superficial, but whose admiration for goodness & detestation of wickedness is ready & powerful. The melodramatist’s task is to get his characters labelled good & wicked in his audience’s minds, & to provide striking situations that shali provoke & relieve anxieties on behalf of poetic justice. Whether a play is or is not to be called a melodrama is therefore often a doubtful question, upon which different critics will hold different opinions. The origin of the name is in a form of play intermediate between opera, in which all is sung, & drama, in which music has no essential part; the early m. was ‘a form of dramatic musical composition in which music accompanied the spoken words & the action, but in which there was no singing. . o . This is the source of romantic dramas depending on sensational incident with exaggerated appeals to conventional senti- ———— ment rather than on play of character, & in which dramatis personae follow conventional types—the villain, the hero wrongfully charged with crime, the persecuted heroine,

+ the adventuress, &c.’—Enc. Brit. What the m. now so called inherits from the early form is the appeal to emotion; the emotional effect of musical accompaniment is obvious, & it is on emotional sympathy that m, still depends for success. melody) (harmony. See HARMONY. melt. Molten as in the verbal use (will be molten &c.) is now confined to poetry; as an adjective (like molten glass &c.) it can still be used without archaism, but only in literary contexts.

membership. The sense number of members (of a club &c.) is, though not a very desirable one, more or less established (The necessity of adding to the m. of the House; A large m. ts necessary). Much less desirable still is the extension from number of members to members (the Committee being chosen from the m. of the two Houses of Parliament./The employers’ proposals may be distasteful to a large section of our m.); needless substitution of the abstract for the concrete is one of the surest roads to flabby style.

membran(e)ous. There is no difference of meaning; the -nous form is recommended.

memento. Pl.-os; sec-o(£)s6. The word is sometimes sounded mémé’ntō by the ignorant.

memorandum. Pl. -da; see -UM.

memorize has -zable; see MUTE E.

ménage. See FRENCH WORDS.

menagerie. Pronounce mina&’jeri, & not as French.

mendacity, mendicity. The first is the conduct of a liar, the second that of a beggar.

meninx. Pl. usu. meninges.

meningitis. See GREEK G.

menstruum. PI. -ua.

-ment. For differences between this & -ion, see -ION & -mENT. The stems to which -ment is normally appended are those of verbs; freaks like oddment & funniment should not be made a precedent of; they are themselves due to misconception of merriment, whichis not from the
