page: 348

+ adjective, but from an obsolete verb merry to rejoice.

mentality. Str,—The mentality of the politician is a constant source of amazement to the engineer. Twenty years ago, no-one would have written that. The word would have been either mind or idiosyncrasy, according as the writer had a taste for short or for long words; in those days we had not discovered m.; in Routledge’s New English Dictionary (first published in 1914, & equal to all ordinary demands up to that date) it was not even recorded as a word. But we all know the sound & the look of it now; the meaning we neither know nor are likely to know so long as it retains its present vogue; for it is thrust into the place of all the old familiar words— mind, idiosyncrasy, disposition, character, nerve, mood, intellect, & a dozen others—for which it can possibly be made to do duty. Examples of it will be found in Love OF THE LONG WORD., Some like it because it is longer than mind; some because it is a VOGUE-WORD; & some because it has a pseudoscientific sound about it that may impress the reader; see PorU- LARIZED TECHNICALITIES. The best thing we can do with it is to let it lapse into its former obscurity; its meaning while it had one of its own instead of many borrowed ones was purely intellectual power, or more often the preponderance of that over the other faculties (An insect’s very limited m./Hudibras has the same hard m./Pope is too intellectual & has an excess of m.); in which senses intellect(wality) was far more common, so that m, is a truly SUPER- FLUOUS WORD.

menu. See FRENCH WORDS.

Mephistopheles. The adjective is Mephistophelean (méfistSfilé’an) or Mephistophelian (mifi’stofé/lian), the latter perhaps more likely to last; see HERCULEAN, mercy. For the tender mercies of,

| see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

merge makes -geable; see MUTE E.

meringue. Pronounce mera’ng.

merino. Pl. -os; see -o(E)S 8.

merit makes -ited &c. 3 see -T-, -TT-.

merriment. Not to be quoted in defence of bad formations like funniment; see -MENT.

merry. For the m. monarch see SOBRIQUETS.

mésalliance. See FRENCH WORDS.

mesembrianthemum should be so spelt. It is absurd not to correct, in a cumbrous word whose length can only be excused if it is at least significant to the learned, the misspelling y for 7; the y at once puts the Greek scholar off the track by suggesting embryo or bryony (Greek bruo swell, burgeon), & forbids him to think of mesembria noon, which is what he ought to be thinking of. When a word like rhyme that is | familiar to everyone has settled itself | into our hearts & minds with a wrong spelling, there is much to be said for refraining from correction; but with the y of m. no-one has tender associations.

mesmerize has -zable; see MuTE E.

messuage. Pronounce mé’swij.

metal makes metalled, metalliferous, &c.; see -LL-, -L-- For metal more attractive, see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

metamorphosis. Generally accented on the middie syllable (-mor-) 3 but the more regular accent on -pho- is still often heard; &, as m. seems to be the only word in -osis irregularly accented, as it retains the classical plural (-oses, pronounced with -éz), & as the -osis ending is now familiar in tuberculosis & other medical terms, it may be expected to revert to métamorfd’sis; cf. metempsychosts, which is stated b | the OED to have formerly had the accent on the -sy-, & has now | recovered.

METAPHOR. 1. Live & dead m. 2. Some pitfalls. 8. Self-consciousness & mixed m. 4. For m. & simile, see SIMILE & METAPHOR.

1. Live & dead m. In all discussion of m. it must be borne in mind that
