page: 352

+ it need hardly be considered in the middle one of them a live m. at all; however, the as-good-as-dead m. of jam is capable of being stimulated into life if anyone is so foolish as to bring into contact with it another half-dead m. of its own (i.e. the foodstuff) kind; & it was after all mixing metaphors to say the jam was a Slice of pie; but then the way of escape was to withdraw either the jam or the pie, instead of forcing them together down our throats with a ramrod of apology./Time sifis the richest granary, & posterity is a dainty feeder. But Lyall’s words, at any rate—to mix the metaphor— will escape the blue pencil even of such drastic editors as they. Since all three metaphors are live ones, & they are the sifter & the feeder, the working of these into grammatical connexion with the blue pencil does undoubtedly mix metaphors. But then our author gives us to understand that he knows he is doing it, & surely that is enough. Even so some liars reckon that a lie is no disgrace provided that they wink at a bystander as they tell it; even so those who are addicted to the phrase ‘to use a vulgarism’ expect to achieve the feat of being at once vulgar & superior to vulgarity./Certainly we cannot detect the suggested lack of warmth in the speech as ut is printed, for in his speech, as in the Prime Minister’s, it seems to us that (if we may change the metaphor) exactly the right note was struck./We may, on the one hand, recewe into our gill its precise content of the complex mixture that fills the puncheon of the whole world’s literature; on the other—to change the metaphor—our few small strings may thrill in sympathetic harmony to some lyrical zephyrs & remain practically unresponsive to the deep sea gale of Aeschylus or Dante. Certainly, gentlemen, you may change your metaphors, if it seems good to you; but you may also be pretty sure that, if you feel the necessity of proclaiming the change, you had

+ better have abstained from it./Two of the trump cards played against the Bill are (1) that ‘it makes every woman who pays a taa-collector in her own house’, & (2) that ‘it will destroy happy domestice relations in hundreds of thousands of homes’ ; if we may at once change our metaphor, these are the notes which are most consistently struck in the stream of letters, now printed day by day for our edification in the Mail. This writer need not have asked our leave to change from cards to music; he is within his rights, anyhow, & the odds are, indeed, that if he had not reminded us of the cards we should have forgotten them in the three intervening lines; but how did a person so sensitive to change of m. fail to reflect that it is ill playing the piano in the water? a stream of letters, it is true, is only a picturesque way of saying many letters, & ordinarily a dead m.; but once put your seemingly dead yet picturesque m. close to a piano that is being played, & its notes wake the dead—at any rate for readers who have just had the word m. called to their memories.

metaphysics & metaphysical are so often used as quasi-learned & vaguely depreciatory substitutes for various other terms, for theory & theoretical, subtle(ty), (the) super- natural, occult(ism), obscure & ob- | scurity, philosophy & philosophic, academic(s), & so forth, that it is pardonable to forget that they have a real meaning of their own—the more that the usual resource of those who suddenly realize that their notion of a word’s meaning is hazy, an appeal to its etymology, will not serve. It is agreed that Metaphysics owes its name to the accident that the part of Aristotle’s works in which metaphysical questions were treated of stood after (meta) the part concerned with physics (ta phusika), & that the word’s etymology is therefore devoid of significance. What is wanted, then, is a defini-
