page: 353

tion plain enough not to perplex,

but precise enough not to mislead. | Metaphysics is the branch of philo-

sophy that deals with the ultimate

nature of things, or considers the

questions, What is the world of | things we know? &, How do we

know it? ‘ Three kinds of definite

answers are returned. Metaphysical _ materialism is the view that every-

thing known is body or matter. Metaphysical idealism is the view that everything known is mind, or

some mental state or other. Meta- | physical realism is the intermediate

view that everything known is | either body or soul, neither of which

alone exhausts the universe of | being °™— Prof. T. Case in Enc. Brit. | Such being the subject of Meta- | physics, it is not wonderful, in view | of the infinity of theories & subtlety | of arguments evoked, that it should í have come by some or all of the | wrongacceptationsmentionedabove; Í but it is very desirable that the

plain man, who at best finds the

notion of it hard to grasp, should l not have his difficulties increased by / its being misapplied.

See TECHNICAL TERMS. _ metathesis.

Pl. -eses (-€2).

métayage, métayer.

See FRENCH METATHESIS 3

WORDS.

mete makes -table; see MUTE E.

metempsychosis. Pl. -oses (-€z). l Pronounce mitémpsik6’sis. i -meter. For words like speedo- | meter, see HYBRID DERIVATIVES. I For verse-names, see -meter in | TECHNICAL TERMS.

method. For m. in madness, see

IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

methodize has -zable; see MUTE E.

meticulous. What is the strange | charm that makes this wicked word | irresistible to the British journalist? | does he like its length? does he | pity its isolation (for it has no _ kindred in England)? can a Latin

scholar like him not get meticulosus Í out of his head? can so accom- | plished a Frenchman never be sure | whether méticuleux or m. is the

1351

+ word he knows so well? or what is it? At any rate, he must have the word always with him, however unsuitable the surroundings. It is clear first that it is not a piece of latinity that cannot be forgotten; ‘ ante- & post-classical’ say Lewis & Short; that is, you may read your Cicero & Virgil & Horace & Livy through & never meet it; & when it is unearthed in Plautus or somewhere it means not what the journalists make it mean, but just frightened; it is the word for the timid hare, or the man who is gibbering with fear (Nullust hoc meticulosus aeque ... Perii, pruriunt dentes— Was ever man in sucha funk?... Lord, how my teeth chatter!), That meaning, comprehensible enough through the Latin metus fear to all who have learnt any Latin, but not to others, since metus by some odd chance has given no common words to English, meticulous had some centuries ago; but the word died out. When it was resuscitated in the nineteenth century, it was by the literary critics with a new sense for which it was not in the least needed, scrupulous & punctilious being amply sufficient; but literary critics are given to gallicizing, & méticuleux appeared in the French- Academy dictionary in 1835, i.e., had lately become fashionable in France. The question is whether we are going to allow the word to be imposed upon us for general use, now that the journalist of the daily papers has caught it up from the literary critic. It is, for the uneducated, far less intelligible than scrupulous & punctilious, which have well-known nouns associated; it is, for the educated, divorced from its etymological meaning; it is, for the Englishman, a Gallicism. It might, indeed, have had a distinct shade of meaning that would have justified its existence, if it had been applied only to the care that has its origin in terror of being caught breaking rules or mis-stating facts; but how far it is from being so limited will be
