page: 355

+ microbe, micro-organism. See | SCHIZOMYCETES. mid has superl. midmost; mid air | should not be hyphened, see Hy- PHENS. middle. M. class is hyphened as an adjective (middle-class educa- | tion), but not as a noun (belongs to the middle class); see HYPHENS. For middle (article) & middle voice | see TECHNICAL TERMS. | middling(ly). The -ly is unusual & | undesirable: a middling good crop; | did middling well; it went only | middling. See UNIDIOMATIC -LY. midwifery. Three syllables; mi‘dwifri is perhaps usual, but both mi’dwifri & mi’difri are also heard; cf. HOUSEWIFE.

mighty. In the colloquialism m. fine &c., mightily should not be substituted; see UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

mignon, migraine. See FRENCH WORDS.

mikado. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 6.

milage. So spelt; see MUTE E.

milden. See -EN VERBS.

Milesian (Irish) is now chiefly a resource of the ELEGANT VARIA- TIONIST; see also POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

millenarian, of the, believer in the, millennium. The apparent inconsistency in spelling (-7-, -nn-) results from the fact that millenarian, like peenar, does not contain the stem of the Latin annus year, which is present in millennium; if it were formed from millennium, the form would be millenniarian; millenarian strictly means thousander, not thousand-yearer. Cf. CENTENARY.

millenary. The OED pronounces mi‘linari; but see CENTENARY.

millennium. Pl. -ms, -ia; see -UM.

milli-. See KILO-.

milliard means a thousand millions; it is chiefly a French term, though perhaps advancing in general currency. In France it is the equivalent in ordinary use for the mathematical French (which differs from the English) BILLION.

+ million. 1. A m. & a quarter, two millions & a half, rather than one & aquarter million(s) & two & a half millions; see HALF. 2. It is safe to say, therefore (adds the ‘ Times’), that the total is considerably less than 2% millions, although it must be well over 14 million. This change from 2} millions to 14 million is wrong (see ONE) unless 74 million is meant merely for the printed form that is to be said as ‘a million & a half’.

3. Forty-five million people rather than forty-five millions of people (on the analogy of dozen, score, hundred, & thousand); but, with a few & many, millions of is perhaps the more usual form.

4. Amongst the eight million are a few hundred to whom this does not apply rather than millions, hundreds; but He died worth three millions rather than million; this because ‘a million’ is an established noun (as distinguished from a mere numeral) in the sense £1,000,000, but not in the sense a million people.

Milly. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

milor(d). See FRENCH WORDS.

mimic, vb, makes -cked, -cking; see -C-, -CK-.

minacious, minatory. Both words smack of pedantry; but while the first is serviceable only for Pory- SYLLABIC HUMOUR, the second is not out of place in a formally rhetorical context,

mince, vb, makes -ceable; see MUTE E.

mine. For (my or) mine & your future depends upon it &c., see ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES.

mine, vb, has -nable; see MUTE E.

mineralogy is a syncopated form (the syncopation done in French) for mineralology, & should not be quoted in defence of proposed wrong forms in -alogy; cf. pacifist.

minify, minimize, diminish. Minify is a badly formed & little used word; it owes its existence to the desire for a neat opposite to the correctly
