page: 356

+ MINIMUM 356 formed magnify, but is now chiefly used by people who, rightly enough offended by the extension of minimize to improper meanings, are too ready to catch at the first alternative; a slight further search would bring them through minish (to which the only but fatal objection is that it is archaic) to diminish.

Minimize is both a rightly formed & a current word, but unfortunately current in more senses than it has any right to. It should be kept strictly to the limits imposed by its derivation from minimus (not less or little, but least), & therefore always mean either to reduce to the least possible amount (We must minimize the friction) or to put at the lowest possible estimate (It is your interest to minimize his guilt). The meanings given to minimize in the following quotations, i.e. reduce & underestimate, ignore the essential superlative element:—The utility of our convoy would have been considerably minimized had it not included one of these./The Shipping Federation has left little scope for unions of the men; nobody who knows anything of that combination is likely to minimize its power./An open window or door would greatly minimize risk.

Minify should be given up as a SUPERFLUOUS WORD; minimize should be kept to its proper senses; magnify should have as its opposite, in one of its senses diminish (the diminishing end of the telescope), & in another underestimate (neither magnify nor underestimate the diffculties). See also BELITTLE,

minimum. Pl. usually -ma.

minister. The tendency to apply the word, in the sense m. of religion, to dissenters, & to avoid applying it to Anglicans, noteworthy seeing that m. is common in the Prayer-Book rubrics, is explained by historical circumstances; it was adopted as an acceptable name ‘ at first chiefly by those who objected to the terms priest & clergyman as implying

MINOTAUR | erroneous views of the nature of the sacred office ’—OED.

Minnie.

So spelt; see -EY, -IE, ity, m. has, A, inferiority of number . ’ -Y.

minor (in logic). See TECHNICAL TERMS.

minority is like MAJORITY, only more so, in its meanings, with which odd tricks can be played. Corresponding to the A, B, & C, of majoror fewerness or pauciority, B, a party having a pauciority, & C, less than half of any set of people. ` ‘More so’, because, if one presses one’s rights, one may say that a small m. (sense B) isin a considerable | m. (sense A) or is the vast m. i (sense C), both of which statements happen to sound absurd; & again, in a Board of 51 a m. of one may be || either 25 persons (A) or one person (B). The point need not be laboured, but should be appreciated. There is a tacit convention, in the interests of lucidity, that adjectives naturally appropriate to magnitude shall not be used with m. to emphasize smallness of number, & another that a m. of one shall always mean one person. But the first is not always kept to:— With a considerable minority of the votes polled, the Tory Party have obtained a clear & substantial majority over all other parties in the House. Oddly enough, the newspaper whose own words are those has this paragraph about a fellow offender:— Says a motoring writer in a Sunday | paper: ‘Itis time that a period were | put to the era of the trap on the open road, & that the interests of the public | at large were considered by attacking the real evil—the dangerous & inconsiderate driver. Fortunately, he con-

| stitutes the vast minority of motor-car

| owners & drivers’. We know what is meant, but ‘the vast minority’ is a very unfortunate way of saying it. In the first passage m. is used in sense A, & in the second in sense C; but the convention is applicable to both or neither, Minotaur. Generally pronounced
