page: 359

+ ous, unbosomed, blossoming, bottomed, buxomest, harmoniumist, vellumy); but words in -gram double the m (compare epigrammatic, diagrammatic, with systematic). mobilize makes -zable; see MUTE E. mobocracy. See HYBRID DERIVA- TIVES. moccasin, which suggests the pronunciation better, is now preferred | to the formerly current mocassin. mocha, coffee. Pronounce mõ'ka. model makes -lled, -lling, &c. ; see *LL-, -L-. moderate makes -rable, -tor;

see -ABLE l, -OR. modern makes -nness. For the m. Athens, the m. Babylon, see SOBRI- QUETS. modernize has -zable; see MUTE E. modest makes -er, -est. modify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6. modish. So spelt; see MUTE E.

modulate makes -lable, -ior; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

modulus. P1. -li (-i).

modus vivendi (literally way of living) is any temporary compromise that enables parties to carry on pending settlement of a dispute that would otherwise paralyse their activities.

Mogul, Accent the second syllable. For the spelling Mughal see DIDAC- TICISM, MAHOMET.

Mohammed(an). See MAHOMET.

moiety, apart from uses as a legal term & a FORMAL WORD, exists merely for the delight of the ELE- GANT-VARIATIONist in such triumphs as: The Unionist candidate was returned by exactly half the number of votes polled, the other moiety being divided between a Labour & an Independent opponent.

moire)(moiré. Moire, or moire antique, is the name of the watered silk material; moiré is first an adjective meaning watered like moire (often of metal surfaces), & secondly a noun meaning watered surface or effect. A moire dress; velvets & moire antiques; a moiré

+ surface; the moiré has been improved by using the blowpipe. Pronounce mwahr, mwar’a. moisten. The ¢ is silent; see PRONUNCIATION. molasses is used as a singular. molecule, atom, electron, corpuscle. To the mere literary man without scientific knowledge, the relations of these words to each other are puzzling, & not easy to learn, even in an elementary way, from consulting each by itself in dictionaries. Some sentences picked out from the Enc. Brit. article on molecule may throw light; but here, first, are the etymological meanings: molecule, small mass; atom, uncuttable (particle); electron, amber; corpuscle, small body.

‘The doctrine that matter can be divided into, or regarded as composed of, discrete particles (termed atoms by early writers, & molecules by modern ones) has at all times played an important part in metaphysics & natural science.’ .

‘< Democritus was the founder of the atomic theory, while Anaxagoras propounded that of continuity.’

‘The atoms, they [the atomists] said, do not fill up the universe; there are void spaces between them . . . The opposite school maintained then, as they have always done, that there is no vacuum—that every part of space is full of matter, that there is a universal plenum.’

< Molecule, the minutest particle of matter capable of separate existence. The word appears to have been invented during the 17th century, & remained synonymous with atom . . . until the middle of the 19th century, when a differentiation was established.’

‘An enormous mass of experimental evidence now shows quite conclusively that matter cannot be regarded as having a continuous structure, but that it is ultimately composed of discrete parts. The smallest unit of matter with which physical phenomena are concerned
