page: 361

+ first time, should be ousting the entirely satisfactory eyeglass is a melancholy illustration of the popular taste in language. monologist. See GREEK G. monologue,monometer. See TECH- NICAL TERMS.

monopolize makes

-zable; see MUTE E.

monotonic, -nous. The secondary sense of monotonous (same or tedious) has so nearly swallowed up its primary (of one pitch or tone) that it is well worth while to remember the existence of monotonic, which has the primary sense only.

Monroe doctrine. Its status is that of a manifesto addressed by the U.S.A. to all whom it may concern, not that of a treaty or a piece of international law.

Its contents are not definite, nor expressed as a legislative enactment, nor extractable from a single document, but are in course of development, having varied from the view that European Powers must not interpose with a view to securing control of independent American States, nor establish fresh colonies in America, to the principle that every portion of the American continent must be free from European control.

Its name is taken from President Monroe, who in 1823 made a declaration to Congress to the effect stated above in summary as the first view.

The original policy at least had the official approval of Great Britain.

See

monseigneur, monsieur. FRENCH WORDS.

Pron. -ényor’(é).

monsignor, -ore. Pl. -ori (-€).

monsoon. See WIND, N.

mood. It may save misconceptions to mention that the grammar word has nothing to do with the native word meaning frame of mind &c., & is merely a variant of mode.

moollah. See MULLAH. 7

mora. The Italian finger-flashing

+ game is so spelt in Italian, not MOTTA.

moral, adj. 1. For distinctions between m. & ethical, morals & ethics, see ETHICAL 5, 6. 2. M. victory, m. certainty. The first is often applied to an event that is from another point of view a defeat; the second is always applied to what is in fact an uncertainty. Itis so easy to see why m. victory should mean what it does, & so hard to see why m. certainty should, that anyone considering the point by the mere light of nature is tempted to guess that m. certainty is the illegitimate offspring of m. victory, & perhaps to abstain from using it as a solecism. The OED quotations show that, on the contrary, it is much the older of the two phrases; &, though this peculiar sense of practical or virtual in combination with certainiy, & of tantamount to demonstrative in combination with evidence, is hard to account for, it is established as idiomatic.

moral(e), n. Is a combination of pedantry & Gallicism to bully us into abandoning the English word morale? For, until a few years ago, we all wrote that without thinking twice about it; & to this day you will meet it in the local newspapers that have not time to keep up with the latest tricks of the London Press, & in those parts of the London Press itself that have to use a tongue understanded of the people.

The case for the spelling moral is that (1) the French use the word moral for what we used to call morale, & therefore we ought to do the same; & that (2) the French use morale to mean something different from what we mean by it.

The case against moral is (1) that it is a new word, less comprehensible to ordinary people, even now after its wartime currency, than the old morale; (2) that it must always be dressed in italics owing to the occasional danger of confusion with the English word moral, & that such N3
