page: 363

+ use of he more, see THE. 2. For the common confusion between much m. & much less, see ILLOGICALITIES, LESS, and MUCH. 3. M. than one, though its sense is necessarily plural, is treated as a sort of compound of one, following its construction, & agrees with a singular noun & takes a singular verb: m. t. o. workman was killed, m. t. o. was killed, not workmen or were. 4. For m. in sorrow than in anger, see HACKNEYED PHRASES. 5. The new dock scheme affects the whole of the northern bank of the Thames*in a more or less degree. This is wrong because, though a less degree is English, a m. degree is not; & the reason for that again is that while Less still preserves to a certain extent its true adjectival use (=smaller) as well as its quasi-adjectival use ( = a smaller amount of), the former use of m. (=larger) has long been obsolete, & it retains only the latter sense, a larger amount of. Less butter, less courage, a less degree, & even a less price, are possible; but not a m. degree or a m. price, only m. butter or courage. The m. part, & More’s the pity, are mentioned by the OED as survivals of the otherwise obsolete sense.

morgue. See FRENCH WORDS.

morning. 1. M. Service, M. Prayer, Matins. The first is perhaps the usual unofficial term; the other two are official, & the last is especially in High-Church & musical use. Similarly Evening Service, Evening Prayer, Evensong. 2. M. performance. See MATINEE.

morocco. Pl. -os; see -O(£)s.3.

morphia, morphine. The meaning is the same, the second being the scientific term, but the first surviving in ordinary use.

morra. See MORA.

mortal. For all that was m. of, & the m. remains of, see HACKNEYED PHRASES, & STOCK PATHOS.

mortgagee, -ger, -gor. 1. As the word mortgager is one that could be formed at will from the verb

+ morigage even if it were, as it is not, unrecorded, the maintenance of the form -gor, pronounced -jor, seems an absurdity; the only other English words in which g is soft before a or o or u are perhaps gaol & its derivatives, & the debatable MARGARINE. 2. The mortgagee is the person who lends money on the security of an estate, the mortgager or -or the person who pledges his property in order to get the loan. But, as the owner of a mortgaged estate is often himself described as ‘mortgaged up to the eyes’ &c., & as -ee suggests the passive, & -or & -er the active party, those who are not familiar with the terms are apt to have the meanings reversed in their minds.

mortifiedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

mortify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

mortise, -ice. The first is better. In m. & tenon, the m. is the receiving cavity.

moslem, muslim. The OED treats the first as the ordinary English form, & there is no doubt that it is so. Correction into muslim is to be deprecated; see Dipacticism. M. ean be used as adjective or as noun, & the plural of the noun is preferably -ms, but sometimes the same as the singular; the use of the plural moslemin or muslimin is bad didacticism. See also MUSSULMAN.

mosquito. Pl. -os; see -o(z)s 6.

-most. The commoner words with this ending are best pronounced -ost, not -dst, though mistaken effort is often expended on satisfying the supposed demands of the spelling. The origin was not the word most, but a double superlative suffix -mest, & it is not unlikely that the ordinary colloquial pronunciation records this fact. Foremost, innermost, uppermost, topmost, inmost, utmost, hindermost, are examples of the words in which the obscure o is better than the clear 6,

most(ly). The internecine conflict
