page: 365

+ mouthed &c. -dhd, & mouthy -dhi; see -TH & -DH. mouthful. Pl. -ls; see -FuL. move makes -vable, not -veable; see MUTE E. mow, stack or cock. Pron. mow. mow, grimace. Pron. mow or mō. mow, vb. The p.p., when used as an adjective, should be mown (the mown, not mowed, grass; newmown &c.); when it is verbal, both forms are current (the lawn was mown, or mowed, yesterday). M.P. Four forms are wanted: ordinary singular, ordinary plural, possessive singular, & possessive

lural. They are easily supplied: M.P. (Heis an M.P.); M.P.s (M.P.s now travel free); M.P.’s (What is your M.P.’s name?); M.P.s’ (What about income tax & M.P.s salaries?). The following newspaper extract contains two of the parts, but represents them both by the same form, & that one belonging to another:

M.P.S PIGEON RACE

A pigeon race, organized by M.P.’s, took place on Saturday. Read (1) M.P.S’, (2) M.P.s.

Mr, Mrs. See Prrrop for the question whether Mr & Mrs or Mr. & Mrs. are better.

much. 1. For the use of m. rather than very with participles (m. pleased &c.), see VERY.

2. M. more & m. less. The adverbs more, & less, are used in combination with m. or still to convey that a statement that is being or has been made about something already mentioned applies more forcibly yet to the thing now to be mentioned: The abbreviating, m. more the garbling, of documents does great harm./ Garbling was not permitted, m. less | MOUTHFUL 365 encouraged. The choice between more & less is under some circumstances a matter of difficulty even for those who are willing to be at the pains of avoiding illogicality, & a trap for the unwilling.

With sentences that are affirmative both in effect & in expression it is

+ plain sailing; m. more is invariable. With sentences that are negative in expression as well as in effect there is as little doubt; m. less is invariable: J did not even see him, m. less shake hands with him. It is when the effect is negative, but the expression affirmative, even if technically affirmative only, that doubts arise. The meaning of technically, & the distinction between effect & expression must be made clear. Té will be a year before it is done; the effect of that is negative, since it means that the thing will not be finished in less than twelve months; but its expression is simply affirmative, there being no negative word init. Jt is not possible to do it under a year; the effect & the expression of that are obviously both negative. It is impossible to do it under a year; the effect of that is negative, but the expression is technically affirmative. Though the difference in meaning between the last two is undiscoverable, the difference of expression decides between more & less: It is not possible to do it under a year, m. less in six months; It is impossible to do it under a year, m. more in six months. What governs the decision, is the right words required to fill up the ellipsis: Tt is not possible to do it under a year, much ——? (is tt possible to do tt) in six months; It ts impossible to do it under a year, much ORSA impossible) to do it in six months.

Careless writers make the mistake of letting the general effect run away with them instead of considering the expression. In the example that has just been worked out the fault is a slight ome, because the wrong filling up of the ellipsis with changed words (is it possible instead of is it impossible) is so easy as to seem to the reader not less natural than to the writer. In less simple examples the fault is much more glaring. In all the following quotations more should have been written instead of less:—

It is a full day’s work even to open,
