page: 368

+ exciteable or excitable? time, timeous or limous? move, moveable or movable? like, likely or likly? dote, doteard or dotard? judge, judgement or judgment? hinge, hingeing or hinging? singe, singeing or singing? gauge, gaugeable or gaugable? notice, noticeable or noticable? mouse, mousey or mousy? change, changeing or changing, changeling or changling? hie, hieing or hiing? glue, gluey or gluy? due, duely or duly? blue, blueish or bluish? whole, wholely or wholly? Whether such questions are idle was decided for me, as this article was being written, by the following in an evening paper:— The almost ungaugable Forces which make history & forge the destinies of the race will not be hurried.

The only satisfactory rule, exceptions to which are very few, is this: If the suffix begins with a consonant, the mute e is retained; if the suffix begins with a vowel, the mute e is dropped. Applying this to the list above, we get (with the wrong results in italics, as a basis for exceptions); stalish; loving; milage; livable; striving; excitable; timous; moyable; likely; dotard; judgement; hinging; singing; gaugable; noticable; mousy; changing; changeling; hiing; gluy; duely; bluish; wholely.

The chief exception (gaugeable, noticeable, singeing) is that e remains even before a vowel when the soft sound of c or g is to be made possible (as before -able) or to be insisted on (as in distinguishing the participles of singe & sing). There are no other general exceptions; duly, truly, & wholly, are individual ones merely; hieing is specially so spelt to avoid consecutive is, much as clayey has an e actually inserted to separate two ys; & glucy, bluey, are due to fear that gluy, bluy, may be pronounced after buy & guy. For practical purposes, then, a single rule, with a single exception, suffices—stated again below. The only sacrifice involved is that of the power (most arbitrarily & incon-

+ sistently exercised at present) of indicating the sound of an earlier vowel by insertion or omission of the e (mileage for fear that milage may be pronounced mil-). The history of dispiteous is perhaps the best comment; from despite came despitous (dispi’‘tus); when the spelling changed to despiteous (cf. the recent lineage, li‘nij), the pronunciation changed to dispi’tius (cf. the old-established lineage, li’niéj), & out of this came a false association with piteous, cutting the word off from its etymology & attaching it to pity instead of to spite.

RULE

When a suffix is added to a word ending in mute e, the mute e is dropped before a vowel, but not before a consonant.

EXCEPTION

The e is kept even before a vowel if it is needed to preserve or emphasize the soft sound of a preceding gorc.

EXAMPLES

change, changeling, changing, changeable; singe, singeing; hinge, hinging; trace, traceable; fake, fakable; line, linage; mite, mity 5 strive, striving; pale, palish; judge, judgement.

mutilate makes -lable, -tor 5

see -ABLE l, -or.

mutiny. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

mutism. So spelt; see MUTE E.

mutual is a well-known trap. The essence of its meaning is that it involves the relation, æ is or does to yas yto x; & not the relation, æ is or does to z as y to z; from which it follows that our mutual friend Jones (meaning Jones who is your friend as well as mine), & all similar phrases, are misuses of m. An example of the mistake, which is very common, is: On the other hand, if we [i.e., the Western Powers] merely sat with our arms folded there would be a peaceful penetration of
