page: 369

+ Russia by the country [i.e., Germany] which was the mutual enemy [i.e., of both Russia & the Western Powers]. In such places common is the right word, & the use of m. betrays ignorance of its meaning. It should be added, however, that m. was formerly used much more loosely than it now is, & that the OED, giving examples of such looseness, goes no further in condemnation than ‘ Now regarded as incorrect ’, ‘Commonly censured as incorrect, but still often used in the collocations m. friend, m. acquaintance, on account of the ambiguity of common’. The Dickens title has no doubt much to do with the currency of m. friend.

Another fault is of a different kind, betraying not ignorance, but lack of the taste or care that should prevent one from saying twice over what it suffices to say once. This happens when m. is combined with some part of each other, asin: It is this fraternity of Parliament-men serving a common cause, mutually comprehending each other’s problems & difficulties, & respecting each other’s rights & liberties, which is the foundation of the structure. It may fairly be said that the sole function of mutual(ly) is to give the sense of some part of each other when it happens to be hard to get each other into one’s sentence; if each other not only can be, but is, got in, m. is superfluous; in the quotation it adds nothing whatever, & is the merest tautology.

A few bad specimens follow:—The ring was mutually chosen by the Duke & Lady Elisabeth last Wednesday./ They have affinities beyond a m. admiration for Mazzini./M. exchange of prisoners./A m. exchange of berthage accommodation at Southampton & Bremen./It involves . . . m. semibankruptcy of employers & employed./ M. quotation of each other.

For the distinction between m. & reciprocal, see RECIPROCAL,

muzhik. See MOUJIK.

my. For my & your work &c. (not mine), see ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES.

mynheer, mein Herr, Herr. The first is Dutch & can mean gentleman, sir, or Mr; the second is German for sir; the third is German for gentleman & Mr.

myriad is generally used of a great but indefinite number; but it is well to remember that its original sense, still occasionally effective, is ten thousand.

mystic has been much slower than mysterious in becoming a popular word & thereby losing its definitely spiritual or occult or theological implications. Everything that puzzles one has long been called mysterious (who committed the latest murder, for instance), but not mystic. It is very desirable that mystic should be kept as long as possible from such extension, . Unfortunately the NovrLTy-HUNTERS, tired of mysterious, have lately got hold of it: But I don’t want to be mystic, & you shall hear the facts & judge me afterwards.

mystifiedly. A bad form; see -EDLY,.

mystify. For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

myth is a word introduced into English less than a century ago as a name for a form of story characteristic of primitive peoples & thus defined by the OED: A purely fictitious narrative usually involving supernatural persons, actions, or events, & embodying some popular idea concerning natural or historical phenomena, By those who wish to mark their adherence to this original sense the word is still often pronounced mith. But the meaning popularly attached to the word is little more than a tale devoid of truth or a non-existent person or thing or event; always in these senses, & usually even in the original one, the pronunciation is mith. See POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES.

mythopoeic, -peic. See Æ, Œ.
