page: 370

N

n. To the nih. As a mathematical symbol, n means an unspecified number; it is a dummy occupying a place until its unknown principal comes along, or a masquerader who on throwing off the mask may turn out to be anything. It does not mean an infinite number, nor the greatest possible number, nor necessarily even a large number, but simply the particular number that we may find ourselves concerned with when we come to details; it is short for ‘one or two or three or whatever the number may be’. It follows that the common use of to the nth for to the utmost possible extent (The Neapolitan is an Italian to the nth degree./Minerva was starched to the nth) is wrong. It is true that sentences can be constructed in which the popular & the mathematical senses are reconciled (Though the force were increased to the nth, it would not avail), & here, no doubt, the origin of the misuse is to be sought. Those who talk in mathematical language without knowing mathematics go out of their way to exhibit ignorance. See POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES.

nacrous, The first is

hacreous.

370 better.

naiad. PI. -ds or -des (pron. -déz).

naif. If we were now adopting the French word for the first time, & were proposing not to distinguish between masculine & feminine, but to choose either -f or -ve for all uses, something might be said for the masculine form (in spite of pensive, effective, &c.) as being the French word before inflexion. But both forms have been with us for centuries representing both genders, & it is undeniable that naive is now the prevalent spelling, & the use of naif (either in all contexts or whenever the gender is not conspicuously feminine) a conscious correction of other people’s supposed errors, Such corrections are pe-

+ dantic when they are needless; on the needlessness of correcting established mis-spellings of foreign words, see MORALE.

nail. Hit the (right) n. on the head. It is clear from the OED quotations that right, which blunts the point by dividing it into two, is a modern insertion; all the quotations up to 1700 are without it, & all after 1700 have it; it is better omitted.

naive, naiveté, naive, naivety. The slowness with which the naturalization of the words has proceeded is curious & regrettable. For it will hardly be denied that they deserve a warm welcome as supplying a shade of meaning not provided by the nearest single English words. The OED definition, for instance, ‘Natural, unaffected, simple, artless’, clearly omits elements—the actor’s unconsciousness & the observer’s amusement—that are essential to the ordinary man’s idea of naiveté. Unconsciously & amusingly simple; naive means not less than that, & is therefore a valuable word: but, as long as the majority of Englishmen are kept shy of it by what is to them queer spelling & pronunciation, its value will not be exploited. The difficulty is rather with the noun than with the adjective; many by this time write naive, & many call it nav; but naivety, though it was used by Hume & other 18th-century writers, has not yet made much headway against naiveté ; tillit wins, these potentially useful words will be very much wasted. name makes namable; see MUTE E. name-part. Title-rôle is the established word; what is the matter with it? See NOVELTY-HUNTING. naphtha. So spelt. Pronounce năf-, not năp-. napkin should be preferred to SERVIETTE, narcissus.

Pl. -ssuses or -ssī. narcosis.

Pl. -oses (-dséz),
