page: 371

+ narghile.

Pron. -gili.

narrate makes

-table, -tor; see -ABLE l, -OR.

narratress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

nasal. For n. organ see PEDANTIC HUMOUR. For the phonetic sense see TECHNICAL TERMS.

nath(e)less. The OED puts first the spelling natheless & the pronunciation na‘thlis. nationalize, naturalize, make -zable; see MUTE E.

nature. 1. Periphrasis. The word is a favourite with the lazy writers who prefer glibness & length to conciseness & vigour. The accident was caused through the dangerous nature of the spot, the hidden character of the by-road, & the utter absence of any warning or dangersignal. The other way of putting this would be The accident happened because the spot was dangerous, the by-road hidden, & no warning given./ It must not be supposed that when we speak of Mr Balfour as unwilling to snatch at office we are suggesting any feeling of a converse nature in Mr Asquith. ‘Any fecling of a converse nature’ means the converse Se rather, perhaps, the opposite) eeling./It is true that nature slips readily off the tongue or pen in such contexts, but the temptation should be resisted; see PERIPHRASIS.

2. One touch of nature makes the whole world kin. What Shakspere meant was: ‘There is a certain tendency natural to us all, viz that specified in the following lines (Troilus & Cressida, 111. iii. 176-9), which is, so far as one word may express it, fickleness. What is meant by those who quote him is: A thing that appeals to simple emotions evokes a wonderfully wide response; this is both true & important; but to choose for the expression of it words by which Shakspere meant nothing of the! NARGHILE 371 kind is unfair both to him & to it. That the first words of a cynicism appropriately put in the mouth of the Shaksperian Ulysses should be

+ the stock quotation for the power of sympathy is an odd reversal. naught, nought. The variation of spelling is not a modern accident, but descends from Old English. The distinction, however, now usually observed between the senses borne by each form is a matter of convenience only, & by no means universally recognized. This distinction is that nought is simply the name of the cipher 0, while the archaic, poetic, & rhetorical uses in which the word is substituted for nothing in any other than the arithmetical sense now prefer naught:— one, nought, noughi, one; noughts & crosses; bring or come to, or set at, naught; availeth naught; give all for naught.

nautilus. PI. -li.

navigate makes -gable; see -ABLE.

navy. For n. & army, see ARMY.

near(ly). The use of near in the sense of nearly (Not near so often; near dead with fright; near a century ago) has been so far affected by the vague impression that adverbs must end in ly as to be obsolescent; see UNIDIOMATIC -Ly for other words in which the process has not gone so far. Those who still say near for nearly are suspected, if provincialism & ignorance are both out of the question, of pedantry; it is a matter in which it is wise to bow to the majority.

nebula. PI. -Jae.

necessarian. See NECESSITARIAN.

necessary. For essential, n., & requisite, see ESSENTIAL.

necess(it)arian. The existence of two forms of a word, unless they are utilized for differentiation, is inconvenient, putting those who are not thoroughly familiar with the matter to the needless pains of finding out whether the two do in fact stand for different things or for the same. It would therefore be well if one of this pair could be allowed to lapse. There is no valid objection to the formation of either; but neces-
