page: 374

noun & adjective. 4. Number &

| like Johnson & Ruskin have done

person of verb after neither... nor.

5. Position of neither . . . nor. 6.

Neither ... or. 7. Neither as con-

junction. 8. Neither pleonastic.

1. The pronunciation recommended

is ni’‘dher; see EITHER.

2. The proper sense of the pronoun

(or adjective) is ‘not the one nor

the other of the two’. Like either,

it sometimes refers loosely to num-

bers greater than two (Heat, light,

electricity, magnetism, are all corre-

latives; neither can be said to be the essential cause of the others); but none or no should be preferred; cf. EITHER 3. This restriction to two does not hold for the adverb (Neither fish nor flesh nor fowl).

3. The number of the adjective & pronoun is properly singular, & disregard of this fact is a recognized grammatical mistake, though, with the pronoun at least, very common:—The conception is faulty for two reasons, neither of which are noticed by Plato./What at present I believe neither of us know; grammar requires is noticed, & knows. The same mistake with the adjective is so obviously wrong as to be almost impossible; not quite, however: Both Sir Harry Verney & Mr Gladstone were very brief, neither speeches exceeding fifteen minutes. An almost equally incredible freak with the pronoun is: Lord Hothfield & Lord Reay were born the one in Paris & the other at The Hague, neither being British subjects at the time of his birth (as indeed neither could be unless he were twins).

4. Number & person after neither . e e NOT. If both subjects are singular & in the third person, the only need is to remember that the verb must be singular & not plural. This is often forgotten; the OED quotes, from Johnson, Neither search nor labour are necessary, &, from Ruskin, Neither painting nor fighting feed men, where is & feeds are undoubtedly required. The right course is not to indulge in bad grammar ourselves & then plead that better men

+ | it before us, but to follow what is | now the accepted as well as the

logical rule. Complications occur

when, owing to a difference in

number or person between the sub-

ject of the neither member & that

of the nor member, the same verb-

form or pronoun or possessive

adjective does not fit both: Neither

you nor I (was?, were?) chosen;

Neither you nor I (is?, am?, are?)

the right person; Neither eyes nor nose (does its?, do their?) work; Neither employer nor hands will say what (they want?, he wants?). The wise man, in writing, evades these problems by rejecting all the alternatives—any of which may set up friction between him & his reader—& putting the thing in some other shape; & in speaking, which does not allow time for paraphrase, he takes risks with equanimity & says what instinct dictates. But, as instinct is directed largely by habit, it is well to eschew habitually the clearly wrong forms (such as Neither chapter nor verse are given) & the clearly provocative ones (such as Neither husband nor wife is competent to act without his consort). About the following, which are actual newspaper extracts, neither grammarians nor laymen will be unanimous in approving or disapproving the preference of is to are or of has to have; but there will be a good majority for the opinion that both writers are grammatically more valorous than discreet:— Neither apprenticeship systems nor technical education is likely to influence these occupations (why not have omitted systems?)./Neither Captain C. nor I has ever thought it necessary to... (Neither to Captain C. nor to me has it ever seemed , . JE 5. Position of neither . . . nor. Which neither suits one purpose nor the other. Suits being common to both members should not be inserted in the middle of the neither member. Such displacement has been discussed & illustrated under
