page: 375

+ EITHER 5, & need only be mentioned here as a mistake to be avoided. 6. Neither ...or. When a negative has preceded, a question often arises between nor & or as the right continuation, & the answer to the question sometimes requires care; see NOR, OR. But when the preceding negative is neither (adv.), the matter is simple, or being always wrong. Examples of the mistake: Diderot presented a bouquet which was neither well or ill recetved./Like the Persian noble of old, I ask ‘ that I may neither command or obey’. Here again, to say that Morley & Emerson have sinned before us is a plea not worth entering.

7. Neither alone as conjunction. This use, in which neither means ‘nor yet °’, or ‘ & moreover... not’, & connects sentences instead of the ordinary & not or nor (I have not asked for help, neither do I desire it; Defendant had agreed not to interfere, neither did he) is much less common than it was, & is best reserved for contexts of formal tone.

8. Neither with the negative force pleonastic, as in I don’t know that neither (instead of either), was formerly idiomatic though colloquial, but is now archaic & affected.

Nelly, or Nellie; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

nepenthe(s). Three syllables, whether with or without the -s. The -s is part of the Greek word, & should have been retained in English; but it has very commonly been dropped, probably from being mistaken for the plural sign as in pea for pease &c. The prevailing form (except in Botany, where the classical word is naturally used) is now -the.

Nereid. Pronounce ner‘iid.

Nero. Pl. -os, see -0(E£)s 8.

nervy. So spelt; see -EY & -y.

-ness. For the distinction between conciseness & concision, & similar pairs, see -ION & -NESS.

nestle, nestling. Pronounce without the -t-; see PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

+ net. In the commercial sense (free from deduction, &c.) the spelling should, as elsewhere, be net, not nett. See SET(T). nether. For n. garments, n. man, &e., see PEDANTIC HUMOUR. neurasthenia. The OED gives -thé-, not -thé-. See FALSE QUANTITY. neuroma. PI. -aia. neurosis. PI. -oses (-ēz); see LATIN PLURALS 2. neuter. See COMMON, & EPICENE, for some distinctions. neutralize has -zable; see MUTE E. névé. See FRENCH WORDS. never so, ever so, in couditional clauses (refuseth to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely). The original phrases, going back te Old English, are never so, & never such. The change to ever, ‘substituted from a notion of logical propriety ° (OED), seems to date from the later seventeenth century orly, & never so is very common in the Bible & Shakspere. Ever so, however, is the normal modern form, not never so, & it is in vain that attempts are occasionally made to put the clock back & restore never in ordinary speech, In poetry, & under circumstances that justify archaism, never so is unimpeachable; but in everyday style the purism that insists on it is futile. As to that ‘ notion of logical propriety ’, it was perhaps that there was nothing negative in the sense; there was, however, if ‘ charm he never so wisely’ is a compressed form of ‘ charm he so wisely as never else’; we can at least see how the mever idiom may have arisen; to account for ever (except as a mistaken correction of never) is a much harder problem. But the modern phrase, explicable or not, & logical or not, is ever so.

news. The number varied (the n. is bad, are bad) for more than two centuries, but has now settled down permanently as singular.

next. l. The n. three &c. 2. N. Friday, June, &c. 3. N.important &c.
