page: 376

1. For the question between the

next three &c. & the three &c. next,

see FIRST 4,

2. Next June, n. Friday, &c., can

be used as adverbs without a pre-

position (Shall begin it next June);

but, if next is put after the noun,

idiom requires a preposition (may be

expected in June next, on Monday

next). See FRIDAY.

3. The ‘ No Surrender’ party had

the rank & file at their back because they fought to the last ditch to save the grandest institution in the country; do they expect support now in wrecking the two next important institutions? The two neat important institutions is clearly used in the sense ‘the two institutions next in importance’, The OED quotes no example of such a use, but it is perhaps not uncommon colloquially, & must be a conscious or unconscious experiment in extending the convenient next best idiom. That idiom requires a superlative, & such words as oldest, worst, narrowest, weightiest, suit it well; but it is ugly with adjectives having no superlative but that with most, & there is a temptation to try whether, for instance, next important will not pass for next most important. It should be resisted; the natural sense of the two next important institutions is ‘ the two next institutions that are of importance °’, which need by no means be the two that are next in importance.

nexus. The English plural newuses is intolerably sibilant, & the Latin, nexus (-ūs), not next (see -US), sounds pedantic; the plural is consequently very rare. nice.

1. N. makes nicish; see MUTE E. 2. Nice & as a sort of adverb= satisfactorily (I hope it will be n. a. fine; Aren’t we going n. a. fast?) is an established colloquialism, but should be confined, in print, to dialogue. 3. Meaning. N. has been spoilt, like CLEVER, by its bonnes fortunes;

it has been too great a favourite with

the ladies, who have charmed out of

it all its individuality & converted

it into a mere diffuser of vague &

mild agreeableness. Everyone who

uses it in its more proper senses,

which fill most of the space given to it in any dictionary, & avoids the

modern one that tends to oust them all, does a real if small service to the language.

Nicene. The name of the place from which the ereed is so called is spelt Nicaea or Nicea, not Nicoea.

nic(e)y, sweetmeat. Omit the e; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

nickel makes -lled; see -LL-, -L-.

nick-nack. See KNICK-KNACK.

nict(it)ate, -ating, -ation. The forms with the extra syllable are the commoner, & those without it are NEEDLESS VARIANTS.

nidus. Pl. -duses, -di (-i).

niello. PI. -li (-ē), -los, see -O(E)s 3.

nigger, applied to others than full or partial negroes, is felt as an insult by the person described, & betrays in the speaker, if not deliberate insolence, at least a very arrogant inhumanity.

nighty (night-gown). So spelt; see “EY, -IE, -Y.

nihilism, -ist. Pronounce ni‘-, with the h silent; see PRONUNCIA- TION.

nimbus. Pl. -bi (-i).

For nimbus(s)ed see -s-, -sg-,

nineties, ’nine-. See TWENTIES. nitre, -ter. See -RE & -ER. nitrify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6. -N-, -NN-. Monosyllables ending in n double it before suffixes beginning with vowels if the sound preceding it is a single vowel (a, e; 1, 0, u, y), but not if itis a diphthong or a double vowel or a vowel & r: mannish, but darning; fenny, but keener; winning, but reined $ COnned, but coined; runner, but turned. Words of more than one syllable follow the rule for monosyllables if their last syllable is accented, but
