page: 377

+ otherwise do not double the n: japanned & beginner, but dragooned, womanish, turbaned, awakening, musliny. no. l. Parts of speech. 2. Confusion of adjective & adverb. 3. No in negative confusions. 4. Negative parentheses. 5. Writing of compounds. 6. Plural.

1. No is (A) an adjective meaning in the singular not a (or not any), & in the plural not any; it is a shortened form of none, which is still used as its pronoun form: No German applied; No Germans applied; None of the applicants was, or were, German. No is (B) an adverb meaning by no amount & used only with comparatives: I am glad it ts no worse. No is (C) an adverb meaning not & used only after or, & chiefly in the phrase whether or no: Pleasant or no, it is true; He must do it whether he will or no. No is (D) a particle representing a negative sentence of which the contents are clear from a preceding question or from the context:—Is he there?—No (i.e., he is not there). No, it is too bad (i.e., I shall not submit; it is too bad). No is (E) a noun meaning the word no, a denial or refusal, a negative vote or voter: Don’t say no; She will not take a no; The Noes have it.

2. Confusion of adjective & adverb. If the tabulation in 1 is correct, it is clear how the worse than superfluous a, the, & her, made their way into the following extracts. The writer of each thought his no was a B or a C adverb, against which the absence of the invariable accompaniments should have warned him, & did not see that it was the adjective, which contains a in itself & is therefore incompatible with another a, or the, or her. We can hardly give the book higher praise than to say of it that it is a no unworthy companion of Moberly’s ‘ Atonement’ (Omit a, or write not for no)./The value of gas taken from the ground there & sold amounted to the no insignificant

+ value of 54,000,000 dols (the not)./ Paintings by Maud Earl, who owes her no small reputation as an artist to the successes which ... (her reputation, no small one)./A fourth example is more excusable because the conditions are obscured by the accidental presence of a comparative: We could ask for no more cheerful a by-product of our discontent than a second volume of this most patriotic of Christmas books. Such a sentence as The second volume will be no more cheerful a by-product than the first would be right, no being there actually the adverb. But the phrase in its present setting means no by-product that shall be more cheerful, & no is the adjective & contains a & refuses to have another thrust upon it.

3. No, used in the first of two parallel clauses, ensnares many a brave unwary writer; the modifications necessary for the second clause are forgotten, & bad grammar or bad sense results. See NEGA- TIVE & AFFIRMATIVE IN PARALLEL CLAUSES; some specimens are:— He sces in England no attempt to mould history according to academic plans, but to direct it from case to case according to necessity (it is rather directed)./There is no reason to suppose that the Government will accept any vital amendments, & most certainly not an amendment to eaclude Home Rule (& it will certainly not accept one)./Although no party has been able to carry its own scheme out, it has been strong enough to prevent any other scheme being carried (each has been)./No place of any importance, & a good many of none at all, are now without iheir bowling greens (AIl places of importance . .. now have).

4. Negative parentheses. The rule here to be insisted on concerns negative expressions in general, & is stated under no only because that word happens to be present in violations of it oftener perhaps than any other. The rule is that adverbial qualifications containing a
