page: 381

+ extracts below have looked up name in search of some longer & more imposing word, some (shall we say?) adequately grandiose vocable. That nomenclature does not mean a name, but a system of naming or of names, is to such writers what they would perhaps call a mere meticulosity; see LOVE OF THE LONG WORD. The forerunner of the present luxurious establishment was the well-known Gloucester Coffee House, the nomenclature of which was derived from that Duke of Gloucester who .. ./A small committee of City men has just launched a society, under the nomenclature of the ‘ League of Interpreters’, with the object of .../The most important race of the season for three-yearold fillies; the nomenclature was obtained from Lord Derby’s seat, * The Oaks ’, in the litile hamlet of ...

nominal. For this as the adjective of noun, see NOUN.

nominate makes -nabie, -tors see -ABLE l, -OR.

See

nominatival(ly), -tive(ly). ABLATIVELY.

nominative. The grammatical word is always pronounced n6’minativ; the adjective connected in sense with nominate & nomination (e.g.in partly elective & partly n.) is often, & perhaps more conveniently, n6’minativ.

See TECH-

nominativus pendens. NICAL TERMS.

non-. On non-moral & amoral, see A-, AN-.

non avenu. See FRENCH WORDS.

nonchalant, -ance. Pronounce né/nshalant, -ans (i.e. as English words, but with -sh-).

none. i. Itis a mistake to suppose that the pronoun is sing. only & must at all costs be followed by sing. verbs &c. ; the OED explicitly states that pl. construction is commoner. 2. The forms none so, none too, are idiomatic (It is none so pleasant to learn that you have only siz months to live; The look he gave me was none too amiable), but are perhaps seldom used without a certain sense of condescending to

+ the vernacular as an aid to heartiness of manner or emphasis; & condescension is always repellent. nonentity, in the now rare abstract sense of non-existence, should have the non pronounced clearly non, & perhaps be written with a hyphen (non-entity). Inthe current concrete sense of a person or thing of no account, it is written nonentity & said with the o obscured (noné’ntiti).

nonesuch, nonsuch. The first is the original form, but the second the now usual one.

nonet(t)e. Spell -ef; see DUET.

nonpareil. Pronounce nénparé1.

nonplus makes -ssed, -ssing, &c. ; see -S-, -SS-.

See TECHNICAL

non sequitur. TERMS.

nonsuch. See NONESUCH.

nor is a word that should come into our minds as we repeat the General Confession. Most of us in our time have left undone those things which we ought to have done (i.e. failed to put in nor when it was wanted) & done those things whieh we ought not to have done (i.e. thrust it in when there was no room for it). The negative forms of He moves & speaks, He both moves & speaks, are He moves not nor speaks, He neither moves nor speaks; or, with the verb resolved as usual in modern negative sentences, He does not move or speak, He does not either move or speak. The tendency to go wrong is probably due to confusion between the simple verbs (moves &c.) & the resolved ones (does move &c.) 3 if the verb is resolved, there is often an auxiliary that serves both clauses, &, as the negative is attached to the auxiliary, its force is carried on together with that of the auxiliary & no fresh negative is wanted. Two cautions are necessary on this carrying on of the negative force & consequent preference of or to nor. The first is that it will not do to repeat the auxiliary & yet use or under the impression that the
