page: 383

+ with Nicht alle Menschen sprechen Deutsch before them, translate it “ All men do not speak German ”’, neglecting the plain guidance of their original’. This gentieman has logic on his side, logic has time on its side, & probably the only thing needed for his gratification is that he should live long enough. The older a language grows, & the more consciously expert its users become, the shorter shrift it & they may be expected to grant to illogicalities & ambiguities. All... not for Not all, like the two First for the first two, the displacements of BoTH & NEITHER & ONLY, the omission of not in than you can HELP, & the use of much LESS for much more, is already denounced by those who have time to spend on niceties; but it is still, like many other inaccuracies, the natural & idiomatic English; it will pass away in time, for magna est veritas et praevalebit; in the meantime it is worth anyone’s while to get on speaking terms with the new exactitudes (i.e., to write Not all himself), but worth nobody’s while to fall foul of those who do not choose to abandon the comfortable old slovenries.

2. Not in meiosis & periphrasis. < We say well & elegantly, not ungrateful, for very grateful ’—OED quotation dated 1671. It is by this time a faded or jaded elegance, this replacing of a term by the negation of its opposite; jaded by general over-use; faded by the blight of WORN-OUT HUMOUR with its not a hundred miles from, not wnconnected with, & other once fresh young phrases. But the very popularity of the idiom in English is proof enough that there is something in it congenial to the English temperament, & it is pleasant to believe that it owes its success with us to a stubborn national dislike of putting things too strongly. It is clear too that there are contexts to which e. g. not inconsiderable is more suitable than considerable; by using it we seem to anticipate & put 383

+ aside, instead of not foreseeing or ignoring, the possible suggestion that so-&-so is inconsiderable. The right principle is to acknowledge that the idiom is allowable, & then to avoid it except when it is more than allowable. Examples in which their authors would hardly claim that elegance or point was gained by the double negative, & would admit that they used it only because they saw no reason why they should not, occur in every day’s newspapers; such are:—The style of argument suitable for the election contest is, no doubt, not. infrequently different from the style of argument suitable for use at Westminster (often)./One may imagine that Mr —— will not be altogether unrelieved when his brother actor returns tomorrow (will be much relieved).

8. Not in exclamations. But tf you look at the story of that quadrilateral of land, what a complex of change & diversity do you not discover! A jumble of question & exclamation. The right exclamation would be: What a complex you discover! The possible question would be: What complexity do you not discover? What a complex, & the stop, are essentially exclamatory: not is essentially interrogative; do is characteristically interrogative, but not impossible in exclamations. The forms in a simpler sentence are:—Exclamation: What I have suffered! ; Question: What have I not suffered? ; Exclamation with inversion: What have I suffered! ; Confusion: What have I not suffered! See Srors (question & exclamation marks).

4. Not pleonastic. The point discussed in 8 was the intrusion of a not, unnecessary indeed but explicable, into exclamations that are confused with rhetorical questions. Much less excusable, as needing no analysis to show that it is wrong & often destructive of the sense, is the not that is evoked in a subordinate clause as a mere unmeaning echo
