page: 385

+ note, n. For synonymy see SIGN. note, v., makes -table; see MUTE E. nothing less than. The OED remarks:— The combination nothing less than has two quite contrary senses ’, & gives as the first * quite equal to, the same thing as’, with, for illustration, But yet methinks my father’s execution Was nothing less than bloody tyranny; & as the second ‘ far from being, any thing rather than’, with, for illustration, Who, trusting to the laws, expected ».l.t. an attack. To the second sense it adds the description ‘ Now rare’. As a matter of grammar, either sense is legitimate, less being different parts of speech in the two, as appears in the light of paraphrases:—my father’s death was no smaller thing than tyranny (i.e., less is an adjective); they expected nothing in a lower degree than they expected an attack (i.e., less is an adverb); grammar, then, leaves the matter open. But the risks of ambiguity are very great. If the sense of they expected n.l.t. an attack did not happen to be fixed by trusting to the laws, who would dare decide whether they expected it very much or very little? The sense called by the OED ‘ now rare’ should, in the interests of plain speaking, be made rarer by total abandonment. It is unfortunately less rare than the label would lead one to suppose; passages like the two that follow are not uncommon, & are to many readers very puzzling:—It recognizes also both the necessity of reform & liberation from dead dogmas & rubrics, & the impossibility of reform coming from a House of Commons desiring nothing less than to occupy its debates with discussions of the validity of the thirty-nine articles. / Now we are introduced to inspired ‘ crowd-men’ or heroes who have a passion for making order out of the human chaos & finding expression for the real soul of the people; these heroes or crowdmen resemble n.1.t. the demagogue as popularly conceived,

1351

(0)

+ notice makes -ceable; see MUTE E. notify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6. nought. See NAUGHT. noumenon. Pronounce now’min6n; pl. -ena, see -ON 1. noun has two adjectives—nominal & nounal, but is comfortable with neither. The objection to the first is that it is a word much used in other senses. This has induced grammarians to form the word from which they of all people should have shrunk—nounal. It is what is described in the article HYBRID DERIVATIVES as a spurious hybrid; see that article for a discussion of coastal & similar words. The grammarian’s right course is to work with the word noun as far as possible, & when an adjective or adverb is indispensable, use nominal(ly).

NOUN & ADJECTIVE ACCENT. When a word of more than one syllable is in use both as a noun & as an adjective, there is a certain tendency, though much less marked than the corresponding one with nouns & verbs (see next article), to differentiate the sound by accenting the last syllable in the adjective, but not in the noun; thus He is an expert golfer, but He is an e’xpert in handwriting. A few examples are given, of which the first four are undisputed, & the rest questionable; from these the reader will be able to form an opinion for application to similar cases:—compa’ct a., co’mpact n. ; exper’t a., expert n. ; insti'nct a., i‘nstinct n.; minu’te a., mi’nute n. ; conte’nt a., co'ntent(s) n. (sometimes); conver’se a. (sometimes; & cf. the adv. conver’sely), co’nverse n. (= contrary &c.); supi‘ne a. (usually; & cf. the adv. supi’nely), su’pine n.; suspe’ct a., su’spect n. (=suspect person; sometimes); uprigh’t a. (sometimes; & cf. the n. wprigh’tness), u’pright n. (=post &c.).

NOUN & VERB ACCENT, PRONUNCI- ATION, & SPELLING. When there
