page: 388

+ capacity & pertinacity in exploiting & exhausting a given motive, working tt out to the nth power.

Pl. -lei (-lii).

nucleus.

nugae. Pronounce ni’gé or nū’jē.

nullify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

NUMBER. Several kinds of mistake are common, & various doubts arise, involving the question of number. With some of them pure grammar is competent to deal; in others accommodations between grammar & sense are necessary or usual or debatable; rarely a supposed concession to sense issues in nonsense. The following numbered sections are arranged accordingly, the purely grammatical points coming first. 1. Subject & complement of different numbers. 2. Subject of mixed numbers. 3. Or. 4. Red herrings. 5. Harking back with relatives. 6. Nouns of multitude. 7. Singular verb preceding plural subject, & vice versa. 8. As follow(s) &c. 9. Other(s). 10. What. 11. Pronouns & possessives after everyone &c. 12. Quantity words. 13. Nonsense.

1. If subject & complement are of different numbers, how is the number of the verb to be decided? That is, to come to particulars in the simplest form, shall we use are in Clouds are vaporized water, & was in The last crop was potatoes, because the subject clouds is plural & the subject crop singular, or shall we prefer is & were to'suit the number ot the complements water & potatoes? The natural man, faced with these examples, has no doubt: ‘Of course, Clouds are, The crop was, whatever may be going to follow’. The sophisticated man, who thinks of The wages of sin is death, hesitates, but probably admits that that is an exception accounted for by the really singular sense of wages (= guerdon), It may in fact be fairly assumed that when the subject is a straightforward singular without complications about nouns of multi-

+ tude (as in party &c.), or a straightforward plural without complications about a virtually singular sense (as in wages) or separate items (as in he & she), the verb follows the number of the subject, whatever that of the complement may be. That it is not as needless as it might seem to set this down will be plain from the following extracts, some of the simplest form, all violating the rule:—Our only guide were the stars./Its strongest point are ihe diagrams./Hor Germany’s great need are colonies./The plausible suggestions to the contrary so frequently put forward is an endeavour to kill two birds with one stone./Mr Shortt’s quotations from seditious literature was, in the view of most members, poor cvidence to support the new charges which he brought./Mr Coulton contests the idea that the pre-Reformation days was an age of religious instruction. The only comment necessary on these is that when, as in the first three examples, it makes no difference to the meaning which of two words (stars or guide, point or diagrams, need or colonies) is made the subject & which the complement, the one that is placed first must (except in questions) be regarded as subject & have the verb suited to its number: Our only guide was the stars, or The stars were our only guide.

When the words which or what take the place of the subject, mistakes are more intelligible, but still mistakes; is should be are in The grass plots intersected with gravelled drives which is the ordinary achievement of the English gardener in India; but which does not bear its number on its face. The traps laid by WHAT are so many & various (What puzzles us most are the references to .. ., &c.) that it is better to refer the reader to that word.

2. Subject of mixed numbers. In Mother & children were killed we have a compound subject; in Mother or children are to die we have not one compound subject, but two
