page: 391

+ for this in speaking—often a sufficient one—is that one has started one’s sentence before fixing the precise form of the subject, though its meaning may have been realized clearly enough. But the writer both can & ought to do what the speaker cannot, correct his first words before the wrong version has reached his audience. If he does not, he too, like the waiter with the dirty plate (see 6), is indecently & insultingly careless. Examples:—For the first time there is iniroduced into the Shipyard Agreement clauses which hold the balance equally./A book entitled ‘ America’s Day ’, by Ignatius Phayre, in which is discussed the pressing problems of home & foreign policy that . . ./On these questions there is likely to be acute differences among the political groups & parties. / Instead, we had the Board of Trade figures upon which was reared successive agitations for increases in wages. / Where only three years ago was pasture land now stands vast engineering shops, miles of railway sidings, & the constant hum of machinery.

The converse mistake is seldom made; in the following, the influence of these no doubt accounts for are: The Thames has certain natural disadvantages as a shipbuilding cenire; to these are added an artificial disadvantage.

When the verb precedes a subject compounded of singular & plural, some questions of more interest than importance may arise. There were a table & some chairs in there; were is better because the compound subject is compact. There were a plain deal table in there & some wicker armchairs which Jorgenson had produced from somewhere in the depths of the ship. The alteration of were to was would now be an improvement; but why, if were was best in the bare framework given first? How has the author elaborated it? First & least, he has made table & chairs less homogeneous, less the equivalent of “some articles of furniture’, by

+ describing one as plain deal & the others as wicker; secondly, he has attached to chairs & not to table a long relative clause; third & most important, he has had, in order to cut off the relative clause from table, to shift in there to an earlier place. But it results that the verbal phrase (there were . . . in there) is so arranged that it encloses one item of the compound subject (table) & leaves. the other (chairs) out in the cold. The author would have done better to write was & let the second part be elliptical with there were in there to be understood out of there was in there.

8. As follow(s), concern(s), regard(s), &e. For higher incomes than £1,000 the new rates will be as follow. As follow is not English; as follows is; for discussion of the point see FOLLOW.

9. Other(s). The wrecking policy is, like other of their adventures in recent limes, a dangerous gamble. Other should be others; for discussion see OTHER.

10. What. What provoke men’s curiosity are mysteries. See WHAT for the question whether it can be plural.

11. Pronouns & possessives after each, every, anyone, no-one, one, &e. Everyone without further delay gave themselves up to rejoicing./But, as anybody can see for themselves, the quotation of the actually relevant portion of the argument in our columns would have destroyed .. . Each & the rest are all singular; that is undisputed; in a perfect language there would exist pronouns & possessives that were of as doubtful gender as they & yet were, like them, singular; i.e., it would have words meaning him-or-her, himselfor-herself, his-or-her. But, just as French lacks our power of distinguishing (without additional words) between his, her, & its, so we lack the French power of saying in one word his-or-her. There are three makeshifts:—A, as anybody can see for himself or herself; B, as anybody | can see for themselves; & C, as any-
