page: 393

+ is not enough that the word to be treated should be actual or possible Latin or Greek; the shaping must be done in the right way. We must take account of religio-philosophic speculations with regard to the nature of Eternal Life; Latin, it is true, has both religio & religiosus, but only the second admits of the -otreatment, & it gives religiosophilosophic. See also HYBRID DE- RIVATIVES.

oaf. Pl. -fs, rarely -ves; see -vE(D).

oaken. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

O & oh. Usage has changed, oh having formerly been prevalent in many contexts now requiring O, & is still by no means fixed. The present tendency is to restrict oh to places where it has a certain independence, & prefer O where it is proclitic or leans forward upon what follows; which means for practical purposes that as the sign of the ` vocative (O God our help; O mightymouthed inventor of harmonies) O is invariable, & as an exclamation the word is O when no stop immediately follows it, but before any stop oh (Oh, what a lie!; Oh! how do you know that?; O for the wings of a dove!; O who will o’er the downs with me?; O worship the King!).

oasis. Pl. oases, pron. -éz.

oaten. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

oath. Pl. pron. 6dhz; -TH & -DH.

So spelt. Pl. -os; see

obbligato. -O(E)s 3.

obdurate, adj. The OED quotations show Shakspere, Milton, & Barham, for obdur’at, & Shelley for 6’bdirat. The former is still sometimes heard, but is old-fashioned. See PRONUNCIATION.

obedient. For yours obediently &c., see LETTER FORMS.

obeisance. Pronounce -as-.

obelus. PI. -li (-i).

obfuscate makes -cable, -tor;

see -ABLE 1, -OR.

object, vb. 1. O. makes objector; see -OR. 2. France rightly objects to allow Germany to assume a position

+ in Morocco which .../Uhe cabdrivers object to pay their proportion of the increase. To allow, or to allowing? to pay, or to paying? The infinitive is deprecated & the gerund recommended; for this see GERUND 3. objectify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6. objection. They have been blocked by the objections of farmers & landlords to provide suitable land. Or to providing? see GERUND 3.

objective genitive. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

QBJECT-SHUFFLING. The conferring of a name on a type of mistake, making it recognizable & avoidable, is worth while if the mistake is common. Object-shuffling describes what unwary writers are apt to do with some of the many verbs that require, besides a direct object, another noun bearing to them a somewhat similar relation, but attached to them by a preposition. You can inspire courage in a person, or inspire a person with courage; the change of construction is objectshuffling, which, with the verb inspire, is legitimate & does not offend against idiom; but with instil the object-shuffling would be wrong; you can instil courage into a person; to instil a person with courage is contrary to idiom. Wherever reference is made under any word to this article, the meaning is that with that word object-shuffling is not permissible. Most of the verbs liable to this maltreatment are derived from Latin verbs compounded with prepositions & therefore beginning with in-, sub-, pre-, &c. The Latin scholar, aware that the verbal parts of substituo & instillo & praefigo mean to put & to pour & to fasten, instinctively chooses for their direct objects the stopgap, the influence, & the appendage, not the thing displaced, the person influenced, & the main body; & in writing of the more educated kind his example is followed. But the non-Latinist, if he is 2 0
