page: 395

+ of the kingdom is represented by the majority in another part./In England the very completeness of the defeat of Roman Catholicism has rendered the people oblivious to the danger of its aggression.

The making of these mistakes is part of the price paid by those who reject the homely word, avoid the obvious, & look about for the imposing; forgetful, unaware, unconscious, unmindful, & insensible, while they usually give the meaning more precisely, lay no traps.

obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which (exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word’s rightful or de-jure meaning, & we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive, as they have hitherto succeeded in doing. Meanwhile the rest of us need not scruple to recognize the usurping or de-facto sense offensive or objectionable; this has perhaps no right to exist (‘apparently affected by association with noxious’ says the OED), but it does & will, &, unlike the other, it is comprehensible to everyone.

oboe. See HAUTBOY.

observance)(observation. The useful differentiation in virtue of which neither word can be substituted for the other, & each is appropriated to certain senses of observe, should not be neglected. Observance is the attending to & carrying out of a duty or rule or custom; it has none of the senses of observation (watching, noticing, &c.), & observation in turn does not mean performing or complying. Though the distinction is modern, its prevalence in good writing may be judged from the OED’s having only one 19th-c. & no 20th-c. example of observance, as against many of observation, in the sense consciously seeing or taking notice. Unfortunately, the journalists’ perverted taste for out-of-the-

+ way forms is undoing this useful achievement, & in the last 20 years such uses as the following, almost unknown for two or three centuries, have again become common:—TJo reinforce observance with imagination./That the Americans are & will remain interested in Europe, & that a close observance of European & Asiatic affairs is an essential & important part of the life of the citizen of the U.S./Emerson does not check his assumptions; he scorns observance./Mr Abbotts verse, basing its claims to beauty on significant observance, is apt for that very reason to... ./From him Mr Torr inherits both his gift for exact observance & lively humour./His early poetry, the product of exalted sensation rather than of careful observance./Whose powers of observance & memory have combined to make as varied a raconteur as... In all these the word should be observation; one quotation is added in which observation is wrongly used for observance: The British Government has failed to secure the observation of law & has lost the confidence of all classes.

obstacle. Their apathy, fatalism, & resentment of interference constituted, & still constitute, a formidable obstacle of progress. After obstacle, idiom requires to, not of.

obstetric(al). See -ic(au). The short form is much commoner, & is recommended; its formation is in fact faulty (a midwife is obstetria, -icis, so that obstetricic would be the true adjective), while that of obstetrical would pass; but only pedantry would take exception to obstetric at this stage of its career.

obstruct makes -tor; see -OR.

obtain. See FormaL worps. Customer—Can you get me some? Shopman—We can o. it for you, madam.

obturate makes -tor; see -OR.

obviate makes -iable, -tor; see -ABLE 1l, -OR.

occiput. Pronounce ðksi-.
