page: 396

occupy. For infiexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

occur makes -rred, -rring, &c.; see -R-, -RR-. For occurring see Pro- NUNCIATION S.f,

ocean. For o. greyhound see SOBRIQUETS.

ocellus. Pl. -li (-i).

ochlocracy. Pronounce 6k-.

ochre. For spelling see -RE & -ER; & for ochr(e)ish & ochr(e)ous see SPELLING POINTS, 8 s.f.

octaroon. See OCTOROON.

octavo. See FOLIO. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

octet(te). Spell -et; see DUET.

octingentenary, octocentenary,octocentennial. In preference to all these octingenary is recommended; see CENTENARY.

octodecimo. See rorio. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

octonarius. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

octopus. Pl. -uses; the Greek or Latin pl., rarely used, is -podes (-éz), not -pi; -see LATIN PLURALS, & cf. POLYPUS.

octoroon, -taroon. Both are bad forms, the -r- being imported from quadroon, which has a right to it. But the second is worse than the first, since octa- is not (like quadr-) Latin, but Greek. For meaning, see MULATTO 2,

octosyllabics. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

octroi. Pronounce 6’ktrwah. For Synonymy see TAX.

oddment. Though the word itself is established & useful, its formation is anomalous (see -mMENT) & should not be imitated. ede. See TECHNICAL TERMS. odo(u)r, odorous. Keep the -u- in the noun; see -OUR & -or, -OUR- & -OR-. Odyssey. Pl. -cys. OE, Œ, E. See Ææ, œ. The following spellings of words beginning with oe or its substitutes are recommended: oecist; oecology &c.; ecumenical; oedema &c.; Oedipus; oesophagus;

396

+ oestrum. The pronunciation in all] is simply ë.

-O(E)Ss. The Englishman has a legitimate grievance against the words in -o. No-one who is not prepared to flout usage & say that for him every word in -o shall make -oes, or shail make -os, can possibly escape doubts; one kind of wholehogger will have to write heros & nos & potatos & gos & negros, while the other kind must face embryoes, photoes, cameoes, duodecimoes, & generalissimoes. In this book, most words in -o have been entered with the plurals that seem advisable; here, one or two guiding principles may be indicated. Although there are several hundred nouns in -o, the ending is one that is generally felt to be exotic, & the plural in -oes, which is shown, by its being indispensable with the most familiar words (no, go, cargo, jingo, hero, negro, &c.) to be the normal form, is allowed only to a small minority, most words having -os. It must be understood that the following rules are not more than generally true, & that sometimes they come to blows with each other over a word.

1. Words used as freely in the plural as in the singular usually have -oes, though there are very few with which it is invariable; names of animals & plants fall naturally into this class. So banjoes; bravoes; cargoes; dingoes; dominoes; heroes; potatoes.

2. Monosyllables take -oes; so goes, noes.

3. Words of the kind whose plural is seldom wanted or is restricted to special uses have -os; so dos (the musical note); bravados; calicos; crescendos; dittos; guanos; infernos; lumbagos. 4. When a vowel precedes the -o, -os is usual, perhaps because of the bizarre look of -ioes &e. 3 so arpeggios; baboos; bagnios; cameos; embryos; folios; punctilios. 5. The curtailed words made by dropping the second element of a
