page: 397

+ compound or the later syllables have always -os; so chromos; dynamos; magnetos; photos; stylos. 6. Alien-looking ôr otherwise queer words have -os; so albinos; altorelievos; centos; commandos; duodecimos; fiaşcos; ghettos; magnificos; negrillos. 7. Long words tend to -os; so archipelagos; armadillos; generalissimos; manifestos. 8. Proper names have -0s; so Gallios; Lotharios; Neros; Romeos. of shares with another word of the same length, as, the evil glory of being accessory to more crimes against grammar than any other. But, in contrast with the syntax of as, which is so difficult that blunders are very excusable, that of of is so simple that only gross carelessness can lead anyone astray with it. Nevertheless, straying is perpetual, & the impression of amateurishness produced on an educated reader of the newspapers is discreditable to the English Press. Fortunately, the commonest type of blunder with of is very definite & recognizable, so that the setting of it forth with sufficient illustration has a real chance of working some improvement. That type is treated in the first of the following sections, the list of which is: (1) Wrong patching; (2) Patching the unpatchable; (8) Side-slip; (4) Irresolution; (5) Needless repetition; (6) Misleading omission; (7) Some freaks of idiom.

4. Wrong patching. In the ten examples to be given, the same thing has happened every time. The writer composes a sentence in which some other preposition than of occurs once but governs two nouns, one close after it & the other at some distance. Looking over his sentence, he feels that the second noun is out in the cold, & that he would make things clearer by expressing the preposition for the second time instead of leaving it to be understood. So far, so good; care eyen when uncalled for is

+ meritorious; but his stock of it runs short, & instead of ascertaining what the preposition really was he hurriedly assumes that it was the last in sight, which happens to be an of that he has had occasion to insert for some other purpose; that of he now substitutes for the other preposition whose insertion or omission was a matter of indifference, & so ruins the whole structure. In the examples, the three prepositions concerned are in roman type; the reader will notice that the later of the two ofs can be either omitted or altered to the earlier preposition, & that one of these courses is necessary:—An eloquent testimony to the limits of this kind of war, & of the efficiency of right defensive measures./ Which clearly points the need for some measure of honesty & of at least an attempt at understanding of racial ambitions./He will be in the best possible position for getting the most out of the land & of using it to the best possible advantage./He would have recovered the power to manœuvre his armies in mass, a power absolutely necessary either to achieving a military decision, or in case of necessity of retiring in good order./ The definite repudiation of militarism as the governing factor in the relation of States & of the future moulding of the European world./The varying provisions in the different States respecting the length & nature of the voter’s qualification, as well as of the kind of persons excluded from the suffrage./A candidate who ventured to hint at the possible perststence of the laws of economics, & even of the revival of the normal commonsense instincts of trade./The Ministry aims not merely at an equitable division of existing stocks, but of building up reserves against the lean months./ It begins with the early enthusiasm of St Petersburg for the war, & of the anti-German fecling which transformed the city into Petrograd./The magistrate commented on the nuisance of street-collections by means of boxes,

& of the scandal of a system under-
