page: 398

which a large proportion of the money

given goes for the expenses of collec-

tion.

2. Patching the unpatchable. These

resemble the previous set so far as

the writers are concerned; they

have done the same thing as before;

but for the reader who wishes to

correct them there is the difference

that only one course is open; of

must be simply omitted, & between

or without cannot be substituted.

We can say for you & for me instead of for you & me if we choose, but not between you & between me for between you & me; with cries & with tears means the same as with cries æ tears, but without cries or without tears does not mean the same as without cries or tears; on this point, see OVERZEAL. It could be done without unduly raising the price of coal, or of jeopardizing new trade./ He will distinguish between the American habit of concentrating upon the absolute essentials, of ‘getting there’ by the shortest path, & of the elaboration in detail & the love of refinements in workmanship which mark the Latin mind./Without going into the vexed question of the precise geographical limitations, or of pronouncing any opinion upon the con- Slicting claims of Italy & of the Vugo-Slavs, what may be said is žhat...

3. Side-slip. Besides the types given in the previous sections, so beautifully systematic in irregularity «28 almost to appear regular, there -are more casual aberrations of which no more need be said than that the sentence is diverted from it; track into an of construction by the presence somewhere of an of. Analogous mistakes are illustrated in the article StpE-stie. Swub-section 3 prohibits the Irish Parliament from making any law so as to directly or indirectly establish or endow any religion or prohibit the free exercise thereof or of giving a preference or imposing a disability on account of religious belief or ecclesiastical status. / The primary object was not the

+ destruction of the mole forts, or of the aeroplane shed, or of whatever military equipment was there, or even of killing or capturing its garrison./ Lord Parmoor referred to the progress which had been made in the acceptance of the principle of a League of Nations, mentioning especially its inclusion in the Coalition programme, & of the appointment of Lord Robert Cecil to take charge of this question at the Peace Conference./ Tis whole policy was, & is, simply to obstruct the improvement of the workingman’s tavern, & of turning every house of refreshment & entertainment in the land into that sort of coffee tavern which...

4. Irresolution. Here again we have illustrated Germany’s utter contempt for her pledged word & of her respect for nothing but brute force./His view would be more appropriate in reference to Hume’s standpoint than of the best thought of our own day. The results of having in mind two ways of putting a thing & deciding first for one & then for the other: we have illustrated, & we have an illustration of; to Hume’s standpoint (than to the thought), & to the standpoint of Hume (than of the thought).

5. Needless repetition of of. There is a classical tag about the pleasure of being on shore & of watching other folk in a big sea. A matter not of grammar, but of style & lucidity; in style the second of is heavy, & in sense it obscures the fact that the pleasure lies not in two separate things but in their combination.

6. Misleading omission. The prohibition of meetings & the printing & distribution of flysheets stopped the Radicals’ agitation. Unless an of is inserted before the printing, the instinct of symmetry compels us to start by assuming that the printing &c. of flysheets is parallel to the prohibition of meetings instead of, as it must be, to meetings alone. 7. Some freaks of idiom. You are ihe man of all others that I did not suspect. He is the worst liar of any man I know. A child of ten years
