page: 399

+ old. That long nose of his. The modern tendency is to rid speech of patent ILLOGICALITIES; & all of the above either are, or seem to persons ignorant of any justification that might be found in the history of the constructions, plainly illogical: the man of all men; the worst liar of all liars; a child of ten years, or a child ten years old; a friend of mine, i.e. among my friends, but surely not that nose of his, i.e. among his noses: so the logic-chopper is fain to correct or damn; but even he is likely in unguarded moments to let the forbidden phrases slip out. They will perhaps be disused in time; meanwhile they are recognized idioms—STURDY INDEFENSIBLES, possibly.

offer makes -ered, -ering, &c.; see -R-, -RR-.

officer. Used absolutely, the word ordinarily means any member of Navy, Army, or Air Force, who holds the King’s commission. The following rough distinctions between qualified uses may be serviceable:— Flag officers are all naval officers above & including rear-admirals; General officers are all army officers above & including brigadier generals; Field officers are army officers between general & company officers, & include colonels, lieut.-colonels, & majors; Company officers are regimental officers below & including captains; Regimental officers are all from 2nd lieutenant to colonel whose duties are confined to the normal control of a regiment, battalion, battery, &c.; Staff officers are officers of any commissioned rank in navy or army who have special duties not confined to a ship or regiment & a special relation to a commanding officer; Warrant officers are petty or non-commissioned officers of the higher grades, such as boatswain & sergeant-major, who hold an Admiralty or War- Office certificate; Petty officers in the navy, & Non-commissioned officers in the army, are men given

+ authority by the commanders of their units, & not necessarily holding warrants. officinal. Pronounced ofi’sinal, though the Latin noun is officina; compare medicinal (from medicine), & see FALSE QUANTITY.

officious has a meaning in diplomacy so oddly different from its ordinary one that misunderstanding may arise from ignorance of it. A diplomatist means by an o. communication much what a lawyer means by one without prejudice; it is to bind no-one, &, unless acted upon by common consent, is to be as if it had not been. The word is used as the antithesis of official, & the notion of meddlesomeness attaching to it in ordinary use is entirely absent.

offing, offish, &c. The pronunciation of off itself varies between of & awf, the latter prevailing in Southern or standard English. It is probably true of compounds & derivatives that awf is usual in those whose connexion with off is naturally present to the mind, & ðf in those where it is easily forgotten; thus offish, offscourings, offset, offshoot, tend to awf, but offing & offspring to of.

often. Pronounce aw’fn or 6’fn. The sounding of the ¢, which as the OED says is * not recognized by the dictionaries’, is practised by two oddly consorted classes—the academic speakers who affect a more precise enunciation than their neighbours’ & insist on dé’vil & pi’ktur instead of dé’vl & pi’kcher, & the uneasy half-literates who like to. prove that they can spell by calling hour & medicine howr & mé’disin instead of owr & mé‘dsn, See PRONUNCIATION.

ogee makes ogce’d; see -ED & ’D.

ogre. For spelling see -RE & -ER; for ogr(e)ish, SPELLING POINTS, 3 s.f.

Ogygian. Pronounce the first g hard; see GREEK G.

oh. For oh & O, see o.
