page: 400

okapi. Pl. -is.

old. 1. For the distinction between older, oldest, & elder, eldest, see ELDER, 2. For the phrase a boy &c. of ten &c. years old, see oF 7. 8. For the o. lady of Threadneedle Sireet see SOBRIQUETS.

olden. 1. The adjective, which is of a strange formation & not to be reckoned among the numerous -EN ADJECTIVES, is also peculiar in use; the olden time(s) is common, but outside that phrase the word is usually as ridiculous as Ye substituted for the in the sham-archaic advertisements of shopwindows. The combination of olden with regime in the following example is what one might expect the author to call very tasty; see INcoNGRUOUS VOCABULARY. They form part of the olden railway regime, when every Great Western main-line train was deliberately halted for ten minutes at Swindon for refreshment. 2. For the verb, =make or grow older, see -EN VERBS.

olfactory. For o. organ, see Poty- SYLLABIC HUMOUR.

olio. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 4.

Olive-branches. See HACKNEYED PHRASES, & SOBRIQUETS.

Olympian)(Olympic. The distinction, not as old as Shakspere & Milton, but now usually observed, is useful; see DIFFERENTIATION. Olympian means of Olympus, of or as of the Greek gods whose abode was on it: Olympian Zeus, splendour, indifference. Olympic means of Olympia, of the athletic contests there held: Olympic games, victors. ‘omelet(te). The OED gives precedence to the shorter spelling. omen. For synonymy see SIGN. ominous. Pronounce 6m-. OMISSION OF IT. As had been generally considered would be the case, the negotiations have been successful. As it had been is necessary; the rather difficult question of such omissions will be found discussed under IT 1.

omit makes -tting &c. (see -T-, -TT-), omissible.

omnibus. Pl.

-uses; see LATIN PLURALS.

omnium gatherum. See FACETIOUS FORMATIONS.

on. For on all fours, see FOUR. For onto, on to, & on, see ONTO.

-ON. Of words derived from Greek & having in English the termination -on: 1. Some may, & often ori always do, form the plural in -a; so asyndeton, criterion, hyperbaion, noumenon, organon, oxymoron, phenomenon. 2. Others seldom or never use that form, though it would not be incorrect, but prefer the ordinary English -s; so electron, lexicon, skeleton. 3. In others again, the substitution of -a for -on to form the plural would be a blunder, their Greek plurals being, if they are actual Greek words, of some quite different form, & -s is the only plural used; such are anion, archon, canon, cation, cotyledon, demon, mastodon, pylon, siphon, tenon.

Words about which mistakes are possible are referred in the book to the above numbered classes.

onager. Pl. -s, or onagri (-i).

once. 1. The use as a conjunction (i.e. =if once or when once, as in Once you consent you are trapped) is sound English enough, but it is sometimes forgotten that it is not for all contexts. There is a vigorous abruptness about it that makes it suitable on the one hand for highly literary expression, in poetry for instance, & on the other for the short sentences of actual conversation or dramatic dialogue. Between these extremes it is better to be content with if or when, supplemented or not by the adverb once. In the first quotation if, & in the second when once, would be better:— It is to be explained perhaps by the fear that once foreign affairs become predominant, home affairs take a back place./But their aloofness might have quite the opposite result of that which they desire; for once the crisis had
