page: 401

+ arrived, home affairs would indeed be swamped.

2. Once & away)(once in a way. The two phrases seem properly to have distinct meanings, the first once & no more (It is not enough to harrow once & away—1759 in OED), & the second not often; but the present custom is to use both in the second sense, each person choosing the form that he considers fittest to convey that sense, & in a way being the favourite.

on dit. See FRENCH WORDS.

one. 1. Writing of anyone, no-one, &e. 2. One & a half years &c.)(a year &c. & a half. 3. Once of, if not the best book(s). 4. One of the men that does things. 5. Kind of pronoun— numeral, indefinite or impersonal, or first-personal? 6. Possessive of the numeral & the impersonal—his? one’s? their? '7. Mixtures of one, you, we, &c.

1. The forms recommended are anyone, everyone, no-one, someone. For discussion see NO 5 & EVERY- ONE 1l.

2. One & a half years)(a year & a half. The second is recommended, when words & not figures are used; for discussion, see MILLION l, 2, & HALF l. The wrong form is seen in india has shown her loyalty by the fact that one & a half millions of her sons volunteered; a million & a half of her sons is obviously preferable.

3. One of the, if not the, best book(s). Grammar is a poor despised branch of learning; if it were less despised, we should not have such frequent occasion to weep or laugh at the pitiful wrigglings of those who feel themselves in the toils of this phrase. That the victims know their plight is clear from the way they dart in different directions to find an outlet. Here are half a dozen attempts, all failures, but each distinguishable in some point of arrangement from the rest:—a. Given in the Costume Hali—one of, if not the most, spacious of salons for dresses & costumes— the dancing has been... b. One of

+ the finest, if not the finest, poem of an equal length produced of recent years. c. I think the stage is one of, if not the best of all, professions open to women. d. Kur was one of the greatest—perhaps the greatest—export articles of Norway. e. The Japanese were one of the most, if not the most, enterprising nations in the East. f. One of, if not, the oldest Voortrekkers of South Africa has just passed away.

The nature of the problem is this: we have two expressions of the type ‘ one of the best books ° & ‘ the best book’; but we have been taught to avoid repetition of words, & therefore desire that part of one of these nearly similar expressions should be understood instead of said or written; let us then enclose the partially expressed one inside the other, as a parenthesis. Can this be done? It will be seen that a, b, & c, though they differ in minor points, all alike fail to pass the most obvious test—does the enclosing expression read rightly if the parenthesis is left out?—One of spacious of saloons, One of the finest poem, One of professions open to women: the first & second nonsense, the third the wrong sense. Ind, e, f, the enclosing expression taken alone does give sense; the further test they have to pass is—if the words understood in the parenthesis are written in, does the whole read as sound, though perhaps inelegant, English?—One of the greatest (perhaps the greatest export article) expert articles; One of the most (if not the most enterprising nation) enterprising nations; One of (if not the oldest Voortrekker) the oldest Voortrekkers. Not sound English, but nonsense; compare it with the expanding of a rightly compressed sentence: He was, tf not a perfect, a great orator, which being filled up gives if not a perfect orator, a great orator; that is not nonsense, but sound English. The rule that has been broken in the supposed compressions d, e, f, & not broken in the real one, is that
