page: 404

Secondly, the impersonal one always can, & now usually does, provide its own possessive &c.—one’s, oneself, & one; thus One does not like to have one’s word doubted; If one fell, one would hurt oneself badly.

But thirdly, in American, in older English, & in a small minority of modern British writers, the above sentences would run One does not like to have his word doubted; If one fell, he would hurt himself badly.

The prevailing modern fashion (one’s, oneself, &c.) should be made universal; it gives a useful differentiation between the numeral & the impersonal, which however is not reliable till it is universal; & it makes recourse to the horrible their &c. (One does not like to have their word doubted) needless. The following examples, all but one of them recent, will suffice to show that not all writers yet accept the modern idiom, though it is certainly in the interests of the language that they should:—There are many passages which one is rather inclined to like than sure he would be right in liking (19th-c. American)./Assuredly, there is no form of ‘ social service’ comparable to that which one can render by doing his job to the very best of his ability./Let us, in fact, substitute a ‘ graceful raising of one’s hand to his hat, with a nod’./As one goes through the rooms, he is struck by the youth of most./If seeing siaxteenthcentury Europe implied spending the nights in sixteenth-century inns, one imagines he would rather have siayed at home.

The difference between One hates his enemies & One hates one’s enemies is at once apparent if to each is added a natural continuation:— One hates his enemies & another forgives them; One hates one’s enemies & loves one’s friends. The first one is numeral, the second impersonal, & to make his & one’s exchange places, or to write either in both places, would be plain folly. Let it be added, for anyone who may regard one’s & one(self) in the

404

+ use here concerned as fussy modernism, that they are after all not so modern: JZ hope, cousin, one may speak to one’s own relations—Goldsmith.

7. Mixtures of one with we, you, my, &c. These are all bad, though the degrees of badness differ; for instance, it is merely slipshod to pass from one in an earlier sentence to you in the next, but more heinous to bring two varieties into syntactical relations in a single sentence. As one goes through the rooms, he is struck by the youth of most of those who toil; the girls marry, you are told; he belongs to section 6, in which the sentence has been quoted; you illustrates the more venial form of mixture./As one who vainly warned my countrymen that Germany was preparing to attack her neighbours for many a long day before the declaration of war, I say that... .; My should be his, one being the numeral pronoun; but this kind of attraction in relative clauses (my taking the person of J instead of that of one & who) is very common./ To listen to his strong likes & dislikes one sometimes thought that you were in the presence of a Quaker of the eighteenth century; a bad case; you were should be one was./Perhaps there are too many of them; we might have enjoyed making their acquaintance still more had one been given pause; either we should be one, or one should be we./No one likes to see a woman who has shared one’s home in distress; no-one contains the numeral, not the impersonal, one, & one’s should be his./ To be a good Imperialist you must assent to the impotence & decadence & backwardness of one’s own motherland; you should be one, or one’s should be your.

one-idea’d. So spelt; see -ED & ’p.

ONE WORD OR TWO OR MORE. For ALL RIGHT, ALREADY, ALTOGETHER & all together, any way & anyway, at ANY Tate & at anyrate, COMMON SENSE & common-sense, EVERYONE &
