page: 405

+ every one, INTO & in to, ONTO & on to, see the words in small capitals. For blackbird & black bird, see HYPHENS; for no-one & no one, & for in no wise & in nowise, NO, 53; for someone & some one, EVERYONE.

only, adv.: its placing & misplacing. Z read the other day of a man who ‘ only died a week ago’, as if he could have done anything else more striking or final; what was meant by the writer was that he ‘ died only a week ago’. There speaks one of those friends from whom the English language may well pray to be saved, ene of the modern precisians who have more zeal than discretion, & wish to restrain liberty as such, regardless of whether it is harmfully or harmlessly exercised. It is pointed out in several parts of this book that illogicalities & inaccuracies of expression tend to be eliminated as a language grows older & its users attain to a more conscious mastery of their materials. But this tendency has its bad as well as its good effects; the pedants who try to forward it when the illogicality is only apparent or the inaccuracy of no importance are turning English into an exact science or an automatic machine; if they are not quite botanizing upon their mother’s grave, they are at least clapping a strait waistcoat upon their mother tongue, when wiser physicians would refuse to certify the patient.

The design is to force us all, whenever we use the adverb only, to spend time in considering which is the precise part of the sentence strictly qualified by it, & then put it there—this whether there is any danger or none of the meaning’s being false or ambiguous because only is so placed as to belong grammatically to a whole expression instead of to a part of it, or to be separated from the part it specially qualifies by another part.

It may at once be admitted that there is an orthodox placing for

+ only, but it does not follow that there are not often good reasons for departing from orthodoxy. For He only died a week ago no better defence is perhaps possible than that it is the order that most people have always used & still use, & that, the risk of misunderstanding being chimerical, it is not worth while to depart from the natural. Remember that in speech there is not even the possibility of misunderstanding, because the intonation of died is entirely different if it, & not a week ago, is qualified by only; & it is fair that a reader should be supposed capable of supplying the decisive intonation where there is no temptation to go wrong about it. But take next an example in which, ambiguity being practically possible, the case against heterodox placing is much stronger:—Mackenzie only seems to go wrong when he lets in yellow; & yellow seems to be still the standing difficulty of the colour printer. The orthodox place for only is immediately before when, & the antithesis between seeming to go & really going, which is apt to suggest itself though not intended, makes the displacement here ill advised; its motive, however, is plain—to announce the limited nature of the wrong before the wrong itself, & so mitigate the censure: a quite sound rhetorical instinct, &, if goes had been used instead of seems to go, a sufficient defence of the heterodoxy. But there are many sentences in which, owing to greater length, it is much more urgent to get this announcement of purport made by an advanced only. E.g., the orthodox It would be safe to prophesy success to this heroic enterprise only if reward & merit always corresponded positively cries out to have its only put early after would, & unless that is done the hearer or reader is led astray; yet the precisian is bound to insist on orthodoxy here as much as in He died only a week ago.

The advice offered is this: there
