page: 408

+ enumerations. 4, Wrong repetition after or.

1. Or)(nor. There are sentences in which it is indifferent, & affects neither meaning nor correctness, whether or or nor is used. Compare with I can neither read nor write (in which nor is requisite), & with I cannot either read or write (in which or is requisite), I cannot read nor (or indifferently or) write. The alternatives in the last are differently arrived at, but are practically equivalent: Z cannot read, nor (can I) write; I cannot read(-)or(-) write, where the supposed hyphens mean that write may be substituted for read if desired. The use of nor in such cases was formerly in fashion, & that of or is now in fashion; that is all. But the modern preference for or where it is equally legitimate with nor has led to its being preferred also where it is illegitimate; so:— It is of great importance that they should face them in no academic spirit, or trust too much to conclusions drawn from maps./No Government Department or any other Authority has assisted. The test of legitimacy has been explained in Nor; & it suffices here to say that in the first extract it is the position of no (alter to they should not face them in any), & in the second the presence of any (precluding the carrying on of no), that forbid or.

2. Number, pronouns, &c., after or. When the subject is a set of alternatives each in the singular, however many the alternatives, & however long the sentence, the verb must be singular; in the extract below, account should be accounts; for discussion see NuMBER, 8: Either the call of patriotism & the opportunity of seeing new lands, or conscription, or the fact that tramping was discouraged even by old patrons when the call for men became urgent, account for it. If alternative members differ in number &c., the nearest prevails (Were you or he, was he or you, there? ; either he or you were, either you or he was), but some forms

+ | (e.g. Was I or you on duty?) are avoided by inserting a second verb (Was I, or were you ...?). Forms in which difference of gender causes difficulty with pronouns (A landlord or landlady expects their, his or her, his, rent) are usually avoided, their rent or the rent due to them being ungrammatical, his or her rent or the rent due to him or her clumsy, & his rent or the rent due to him slovenly; some evasion, as expecis tent, or the rent, is always possible.

3. Or in enumerations. JI never heard a sermon that was simpler, sounder, or dealt with more practicai matters. In the very numerous sentences made on this bad pattern there is a confusion between two correct ways of saying the thing, viz (a) that was simpler, sounder, or more practical, (b) that was simpler or sounder or dealt with more practical matters. See ENUMERATION, & for full discussion AND 2. The abundant illustration of the latter makes similar quotations here needless, & it will be enough to give a single sentence for the reader to apply the principle to—a sentence whose length slightly obscures the writer’s mistake; he should have inserted and in the place indicated: A few years ago the natural instincts of the other Powers would have been to notify Italy that Tripoli was a Turkishpossession, \ thatif she wished to secure it she must do so by negotiation & purchase, or, failing that, put her case before a conference of the Powers.

4. Wrong repetition after or. A misguided determination to be very explicit & leave no opening for doubt results in a type of mistake illustrated in the article OvERZEAL. It is peculiarly common with or, & to put writers on their guard a number of examples follow. False analogy from and explains it; with and, it does not matter whether we say without falsehood & deceit or without falsehood & without deccit, except that the latter conveys a certain sledge-hammer emphasis; but
