page: 410

The proper sound of the first element

is orni’tho, not or’nitho, & it seems

better to keep the i except when the

falling of the main accent on the next

syllable (-o-) makes it unnatural; see FALSE QUANTITY. This would give, among common words: ornithocepha‘lic, ornitholo’gical, orni’thomancy, & ornithorhy’neus; but ornitho‘logist, ornitho/logy, & ornitho’scopy.

orography, orolingual, &c. The identical representation of Greek oros mountain & Latin os mouth by oro- is regrettable. The most convenient arrangement consistent with correctness would have been to make ori- the combining form of Latin os mouth (oricentral, ori-anal, orilingual, &c.), & oreo- that of Greek oros mountain (oreography, oreometric, &c.). As ori- does exist in orinasal & other mouth-words, & oreo- has not been entirely superseded in the mountain-words, it is possibly not too late to suggest that this distinction should even now be established.

orotund. The odd thing about the word is that its only currency, at least in its non-technical sense, is among those who should most abhor it, the people of sufficient education to realize its bad formation; it is at once a monstrosity in its form & a pedantry in its use. If the elocutionists & experts in voice-production like it as a technical term, they are welcome to it; the rest of us should certainly leave it to them, & not regard it as a good substitute for magniloquent, sounding, highflown,inflated, pompous, imposing, & the like. oscillate makes -llable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -or. osculatory. A favourite Pory- SYLLABIC-HUMOUR word: The two ladies went through the o. ceremony./ At the end of one letter were a number of dots which he (counsel) presumed were meant to represent an o. performance. ossify. For inflexions see VERBS

| IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

ostler, h-. Pronounce 6’sler; see PRONUNCIATION. The form without h- is the now established one, though etymologically wrong; hospital, hostel, hotel, & hostler, belong together.

osiracize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

other. 1. Each o.)(one another. 2. On the other hand. 3. Of all others. 4. Other)(others or another. 5. Other than.

1. Each 0.)(one another. For the syntax of these, & for the distinction sometimes made between them, see EACH 2.

2. On the o. hand. For the difference between this & on the contrary, see CONTRARY 2.

3. Of all others. You are ihe man of all others I wanied to see. A mixture of You are the man of all men &c. & You are the man I wanted to see beyond all others. A still popular InLocicarity, perhaps to be counted among the STURDY INDEFENSIBLES that are likely to survive their critics.

4. Other)(others or another. The writers of the following sentences may be supposed to have hesitated between oiher & others; if they had decided for others, they would have been more in tune with modern usage; to say they would have chosen more correctly is hardly possible:—The Unionist Party will do well to remember that the wrecking policy is, like other of their adventures in recent times, a dangerous gamble./We find here, as in other of his novels, that he has no genius for . = Mrs will, we hope, incite other of her countrymen & counirywomen to similar studies./ We were quiie prepared for the most rigid prohibition of trade with Germany; sowas France & other of our Allies./A Privy Councillorship, an honour which has but rarely been won by other than those who were British subjects from the moment of their birth.

In four of these we have what the OED calls the absolute use of the adjective, the noun represented by other being present elsewhere in the
