page: 411

+ sentence, but not expressed with other (like other adventures of the adventures &c. would be the fully expressed forms); in the fifth we have the full pronoun use, other meaning other persons, & persons not being expressed either with other or elsewhere. But alike of the absolute & the pronoun use the OED describes the plural other as archaic, & the plural others as the regular modern form. In older English, however, other was normal in such contexts, so that those who like the archaic can justifythemselves; others is here recommended.

If it is now contrary to usage to prefer other to others, it is much worse to prefer it to another, which is the modern absolute & pronominal form in the singular just as others is in the plural; but that is what has been done in: A number of writers on various subjects serve to give interest to the review on other than its political side—unless indeed the meaning is its other than political side, which would stand or fall, as the equivalent of its non-political side, with the examples discussed at the end of 5; but, if so, the order of words has been dislocated.

5. Abuses of other than. The existence of an adverbial use of other is recognized by the OED, but supported by very few quotations, & those from no authors whose names earry weight; its recent development may be heartily condemned as both ungrammatical & needless. A number of newspaper extracts will first be given in which the only correction necessary is to insert the real adverb otherwise instead of the false adverb other; it will be seen that, every time, the phrase on the other side of than is adverbial like otherwise, & not adjectival like other; _in the article OTHERWISE the converse mistake is shown to be equally common; both mistakes are as stupid as they are common; &, though the substitution of otherwise for other or vice versa removes the blunder, it is usually true that it

+ would have been better to use neither other than nor otherwise than, but some different expression.

Other for otherwise

So that no new invention could come in o. t. through a specific company (except)./A subordinate sprite will no more obey a conjuration addressed to him by a magician o. t. in the name of his proper superior than... (in any other name than that)./It could not possibly have been carried out o. t. by the mammoth vessels (except)./ Some via media whereby the influence of the community could be brought to bear o. t. through the Civil Service could probably be evolved (otherwise). / Yet how many of the disputants would know where to look for them— o. t. by a tiresome search through the files of the daily Press—if they desired to consult them? (short of)./ Although the world at large & for long refused to treat it o. t. humorously (otherwise)./There was never a moment when it could less become Englishmen to speak o. t. respectfully & courteously of the Russian nation (otherwise).

But simple confusion between other & otherwise does not account forevery bad other than. A notion seems to prevail that one exhibits refinement or verbal resource or some such accomplishment if one can contrive an other-than variant for what would naturally be expressed by some other negative form of speech: with o. t. apprehension is thought superior in literary tone to without apprehenston, could not leave o. t. restless to could not but leave restless, be other than flattered to help being flattered, o.t. when Parliament was sitting to when Parliament was not sitting; so:—Up to the very end no German field company would look with o.t. apprehension to meeting the 25th on even terms./Four years of war could not leave a people o.t. restless./Mr Collier has some faults to find, but no Englishman can be o. t. flattered by the picture which he paints of British activities./The Premier sent
