page: 414

+ which . . That is due to the particular verb showing, which prevents applicability from including as usual its opposite. But, while such cases are rare (1: 14 gives the proportion in which they have actually presented themselves to the collector), it is better even in these to give the sense in some other way, e.g. to showing how far the principles which... are applicable. Similarly, in It has an area of under 100 square miles, & enjoys—o. 0.—a very heavy rainfall ‘or does not enjoy’, ‘ or endures °’, &c., would be better in grammar, as good in sense, &, considering the dimness with which or otherwise now sparkles, not inferior in brilliance.

The reader may perhaps be curious about the statement that such phrases as applicability o. o. are grammatically not quite indefensible. In He never conveyed to me any intimation that he disapproved, strongly o. o., of my conduct, we have an unquestionably legitimate use, otherwise being parallel to strongly, another adverb. In Yesterday he was our hero, but today he is otherwise, otherwise is parallel not to an adverb, but to the noun hero; ‘nevertheless grammar is not offended, because the complement of to be can be noun, adjective, or adverb, indifferently: He is a hero, He is dead, He is abroad. That is why Governor Sulzer is the hero (0. 0.) of a quaint election story is excusable; though not itself legitimate, it is a slight & natural extension of something that is legitimate; yet it remains true that or villain (or other opposite of hero, according to the sense desired) would be better. The type of which so many examples were given, with o. o0. answering to abstract nouns like applicability or truth, is similarly accounted for. Is it applicable or is it otherwise? is sound enough English; when we want to turn these questions into a noun, its applicability 0.0. not unnaturally presents itself as a short form of its being applicable or being

+ otherwise; it can claim a sort of secondhand soundness; like an addled egg, it has in an earlier phase been good.

To sum up, 0.0. is in grammar occasionally quite correct, often indefensible, but usually capable of a rather far-fetched justification; in meaning it is, except when strictly correct, nearly always superfluous, & always less exact than some equivalent; & in style (again except when correct) it has the disadvantage of suggesting, even when the user is innocent of any such intent, a sort of insipid jocosity.

ottava rima.

See TECHNICAL TERMS.

ought, n., is a wrong form for nought.

ought, v., is peculiarly liable to be carelessly combined with auxiliary verbs that differ from it in taking the plain infinitive without to. Can & ought to go is right, but Ought & can gois wrong. We should be sorry to see English critics suggesting that they ought or could have acted otherwise; insert to after ought, or write that they could or ought to have acted. See ELLIPSIS 2.

our. 1. Our)(ours. 2. Our editorial & ordinary. 3. Our)(his.

1. Our)(ours. Ours & the Italian troops are now across the Piave. The right alternatives are: The Italian troops & ours, The Italian & our troops, Our & the Italian troops; the wrong one is that in the quotation; see ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES.

2. The editorial owr, like we & us of that kind, should not be allowed to appear in the same sentence, or in close proximity, with any noneditorial use of we &c. In the following, our & the second we are editorial, while ws & the first we are national: For chaos it is now proposed to substitute law, law by which we must gain as neutrals, & which, in our view, inflicts no material sacrifice on us as belligerents. We do not propose to argue that question again from the beginning, but...
