page: 415

3. Our)(his. Which of us would wish to be ill in our kitchen, especially when it is also the family livingroom? If a possessive adjective were necessary, his & not our would be the right one, or, at greater length, his or her. People of weak grammatical digestions, unable to stomach his, should find means of doing without the possessive; why not simply the kitchen, here? But many of them, who prefer even the repulsive THEIR to the right forms, are naturally delighted when of us gives them a chance of the less repulsive but at least slovenly our. It is undeniable that which of us is a phrase denoting a singular, & that the possessive required by it is one that refers to a singular.

-OUR &-OR. The American abolition of -our in such words as honour & favour has probably retarded rather than quickened English progress in the same direction. Our first notification that the book we are reading is not English but American is often, nowadays, the sight of an -or. ‘ Yankee’ we say, & congratulate ourselves on spelling _ like gentlemen; we wisely decline | to regard it as a matter for argument; the English way cannot but be better than the American way; _ that is enough. Most of us, therefore, do not come to the question with an open mind. Those who are willing to put national prejudice ` aside & examine the facts quickly | realize, first, that the British -our words are much fewer in proportion to the -or words than they supposed, &, secondly, that there seems to be no discoverable line between the two sets so based on principle as to serve any useful purpose. By the | side of favour there is horror, beside ardour pallor, beside odour tremor, & so forth. Of agent-nouns saviour (with its echo paviour) is perhaps the only one that now retains -our, governor being the latest to shed its _-u-. What is likely to happen is that either, when some general

+ reform of spelling is consented to, reduction of -our to -or will be one of the least disputed items, or, failing general reform, we shall see word after word in -our go the way of governour. It is not worth while either to resist such a gradual change or to fly in the face of national sentiment by trying to hurry it; it would need a very open mind indeed in an Englishman to accept armor & succor with equanimity. Those who wish to satisfy themselves that the above denial of value to the -our spelling is borne out by facts should go to the article -or in the OED for fuller information than there is room for here.

-OUR- & -OR-. The contents of this article, with the exception of the next paragraph, are given as opinions only.

Even those nouns that in our usage still end in -our (see -OUR & -OR), aS opposed to the American -or, e.g. clamour, clangour, humour, odour, rigour, valour, vapour, vigour, have adjectives ending in -orous, not -owrous—humorous, vaporous, &C.

Derivatives in -ist, -ite, & -able, are regarded as formed directly from the English words, & retain the -u- ; so colourist & humourist, labourite (cf. favourite, of different formation), colourable & honourable. But devivatives in -ation & -ize are best treated, like those in -ous, as formed first in Latin, & therefore spelt without the -u-; so coloration, invigoration, vaporize, & deodorize.

ours)(our. See our 1.

ousel. See OUZEL.

outcome is one of the words specially liable to the slovenly use described in the article Haziness; so: The outcome of such nationalization would undoubtedly lead to the loss of incentive & initiative in that trade. The o. of nationalization would be loss; nationalization would lead to loss.

For pronunciation see outermost. -MOST.
