page: 416

+ out-herod. In view of the phrase’s great popularity & many adaptations, two cautions are perhaps called for. The noun after outherod should be Herod & nothing else (the OED quotes ‘ out-heroding the French cavaliers in compliment’; cf. Ecclesiastical functionaries who out-heroded the Daughters of the Horsc-leech), &, after adaptations like out-milton & out-nero, Milton &c. should be repeated (outzola Zola, not out-zola the realists). Secondly, the name used should be one at least that passes universally as typifying something; to outkautsch Kautsch (The similar German compilation edited by Kautsch was good; but Charles easily outkautsches Kautsch) is very frigid.

OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN. A very large proportion of the mistakes that are made in writing result neither from simple ignorance nor from carelessness, but from the attempt to avoid what are rightly or wrongly taken to be faults of grammar or style. The writer who produces an ungrammatical, an ugly, or even a noticeably awkward phrase, & lets us see that he has done it in trying to get rid of something else that he was afraid of, gives a worse impression of himself than if he had risked our catching him in his original misdemeanour; he is out of the frying-pan into the fire. A few typical examples will be here collected, with references to other articles in which the tendency to mistaken correction is set forth more at large.

Recognition is given to it by no matter whom it is displayed. The frying-pan was ‘no matter whom it is displayed by °, which the writer did not dare keep, with its preposition at end; but in his hurry he jumped into nonsense; see MATTER, & Preposirions./When the record of this campaign comes dispasstonately to be written, & in just perspective, it will be found that... The writer took ‘to be dispassionately written ’:

+ for a SPLIT INFINITIVE, & by his correction convinces us that he does not know a split infinitive when he sees it./In the hymn & its setting there is something which, to use a word of Coleridge, ‘ finds’ men. ‘A word of Coleridge’s’ is an idiom whose genesis may be doubtful, but it has the advantage over the correction of being English; a word of Coleridge is no more English than a friend of me./The object is to bring before the public many ancient & modern aspects of the Theatre’s Art which have too long been disregarded, ‘ The theatre’s art ’ is a phrase that, . apart from surroundings, no-one would prefer in prose to * the art of the theatre’. What the writer has shied at is the repetition of of in | of the art of the theatre, which is however much more tolerable than this ’S INCONGRUOUS./But the badly cut- up enemy troops were continually ` reinforced &- substituted by fresh units. The frying-pan was REPLACE in the sense ‘take the place of’ ; the fire is the revelation that the writer has no idea what the verb SUBSTITUTE means./Sir Starr Jameson has had one of the most varied & picturesque careers of any Colonial statesmen. ‘Of any statesman’, idiomatic but apparently illogical, has been corrected to what is neither logical (of ail would have been nearer to sense) nor English. / The claim yesterday was for the difference between the old rate, which | was a rate by agreement, & between the new. The writer feared, with some contempt for his readers’ | intelligence, that they would not be | equal to carrying on the construc- | tion of between; he has not mended | matters by turning sense into nonsense; see OVERZEAL./The reception was held at the bride’s aunt. The reporter was right in disliking bride’s aunt’s, but should have found time | to think of ‘ at the house of’.

The impression must not be left, however, that it is fatal to read over | & correct what one has written. The moral is that correction requires
