page: 418

+ it is misused, but in the hope of ealling attention to it as a phrase that should be more used. Its rights are now perpetually infringed by puE to. The difference is that, while o.t. can be either adjectival or adverbial (The accident was not o. t. carelessness; O.t. my carelessness he broke his leg), d.t. can only be adjectival (The accident was not d.t. carelessness). In the following examples (& see pur for others) owing must be substituted for due:— Due to this omission he has unfortunately committed himself to views he finds it difficult to go back on./But, due largely to the fact that the hall was situated a long distance from the Congress building, the visitors did not attend in such large numbers as previously. See QUASI-ADVERBS.

owl-like. For hyphen see -LIKE.

own. For own the soft impeachment, see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

ox. Pl. oxen.

oxidize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

oxymoron. Pl. -s or -ra; see -on. For meaning see TECHNICAL TERMS.

P

pacé. This latinism (p. tuâ by your leave, or if you will allow me to say so; p. Veneris if Venus will not be offended by my saying so) is one that we could very well do without in English. Not only is it often unintelligible to many readers even when rightly used; it is also by many writers wrongly used. In the two following pieces, which have unluckily to be long if the point is to be clear, the meaning is ‘ according to Mr Begbie’ or ‘ according to the Jungborn enthusiasts’; it ought to be just the opposite— “though Mr B. (or the enthusiasts) will doubtless not agree’ :—After the beauty of rural life in the South his picture of Belfast is a vision of horror. On the details of that picture we need not dwell; but the moral which Mr Begbie appears to draw from his contrast is that a Conservative Irish Parliament will do little to

+ better the conditions of town life, & that the industrial classes would find relief from those conditions more quickly under the rule of the English Parliament, which, pace Mr Begbie, ts advancing rapidly towards some form of Socialism./For more than ten thousand years these things have been recognized in some part of the world; during that lapse of time, at least, some men & women have been living according to their own lights rather than according to the light of nature. Now, pace the Jungborn enthusiasts, the time has come to change all this. If man would survive as a species, we learn in effect, he must begin the return journey to the place whence he came.

Minor objections are that the construction is awkward in English (p. Mr Smith is the best we can do for p. Caesaris in the genitive), & that the Latinless naturally, but distastefully to those who know Latin, extend the meaning or application as they do those of VIDE, RE, & E.G. So: But in the House of Lords there is no hilarity—pace Lord Salisbury’s speech last night. Pacé does not mean notwithstanding a fact or instance, but despite someone’s opinion.

pacha. See PASHA.

pachydermatous. A favourite with the POLYSYLLABIC HUMOURIists.

pacif(ic)ist. There is no doubt that the longer form is the better; for full discussion see -1st A; but its chances of ousting the wrong form are small.

pacify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c¢., 6.

Paddy. So spelt; see -ry, -IE, -y.

padrone. Three syllables (padr0’né);_ pl. -ni (-é).

paean. See a, a.

pageant. Pronounce p&’jant.

pailful. Pl. pailfuls; see -FUL.

paillasse. See PALLIASSE.

painedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

paintress. See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS,

pair, n. See COLLECTIVES 3.
