page: 423

+ that parsimonia was the actual spelling in classical Latin ’—OKD. As pars-is also the prevailing modern form, the parc- spelling should be abandoned.

partake makes -kable; see MUTE E.

partially is often used where partly would be better. This is, no doubt, because it is formed normally, by way of the adjective partial, while partly formed direct from the noun part is abnormal. There is between the two words much the same difference as between wholly (opp. partly) & completely (opp. partially); in other words, partly is better in the sense ‘as regards a part & not the whole ’, & partially in the sense ‘ to a limited degree’: It is partly wood; This was partly due to cowardice; | A partially drunken sailor; His partially re-esiablished health. Often either will give the required sense equally well; partly is then recom- | mended, since it is partially that tends to be over-used; see LONG VARIANTS for other such pairs. An | example or two of the wrong partially are:—The two fect are partially of iron & partially of clay./Whether The Case is Altered may be wholly or partially or not at all assignable to the hand of Jonson.

participate makes -pable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

PARTICIPLES. 1. Unattached p. 2. Absolute construction. 3. Fused p. 4. Initial p. &c. 5. Accent & pronunciation in p.p. (or adjective or noun) & verb.

4. Unattached p. For this danger, as insidious as notorious, see UN- ATTACHED PARTICIPLE.

2. Absolute construction. The Municipal Council, having refused their assistant clerks’ demand for a rise in salary, those in the Food Supply offices today declared a strike. This false stopping (there should be no comma after Council) is an example of what is perhaps both the worst & the commonest of all mistakes in punctuation, See ABSO- LUTE CONSTRUCTION.

+ 3. Fused p. Jimmy Wilde’s first fight in the United States resulted in him being beaten by Jack Sharkey./ They are so weil chosen that there is little fear of the reader to whom the more familiar aspects of the subject have ceased to appeal being wearied by them. ‘ Him being beaten ’, ‘ the reader being wearied ’, are examples of a construction regarded in this book as a corrupting influence in modern English, & fully discussed in the article FUSED PARTICIPLE.

4, Initial participle &c. If newspaper editors, in the interest of their readers, maintain any discipline over the gentlemen who provide inch-long paragraphs to stop gaps, they should take measures against a particular form that, by a survival of the unfittest, bids fair to swallow up all others. In these paragraphs, before we are ‘allowed to enter, we are challenged by the sentry, being a participle or some equivalent posted in advance to secure that our interview with the C.O. (or subject of the sentence) shall not take place without due ceremony. The fussiness of this is probably entertaining while it is quite fresh; one cannot tell, because it is no longer fresh to anyone. Examples:—Described as ‘disciples of Tolstoi’, two Frenchmen sentenced at Cheltenham to two months’ imprisonment for false statements to the registration officer are not to be recommended for deporiation./Composed of the 8rd Royal Fusiliers, the Scottish Horse, & the 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, the 149th Brigade, as General Jackson (50th Division) says in his foreword, represented ‘ the very best material, traditions, & qualities of England, Scotland, & Ireland’./ Winner of many rowing trophies, Mr Robert George Dugdale, aged seventyfive, died at Eton./Appointed Inspector-General, West African Frontier Force, Brevet- Lieut. - Colonel A, H. W. Haywood, C.M.B., D.S.O., of the R.G.A., in 1910 spent six months’ furlough by crossing the Sahara Desert./Aged seventy-nine,
