page: 424

+ Hurley, near Marlow, whose death is announced, bathed daily in the Thames, winter & summer, till a few months ago./Believed to be the youngest organist in the country, Master Herbert Woolverton, who officiates at Hutton Church, Essex, has passed the examination as Associate of .. ./ Thirty-four years in the choir of the Chapel Royal, Hampton Court Palace, Mr Francis P. Hill, of Milner Road, Kingston, has retired./Found standing in play astride the live rail of the electric line at Willesden & in danger of instant death, Walter Spentaford, twelve, was fined 12s. for trespass.

5. Accent & pronunciation in p.p. (or participial adjective or noun) & verb. Beside many of the verbs formed from Latin supine stems (animate, dilute, extract, &c.) there are passive participles of the same spelling, now used as adjectives or nouns. They are often distinguished from the verbs by a difference of sound. This may be (A) a shifting of the accent, as in attri’bute v., a’ttribute n.; co’nsummate v., Consu’mmate a.; convi’ct v., co’nvict n.; dicta’te v., di’ctates n. ; dige’st v., di’gest n.; dilu’te v., dilute a. ; extra’ct v., e’xtract n.; frustra’te v., fru’strate a.; refu’se v., re’fuse n.; (B) the obscuring of the vowel of -ate, as in advocate v., advocate n.; animate v., animate a.; articulate v., articulate a. ; compassionate v., compassionate a.; degenerate v., degenerate a.; delegate v., delegate n.; deliberate v., deliberate a.; designate v., designate a. ; desolate v., desolate a.; elaborate v., elaborate a.; estimate v., estimate n.; legitimate v., legitimate a.; moderate v., moderate a.; regenerate v., regenerate a.; reprobate v., reprobate n. ; separate V., separate a.; subordinate v., subordinate a. & n. ; or (C) a change of consonant sound, as in diffuse {-z) v., diffuse (-s) a. ; refuse (-z) v., refuse (-s) n.

Words are referred to this article {PARTICIPLES 5 A or B or C) to draw

PASSABLE | attention to a double pronunciation 3; see also NOUN & VERB ACCENT.

parti-coloured, party-, partic-. The first is recommended.

particularize makes

-zable; see MUTE £.

parting. The British Empire is at the p. of the ways. Empires & men are now so familiar with that position that, when told they are there once more, they are not disquieted; their only impulse is to feel in their breeches pockets for the penny with which they may toss up. See HACKNEYED PHRASES.

partisan, -zan. Whether the two nouns (adherent of a party, the weapon) are etymologically connected or not is doubtful. The weapon is accented on the first syllable, the adherent sometimes so & sometimes on the last. It would be well to make partisa’n (or -za’n) invariable for the latter; & perhaps the -s- might be appropriated to it, & the -z- to the weapon: partisa’n adherent; par’tizan weapon. But, as the distinction would be at least partly arbitrary, & as the weapon word is now seldom wanted, this suggestion is not very likely to be acted upon.

partitive. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

party. For this in the sense person, see POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES.

parvenu, pas. See FRENCH WORDS.

pasha, pacha. Spell pasha & pronounce pah’sha.

pasquinade.

See LAMPOON for synonyms.

pass makes passed for its past tense (You passed me by), & for its p.p. used verbally (It has passed out of use); but when the p.p. has become a mere adjective it is spelt past (In past times). The distinction between p.p. & adjective is rather fine in Those times have passed away (p.p.), Those times are passed away (INTRANSITIVE P.P.), Those times are past (adjective).

passable, passible. The first word (pronounced, usually, pah-) is the
