page: 426

+ emotion; but in this phrase, now common though little recognized in dictionaries, the original wider sense of emotion in general is reverted to, & the p.f. means the tendency to credit nature with human emotions. Sphinalike, siren-sweet, sly, benign, impassive, vindictive, callously indifferent the sea may seem to a consciousness addicted to pathetic fallacies,

pathos. For this & bathos the OED recognizes only the pronunciations pa-, ba-.

patois. For p., dialect, &c., see JARGON,

patriot(ic). The sounds usually heard are perhaps 4 in the noun & 4 in the adjective. There is no objection to the difference, & the FALSE QUANTITY 4 is of no importance.

patrol makes -lling, -lled, -llable; see -LL-, -L-.

patron, -age, -ess, -ize. The OED gives the sound of the -a- as patron, patronage, patroness, & pătronize.

patroness. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

patten. See PATEN.

paulo-post future.

See TECHNICAL TERMS.

pave makes the exceptional agentnoun paviour.

pavé. See FRENCH WORDS.

pawky. The Englishman is tempted to use the word merely as a synonym in certain contexts for Scotch; any jest uttered by a Scot is pawky, & pawky humour is understood to be unattainable except by Scots. The underlying notions are those of craftiness, concealment of intention, apparent gravity, ironical detachment. The pawky person says his say, &, if the hearers choose to find more point in the words than a plain interpretation necessitates, that is their business; more than other people’s, his Jest’s prosperity lies in the ear Of him that hears. pay. For inflexions, see VERBS IN “IE &c., 1.

:

See FRENCH WORDS. paysage.

peasoup, not pea-soup; for the

principle, see HYPHENS 3 B.

pearl barley. No hyphen; see

HYPHENS 3 B.

peccadillo. Pl. -0s; see -o(z)s 7.

peccavi. Pronounce péka’vi.

peculate makes -lable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

pedagogy, -gical. See GREEK G.

pedal makes -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

PEDANTIC HUMOUR. No essential distinction is intended between this & POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR; one or the other name is more appropriate to particular specimens, & the two headings are therefore useful for reference; but they are manifestations of the same impulse, & the few remarks needed may be made here for both. A warning is necessary, because we have all of us, except the abnormally stupid, been pedantic humourists in our time. We spend much of our childhood picking up a vocabulary; we like to air our latest finds; we discover that our elders are tickled when we come out with a new name that they thought beyond us; we devote some pains to tickling them further; & there we are, pedants & poly- Syllabists all. The impulse ïs healthy for children, & nearly universal—which is just why warning is necessary; for among so many there will always be some who fail to realize that the clever habit applauded at home will make them insufferable abroad. Most of those who are capable of writing well enough to find readers do learn with more or less of delay that playful use of long or learned words is a onesided game boring the reader more than it pleases the writer, that the impulse to it is a danger-signal— for there must be something wrong with what they are saying if it needs recommending by such puerilities—, & that yielding to the impulse is a confession of failure. But now & then even an able writer will go on believing that the incongruity be- tween simple things to be said &
