page: 427

beverage; | eke © nether garments; | | out-of-the-way words to say them in has a perennial charm; it has, for the reader who never outgrows hobbledehoyhood; but for the rest | of us it is dreary indeed. It is possible that acquaintance with such labels as pedantic & polysyllabic humour may help to shorten the time that it takes to cure a weakness incident to youth.

An elementary example or two should be given. The words homoeopathic (small or minute), sartorial (of clothes), interregnum (gap), are familiar ones:—To introduce * Lords of Parliament’ in such homoeopathic doses as to leave a preponderating power in the hands of those who enjoy a merely hereditary title./While we were motoring out to the station I took stock of his sartorial aspect, which had changed somewhat since we parted./ In his vehement action his breeches fall down & his waistcoat runs up, so that there is a great interregnum.

These words are, like most that are much used in humour of either kind, both pedantic & polysyllabic. A few specimens that cannot be | described as polysyllabic are added here, & for the larger class of long | words the article POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR should be consulted:— ablution; aforesaid;

caloric; bivalve (the succulent); cuticle; digit; domestics; (adv.); ergo; erstwhile; felicide; nasal organ; neighbourhood (in the n. of, =about); optic (eye); parlous; yulpicide.

PEDANTRY may be defined, for the purpose of this book, as the saying of things in language so learned or so demonstratively accurate as to imply a slur upon the generality, who are not capable or not desirous of such displays. The term, then, is obviously a relative one; pedantry is your scholarship, his reasonable accuracy, her irreducible minimum of education, & someone else’s ignorance, It is therefore not very profitable to dogmatize here on the subject; an essay would 427

PEDANTRY establish not what pedantry is, but only the place in the scale occupied by the author; & that, so far as it is worth inquiring into, can be better ascertained from the treatment of details, to some of which accordingly, with a slight classification, reference is now made. ‘The entries under each heading are the names of articles; & by referring to a few of these the reader who has views of his own will be able to place the book in the pedantry scale & judge what may be expected of it. There are certainly many accuracies that are not pedantries, as well as some that are; there are certainly some pedantries that are not accuracies, as well as many that are; & no book that attempts, as this one does, to give hundreds of decisions on the matter will find many readers who will accept them all.

Spelling Niceties: See Didacticism; -in & -ine; Mute e; amuck; gypsy; Mahomet; morale.

Pronunciation: See False quantity; French words; Greek g; Christmas; diphtheria; margarine.

Long or learned words: See dual- (istic); Love of the long word; fuliginous; intermediary; meticulous; thrasonical.

Synonyms: See apt; authentic; broad; classie(al); exceedingly.

Variants & differentiation: See acceptance; act(ion); alternative; ascendancy; complacent; masterful.

Symmetry: See between; both; either; nor.

Logic & pleonasm: See ago; because; equally as; Haziness.

Rules of style: See and, 2; Elegant variation; Fused participle; only 5 Preposition at end; Split infinitive.

Reversion to etymological senses: See dastardly; decimate; egregious; enormous; infinite; internecine; journal.

Objections to particular words or constructions: See aggravate; cablegram; case; coastal; conservative; different; doubt(ful); feasible; ilk; Inversion; like; oblivious; quieten.
