page: 433

+ It is in places like these, where a writer hardly intends personification, but slips unconsciously or half- heartedly into implying it, that he reveals his want of literary instinct. Far the commonest form taken by the weakness is that of which many examples are given under ’S INCON- Gruous. To write famine’s or _Austria’s instead of of famine, of Austria, is virtually to personify them; & the modern newspaper is perpetually doing this in the most prosaic contexts.

So:—A particular character of a monsoon season may reduce to famine’s verge millions of industrious ryots (The writer was afraid of verge of famine before millions of ryots; see OUT OF THE | FRYING-PAN). / The tariff is also causing no profit, but heavy loss, to about nine out of ten of Austria’s

e | farmers (Again, fear of of ... of... of).

2. Vacillation. The Government, the Times, the Party, & the like, are nouns of multitude, which can be treated as units & therefore referred to by the words it, iis, & followed by singular verbs, or as bodies of people to which they, them, their, & plural verbs, are appropriate. | Britain, Paris, & the like, are words naturally admitting of personification, & can be referred to in their literal sense by it & its, or in their a a a i ag es a S S O personified sense by she & her. So much everyone knows; what will perhaps surprise the reader is to find from the examples below how many writers are capable of ab- | surdÌy mixing the two methods in a single phrase or staggering, in longer sentences, from one to the other & back again. The noun-ofmultitude examples (for yet more of which see NuMBER, 6) are placed first, the personification ones afterwards; & the words in which the vacillation is exhibited are in roman type:—The Times also gives some interesting comments by their special correspondent./During their six years of office the Government has done great harm./That will gain ground

+ or not in proportion as the public is secure in their minds about the Navy./ It is the party to which Sir Henry Howorth belongs that is discredited by their support of this unprincipled violation./The Union & Progress Party does not seem to be living up to their patriotic resolutions./The Government is pledged to reduce taxation, & of course they cannot begin to look at old-age pensions until it has had sufficient time to reduce expenditure./ The excuse of the Admiralty, which were responsible for these proceedings, is... (which was, or who were)./ The population, who was driven away on the morrow of the surprise of May 27, are glad to come back only two months later./Japan itself now ceases to be an island Power, & for the first time accepts responsibilities on the continent which it cannot abandon; her frontier is no longer the sea./When Poplar no longer maintains its own paupers she must no longer determine the standard on which they are to be maintained./ The United States has given another proof of its determination to uphold her neutrality.

3. Unattached possessives. Danish sympathy with Finland is writ large over all her newspapers, literature, & public speeches, as the most casual visitor to Copenhagen can sec. Her means ‘of (the personified) Denmark’; we can all see that; but we most of us also resent, nevertheless, a personification that is done not on the stage, but ‘ off’ ; a Denmark personified & not presented is a sort of shadow of a shade./This is a timely tribute from a man who has spent a large part of his life in Friendly Society work, & who would be the last to sanction anything that imperilled their interests. Their means ‘ of the Friendly Societies ” ; but where are they? The adjective Friendly Society is as unavailing here as Danish in the previous example./The true doctrine is that every public act of the Crown is an act for which his advisers are responsible. It is in some contexts indif-
