page: 434

+ ferent whether one says the King, His Majesty, or the Crown; but while the King has his advisers, the Crown can only have its; as to the possessive proper to His Majesty, see MAJESTY.

personify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

personnel, not -sonel. Pronounce personč’l.

perspic-. Perspicacious, -acity, mean (having or showing) insight; perspicuous, -uity, mean (the being) easy to get a clear idea of; see PAIRS & SNARES. Shrewd & shrewdness, clear & clearness, or other short words, are used in preference by those who are neither learned nor pretentious. The learned, however, can safely venture on the perspicpairs; when the unlearned pretender claims acquaintance with them, they are apt to punish the familiarity by showing that he is in fact a stranger to them. The usual mistake is to write -uity for -acity, as _in:—Sometimes, however, Dr Bells perspicuity was at fault./He claims for it superiority to other alternatives, the defects of which he sees wtth that perspicuity which the advocates of each ideal system invariably display towards rival systems./The high-class West End & provincial tailors are displaying considerable perspicuity in buying checks,

perspire, perspiration. See GEN- TEELISMS,

persuade makes -dable (see MUTE £) as well as persuasible; the former is recommended (see -ABLE 2). persuasion. Parodies of the phrase ‘of the Roman, Protestant, &c., p.’, e.g. Hats of the cartwheel pP., are to be classed with WORN-OUT HUMOUR; see also HACKNEYED PHRASES, pertinence, -cy. There is no useful distinction; the first will probably prevail. See -cr, -cy. perturbedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY. peruse. See FORMAL WORDS. P. makes -sable; see MUTE E.

pervade makes -dable; see MUTE E.

pervert. See NOUN & VERB ACCENT.

pessimism. See OPTIMISM for comments on the popular use, & Popu- LARIZED TECHNICALITIES.

pester makes -ered; see -R-, -RR-.

pestle. Pronounce without -t-; see PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

petal makes -led; see -LL-, -L-.

petit. For p. & compounds see FRENCH WORDS.

petitio principii.

See TECHNICAL TERMS.

petition, vb, makes -oned &c.; see -N-, -NN-.

petrel. The OED recognizes only the pronunciation pét-.

petrify. For inflexions see verbs in -IE &c., 6.

petrol(eum).

For synonyms see KEROSENE,

petty. For p. officer see OFFICER.

pewit, pee-. The OED puts first the form pewit, but the pronunciation pé’-wit (not piit), This makes things difficult, & it would seem better to spell peewit, unless pūřit, which has Tennyson for it, rhyming pewit with cruet in Will Waterproof, is to be the sound.

phaeton. The three-syllable pronunciation (fā’'itn) is best.

phagedaena. See GREEK G.

phalanstery. Accent on the first (fălan-).

phalanx. Ordinary pl. -xes, but in Anatomy phalanges (fala’njéz). See LATIN PLURALS.

phallus. Pl. -li (-i).

phantasmagoria is sing., not (as in the following) pl.:—We shall then be able to reach some conclusion as to the meaning & effect of these bewildering phantasmagoria. The word was designed to mean ‘crowd of phantasms’, phantasm)(phantom. The two are by origin merely spelling variants, differentiated, but so that the differences are elusive; the following tendencies are discernable, but sometimes conflict. 1. Phantom is the more popular form, -asm being chiefly in literary use. 2. Both meaning roughly an illusive appari-
