page: 436

+ is stereotyped by forming part of a title (Philosophical Transactions &c.), the -ic form is now commoner in all the more specific senses; -ical still prevails in the very general sense ‘resembling’ or ‘ befitting a philosopher’, i.e. wise or unperturbed or well balanced; & this gives a basis for differentiation; see -1c(AL).

philtre, -ter. The first is usual.

phiz. See CURTAILED WORDS.

phlegm &c. The g is silent in p. & phlegmy, but sounded in phlegmatic.,

phlogiston. See GREEK G.

Phoenician, phoenix.

Best so have to meet several requirements. written; see Æ, Œ.

phone, vb. See CURTAILED WORDS.

PHONETICS. It often happens that one who is perhaps himself unacquainted with complicated & complete phonetic systems, & at any rate writes for those to whom they are mysteries, has occasion to make the pronunciation of some word intelligible in print. A scheme that would enable this to be done would be of value; but it would rather hard to reconcile. 1. It must use no special types, or it cannot be printed on demand. 2. It must be both simple & systematic, or those who learn it, but have to read it only now & then, will not remember it. 38. It must be to a great extent self-explaining, or it will mean nothing to those who have not learnt it. 4. It must be capable of rendering all English sounds, un- English ones being ruled out as beyond the compass of a scheme subject to requirements 1 & 2. The following is offered as a solution that may serve for want of a better.

A. VOWEL SOUNDS

Each of the five vowels aeiou represents two clear sounds & an obscure one, according as it has the lang mark over it (mate méte mite mote mute), or the short mark (rack réck rick réck riick), or no mark (a in about, e in cozen, i in cousin, o in proceed, u in Whitsun).

When two or more italic letters are used, they form a single symbol, as aw, OW, ot, ah, oor, owr (cawl, cowl, coil, bah, boor, dowry).

The italic symbols consisting of one vowel & r, & 00, have always a long or short mark over the first letter thus: madre, mére, mire, more, mure, pdrt, pert, port, stdol, stdod; their r is usually not trilled before a consonant, but is or may be before a vowel sound. If two italic symbols (see B also) come together, a vertical line (as in Illustrations, rouge, douche) should part them.

B. CONSONANT SOUNDS

b, d, f, h, j k, l, m, n, p, T, t, V, W, Z, are unambiguous,

c, q, X, are not used.

g is reckoned hard (get); s is reckoned hard (set); y is reckoned consonantal (yet).

The italic combinations ch, sh, zh, th, dh, ng, ngg, kw, represent the italicized parts of witch, wish, vision, pith, with, singer, finger, whit: thus, wich, wish, vizhon, pith, widh, singer, fingger, hwit.

C. ACCENT

This should be placed after the vowel sound of the syllable on which it falls (té’nder, fé’nian),

ILLUSTRATIONS father, fah’dher iniquitous, ini’kwitus pyjamas, pijah’maz laboratory, la’boratori fascination, fisina’/shon magical, ma’jikal consciousness, k6’nshusnis rouge, rdo|zh mountaineer, mowntinér’ douche, ddo|sh Colquhoun, kohdo’n agriculture, a’griktilchur whetstone, hwé’tstin coyness, kot’nis burglary, bér’glari burglarious, bugldr’ius dubiety, dab/iti business, bi’znis
