page: 437

SUMMARY OF SCHEME mate méte mite mōte mite rack réck rick réck riick cawl cowl coil bak boor dowry mare mêre mire mére mure part pert port stéol stdod Noreg Or X g; S, y, as in get, set, yet ch, sh, zh, sounds in witch, wish,

vision th, dh, sounds in pith, with ng, ngg, sounds in singer, finger hw, sound in whet

Accent after the vowel sound of the stressed syllable.

photo. See CURTAILED WORDS. Pl. -os; see -o(z)s 5.

phrase, vb, has -sable; see MUTE E.

phraseology. Pron. frazi6‘loji.

phthisis. The old pronunciation dropped the ph-, but this will probably recover its sound now that everyone can read. The Greek word had short i, but fthi- is now usual; see FALSE QUANTITY.

Pronounce & accent

phyloxera. filokzer’a.

phylum. PI. -la.

physic, n. See FORMAL WORDS.

physic makes -cked, -cking, -cky; see -C-, -CK-.

physician, doctor, surgeon, in ordinary parlance. ‘ The p.’ & ‘ the d.’ may be used to denote the same person, viz one whose vocation is to heal physical troubles, p. being the FORMAL WORD, & no particular relation to s. being implied by either. A s.is always a doctor who undertakes to perform manual operations, but not necessarily one who confines himself to them. Physician is also used in contrast with s. to denote one who deals with medicines & treatment, not withsurgical instruments, & again in contrast with general practitioner to denote a specialist or consultant. It must be remembered, however, that ‘In the United Kingdom, every medical practitioner is now required to have a qualification as Physician & also as Surgeon; so that a general practitioner usually describes himself as “ Physician & Surgeon ” >—OED.

physics)(physiology. The two words had once the same wide meaning of natural science or natural philosophy. They have now been narrowed & differentiated, physics retaining only the properties of matter & energy in inorganic nature, & physiology only the normal functions & phenomena of living beings.

physiognomy, -nomical.

The g is silent.

physiology. See puysics. For the adjective, -ical is so much the commoner that it should be accepted as the only form. See -1c(At).

pi (pious). See CURTAILED WORDS.

pianist. Pronounce pé’anist.

piano. The instrument is pid’no; pl. -os, see -o(c)s 5. The musical direction is pyah’n6.

pianola. Pronounce péand‘la.

piazza. The OED gives pii’za; but the Italian pyah’tsa is perhaps as often said; see [ITALIAN SOUNDS.

pibroch. Pronounce as Scotch (pé-, & ch as in loch).

Ppicaresque. The p. novel is defined in the Enc. Brit. as:— The prose autobiography of a real or fictitious personage who describes his experiences as a social parasite, & who satirizes the society which he has exploited’. The type is Spanish, but the most widely known example is the French Gil Blas. Pícaro is a Spanish word meaning vagabond.

piccolo. PJ. -os; see -o(£)s 6.

pickaxe. For spelling see AXE.

picket, vb, makes -eied, -eting, &c. ; see -T-, -TT-.

picket, picquet, piquet. The second form serves no purpose at all; the third should be reserved for the card-game, & picket be used for all other senses, including that of the military outpost often spelt with -Qu- Or -cqu-. picnic makes -cking, -cked, -cker, -cky; see -C-, -CK-. à picture. Piktur is academic; piktyer is impossible except with a deliberate pause after the t (though many people think they say
