page: 439

+ RIVATIVES. Pivot used attributively will almost always serve the need.

pixy, -ie. The first is better.

pizzicato. Pronounce pitsikah’t6. Pl. -os; see -0(£)s 6.

placable. The OED gives plaprecedence.

placard. The pronunciation recommended is pla’kard for the noun & plakar’d for the verb; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. fi

placate. The pronunciation recommended is plaka’t, but both pla’‘kat & pla&’kat are also heard. The word is much more in American than in British use, but is quoted from the 17th c. Beside the adjective placable, placatable can be made for the gerundive use; see -ABLE 1.

place, vb, makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1.

placid makes -dest; see -ER & -EST 4.

plagiarize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

plague makes -guable, -guing, -guy; see MUTE E, -EY & -y.

plaice (fish). So spelt.

plaid. Pronounced plad in Scotland, but plăd in England.

plain makes plainness. P. sailing is (‘ probably "—OED) a popular use of the nautical term plane sailing, which means navigation by a plane chart, ‘a simple & easy method, approximately correct for short distances’. The corruption, if it is one, is so little misleading, since plain sailing is as intelligible in itself as clear going or any such phrase, that any attempt to correct it is needless as well as vain. plait. Pronounce plat. planchette. See FRENCH WORDS. plane, vb, makes -nable; MUTE E. plane sailing, as a correction of the plain sailing of ordinary use, is a pedantry; see PLAIN. y plangent. Pronounce -ănj-. plantain. Pronounce pla’ntin. plaster makes -ered &c. ; -R-, -RR-. plat (food served). See FRENCH WORDS. plateful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL. plate glass. Two words

unhyphened; see Hypuens 3 B.

plateau. See FRENCH WORDS; but the sound pla&’t6, & the pl. -s, are now common; see also -x.

platen, -tt-, pressing-plate in printing. The OED prefers -t- to -it-. Pronounce -At-.

platform. The political sense of party programme is still rather American than English, but in England too is now not uncommon,

platinize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

platitude, -dinous. The words are misused in the following extracts; for the differences ‘between po commonplace, & truism, see COMMON- PLACE. He would probably in his speech at Glasgow have avoided the use of certain phrases & arguments which, though he clearly means them to be innocuous & even platitudinous, have none the less been the subject of vehement controversy. / The miners acknowledge the force of this principle or platitude as freely as the rest of us.

Platonic love. For the origin of the expression, see Plato’s Symposium. For its meaning, the definition, & | one or two quotations, from the OED here follow:—(Definition) Applied to love or affection for one of the opposite sex, of a purely spiritual character, & free from sensual desire. (Quotations): (Howell) It is a love that consists in contemplation & idaeas of the mind, not in any carnall fruition. (Norris) Platonic Love is the Love of Beauty abstracted from all sensual Applications, & desire of Corporal Contact. (Lewes) Love is the longing of the Soul for Beauty; the inextinguishable desire which like feels for like, which the divinity within us feels for the divinity revealed to us in Beauty. This is the celebrated Platonic Love, which, from having originally meant a communion of two souls, & that in a rigidly dialectical sense, has been degraded to the expression of maudlin sentiment between the sexes. platypus. Pl. -puses, not -pi; see LATIN PLURALS,
