page: 440

play. For inflexions see VERBS IN E &c., 1.

pleading.

For special p. see SPECIAL,

pleasant has -er, -est, in comparison; see -ER & -EST 2.

pleased. For very p., see VERY.

pleasure. I have the p. of doing so-&-so means I do it, & am glad to do it—a courteous announcement that one is conferring some favour. It is my p. to do so-&-so, or that so-&-so should be done, means I choose to, & therefore of course shall, do it or have it done—an imperious statement of intention. The second idiom is based on the definite special sense of p. with possessives (my, his, the king’s, &c.), viz one’s will, desire, choice. It is a p. to do, on the other hand, means the same as I have the p. of doing. But insensibility to idiom often causes It is my or our (not a) p. to be substituted for I or We have the P.; see CAST-IRON IDIOM. Examples of the mistake are:—Once again it is our p. to notice the annual issue of ‘The Home Messenger YA In the experiment which it was my p. to witness, M. Bachelet used only two traction coils./When it was my p. to address a public meeting of more than 2000 at the Royal Theatre the organized opposition numbered less than seven score.

pleb. See CURTAILED WORDS.

plebeian makes -nness (abstract noun).

plebiscite, -tary. Pronounce plé’bisit, plibi’sitari. plectrum. PI. -tra. Pleiad. Pronounce plad. Pl. -ds or -des (-éz). The use in the sing. for a group of brilliant people comes from the Pléiade of poets of the French Renaissance. pleistocene, pliocene, miocene, are regrettable BARBARISMS. Itis worth while to mention this, not because the words themselves can now be cither ended or mended, but on the chance that the men of science may some day wake up to their duties to

+ the language—duties much less simple than they are apt to suppose.

plenteous, -iful. As with other pairs in -eous & -iful (e.g. from bounty, beauty, duty, pity), the meaning of the two is the same, but the -cous word is the less common & therefore the better suited to the needs of poetry & exalted prose; for these it should be reserved.

plenty. Excuses are plenty (i.e. plentiful), There is p. wood (i.e., p. | of), That is p. hot enough (i.e. quite), | are irregularities of which the first is established in literature, the second is still considered a solecism | (though the omission of of is easily |] paralleled, as in a little brandy, a dozen apples, more courage, enough food), & the third is recognized , colloquial, but not literary, English.

PLEONASM is the using of more words than are required to give the sense intended.

1. It is often resorted to deliberately for rhetorical effect (Lest at any time they should see with their eyes & hear with their ears). The writer who uses p. in that way must be judged by whether he does produce his effect & whether the occasion is worthy of it.

2. There are many phrases originally put together for the sake of such emphasis, but repeated with less & less of impressiveness until they end by boring instead of striking the hearer. Such are the pairs of synonyms if & when, unless & until, save & except, in any shape or form, of any sort or kind. These & many others have long worn out their force, & what those who would write vigorously have to do with them is merely to unlearn them; see IF & WHEN, the apparently least pleonastic of these stock phrases, for fuller discussion. Those who use this form of p. can hardly be unconscious that they are saying a thing twice over, the and or or being there as a reminder. 3. In other phrases, the offender is
