page: 441

+ evidently unconscious, & expresses the same notion twice over in the belief that he is saying it once. Such are EQUALLY As (2), more PREFERABLE, & continue to REMAIN, which mean neither more nor less than equally (or as) preferable, & remain, by themselves, but which can be defended, by those who care to defend them, as not worse than uselessly pleonastic. With these may be classed the queer use of both, repugnant to sense but not to grammar, where they or the two is replaced by it though the emphasis necessarily attaching to both is absurd; so:—Both men had something in common./Archer Bey telephoned to General Morris & both conferred at the Residency. See BoTH 2 for more varieties of this very common ineptitude:

4, A further downward step brings us below the defensible level, & we come to the overlappings described in the article Haziness:—It is singular how apparently slow some minds seem to learn the elementary truth./We have been enabled to make large economies while at the same time increasing the efficiency of the fleet. See also aco & BECAUSE.

5. Lastly, there are the pleonasms in which by wrongly repeating a negative or a conjunction the writer produces a piece of manifest nonsense or impossible grammar. So:— ‘t You just come with me in a tub pair, & I should not wonder if I could not lick you into shape’./It should be a very great thing that before guns, shells, mountings, rangefinders, &c., are adopted, that the opinion of real & not of soi-disant experts shall be taken./We can only say that if the business men who read the Times are really of opinion that this is a sensible procedure, & that, if they find any satisfaction whatever in the writing down of a huge sum, which everybody knows can never be recovered, they will have only themselves to thank if ... See also NEGATIVES, THAT conj., & OVER- ZEAL.

+ plesiosaurus. PI. -ri (-i). plethora. Pronounce plé’thora. pleura. Pl. -rae. pleurisy. So spelt, not plu-; the derivation is from plewra rib, not plus pluris. plexus. Pl. -uses or plexus (-is), not -æi; see -US.

plica. Pl. -ae.

pliers. So spelt.

pliocene. See PLEISTOCENE.

plumb-. The bis silent in plumber, plumbery, plumbing, & plumbless, but sounded in plumbago, plumbeous, plumbic, plumbiferous, & plumbism.

plume makes plumy; see -EY & Y.

plump(en), vb. See -EN VERBS.

plumpy. Poetical only.

plunder makes -ered &c.; -R-, -RR-.

PLURAL ANOMALIES. See -ics 2 for the question whether words in -ics are singular or plural. Plural names of diseases, as mumps, measles, glanders, can be treated as singular or plural; chickenpox & smallpox, originally plural, are now reckoned singular. Innings, corps, & some other words in -s, are singular or plural without change of spelling, but, while corps has -s silent in singular & sounded in plural, an innings & several innings show no distinction, whence arises the colloquial double plural inningses. For the plural of Court Martial & Lord Justice, the number of porridge, & the difference between pence & pennies, see the words.

plurality. With three-cornered contests as common as they now are, we may have occasion to find a convenient single word for what we now call an absolute majority, i.e. a majority comprising more than half the votes cast. In America the word majority itself has that meaning, while a poll greater than that of any other candidate, but less than half the votes cast, is called a plurality. It might be well to borrow this distinction, but to better it by changing plurality to plurity. The correct meaning of plurality is not moreness (which is the notion wanted, but
