page: 442

which would be plurity), but plural-

ness or severalness or more-than-one-

ness. Plurity is an obsolete English

word exactly suited to the need;

ef. REVIVALS. See also MAJORITY.

ply, vb. For inflexions see VERBS

IN -IE &e., 6.

pneumatic, pneumonia, &c. The

OED gives nū- only for these particular words, but prefers pnii- for less familiar words from the same stems, such as pneumatology, pneumonometer. It is to be hoped that these silent letters may recover their voices now that everyone can read; cf. PHTHISIS, PSYCHOLOGY.

pochard. The OED puts põchfirst, but pdch-, pok-, & pdk-, are also recognized.

pocket makes -eted, -eling, &c.; see -T-, -TT-.

pocketful. Pl. -ls; see -run.

pococurante. Pronounce

põkokoorah’nté. Pl. -ti (-é).

podagra. The OED puts first the pronunciation p6‘dagra.

podgy. So spelt; see -EY & -y.

podium. Pronounce pé-; pil. -ia.

poetess. See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS.

poetic(al). See -1c(aL). The two forms are more or less peculiar in being both in constant use, while yet there is no clear division of functions between them. Certain tendencies, not always operative, there are:—poetical labels, while -ic admires (The -ical works of —; Conceived in a truly -ic spirit); -ical is the form for ‘ written in verse ”, & -ic for ‘instinct with poetry ’ (Poetical composition; The -ic impulse); -ical is the commonplace, & -ic the rhetorical form (In a poetical mood; but In -ic mood); -ical is sometimes used at the end of a sentence when in another position -ic would be more natural (An idea more true than -tcal, cf, A no less true than poetic idea); & -ic is sometimes jocularly substituted for -ical (The -ic effusions of an advertising soapboiler). POETICISMS. Simple reference of

words to this article warns the

reader that to use them in ordinary

prose contexts is dangerous; see

also INCONGRUOUS VOCABULARY. A

small haphazard collection of speci-

mens is:—an, conj.; aught; beau-

teous; broidery; canorous; childly;

clamant; delightsome; direful;

duteous; eke, adv.; ere; erst S

lorn; magnifical; plain, vb; plangent; whilom.

poeticize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

pogrom. Pronounce pogré’m.

poignant. Pronounce poi’nant.

point. For synonyms in the sense province &c., see FIELD. P. of view is the native phrase now being i ousted by standpoint. The latter | is a translation of the German Standpunkt, & appears in the form standpunct in one of the earliest OED quotations. What is killing p. 0.v. is no doubt the awkwardness of following it, as is constantly necessary, with another of (from the p.0.v. of philosophy); the process may be expected to continue, & there is no valid objection to standpoint; p.o.v. will linger for a time where the of difficulty does not present itself (from my, or Mill’s, p.0.0.). It is certainly better that standpoint should be accepted than another solution that is being tried on purpose to avoid it—that is, the using of point by itself as equivalent to point of view (from the point of the Tory Party): They agree that the demand of {3 a week by the men was unreasonable if it was meant to sustain ‘ a mere existence *, but from the point of a living wage it was not unreasonable. View-point, an earlier product of the repugnance to standpoint, has the disadvantage of calling to mind what standpoint allows to be forgotten, that the idiomatic English is undoubtedly p. of view. The perplexed stylist is at present inclined to cut loose & experiment with angle. What is here recommended is to use p.o.v. as the normal expression, but not be afraid of standpoint on occasion.
