page: 444

pollute makes -table; see MUTE E.

polyglot makes -ttal, -ttic, -ttism;

exceptionally, see -T-, -TT-,

polypus. Pl. -pi (-i) or -puses. The

inconsistency between this & octopus

is due to its having come to us

through classical Latin, in which it

was declined like the ordinary Latin

nouns in -us.

POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR. See PE-

DANTIC HUMOUR for a slight account

of the impulse that suggests long or

abstruse words as a means of entertaining the hearer. Of the long as distinguished from the abstruse, terminological inexactitude for lie or falsehood is a favourable example, but much less amusing at the hundredth than at the first time of hearing. Oblivious to their pristine nudity (forgetting they were stark naked) is a less familiar specimen. Nothing need here be added to what was said in the other article beyond a short specimen list of long words or phrases that sensible people avoid. Batavian, Caledonian, Celestial, Hibernian & Milesian, for Dutch, Scotch, Chinese, Irish. Solution of continuity, femoral habiliments, refrain from lacteal addition, & olfactory organ, for gap, breeches, take no milk, & nose. Osculatory, pachydermatous, matutinal, diminutive, fuliginous, fugacious, esurient, culinary, & minacious, for kissing, thick-skinned, morning, tiny, sooty, timid, hungry, kitchen, & threatening. Frontispiece, individual, equitation, intermediary, cachinnation, & epidermis, for face, person, riding, means, laughter, & skin. Negotiate & peregrinate for tackle & travel.

pomade. The OED gives -ād as the English pronunciation, & -ahd as a foreign one; the latter, however, is probably almost universal. pommel, pu-. The first spelling is usual for the noun, the second for the verb, though the verb is merely ause of the noun, & not of different origin. Both are pronounced pum-, & both make -lled (see -LL-, -L-),

POMPOSITIES. Such words as

beverage, catarrh, collation, comesti-

bles, condiment, co’nsort, divagation,

edifice, emporium, ere, evince, exacer-

bate, intermediary, the military, munificent, save (except), spouse, vituper-

ate, have all ‘a certain use in the

world, no doubt’; but they are seen in the newspapers very much more often than occasions for those certain uses occur, & may serve as specimens of hundreds that are habitually substituted for others merely as pompous ornaments.

ponceau. See FRENCH WORDS.

poncho. Pronounce with -ch-. Pl. -0S; see -O(E)s 6.

pongee. Pronounce ponjé’.

pontifex. Pl. -fices (-éz).

pontify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

poor. The unorthodox pronunciations por & por are heard often enough to necessitate a warning, For poorness & poverty see the latter. For ‘a p. thing but mine own ’, see MISQUOTATION,

pop, = popular concert.

See Cur- TAILED WORDS.

popularize makes -zable: MUTE E.

POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES. The term of this sort most in vogue at the moment of writing (1920) is undoubtedly acid test (The measure, as our correspondent says, provides an acid test for every Free Trader), which became familiar through a conspicuous use of it during the war by President Wilson. In contrast with this newest acquisition may be set intoxicated, so long popular as to be not now recognizable for a medical term at all; it is just a ponderous GENTEELISM for drunk. Have we to fear something of the kind with anaesthesia? the extract that follows raises apprehensions: This appetite grows by what it feeds upon, & it is accompanied by a total anaesthesia towards [i.e. carelessness of] the public interest & the results upon those who are victimized by these proceedings. A few examples of these popularized technicalities
