page: 445

+ may be gathered together; they will be only as one in a score or a hundred of those that exist, but will serve as specimens. Upon most of them some remarks will be found in their dictionary places. Two general warnings will suffice: first, that the popular use more often than not misrepresents, & sometimes very badly, the original meaning; & secondly, that free indulgence in this sort of term results in a tawdry style. It does not follow that none of them should ever be used.

From Philosophy—optimism & pessimism, category, concept, dualistic.

From Mathematics — progression arithmetical & geometrical, to the nth, to be a function of, perceniage & proportion (= part), curve (= tendency).

From Religion—devil’s advocate, immanent, implicit, incarnation.

From Psychology—personal equation, idiosyncrasy, mentality, psychological moment, complex.

From Law—special pleading, leading question, party (=person), aforesaid & such & same, re, ilk, ferae naturae, exception that proves the rule.

From War—decimate, internecine.

From Logic—dilemma, idols of the market.

From Commerce—asset.

From Architecture—flamboyant.

From Agriculture—intensive, hardy annual, common or garden.

From Astrology—ascendant.

From Politics—conservative (= small).

From Chemistry—eliminate.

From Literature—protagonisi, euphuism, Homeric laughter, myth, pathetic fallacy.

From Medicine—chronic, expectorate, hectic.

populate makes -lable; see -ABLE 1.

porcelain is china, & china is p. ; there is no recondite difference between the two things, which indeed are not two, but one; & the difference between the two words is merely that china is the homely term, while porcelain is exotic & literary. See WORKING & STYLISH WORDS.

+ Porch. For the P. in Philosophy see ACADEMY.

pork pie. No hyphen;

see Hy- PHENS 3 B.

porpoise. Pron. por’pus (not -oiz).

porridge is treated in Scotch use as plural (* & butter in them’).

porrigo. Pronounce pori’gé.

port, harbour, haven. The broad distinction is that a haven is thought of as a place where a ship may find shelter from a storm, a harbour as one offering accommodation (used or not) in which ships may remain in safety for any purpose, & a port as a town whose harbour is frequented by naval or merchant ships.

port, larboard. The two words mean the same, but p. has been substituted for J. (the earlier opposite of starboard) because of the confusion resulting when orders were shouted from the too great similarity between l. & starboard; l., however, has not yet perished.

portcullis makes -ised; see -s-, -Ss-.

porte-cochére. See FRENCH WORDS.

portfolio. Pl. -os; see -o(£)s 4.

portico. Pl. -os; see -o(&)s 6.

portière. See FRENCH WORDS.

portion. The Prime Minister, at the Lord Mayors banquet on Saturday, devoted the major portion of his speech to Russia. See FORMAL WORDS for major p. as compared with greater part. A favourite piece of buckram. See also MAJOR.

portly. For the adverb see -LILY.

portmanteau. Pl. -s (or -æ; see -x). For p. word the OED quotes from Through the Looking-glass ‘Well, “ slithy ° means “lithe & slimy”. . . You see it’s like a portmanteau—there are two meanings packed up into one word ’.

portray. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 1.

portress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

Portuguese, n., is both singular & plural. ‘In modern times a sing. Portug(u)ee has arisen in vulgar use ’—OED.

pose makes -sable; see MUTE E.
