page: 447

+ together of its parts the natural & normal thing, (B) that there is, however, no sacro-sanctity about that arrangement, (C) that adverbs should be kept outside if there is neither anything gained by putting them inside nor any difficulty in finding them another place, but (D) that such gain or difficulty will often justify the confessedly abnormal splitting. One pair of examples will throw light on C & D:—The people are now returning & trying to again get together a home./With us outside the Treaty, we must expect the Commission to at least neglect our interests. In the first, it is easy to write to get a home together again, &, as again does not belong to the single word get, but to get a home together, nothing is gained by its abnormal placing. In the second, at least cannot be put before to because it would then go with Commission (=the Commission, even if not other people), nor after neglect because it would then be doubtful whether it referred back to neglect or forward to interests, nor after interests because it would then belong either to interests or to neglect our interests, neither being what is meant; where it stands, it - secures our realizing that the writer has in mind some other verb such as injure or oppose with which the weaker neglect is to be contrasted.

In a split infinitive, however, we have not so much a misplacing of _ the adverb as a violence done to the verb. It is by repulsion, not by attraction, that the infinitive acts in effecting the many misplacings, to be shown below, for which it is _ responsible. 2. Fear of split infinitive. The order of words in the following examples is bizarre enough to offend the least cultivated ear; the reason why the writers, whose ears were perhaps no worse than their neigh- _bours’, were not struck by it is that they were obsessed by fear of infinitive-splitting. It will be seen that the natural (not necessarily |

+ the best) place for the adverb in each is where it would split an infinitive. Such genilemen are powerless to analyse correctly agricultural conditions./A body of Unionist employers which still has power to influence greatly opinion among those who work for them./Might I kindly ask you to forward? The place into which each adverb has been shifted is such that one or other of the faults explained in later sections is committed, & the writer is OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN into the fire; see especially 6.

But the terrorism exercised by the split infinitive is most conspicuous where there is in fact (see next section) no danger.

3. Imaginary split infinitive passive. In the following examples it is again clear that the natural place for the adverb is not where it now stands, but invariably after the words to be. To insert an adverb between to & be would be splitting an infinitive; to insert one between to be & forgotten or pained is nothing of the kind, but is a particular case of the construction explained in 5. The position after to be is not only the natural one in these sentences, but the best. The mistake—& that it is a definite mistake there is no doubt whatever—is so common that many examples are called for:— The awkward necessity for getting to work & working as hard as possible & with heariy goodwill altogether seems to be forgotten./Every citizen worth the name ought vitally to be concerned in today’s election./All of us who believe in Parliamentary institutions cannot fail deeply to be pained at reading the story./But if the home trade were really in a bad state, it would be impossible for the workers so fully to be employed as they have been & are./There were those who thought the Turkish Government would not be willing to adopt a policy of conciliation, but it looks as if they were agreeably to be disappointed./The nuisance of allowing visitors to cross the footlights had
