page: 452

are two escapes; one is to write the

title in italics instead of inverted

commas, but the possessive s in

roman type (The Times’s), & the

other is to fly to of (in the opinion of

‘ The Times’).

5. For somebody else’s or somebody’s

else see ELSE.

possible. 1. Do one’s p. 2. Con-

struction. 3. P.) (probable.

1. Do one’s possible is a GALLICISM 2

&, with do what one can in established existence, it is superfluous.

2. Construction. But no such questions are possible, as it seems to me, to arise between your nation & ours. / No breath of honest fresh air is suffered to enter, wherever it is possible to be eacluded. These are wrong. Unlike able, which ordinarily requires to be completed by an infinitive (able to be done, to exist, &c.), p. is complete in itself & means without addition able to be done or occur, The English for are p. to arise & is p. to be excluded is can arise, can be excluded. The mistakes are perhaps due to the frequency of such forms as It is p. to find an explanation, in which it is not an ordinary pronoun, but merely anticipatory; that is, the sentence in its simpler form would not be .An explanation is p. to find, but To find an explanation is p. When it is felt that p. does require to be amplified, it is done by of with a verbal noun— Limits that are p. of exact ascertainment; but susceptible or some other word is usually better.

3. P.) (probable. It would be too much to demand that p. should always be kept to its strict sense & never so far weakened that impossible (or possible in a negative context) means no more than very unlikely; but, when probable & Dp. are in explicit contrast, the demand may fairly be made. The Prohibition Amendment can only be revoked by the same methods as secured its adoption. I met no one in America who deemed this probable, few who thought it even possible. As all

sensible people know it, whatever

its improbability, to be possible, the

picture of American intelligence is

uncomplimentary; but this ab-

surdity is common enough, & ranks

with the abuse of LITERALLY.

poste restante. See FRENCH WORDS.

post hoe, ergo propter hoc. See

TECHNICAL TERMS.

posthumous. The -h- is silent, & also, though never omitted, etymologically incorrect.

posticous. Pronounce posti’kus.

postil(ljion. The OED prefers the single -l-.

postmistress. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

postpone. Pronounce pospd/n.

postprandial. Chiefly in PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

postscript. Pronounce po’skript.

postulate makes -lable, -tor; see -ABLE I, -or.

pot, not pott, of paper. See POT(T).

potage. See FRENCH WORDS.

potato. Pl. -oes; see -o(£)s 1.

poteen, -th-. The OED treats -teen as the established spelling.

potency, -nce. In gencral senses -cy is much commoner; &, as -ce has technical senses in engineering, watch-making, &c., it would be better to confine -ce to these, & make -cy universal in the general Senses. See -CE, -CY.

potentate. Pronounce pd’-.

potential has no longer the meaning of potent, which should have been the wordin: The Labour Party... was exercising most potential influence on some social problems. See LONG VARIANTS.

potful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL. pother is now, except in dialects, a LITERARY worD. The more correct, but now less usual, pronunciation is pti’dher rhyming with other brother mother. There is no proof of connexion with either bother or powder, though it is thought that bother may be an Irish corruption of pother, Between pother & bother there is the difference in meaning that p. denotes ado or bustle or
