page: 453

+ confusion in itself, while b. emphasizes the annoyance or trouble caused.

pot-pourri. See FRENCH WORDS.

pot(t). The paper size is so named from the pot that it formerly bore as a watermark; the right spelling is pot, the -tt being merely like that in mait, neti, & SET(T).

potter makes -ering &c.; -R-, -RR-.

poult-de-soje. See FRENCH WORDS.

poultice makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1.

pourboire, pourparler, pour rire, poussette. See FRENCH WORDS.

poverty) (poorness. The dominant sense of poor is having little money or property. The noun corresponding to this dominant sense is poverty, & poorness is never so used in modern English. The further the dominant sense is departed from, the more does poverty give way to poorness—Poverty is no excuse for theft; The poverty (or poorness) of the soil; The poorness (or poverty) of the harvest; The poorness of his performance. See -TY & -NESS.

-P-,-PP-. Monosyllables ending in -p double it before suffixes beginning with vowels if the sound preceding it is a single vowel (a, e, i, 0, u, y), but not if it is a diphthong or a double vowel or a vowel & r: trapped, scrappy, uppish, popping, sleepy, carping, leaper. Words of more than one syllable follow the rule for monosyllables if their last syllable is accented (entrapped, but upheaped); they also double the p if, like handicap & kidnap, milksop & lollipop, they have a clear 4 or 6 as opposed to the obscure sound in jalap & gallop, or if, like horsewhip & sideslip, they are compounded with a monosyllable; but otherwise they do not double it except worship: chirruped, enveloping, galoping, galloper, gossipy, filliped, equipped, trans-shipping, hiccuped, handicapper, kidnapped, walloping, milksoppish, jalaped, lollipoppery, horsewhipping, worshipper, sideslipped.

practicable) (practical. 1. The nega-

+ tive forms are impracticable, but unpractical; impracticalisoften wrongly written (The most impractical of all persons—the man who works by rule of thumb); see IN- & UN-.

2. Meanings. Each word has senses in which there is no fear that the other will be substituted for it; but in other senses they come very near each other, & confusion is both natural & common. Safety lies in remembering that practicable means capable of being effected or accomplished, & practical adapted to actual conditions; it is true that the practicable is often practical, & that the practical is nearly always practicable; but a very practical plan may prove owing to change of circumstances impracticable, & a practicable policy may be thoroughly unpractical. In the extracts, each word is used where the other was wanted:—In the case of a club, if rules are passed obnoxious to a large section of the members, the latter can resign; in our national relationships, Secession is not practical nowadays. The last sentence is in clear antithesis to the latter can resign, & means You cannot secede, orin other words Secession is not practicable./ But to plunge into the military question without settling the Government question would not be good sense or practicable policy; & no wise man would expect to get serviceable recruits for the Army from Ireland in this way. The policy was certainly practicable, for it was carried out; & the writer, though he had not the proof that we have of its practicability, probably did not mean to deny that, but only to say that it was not suited to the conditions, i.e. practical./We live in a low-pressure belt where cyclone follows cyclone; but the prediction of their arrival is at present not practical. practice, -se. Noun -ce, verb -se; see LICENCE. practitioner. See PHYSICIAN. _ pragmatic(al). In the diplomatic, historical, & philosophical senses,
