page: 454

the -ic form is usual. In the general

sense of officious or opinionated,

-ical is commoner. In the interests

of differentiation these tendencies

should be encouraged; see -1c(AL).

praise makes -sable; see MUTE E.

pram (perambulator). See Cur-

TAILED WORDS.

pratique. Pronounce pră’tik.

pray. 1. For inflexions see VERBS

IN -IE &¢., 1.

2. Pray in aid. One of the pictu-

resque phrases that people catch up

& use without understanding: We are disturbed to find that this principle of praying in aid the domestic circumstances of the woman appears to have been sanctioned officially by the Committee on production. This writer, & most of those who use the words, suppose that in aid is an adverb, & that pray is therefore free to take an object—here circumstances. The fact is that the object of pray is aid, & in is not a preposition but an adverb, to pray in aid being word for word to call in help; if the helper or helping thing is to be specified, it must have an of before it, as in the following OED quotations:—A city or corporation, holding a fee-farm of the King, may pray in Aid of him, if anything be demanded of them relating thereto./ An incumbent may pray in aid of the patron & ordinary.

pre-. In compounds whose second part begins with e or i a hyphen is used: pre-eminent, pre-issue. In others the hyphen is not necessary, but is freely used if the compound is one made for the occasion, or if any peculiarity in its form might prevent its elements from being instantly recognized, or if recurrence from the sense now developed to a more primitive one is to be marked by especial stress on the elements: predetermine, prenatal, prearranged; pre-Coalition, pre-war, pre-position (in contrast with preposition the part of speech). preachify. For

inflexions see

454 VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

precede makes -dable; see MUTE E.

precedence, precedent. The pro-

nunciation is tricky. The OED

gives for the first prisé’dns only

(not pré’sidns), & for the second

prisé’dnt only in adjectival use, but

pré’sidnt only in noun use. This,

which is a very disputable account of present usage, is not likely to remain true; pré’sid- is here recommended for all alike.

precedent. The House of Commons is always ready to extend the indulgence which [it] is a sort of precedent that the mover & seconder of the Address should ask for. A bad piece of SLIPSHOD EXTENSION; a p. is not a custom or a tradition (though it may start one; cf. HaziNeEss), but a previous case.

preciosity & preciousness illustrate well the differentiation that should be encouraged whenever there is an Opening for it between the two terminations; see -TY & -NESS. The special sense of excessive fastidiousness in diction, pronunciation, & the like, is almost confined to -ty, & the more general senses are left to -ness. The opening here was provided by the fact that -ty represents the French form & so calls up the Précieuses Ridicules of Molière.

precipitance, -ancy, -ation. The most economical way of dealing with the words would have been to let -ancy perish, & make -ance mean rashness of action or suddenness of occurrence or speed of motion, & -ation the bringing or coming to pass with especial rashness or speed. But what is happening is that all three exist side by side, -ance & -ancy slowly giving way to -ation just as their parent precipitant has given way to precipitate. See also PRECIPITOUS. precipitate. 1. The verb makes -ttable; see -ABLE 1. 2. The verb is pronounced -at, the adjective & noun -at or -it; PARTICIPLES 5 B. precipitous. The position, then, is
