page: 456

+ an infinitive, but the sound of I p. to die to to pay blackmail, or even of I p. to die to paying, is intolerable. It is easy sometimes to make the change corresponding to that of to die to death, but by no means always. When the infinitive is unavoidable, the way out is to use rather than instead of to: I p. to die rather than pay blackmail. To use simple than instead of rather than (I p. to die than pay) is clean against established idiom, as bad as saying superior than or prior than instead of superior or prior to. But this solecism, of which there is hardly a trace in the OED article (1908), has recently become common; the array of quotations given below is in amusing contrast with the solitary specimen (dated 1778) that the OED could show. Even the rather than mentioned above is not much to be recommended; but, if the writer is bent on using prefer, it will pass; a better plan is to change the verb prefer to choose rather or would rather (He chose to die rather than pay; LI would rather die than pay); the main point is that prefer than without rather is not English:—We should greatly p. to pay the doctors more than to limit the area of insurance (We would much rather pay... than limit)./We should p. to entrust ourselves without a solitary guarantee to the goodwill of our Nationalist fellow-countrymen than fetier the Irish Parliament with safeguards (we would sooner entrust). / One would p. to have Mistress Alys Wryght’s own account of herself than be invited to picture her (would rather have)./ They are preferably left, we think, to the enjoyment of the reader than torn from their context (are better left). / The majority of them, we rather think, would prefer to bear the ills they know than to fly to the untried remedy of the State regulation of wages (Shakspere preferred rather bear to preferred to bear; the other rather has caused him to be corrected, but not improved)./Many p. to go bareheaded than to reassume the fez (many go

+ bareheaded rather than reassume)./

They have always preferred to speculate on the chance of winning a General Election than to setile with their opponenis (rather than settle). / Surely the public would prefer to arrive half an hour later than run the ghastly risks (would choose ... rather than run)./The nine deportees would p. to go home than to undergo sentence after trial by Couri-martial (would sooner go... than undergo). / Ukrainian peasants even prefer to fire their crops than to see them seized by these bullies (even fire their crops rather than see)./Any man of ordinary pride would have preferred to accept any responsibility than attribute to himself the cowardly evasion which ... (would have accepted... rather than attribute)./He would certainly p. that we should credit him with none at ail than allow him a grain too much (would certainly rather have us credit)./He is persuasive rather than dogmatic, & prefers to suggest than to conclude (suggesting to concluding).

prefigure. For pronunciation of this & its derivatives, see FIGURE.

prefix. 1. The noun is pré’fiks, the verb prifiiks; see Noun & VERB ACCENT, &, for meaning, TECHNICAL TERMS. 2. For derivative nouns it is better to rub along with prefix & prefixing than to resort to prefixion & prefixture. 3. Prefix, vb) (preface, vb. P.is one of the verbs liable to the OBJECT-SHUFFLING abuse. You can prefix a title to your name, but not prefix your name with a title. Several examples of the confusion follow; in each the construction must be turned inside out if p. is to be kept, but in most of them the change of prefix(ed) to preface(d) would put things right:—The speeches in the present volume are prefixed by a clear æ connected account of the administration of India./Many others are Austrian Barons of modern creation, these titles being very numerous, because every son is allowed to prefix his name
