page: 457

+ with the title./A * Collection of Poems & Essays by Mary Queen of Scots ’, prefixed by an essay on the character & writings of Mary Siuart./Two notes dealing with recent cases on the subject of company directors are prefixed by the catchwords in very prominent type: * Retirement & Remorse ’./The story is prefixed by an introductory sketch of Pope Alexander VIs Spanish ancestry./Every paragraph is prefixed with a kind of title to it.

The poor old word preface, with foreword assailing it on one front & prefix on another, is going through troubled times.

pregnant construction. See TECH- NICAL TERMS.

prejudg(e)ment.

Keep the -e- ; see MUTE E.

prejudice, n. The Committee’s Report adds that without doubt a marked prejudice to the eating of eels exists in Scotland. The prepositions after p. are against & in favour of; this to is transferred from objection; see ANALOGY.

adv. See QUASI-

preliminary, ADVERBS.

prelude. The noun is pré/lid; the verb used to be prili’d (‘ All the verse quotations & the dictionaries down to c 1830 ’—OED), but is now pronounced like the noun—a remarkable exception to the tendency mentioned in Noun & VERB ACCENT.

premature. The pronunciation pré’matur is recommended, but the sound of the e & the place of the accent are both variable; in any case, the last syllable is fully pronounced & not weakened to -cher.

premier as an adjective is now suggestive of tawdry ornament, though it was formerly not avoided by good writers. The ELEGANT-VARIATIONISt finds it useful (There was a time when the School of Literae Humaniores stood first in point of number, but of late the History School has taken premier place), but would do better to find

Q3 some other way out. It is wise to

+ confine it now to such traditional phrases as p. Earl or Baronet (Bacon had no issue of his marriage, the preseni Sir Hickman Bacon, premier Baronet of England, being descended from his half-brother).

première. See FRENCH WORDS.

premise(s), -ss(es). 1. The noun is pré’mis, the verb primi’z; see Noun & VERB AccENT. 2. The verb is spelt premise, not -ize; see -ISE) (-1zE. 3. The two noun spellings (-tses & -isses in the plural) may perhaps be thought useful; but ambiguity cannot often arise between the parts of a syllogism (-isses; see, for meaning, TECH- NICAL TERMS) & of a public house (-tses); &, except practical utility, there is no reason for the variation. The two words are one, the parts of a syllogism being ‘the previously stated’, & the parts of a public house &c. being ‘the aforesaid ’, (facts, places, &c.). The uniform spelling premise (pl. premises) is recommended. 4. The verb makes -sable; see MUTE E.

premium. Pl. -ms only; see -um.

preoccupiedly. A bad form; -EDLY.

prep. See CURTAILED WORDS.

preparatory. For the use in They were weighing it preparatory to sending tt to town, see QUASI-ADVERBS.

prepare makes -rable; see MUTE E.

preparedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY.

prepay. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &e., 1.

PREPOSITION AT END. It is a cherished superstition that prepositions must, in spite of the incurable English instinct for putting them late (‘ They are the fittest timber to make great politics of’ said Bacon; & ‘ What are you hitting me for?’ says the modern schoolboy), be kept true to their name & placed before the word they govern. ‘A sentence ending in a preposition is an inelegant sentence ’ represents a very general belief. One of its chief supports is the fact that Dryden, an acknowledged master of
