page: 459

+ is given to it by no matter whom it is displayed (no matter whom it is displayed by)./That promised land for which he was to prepare, but scarcely to enter (that he was to prepare for).

It was said above that almost all our great writers have allowed themselves to end a sentence or a clause with a preposition. A score of specimens follow ranging over six centuries, to which may be added the Bacon, Cowper, & Ruskin examples already given:—(Chaucer) But yit to this thing ther is yit another thing y-ioigned, more to ben wondred upon. (Spenser) Yet childe ne kinsman living had he none To leave them to. (Shakspere) Such bitter business as the day Would quake to look on. (Jonson) Prepositions follow sometimes the nouns they are coupled with. (Bible) I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of. (Milton) What a fine conformity would it starch us allinto. (Burton) Fit for Calphurnius & Democritus to laugh at. (Pepys) There is good ground for what he goes about. (Congreve) And where those qualities arc, ’tis pity they should want objects to shine upon. (Swift) The present argument is the most abstracted that ever I engaged in. (Defoe) Avenge the injuries ... by giving them up to the confusions their madness leads them to. (Burke) The less convincing on account of the party it came from. (Lamb) Enforcing his negation with all the might ... he is master of. (De Quincey) The average, the prevailing tendency, is what we look at. (Landor) The vigorous mind has mountains to climb, & valleys to repose in. (Hazlitt) It does for something to talk about. (Peacock) Which they would not otherwise have dreamed of. (Mill) We have done the best that the existing state of human reason admits of. (IKinglake) More formidable than any... that Ibrahim Pasha had to contend with. (M. Arnold) Let us see what

+ it amounts to. (Lowell) Make them show what they are made of, (Thackeray) So little do we know what we really are after. (Kipling) Too horrible to be trifled with.

If it were not presumptuous, after that, to offer advice, the advice would be: Follow no arbitrary rule, but remember that there are often two or more possible arrangements between which a choice should be consciously made; if the abnormal, or at least unorthodox, final preposition that has naturally presented itself sounds comfortable, keep it; if it does not sound comfortable, still keep it if it has compensating vigour, or when among awkward possibilities it is the least awkward.

presage. The noun is pré’sij, the verb prisa’j; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. The verb makes -geable; see -ABLE l.

prescience, -nt. The OED gives préshyens, -nt, only; but pré- is as often heard.

prescribe makes -bable; see MUTE E.

prescription. For the meaning, & its relation to imprescriptible, see that word.

present, a. Ze p. writer is a periphrasis for J & me that is not entirely avoidable under existing journalistic conditions, & is at any rate preferable to the false firstpersonal one (see ONE 5) that is being tried as a substitute; but it is very irritating to the reader; personality, however veiled, should be introduced into impersonal articles only when the necessity is quite indisputable. The worst absurdity occurs when a contributor or correspondent whose name appears above or below his article or letter puts on this Coa vestis of a veil; but they often do it.

The verb is

present, n. & v. prizé’nt, the noun pré‘znt;

see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

presentiment, presentment, presentient. Nine people out of ten, challenged to pronounce the first, will do it with z. On the other hand
