page: 460

the OED gives only the pronuncia-

tion with s; that is undoubtedly the

correct one, as in sentiment; but the

sound has been assimilated to that

of present, with which presentment is,

but presentiment is not, connected;

& with presentient, which is not in

popular use, no-one would make the same mistake. Mistake or not, however, even the OED’s authority is hardly likely to cure presentiment of its z, & the pronunciations here recommended are prizé’ntiment, prizéntment, présé’nshent.

preserve, n. For p.=jam, see FoRMAL WORDs,

preserve, vb, has -vable; MUTE E.

presidentess. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

prestidigitator, -tion. Now chiefly in POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

prestige. The anglicized pronunciation pré’stij is given by the OED as well as the usual préste’zh, but is perhaps seldom heard.

prestissimo, presto. Pl. -os; -o(£)s 3.

presume makes -mable; see MUTE E.

presumedly. Four syllables .f used; see -EDLY; it is better to use presumably or other synonym.

presumptive. For heir p., see HEIR 2.

PRESUMPTUOUS WORD-FORMA- TION. A selection of words follows that for one reason or another should not have been broughtinto existence. Some, as basal, were not wanted; some, as bureaucrat, were bad formations; some, as intensive, were essentially liable to confusion with others; & against some, as dandiacal, more than one of these objections can be brought. They are not here sorted into classes, the particular faults of each being stated in its dictionary place, but are merely put together as a general warning to those who are given either to reckless wordmaking for themselves or to catching up of new vogue-words started by others. Amoral, amusive, basal, bureaucrat, calmative, coastal, concision, dandiacal, declinal, demean (lower),

+ devolute, duologue, epistolatory, eventuate, feature vb, femininity, forceful, foreword, funniment, happenings, historicity, idiosyncratic, intensive, interpretive, lectureship, locution, mentality, mineralogy, minify, monachal, monarchial, opinionative, pacifist, pleistocene, purposive, speedometer.

presuppose makes -sable; MUTE E.

preterite. In dealing with English grammar, it is better to say past.

pretermit makes -tted, -iting (see -T-, -TT-), & -ssible or -ttable (see -ABLE 1, 2.

prettify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

preux chevalier, FRENCH WORDS.

prevaricate makes -tor; see -or.

preventable, -ible. The first is recommended; see -ABLE 2.

prevent(at)ive. The short form is better; see LONG VARIANTS.

previous. 1. For the construction in will consult you previous to acting, see QUASI-ADVERBS. 2. Too previous, originally amusing both because the sense of p. was a specially made one, & because foo was with that sense deliberately redundant, has passed into the realm of Worn- OUT HUMOUR. 3. The previous question is a phrase that does not explain itself. We all know that moving the p.q. is somehow a way of attempting to shelve the matter under debate, but the light of nature would suggest only, & wrongly, that the proposal was to go back to what the House had been engaged upon before this present matter. The p. q. is in fact a proposal that the matter under debate should not now (formerly, should now) be divided upon. Those who wish to shelve the matter move this p. q., to which they now vote ay (formerly no).

pre-war. The only justification for saying p. instead of before the war is that before the war makes a very unhandy adjective, & we are now constantly in need of a handy one; before-the-war conditions, politics, prices, as phrases for everyday use, will never do, & the only justifica-
