page: 461

+ tion is also sufficient. But it fails to cover the use of pre-war as an adverb, now making its way into the newspapers. There is nothing unhandy in that use of before the war, which should be restored in all contexts of the kind here shown— The suggestion is utterly untrue, as a comparison of present prices with those prevailing pre-war will show./ The difference is made up, though not, of course, to the same extent as prewar, by interest on our foreign investments./The season-ticket holder, too, is to pay about 75 per cent. more than he did pre-war./The number of houses demolished annually pre-war ` is again not accurately known.

prey, vb. For

inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 2.

price, vb, makes -ceable; -ABLE 1.

prickly. For the adverb, see -Lity.

pride. For P. goeth before a fail, see MISQUOTATION.

PRIDE OF KNOWLEDGE is a very unamiable characteristic, & the display of it should be sedulously avoided. Some of the ways in which it is displayed, often by people who do not realize how disagreeable they are making themselves, are illustrated in the following among many articles: a loutrance, amuck, Army & Navy, averse, baluster, bedouin, course, different, double entendre, egregious, flautist, Hindu, implement, ingeminate, journal, Mahomet, moral(e), moslem, naif, nom-de-guerre, shamefaced, taboo.

prie-dieu. See FRENCH WORDS.

priestess, See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS.

priestly. For the adv., see -LILY.

prig is a word of variable & indefinite meaning; the following, from an anonymous volume of essays, may be useful:—‘ The best thing I can do, perhaps, is to give you the various descriptions that would come into my head at different times if I were asked for one sudden- ły. A prigis a believer in red tape; that is, he exalts the method above

+ the work done. A prig, like the Pharisee, says: ‘‘ God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are?”— except that he often substitutes Self for God. A prig is one who works out his paltry accounts to the last farthing, while his millionaire neighbour lets accounts take care of themselves. A prig expects others to square themselves to his very inadequate measuring-rod, & condemns them with confidence if they do not. A p. is wise beyond his years in all the things that do not matter. A p. cracks nuts with a steam hammer: that is, calls in the first principles of morality to decide whether he may, or must, do something of as little importance as drinking a glass of beer. On the whole, one may, perhaps, say that all his different characteristics come from the combination, in varying proportions, of three things—the desire to do his duty, the belief that he knows better than other people, & blindness to the difference in value between different things ’.

prima donna. Pronounce pré-. Pl. prime donne (-€ma, -na) or prima donnas.

prima facie. Pron. pri’ma fa’shié.

primary colours. As the phrase is used in different senses, the OED definition is here given:—Formerly, the seven colours of the spectrum, viz. red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet; now, the three colours red, green, & violet (or, with painters, red, yellow, & blue), out of different combinations of which all the others are produced.

primates. Pronounce prima’téz.

prime, vb, has -mable; MUTE E.

primer. The traditional pronunciation is pri’‘mer, & the word was very commonly spelt with -mm-. This pronunciation is still used in the names of types; but in the names of modern school manuals pri‘mer is now more usual. primeur. See FRENCH WORDS. primeval, -aeval. The first is recommended; see Æ, Œ,
