page: 462

princely. For the adv., see -LILY.

princess. As a prefix (P. Edith,

P. Victoria, P. Royal, &c.) pro-

nounced pri‘nsis; as an independent

noun, pri’nsés or prinsé’s.

principal, principle. Misprints of

one for the other are very frequent,

& should be guarded against.

prior. For the adverbial use (p. to

= before) see QUASI-ADVERBS. But

the phrase is incongruous, & ranks

merely with FORMAL WORDS, except in contexts involving a connexion

between the two events more essential than the simple time relation, as in Candidates must deposit Security prior to the ballot. The use deprecated is seen in: Prior to going to Wiltshire, Mr very successfully hunted the Hounds.

prise. This spelling is sometimes used to differentiate the verb meaning to force up by leverage from the other verb or verbs spelt prize; it is also the old spelling of the nautical verb meaning to capture. But the pronunciation (always -z) is against the success of this distinction, & the ordinary form prize is recommended.

privacy. The OED recognizes only priv-, not priv-.

privative. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

privilege, vb. He was generally believed to be an exceptionally taciturn man, but those who were privileged with his friendship say that this was a habit assumed against the inquisitive. An unidiomatic use, on the ANALOGY of honoured with. prize, vb, makes -zable; See MUTE E. For the spelling in various senses, see PRISE. pro (professional). See CURTAILED worps. Pl. pros; see -O(E)s 5. pro & con. Pl., as noun, pros & cons. probable. Two temptations call for notice. The first is that of attaching an infinitive to HOR Oe POSSIBLE; a thing may be likely to happen, but not pP. to happen; ANALOGY is the corrupter: Should Germany meditate anything of the

kind it would look uncommonly like

a deliberate provocation of France, & for that reason it seems scarcely pro-

bable to be borne out by events. /

Military cooperation against Russia is

scarcely probable to be more than a

dream. The second is the wrong use

of the future after p. The result will probably beis right; but The probable result will be is a mixture between that & The probable result is; correct accordingly to is in: It is believed that Said Pasha will be forced to resign, & that his most probable successor will be Kiamil Pasha.

probe, if an -able adjective from it is required, must make probeable for fear of confusion with the ordinary probable—one of the extremely rare necessary exceptions to therulegiven under MUTE E.

problematic(al). The longer form is slightly more common; there is no clear difference in usage; -IC(AL).

proboseis. The pl. recommended is -scises; the Latin form is -scides (-€z), & probosces is wrong. For p.= nose, see POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

proceleusmatic. See GREEK G.

process. The OED gives prd’sés as the better pronunciation; but prō’sés or pr6’sis seems more likely to prevail. process (go in procession) is a BACK- FORMATION; pronounce prosé’s. procès-verbal. See FRENCH WORDS. proclitic. See TECHNICAL TERMS. procrastinate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE l, -OR. proctorize makes -zable; MUTE E. procure makes -rable; see MUTE E. procuress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS. produce. Verb prodū’s, noun pro’diis; see Noun & VERB ACCENT, The verb makes -cible; see -ABLE 2. proem, proemial. Pronounce prd’- ém, prdé’mial. But the words, not having made their way like poem & poetic into common ` use, remain puzzling to the unlearned & are better avoided in general writing.
