page: 464

prohibit. The modern construc-

tion, apart from that with an object

noun as in an Act prohibiting export,

is from doing, not to do; the OED

marks the latter as archaic, but it

is less archaism than ignorance of

idiom & the analogy of forbid that

accounts forit in such contexts as:—

Marshal Oyama prohibited his troops

to take quarter within the walls./The

German Government has decided to

issue a decree prohibiting all Govern-

ment officials to strike. P. makes -tor; see -OR.

prohibition. Pronounce préji- ; the h is sounded, however, where the i fallowing it bears the accent, as in prohibit itself. See PRONUNCIATION.

project. Verb projé’kt, noun pro’jikt; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. The verb makes -tor; see -or.

prolate, -lative. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

prolegomena. A plural, of which the sing., rarely used, is -menon.

prolepsis. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

prolific is in common use, but to make a satisfactory noun from it has passed the wit of man. Provificacy, prolificalness, prolificity, & prolificness, have been tried & found wanting; tility, productiveness, Sruttfulness, are the best solution.

prologue, -logize, -loguize. The prevalent modern pronunciation is pro‘lég, but the OED gives preference to prd‘l6g. In the verb it seems best to spell -gize, the Greeks having the verb -gizo, but with licence at least te GREEK G) to pronounce it pro’logiz. promenade. Pronounce -ahd. Promethean. See HERCULEAN. prominence, -cy. The second is a -NEEDLESS VARIANT. See -CE, -CY. promiscuous. The colloquial use for random, chance, casual, &c., springs from POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR. promise makes -sable; see MUTE ES ‘The noun promisor is confined to legal use, & -er is the ordinary word. P., vb, is liable to the abuse dis- substitutes such as fer-

cussed in DOUBLE PASSIVES: If it

had been taken down, even though

promised to be re-erected, ii might

have shared the fate of Temple Bar.

promissory. So spelt, not -isory.

promote. 1. P. makes -table; see

MUTE E. 2. Construction. You can

P. a person to an archbishopric, or p.

him to be archbishop, or p. him arch-

bishop, but not mix two of these &

p. him to archbishop. The unidiom-

atic construction, however, is now

commoner in the newspapers than

it should be:—The crowning glory

of an executive naval officer’s career is

to be promoted to Admiral of the

Fleet. / Major-General has been appointed to succeed Lieutenant- General as Director-General (temp.) of the Army Medical Service, & has been promoted to Lieutenant- General (temp.)./Over 1150 cadets of the Military Colleges were promoted to officers.

promalgate makes -atable, -tor; see -ATABLE, -OR.

pronounce

makes -ceable; see -ABLE l. Pronouncedly has four syllables; see -ĽeDLY. Pronouncement is kept in being by the side of pronunciation owing to complete differentiation; it means only declaration or decision, which the other never does.

PRONOUNS & pronominal adjectives are rather tricky than difficult. Those who go wrong over them do so from heedlessness, & will mostly plead guilty when they are charged. It is enough to state the dangers very shortly, & prove their existence by sufficient citations. 1. There must be a principal in existence for the pronoun or proxy to act for. 2. The principal should not be very far off. 3. There should not be two parties justifying even a momentary doubt about which the pronoun represents. 4. One pronoun should not represent two principals on one occasion. 5. The pronoun should seldom precede its principal. 1. No pronoun without a principal in being. Viscount Wolverhampton,
