page: 466

his proxy makes things difficult for

the reader)./On the Lord Mayor’s

left was Queen Elena, as calm & placid as her husband, who had come

into the Guildhall in Parma violet

silk, with a large violet-coloured hat

& a bouquet of orchids of the same hue.

4, One pronoun, one job. ... which opens up the bewildering question as to how far the Duma really represents the nation. The answer to this is far from solving the Russian riddle, but without answering it it is idle even to discuss it (It represents, first, the bewildering question, secondly, the discussion of that riddle, & last, the riddle itself—which is not the same as the question)./This local option in the amount of outdoor relief given under the Poor Law has always operated inequitably & been one of the greatest blots on the system; to extend it to the first great benefit under ihe Insurance Act will greatly lessen its usefulness (It is the blot, but its is the Act’s)./ Again, unconsciousness in the person himself of what he is about, or of what others think of him, is also a great heightener of ihe sense of absurdity; it makes it come the fuller home to us from his insenstbility to it (It is first the unconsciousness, secondly the sense of absurdity, & thirdly absurdity).

5. The pronoun should seldom precede its principal. For Plato, being then about twenty-eight years old, had listened to the ° Apology’ of Socrates; had heard from them ail that others had heard or seen of his last hours (had heard from others all that they had heard &e.)./The old Liberal idea of cutting expendiiure down to the bone, so that his money might fructify in the pocket of the taxpayer, had given place to the idea of ... (the taxpayer’s money might fructify in his pocket)./Both these lines of criticism are taken simultaneously in a message ‘which its special correspondent sends from Laggan, in Alberta, to the Daily Mail this morning (which the D. M. prints S morning from its correspondent

Co):

pronunciam(i)ento. The Spanish

spelling is with the 7, but the OED

gives the English word without it.

Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

PRONUNCIATION. The ambition to do better than our neighbours is in many departments of life a virtue; in pronunciation it is a vice; there the only right ambition is to do as our neighbours. It is true this at once raises the question who our neighbours are. To reply that some people’s neighbours are the educated, others’ the uneducated, & others’ again a mixture, is not very helpful in itself, suggesting social shibboleths; but there is truth in it, for all that, which may serve us if we divide words also into classes, viz that of the words that everybody knows & uses, & that of the words that only the educated, or any other section of us, know & use. As regards the first of these classes, our neighbour is the average Englishman; as regards the second, our neighbour is our fellow member of the educated or any other section. The moral of which is that, while we are entitled to display a certain fastidious precision in our saying of words that only the educated use, we deserve not praise but censure if we decline to accept the popular pronunciation of popular words. To make six syllables of extraordinary, or end level & picture with a clear -é1 & -tit, or maintain the old accent on the middle syllable of contemplate, all everyday words— these feats establish one’s culture at the cost of one’s modesty, & perhaps of one’s hearer’s patience. But if, with some word that most of us pass their lives without uttering—comminatory, for instance, or tntercalary—, a scholar likes to exhibit his deftness in saying many successive syllables after a single accent where the vulgar would help themselves out with a second one (k6’minatori, k6’mina’tori; inter’kalari, i/nterki/lari), why, no-one need mind. The broad principles are: Pro-
