page: 468

of the understandabie by means of

some sort of mystic capression is

very Russian. P. to do or for doing,

not of doing; the ANauocy of

practice, habit, &c., is responsible.

proper makes -est; see -ER & -EST 2.

prophecy, -sy. The noun propheci.

the verb prophesy; see LICENCE.

prophetess. See FEMININE DE-

SIGNATIONS.

prophetic. For my p. soul see

HACKNEYED PHRASES.

prophetic(al). The -al form perhaps

lingers only in such phrases as the

-al books, in which the meaning is definitely ‘ of the Prophets’ ; -IC(AL).

propitiate makes -tiable, -tor; sec -ABLE 1, -OR.

propitiation.

See -CIATION.

proportion. It has been recorded as a common MISAPPREHENSION that p. is a sonorous improvement upon part. What was meant will be plain from the following examples, in all of which the word has been wrongly used because the writers, or others whom they admire & imitate, cannot resist the imposing trisyllable; the greater part, most, &e., should be substituted; see Pomposities for other such temptations. The greater proportion of these old hands have by this time already dropped out; it is estimated that only 25,000 of them remain now (Most of)./A few years ago the largest proportion of the meat coming through Smithfield had its origin in ihe United States (the greater part)./ The total number of all classes & all nationalities carried outward & inward on board British & foreign ships was 6,053,382, of which the great proportion were carried in British ships (the great majority). /There was a large & fashionable audience, &, as might be expected, the greater proportion of them were natives of India (most of them)./By far the largest proportion of applications for using the machinery of the Act came from the employees (the most applications)./The larger proportion of the children received are those of un-

married mothers (Most of)./Eighty-

six estates worth over a quarter of

a million paid death duties, & the

total amount on which estate duty was

levied was nearly 278 millions sterling;

ihe largest proportion of this came

from estates ranging between £1,000 &

£25,000 (The greater part).

‘ The word has been wrongly used °.

It is not merely that here are two

words, each of which would give the

sense equally well, & that the writer

has unwisely allowed length to decide the choice for him; p. does not give the sense so well as part. Where p. does so far agree in sense with part that the question of an exchange between them is possible, i.e. where it means not a ratio but a quota or amount, there is nevertheless a clear difference between them; a p. is indeed a part, but a part viewed in a special light, viz as having a quantitative relation to its whole comparable with the same relation between some analogous whole & part. Thus a man who out of a income of £500 spends £200 upon house-rent is rightly said to spend a large p. of his income in rent, ifitis known that most people’s rent is about 1/5 of their income; p. is there a more precise & better word than part, just because other ratios exist for comparison. But to say ‘A large p. [instead of a large part] of these statements is unverified °, where there is no standard of what ratio the verified facts bear to the unverified in most stories, is to use a worse long word instead of a better short one.

The case is much stronger against p. in the extracts, all of which, it will be noticed, show a comparative or superlative (greater, largest, &c.) accompanying p. & showing that the comparison is not between two ratios, that of the part & whole in question & that of another part & whole, e.g. the standard ones, but simply between the two parts into which one whole is divided; of these two parts of course one is greater or less than or equal to the other,
