page: 469

+ but that relation is adequately given by greater &c. part, & only confused by the dragging in of the comparison of ratios expressed by p. It is a clumsy blunder to use words like greater & largest with p. when the comparison is between the parts of one whole & not between the ratios borne by parts of different wholes to their respective wholes. To give contrasted examples of the wrong & the right: We passed the greater proportion of our candidates is wrong; read part; We hope to pass a greater proportion of our candidates next year is right.

For a parallel, see PERCENTAGE.

proportionable, -nal, -nate. All three adjectives have existed since the 14th c., & it is presumptuous to advise the superannuation of any of them. The statement may be ventured that the latest OED quotation for -nable is dated 1832, & that far from needing three words we can hardly provide two with separate functions; the -al word is better suited to the most general sense of all, ‘ concerned with proportion’, & the -ate word to the particular sense ‘ analogous in quantity to’, but -al & -ate are both so fully in possession of the most usual sense ‘in proportion’ or ‘in due proportion’ that it is useless to think of confining it to either.

proposal. See PROPOSITION.

propose. 1. P. makes -sable; see Mure E. 2. The Insurance Commissioners proposed to be appointed will give their whole time to the work of the Commission. P. is one of the verbs liable to be used in tbis ungainly construction, for which see DOUBLE PASSIVES.

proposition. The modern use as a VOGUE-WORD, in senses of which the OED, in a section published so recently as 1909, shows no trace, is an Americanism. It runs riot in 20th-c. newspapers, but is so slightly recognized in British dictionaries that probably few people realize its triumphant progress. ‘Those who

+ will look through the instances collected below may perhaps be surprised to see the injury that is being done by this single word to the language, & resolve to eschew it. Like MENTALITY, it is resorted to partly because it combines the charms of novelty & length, & partly because it ministers to laziness; there is less trouble in using it than in choosing among the dozen or so of words, one or other of them more suitable, for any of which it will pass.

It may be granted that there is nothing unsound in principle about the development of sense. Proposition does or did mean propounding, &, like other -tion words, may naturally develop from that the sense of thing propounded, from which again is readily evolved the sense thing to deal with, & that sufficiently accounts for all or nearly all the uses to be quoted. And, on another line, there is no objection to proposition’s having the sense proposal, except one— that idiomatic usage is clean against it, & that confusion between the two words has been, until the Americanism reached us, very rare.

It is much to be desired that p. should be brought back to its former well defined functions in Logic & Mathematics, & relieved of its new status as Jack-of-all-trades.

Used for proposal: ‘ Let us pull down everything’ seems to be his proposition./Newman said to Mr Hastings ‘ You must share my room & bed’. This (says Mr Hastings) was to me a curious proposition, but one I had to accept./He prefaced his speech by observing that he intended to put Home Rule before them as a business proposition. i

Used for task, job, problem, objective: Servia certainly is up against a tough proposition./England has now to meet France, which is a different proposition. /With Mr H olbrooke’s ‘ Ulalume’, after Edgar Allan Poe, came a much stiffer proposition, unless one was prepared to . . ./Never
