page: 470

let it be said again that the unlettered

British public are a hopeless proposi-

tion in the matter of grand opera.

Used for undertaking, occupation,

trade: He has got a foothold mainly

because the English maker has been

occupied with propositions that give

a larger proportion of profit./Estab-

lishing floating supply ‘depots at

frequent intervals across the ocean,

a proposition which only a multi-

millionaire could have undertaken. /

The old spirit of common brotherhood

amongst the members dies day by day,

& insurance is becoming ‘ a business proposition ’./For good or evil, rail-

way nationalization is a vast business proposition./Colonial Preference be-

came the ‘ sentimental side ’, merely appealing to the Colonies, of what had become a business proposition./The agriculturist asks that ‘ corn-growing shall become a paying proposition “of Agriculture in England can never again become a paying proposition. / The future of the taximeter-cab proposition in the Metropolis presents a very interesting problem.

Used for opponent: F. Ouimet, who played so brilliantly yesterday, was the proposition the holder had to face./The former is a very tough proposition as an opponent in singles./This Siath Army now standing opposite us was not a very fearsome proposition./The Roumanian army has proved a peculiarly tough proposition.

Used for possibility, prospect: Petrol at 6}d. or 74d. a gallon was hardly a commercial proposition./The only way to increase the recruiting standard of the Territorial Force is to make the service a more attractive proposition to the man & the employer.

Used for area, field: The mining district, according to the best information obtainable, is a placer proposition, & placer mining ruins the land. / Lancashire is vitally interested to Secure a sufficient supply of cotton on the Gezira plains in the Soudan, this locality being what one speaker described as ‘ the very finest cotton-growing proposition in the whole world ’,

Used for method, experiment: The

territories will certainly require many

novel propositions for their develop-

ment.

proprietress.

See FEMININE DE-

SIGNATIONS.

propylaeum. PI. -laea.

For spell-

ing see Æ, a.

prorogue makes -gable, -gation.

proscenium. PI. -ia.

proscribe makes -bable; see MUTE E.

prosecute makes -table (see MUTE E),

-tor (see -OR), -trig (see FEMININE DESIGNATIONS, & -TRIX).

proselyte makes -tism; see MUTE E.

prosify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

See TECHNICAL TERMS. The adjective recommended is prosodic, & the -ist noun prosodist, for which see -1st B on philanthropist.

prosopopoeia. Pronounce prosdpopé’a; for spelling see x, Œ, & for meaning TECHNICAL TERMS.

prospect, vb, makes -tor; see -or. The OED accents pro’spect, not prospe’ct, in the only current verb senses; but the analogy of similar Noun & VERB ACCENTS is almost sure to prevail before long.

prospectus. PI. -tuses, not -ti 3 -US.

prosper makes -ered &c.; -n-, -RR-.

prostitute, vb, makes -utable, -tor; see MUTE FẸ, -or.

prostrate. The adjective pro’ strate, the verb prostra’te; see PARTICI. PLES 5 A.

prosy, not -sey; see -EY & -y.

protagonist. 1. Pronunciation, 2. Meaning & use.

1. Pronunciation. The popular rendering is prota’gonist; but, if any weight is allowed to the considerations advanced in 2, protago’nist would be better, (a) as being the scholar’s natural way of saying what should never have been anything but a scholar’s word, & (b) as at least discouraging the mistaken notion that p. & antagonist are a pair of words showing the common contrast between pro- for & anti- against. __ prosody. 2. Meaning & use. The word that
