page: 474

+ HACKNEYED PHRASE, & at least restricted to contexts in which psychological is appropriate; see also IRRELEVANT ALLUSION. Three examples follow, going from bad to worse:—It is difficult to believe that grievances which have been spread over many years have suddenly reached the breaking-point at the precise p. m. when the Franco-German settlement was reaching its conclusion./There is a feeling that the p.m. has come to

ght with some hope of success against la vie chére./Everything goes right, no sleeping calf or loud-crowing cock grouse is disturbed at the p.m., the wind holds fair.

psychosis. Pl.

-oses (-€z)3 see l LATIN PLURALS 2.

PT-. In ptarmigan, & in Ptolemy & its derivatives, the p is always silent. In other words the OED favours its being sounded; cf. Ps-. But ptomaine is perhaps the only one sufficiently common in talk for the pronunciation to matter.

ptomaine. The OED stigmatizes toma’n as an illiterate pronunciation; but, as with cocaine, it is impracticable to maintain the threesyllable (p)t6’main.

pub. See CURTAILED WORDS.

pucka, pakka, pucca, pukka, &c. The OED gives precedence to the first spelling.

pucker makes -ered &c.; -R-, -RR-. pudenda, -dum, are used indifferently with the same sense, but the first with plural, the second with singular, construction. puggree, puggaree. The OED treats the first as the standard form. puisne. Pronounce piini. puissant. The disyllabic pwi’sant, the older pronunciation, is recommended, the word itself being archaic. P. makes -est; -ER & -EST 4. pulley. Pl. -eys; for verb inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 2. pullulate. Pronounce pňlūlāt. pulpify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

pulque. Pronounce poo’lki.

pulsate makes -atable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

pulse (heart-beat). The OED says ‘ Formerly sometimes construed erroneously as a plural’. The mistake is still made.

pulverize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

pummel. See POMMEL.

pun. The assumption that puns are per se contemptible betrayed by the habit of describing every pun not as a pun, but as a bad pun or a feeble pun, is a sign at once of sheepish docility & desire to seem superior. Puns are good, bad, & indifferent, & only those who lack manner of the wit to make them are unaware of the fact.

Punchinello. Plural -os; -o(£)s 3.

punctilio. Pl. -os; see -o(r)s 4.

punctuate makes -wable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

punctum. PI. -ża.

puncture, vb, makes -rable; see MUTE E.

pundit. For the correction of this into pandit, see Dipacricism.

pupa. Pl. -ae.

pupil. For the derivatives pupil- (Dage, pupil(l)ary, pupil(l)ate, pupil- (Ded, pupil(l)ize, &c., the double 1l is recommended; see -LL-, -L-.

purchase, vb, makes -sable; see Murr E. As a substitute for buy (goods for money), p. is to be classed among FORMAL WORDS; but in figurative use (p. victory by sacrifice &c.) it is not open to the same objection.

purée. See FRENCH WORDS.

purge makes -geable; see -ABLE 1.

purify. For inflexions see VERES IN -IE &c., 6. PURISM. Now & then a person may be heard to ‘ confess’, in the pride that apes humility, to being ‘a bit of a purist’; but purist & purism are for the most part missile words, which we all of us fling at anyone who insults us by finding not good enough for him some

speech that is good
