page: 475

+ enough for us. It is in that disparaging sense that the words are used in this book; by purism is to be understood a needless & irritating insistence on purity or correctness of speech. Pure English, however, even apart from the great number of elements (vocabulary, grammar, idiom, pronunciation, & so forth) that go to make it up, is so relative a term that almost every man is potentially a purist & a sloven at once to persons looking at him from a lower & a higher position in the scale than his own. The words have therefore not been very freely used; that they should be renounced altogether would be too much to expect considering the subject of the book. But readers who find a usage stigmatized as purism have a right to know the stigmatizer’s place in the purist scale, if his stigma is not to be valueless. Accordingly, under headings of various matters with which purism is concerned, a few articles are now mentioned illustrating the kind of view that may be expected in other articles of a similar nature:—

Word-formation: amoral, coastal, funniment, Hybrid derivatives, pleistocene.

New words: happenings, mentality, protagonist.

Old words: howbeit.

Foreign words; French words, Gallicisms.

intrigue, meti-

Foreign senses: culous.

Distinctions of sense: apt, definitive, masterful, one.

Precision of sense: ago, because, England, Haziness, only, Pleonasm.

Popular misuses: aggravate, asset, dastard, idiosyncrasy, journal, optimism, otherwise, percentage, Popularized technicalities.

Corrections: bar sinister, Mahomet, morale, naif, plain sailing.

Bad constructions: avail, different, Double passive, due, Fused participle, infringe, Object-shuffiling, oblivious.

Idiom: first, follow, Idiom, like.

+ Framework: and, between, neither, of, or, Position of adverbs, Preposition at end. Pronunciation: apophthegm, False quantity, often, philharmonic, Pronunciation, Ps-. '

Spelling: gypsy, Mute e.

Sound: Jingles. puritanic(al). The long form is commoner, & there is no perceptible difference in meaning. The existence of a third adjective puritan, which suffices for the mere labelling function (=of the puritans), makes the -ic form even less useful than it might otherwise be, & it will probably be squeezed out; see -1c(AL).

purple makes -lish, -ly; see MUTE E.

purport. 1. Noun per’port, verb perpor’t; see NOUN & VERB ACCENT.

2. Meaning. The word is one that, whether as noun or as verb, requires cautious handling. The noun may be said to mean ‘ what appears to be the significance ’ (of a document, an action, &c.); its special value is that it is non-committal, & abstains from either endorsing or denying, but lightly questions, the truth of the appearance. When such an implication is not useful, the word is out of place, & tenor, substance, pith, gist, or other synonym, should be preferred. But NoveELtTy-HUNT- ING discovers p. sometimes in place of scope or purview, & even of purpose. Read purview or scope in: In‘ A Note on Robert Fergusson’ he touches a theme outside the general purport of the book.

As to the verb, there are certain well-defined idiomatic limitations on its use, one of which, in an ugly recent development, is beginning to be neglected. This development is the use of the passive, as in:—Pro- fessor Henslow compiles from published works the information as to the other world, Christian life & doctrines, the nature of man, &c., purported to be conveyed in communtcations from ‘ the other side ’./Many extracts from speeches purported to have been made by Mr Redmond
