page: 477

purvey makes -or. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 2.

purview. For synonyms see FIELD.

Pushtoo. Pronounce pii-, not poo-.

pussy. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -y.

put(t). According to the OED the pronunciation put, with or without the additional -t, & with verbal forms putited instead of put, is universal in golf, but only Scotch in weight-putting.

putrefy. For infiexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

putrid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4.

puttee. Pronounce pii’ti, not pute’.

putty. For verb inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

pyaemia. See =, Œ.

pygmean, -aean. The first is recommended; see Æ, œŒ. Pron. pigmé’an.

pygmy, pi-. For the reason why py- is the better, see Gypsy. -mounce pijah’maz.

Spell py-, & pro-

pyjamas, pa-.

The adjective should be pyjama’d; see -ED & ’D.

pylon. Pl. -s; see -oN 3.

pyorrhoea. Write so; see Æ, Œ.

pyramidal. Pronounce piré’midI, not pirami‘dl. other Latin words;

pyrites. Pronounce piri’téz.

pyrrhic. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

qua is sometimes misused like

see E.G., DE., PACE, RE, VIDE. The real occasion for the use of g. occurs when a person or thing spoken of can be regarded from more than one point of view or as the holder of various coexistent | functions, & a statement about him (or it) is to be limited to him in one | of these aspects: Qua lover he must be condemned for doing what qua citizen he would be condemned for not doing; the lover aspect is distin- | guished from another aspect in which he may be regarded. The two nouns (or pronouns) must be _ present, one denoting the person or _ thing in all aspects (he), & the other _ singling out one of his or its aspects (lover, or citizen). In the first ex-

+ tract below, a gross misuse, Great Britain, & Ireland, are not aspects of the conviction, but things as different from a conviction as an hour from a walking-stick. In the second, a much less definite offence, financier &c. do not give aspects of the man to be distinguished from other coexistent aspects, but merely successive occupations; the fault is that the occasion does not justify the substitution of the very precise qua for the here quite sufficient as. The root of this conviction, qua Great Britain, is the preposterous fiction of the military value of the Ulster volunteers; & the root of this conviction, qua Ireland, is the shameful & cruel bamboozling of a section of my unfortunate fellow-Provincials into the delusion that few soldiers & no artillery will be available against them./The familiar gentleman burglar who, having played wolf to his fellows qua financier, journalist, & barrister, undertakes to raise burglary from being a trade at least to the lupine level of those professions.

quad. See CURTAILED WORDS.

quadrate. The verb kwadra’t, the adjective & noun kw6’drat; see PARTICIPLES 5 A.

quadr(ijennium, -ial. Qwuadriennium is true Latin, & the -i- should not be, but usually is, dropped in the English words.

quadriga. Pron. kwadri’ga; pl. -gae.

quadrille. Pronounce ka- or kwa-.

gquadrillion. See BILLION.

quadroon. See MULATTO 2,

quadruplicate. Verb -at, adj. & n. -at; see PARTICIPLES 5 B.

quaere, the original of query, is now little used, & nothing is gained by keeping it in being.

quaestor, See Æ, Œ.

qualify. For inflexions see VERES IN -IE &c., 6.

quality. 1. For ‘has the defects of his qq.’ see HACKNEYED PHRASES. 2. The adj. is -itative, not -itive; see QUANTITATIVE. qualm. The OED puts first the pronunciation kwahm,
