page: 478

quandary. The kw6ndar‘i (‘ the original stressing ’— OED) is recommended, the word being hardly a popular colloquial one. But RECESSIVE ACCENT, giving kw6’ndari, has been at work with it.

quand même. See FRENCH WORDS.

quantify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

quantit(at)ive. The long form is the right; but the use of the shortened one is more frequent, & perhaps less of a mere inadvertence, than that of qualitive for qualitative, & authoritive: And what is true of railway traffic is true, so far as this quantitive economy of labour is concerned, of all indusiry in which mechanical power & laboursaving appliances are employed; & see LONG VARIANTS s.f. In the light of the Latin words tempestivus, primitivus, & adoptivus, anomalous in different ways, it would be rash to say that quantitive, qualitive, & authoritive, were not defensible forms; but at any rate good English usage is against them.

quantity. A negligible q. is a POPULARIZED TECHNICALITY, often used where negligible by itself gives all that is wanted, in the way noted in IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

quarenden, -der, quarantine, the apple. The OED treats the first as the standard form.

quarrel makes -lled &c.; -LL-, -L-.

quarry, vb. For inflexions sec VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

quart (fencing). See CARTE.

quarter, n. 1. Hyphening. 2. Constructions. 1. Hyphening. Quarter mile, not quarter-mile; but quarter-day, not quarter day; the difference depends upon the accent, & is explained in Hypurns 3B; winter quarters, similarly, should be two separate words. 2. Constructions. For aq. of the price, for q. of ihe price, for a q. the price, for q. the price, are all blameless English. After three & a q. centuries, or three centuries & aq.? See HALF. quarter, vb, makes -ering, -ered, &.3 see -R-, -RR-. pronunciation

quartet(te). Spell -et; see DUET.

quarto. See roxio. Pl. -os; -0(£)s 6.

Quasi-adverbs. He was rolling up his sleeves preparatory to punching my head. From a narrowly grammatical point of view, the word should be preparatorily; but it never is, except in the mouths of those who know just enough grammar to be timid about it. The adjective is loosely attached to the action described in ‘rolling up his sleeves °. Most of those who would correct, or be tempted to correct, preparatory to preparatorily feel no temptation to write accordingly, instead of according, as or to, because the latter is so familiar as not to draw their attention. See also UNIDIOMATIC -Ly, in which words of a slightly different kind are considered. It should be observed that it is only certain adjectives with which the use is idiomatic; for instance, He did it contrary to my wishes, but neither opposite io nor different from them. A few of the adjectives concerned are: according & pursuant; contrary; preliminary, preparatory, previous, & prior; irrespective & regardless. Another pair of adjectives exhibiting the same arbitrary distinction of idiom as that between contrary & opposite is DUE & OWING.

quassia. The pronunciation likely to prevail is kw6’sha.

quater-centenary. The form recommended is quadringenary; see CENTENARY.

quaternarius.See TECHNICALTERMS.

quatorzain. See -sTicu. Pronounce ka’terzan.

quatrain. See -stica. Pronounce kw0’tran.

quatrefoil. Pron. k&’ter- or ki’tre-.

quattrocento. Pronounce -ché/nt; see ITALIAN SOUNDS, & TRECENTO,.

quaver makes -ered &c.; -R-, -RR-.

queen. For the Q. of the Adriatic see SOBRIQUETS.

queenly. For the adverb, see -Lity.

quenelle. See FRENCH WORDS.

querist. The form queryist would
