page: 480

+ writers seem to avoid it, it is common in uneducated talk. See Lone VARIANTS, & -EN VERBS. quinarius. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

quinte. See FRENCH WORDS.

quintet(t)e. Spell -et; see DUET,

quintillion. See BILLION.

quire, choir. See CHOIR.

quite. 1. Excessive use of q. often amounts to a MANNERISM, & many writers would do well to convict & cure themselves of it by looking over a few pages or columns of their work, 2. The now favourite colloquial formula ‘ quite all right’ is a foolish PLroNasM, quite & all being identical in sense; ‘ quite right ° is all right, & ‘ all right’ is quite right, but ‘ quite all right’ is all quite wrong. 3. Quite (so). Many people are in the habit of conveying their assent to a statement that has just been made to them in talk by the single word quite, where the rest of us say quite so. “Oddly enough, they are mostly of a class that should know better, the class that attaches some importance to the way things are said; quite sounds to them neater, conciser, than quite so. What they do . not realize is that choice between the two is sometimes open to them, but by no means always; used in wrong places, quite is an example of SLIPSHOD EXTENSION. Three specimen exchanges will make the matter clear:—(a) He seems to be mad.— Quite. (b) To demand that Englishmen should act on logic is absurd.— Quite (so), but... (c) Well, anyhow, he did it.—Quite so, but the questionis... Ina, quite so would be out of place, because what is to be qualified by quite is simply the word mad, understood directly from what precedes. In b, choice is open; quite will amount to quite absurd (as in a); quite so will amount to it is quite as you say; & the general effect of each is the same. In c, quite would be wrong, because the other speaker’s words do not supply anything, as in a & b, for quite to

+ qualify; say=so. The bad modern use, in actual life, is well shown in this f scrap of lawcourt examination: There was no power in anyone to bring the child back?—Quite.

quiver. For have one’s quiver full, see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

qui vive. See FRENCH WORDS.

quoin, quoit. Pronounce koi-.

quondam. See LATE &c.

quorum. Pl. -ums, not -a; -UM, & LATIN PLURALS.

quota. Pl. -as.

QUOTATION. Didactic & pole- mical writers quote passages from | others to support themselves by ~ authority or to provide themselves with something to controvert; critics » quote from the books they examine ` in illustration of their estimates. These are matters of business on which no general advice need be offered. But the literary or decorative quotation is another thing. A writer expresses himself in words that have been used before because they give his meaning better than he can give it himself, or becausethey are beautiful or witty, or because he expects them to touch a chord of association in his reader. or because he wishes to show that he is learned or well read. Quota- QUOTATION | the sense is clearly not. he quite did it, but, as in the second . alternative of b, it is quite as you: see tions due to the last motive are | invariably ill advised; the dis- cerning reader detects it & is con- | temptuous; the undiscerning is | perhaps impressed, but even then | is at the same time repelled, pre- tentious quotations being the surest | road to tedium; theless experienced | a writer is, & therefore on the whole | the less well-read he is also, the more is he tempted to this error; experienced knows he had better avoid it; & the well-read, aware the | that he could quote if he would, is | not afraid that readers will think he cannot. Quoting for association’s sake has more chance of success, or less certainty of failure; but it
