page: 481

+ needs a homogeneous audience; if a jest’s prosperity lies in the ear of him that hears it, so too does a quotation’s; to each reader those quotations are agreeable that neither strike him as hackneyed nor rebuke his ignorance by their complete novelty, but rouse dormant memories; quotation, then, should be adapted to the probable reader’s degree of cultivation; which presents a very pretty problem to those who have a mixed audience to face; the less mixed the audience, the safer is it to quote for association. Lastly, the sayings wise or witty or beautiful with which it may occur to us to adorn our own inferior matter, not for business, not for benefit of clergy, not for charm of association, but as carvings on a cathedral facade, or pictures on the wall, or shells in a bowerbird’s run, have we the skill to choose & place them? are we architects, or bric-abrac dealers, or what?

Enough has perhaps been said to indicate generally the dangers of quoting. A few examples follow of oddities that may serve as particular warnings; see also MIsQUOTATION.

PRETENTIOUSNESS

In the summer of 1867 England received with strange welcome a strange visitor. ‘Quis novus hic nostris successit sedibus hospes?’ Looking forward into the future we may indeed apply yet other words of Dido, & say of the new comer to these shores ‘Quibus ille jactatus fatis!’ Tt was the Sultan of Turkey who came to visit England.

MANGLINGS

It may seem somewhat unfair to quote the saying of the old Latin poet, ‘Montes parturiunt, ridiculus mus est ’, in relation to the Government’ s achievements in matiers of domestic legislation. Something seems to have happened to the old Latin poet’s metre./His treatment of the old, old story of the Belgian franctireur is typical. ‘ L'animal est tres méchant, il se défend quand on Vat-

1351

R

+ taque.’ Something has happened to the French poet’s rhyme, as well as his metre./Here again, however, there was a fly in the amber—the incoming of the Italians. A fly in amber, or a fly in the ointment—what can it matter?/The happy phrase that an Ambassador is an honest man sent abroad to lie for his country. There are lyings abroad & lyings abroad, but only one kind of lying for one’s country.

QUOTATION SANDWICH

Yet if we take stock of our situation today, even those of us who are * fearful saints can afford ‘ fresh courage’ to ‘take’./The ‘pigmy body’ seemed ‘ fretted to decay’ by the ‘ fiery soul’ within it. Original: A fiery soul which, working out its way, Fretted the pygmy-body to decay.

FOREIGN OIL & ENGLISH

WATER

Who will be pleased to send details to all who are interested in strengthening Ventente cordiale. Read the entente cordiale. /Even if a change were desirable with Kitchener duce et auspice./ Salmasius alone was not unworthy sublimi flagello./The feeling that one is an antecedentem scelestum./The clergy in rochet, alb, & other best pontificalibus.

CLUMSY ADAPTATION

But the problem of inducing a refractory camel to squeeze himself through the eye of an inconvenient needle is & remains insoluble. / Modern faskions do not presuppose an uncorseted figure; that way would modish disaster lie./Gossip on a subject which is still on the knees of the future.

QUOTATION MARKS. See STOPS.

quote. 1. @. makes -table; see MUTE E. 2. The devil can q. &c. ; q. should be cite; see MISQUOTATION.

quotes, n. pl., may be regarded as a CURTAILED WORD, & left to those whose occupation makes ashortening of ‘ quotation marks’ indispensable,

quoth, quotha. See ARCHAISM.
