page: 483

+ ranunculus. Pl. -luses or -li (-i); see LATIN PLURALS 1.

ranz-des-vaches. FRENCH WORDS.

rape, vb, makes -pable; see MUTE E.

Raphaelesque, Raiiael(l)esque. For the change from the established English Raphael &c. to unfamiliar forms with -f- or -{f-, see DIDACTIC- ISM, MAHOMET.

rapid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4.

rapport, formerly common enough to be regarded & pronounced as English (rapor’t), may now perhaps be called again a FRENCH WORD, & will not be missed in English.

rapprochement. See FRENCH WORDS.

rapt, meaning originally carried off, raped, snatched away, but now usually absorbed or intensely concentrated, has perhaps been affected by the identical sound of wrapped or wrapt, though ravish is enough to show that such an explanation is not necessary. The best known passage (Thy rapt soul siiting in thine eyes) has doubtless helped. A concordance to Milton supplies also:—Wrapped in a pleasing fit of melancholy/Thus wrapped in mist of | midnight / Rapt in a balmy cloud.

rapture. For pronunciation see PICTURE.

rara avis is seldom an improvement on rarity; IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

rarebit. See WELSH.

rarefaction, not -fication, is the correct as well as the usual form, the Latin verb being rarefacere (not -ficare)

rarefaction, rarefy. So spelt (in contrast with rarity), but pronounced rari- (in contrast with rarely).

rase, See RAZE.

raspberry. Pron. with -z- for -sp-.

rate, n. For some synonyms in the sense impost, see TAX.

rate, vb, makes ratable; see MUTE E.

rather. 1. R.is it &c. 2. R. superb &e. 3. I had r. 4. Dying r. than surrender.

1. R. is it &c. Towards the end of | the long article Inversion will be found a section headed Yet, espect-

+ ally, rather. The following examples should be rid of inversion as indicated:—Mr Dooley seldom makes you laugh aloud; rather does he keep his readers continually in a state of the * dry grins’ (r. he keeps, or he keeps his readers, r.,)./I do not feel like one who after a day of storm & rain ts glad to creep indoors, & crouch hopelessly over the fast-dying embers on the hearth; rather do I feel like one who... (r. I feel)./The responsible leaders of the Opposition have abandoned the view that another General Election would * probably but stereotype the last verdict’; rather is it felt that... (r. it is felt, or it is felt, r.,). It should be remembered, however, with r., that care is needed, in mending or avoiding the inversion, not to put r. where it might be interpreted as somewhat; to write I r. feel or it is r. felt in the second & third examples would be worse than the inversion itself.

2. R. superb &e. There is something rather delicious in the way in which some of these inventors ignore previous achievements./This was rather a revelation./While exercising generosity & kindliness more than most the doctor rather loved a quarrel. What is the use of fine warm words like delicious & revelation & love if the cold water of r. is to be thrown over them? ‘R. agreeable.’ if you will; ‘yr. surprising’ by all means; ‘r. enjoyed ’ certainly; but away with r. delicious, r. a revelation, & r. loved! Cf. SOMEWHAT.

3. I had r.is as idiomatic as I would r.; had is the old subjunctive, = I should hold or find, & is used with r. on the analogy of I had liefer= I should hold it dearer; see HAD 1.

4. Dying r. than surrender, He resigned r. than stifle his conscience, &c. The use of the infinitive after r. than in such contexts is discussed in -ING 5.

ratify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

ratio. Pl. -os; see -0(£)s 4.

ratiocinate & its derivatives, as
