page: 486

+ this are the r. is due to, & the r. is on account of, as in:—The r. of our success is largely due to unselfishness, power to combine, power to weather adversity & superhuman bravery./ My only r. for asking your permission to comment upon his remarks is due to the fact that many of your readers will not have seen my previous replies. / The reasons of his success were due not only to wide political knowledge & sincere conviction, but to a speed of work which . . ./The r. why I put such a poem as * Marooned” so very high is on account of its tremendous imaginative power./The r. for the past neglect has been not on account of fish being any less interesting than birds or mammals, but merely because of the difficulty of observing & photographing them.

Réaumur. For pronunciation see FRENCH WORDS.

reave(r), reive(r). The normal English spelling is with rea-; but, the words, especially -r, being commoner in Scotch use, the Scotch rei- has become familiar.

rebate (carpentry) is pronounced ra’/bit & often spelt rabbet.

rebeck. Accent the first (ré’bék).

rebel. Noun ré’bl, verb ribé’1; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. The verb makes -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

rebuke makes -kable; see MUTE E.

rebus, Pl. -uses; see -s-, -ss-.

rebut makes -tted &c., see -T-, -TT-.

recal(l). Write -ll; see -LL-, -L-, 3.

recapitulate makes -lable, -ior; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

receipt, recipe. In the sense ‘ formula for the making of a food or medicine ’, with its transferred applications ‘remedy’, ‘ cure’, ‘ expedient °, ‘ device °’, &c., either word is as good as the other, except that, while prescription has almost displaced both as a name for a doctor’s formula, receipt is in that special sense still more nearly disused than recipe. These facts are worth mention because it is sometimes debated, idly for the most part, which of the two is the right word. Recipe is

+ pronounced ré’sipi, being a Latin imperative = take, originally the first word of prescriptions writtenin Latin.

receive makes -vable; see MUTE E.

RECESSIVE ACCENT. The accentuation of English words is finally settled by the action of three forces on the material presented to them in each word. First, the habit of concentrating on one syllable, or in long words sometimes on two, & letting the others take care of themselves; this habit is in marked contrast to the French equality of syllables, is especially strong in Scotch as compared with southern English, & is responsible for that obscuring of the English vowel sounds which unnecessarily saddens some of our purists; English words of three & four syllables are common in which there is only one clear vowel (corruption, enlightenment, &c.); it is a main characteristic of the language, to be recognized & not fought against or lamented over.

Secondly, recessive accent, or the drift of this usually single stress towards the beginning of the word. The most obvious illustration is what happens to the French words we borrow; château, plateau, tableau, garage, menu, charlatan, souvenir, nonchalant, & hundreds of others, come to us with their last syllables at least as clear & fully stressed as any, but we soon turn them into sha’to & sharlatan & the like. Again, other words that were long pronounced in English with stress on the middle syllable have it shifted to the first: aggra’ndize, reco’ndite, obdur’ate, conirar’y, eque’rry, demo’nstrate, become &’grandiz, é’kweri, &c.

These first & second forces work well enough together, &, as they are always extending their influence & gradually assuming control of new words, account for a large proportion of the variant pronunciations so much more numerous in English than in most languages. In deciding which of two renderings should be
