page: 487

+ preferred, it may be remembered that when recessive accent has once opened an attack it will probably etfect the capture, & that it is well to be on the winning side.

But, thirdly, there comes into conflict with both these tendencies a repugnance to strings of obscure syllables; with the uneducated this is rather inability than mere dislike; their tongues cannot frame a rapid succession of light syllables hardly differing from each other; & the educated, who can manage it if they will, have the English objection to fussy precision & often do not choose to, except where academic surroundings constrain them to academic elocution. Hence reactions with many words whose surrender to recessive accent is on record in the dictionaries. Deuteronomy & laboratory & disciplinary are not easy to say with a single firstsyllable accent each, & the attempt is apt to result in omission of syllables—di’tronmi & 1a’bratri & di’splinri; such dangers are shirked by the use of two stresses (di’ter- 6’nomi, di’sipli’‘nari) or by shifting the stress forward again (lab6’ratori); & ho’spitable, de’spicable, a’pplicable, ca’pitalist, gla’diolus, su’lphuretted, co’ntumacy, are a few examples of the many quadrisyllables from whose orthodox accent many speakers seek relief (dispi’kabl &c., gladi’olus or even gla‘did/lus, sii/Iftré’tid, kontii’masi). In a large class, of which recriminatory (OEDrikri’minatori)may be taken as the type, there are regularly two pronunciations, one academic as above, & the other with a secondary accent or clearly pronounced 4 (rikri/minatori) used by ordinary people. The unsatisfactory clipping of words like voluntar(y)ism & accompan(y)ist (see -1sT) is perhaps due to this dislike of many syllables unrelieved by an accent. The word CONTUMELY, With its five pronunciations, is an interesting case, discussed separately.

Rechabite. Pronounce ré’k-.

+ réchauffé, recherché. See FRENCH WORDS. recidivist. Pronounce risi’divist. recipe. See RECEIPT. recipient. Zhe Serjeant-at-Arms & Lady Horatia Erskine were yesterday the recipients of presentations from members of the Press Gallery./ Sir Wilfrid Laurier, who was seventy years of age yesterday, was the r. of congratulations from Mr Asquith./Mr Albert Visetti, who has just been the r. of a pleasant presentation from his pupils./Mr John D. Clancy, K.C., M.P., who enjoys the unique distinction of having represented continuously an Irish constituency for a quarter of a century, has just been made the r. of a presentation to mark the event. Can any man say that sort of thing & retain a shred of self-respect?

reciprocal (in grammar). See TECH- NICAL TERMS.

reciprocal)(mutual. To the difficulties presented by m. itself must be added that of the difference between it & r. M. regards the relation from both sides at once: the m. hatred of A & B; never from one side only: not B’s m. hatred of A. Where m. is correct, r. would be so too: the r. hatred of A & B; but m. is usually preferred when it is possible. R. can also be applied to the second party’s share alone: B’s r. hatred of A; r. is therefore often useful to supply the deficiencies of m.; A, having served B, can say ‘Now may I ask for a r. [but not for a m.] service? °’. Two parties can take m. or r. action, & the meaning is the same; one party can take r., but not m., action. In the following passage, m. could not be substituted for the correct 1. ; if the words had been not ‘ of the British people’, but ‘of the two peoples ’, m. would have been as good as T., OT indeed better; it must be added, however, that since it takes two to make a friendship, which is essentjally a m. or r. relation, to use either adjective. is | waste:—Mr Wilson said: ‘I trust
