page: 488

+ your Government saw in the warmth of the greetings accorded to his Royal Highness the manifestation of friendly goodwill which the people of the United States hold for those of Britain. Believing in the reciprocal friendship of the British people it will be my aim in the future to...’.

>

reciprocate has -cable; -ABLE 1.

recitative. Pronounce résitaté’v.

recite makes -table; see MUTE E.

reckon makes -oned &c.; -N-, -NN-.

reclaim. Noun spelt reclamation.

réclame. See FRENCH WORDS.

recline makes -nable; see MUTE E.

recognizance. Pronounce rik6é’n-.

recognize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

re-collect, recollect, remember. To re-collect is to collect or rally what has been dissipated (but he soon re-collected his courage or himself); the distinction between this & the ordinary sense of recollect is usually though not always kept up in pronunciation, & should be marked by the hyphen; see RE(-). Between recollect & remember there is a distinction often obscured by the use of recollect as a FORMAL WORD for the ‘dominant term’ remember. Recollect follows I can’t as naturally as remember follows I don’t; i.e., recollect means not remember, but succeed in remembering, & implies a search in the memory. Peter remembered (not recollected) the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.

recompense has -sable; MUTE E.

reconcile makes -lable; see MUTE E. Of the nouns reconcilement & reconciliation, the first is comparatively little used, but has the special function (perhaps as being more closely dependent on the verb; but see -ION & -MENT) of representing the act of reconciling rather than the act or state of being reconciled, which means in practice that it is more fitly followed than reconcilialion by an objective genitive, as in The reconcilement of duty with pleasure is no easy problem.

recondite. The old pronunciation riké’ndit is maintained by some scholarly persons, but ré’kondit is now usual; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

reconnaissance. Pronounce as an English word—rik0/nisans.

reconnoitre makes -tring.

record. Verb rikor’d, noun ré’kord; see NOUN & VERB ACCENT. For noun synonyms in the sense relevant facts, see FIELD.

recount. For re-count see RE(-). For the noun recownial (When the very interesting stories of crime have been unfolded, we can follow the recountal of detection without any bewilderment), see -AL NOUNS; ‘ Frequent in recent journalistic use’ says the OED, perhaps not designing to commend it.

recourse. There is much confusion, writer’s or printer’s (see MISPRINTS), between this, RESORT, & resource.

recover, re-cover, recreation, recreation, &c. See RE(-).

recriminate. Idle people who pass their time in recriminating France. For this transitive use, ‘ now rare’, the OED has only a single quotation later than the 18th c.

recriminatory. For the rival pronunciations (-atori, -atori) see RE- CESSIVE ACCENT.

recrudescence. Hong Kong, Friday.—There is an alarming r. of piracy in the West River./A literary tour de force, a r., two or three generations later, of the very respectable William Lamb (afterwards Lord Melbourne), his unhappy wife, Lady Caroline Lamb, & Lord Byron./ Tirst, we have the unfortunate circumstances which caused England to be weakly represented in the second test match; secondly, we have the r. of Mr Laver. To reerudesce is to become raw again or renew morbid activity, as a wound or ulcer may, or metaphorically a pestilence or vice or other noxious manifestation. That being so, the first example above is proper enough; but what have Mr Laver & Lord Melbourne
