page: 490

reflective)(reflexive. The case is simpler with these than with reflection & reflexion. Reflexive has now lost all its senses except the grammatical one (see TECHNICAL TERMS), & reflective has resigned that & kept the rest; the differentiation wanting with the nouns has been accomplished for the adjectives. But reflective, though it can at need have any of the adjective senses corresponding to reflection, is current chiefly as synonymous with meditative, & reflecting or reflected is substituted for it as often as possible in referring to the reflection of light &c. —reflecting surface, reflected colour, rather than reflective.

reflet. See FRENCH WORDS.

reflexion, reflexive. See REFLEC- TION, REFLECTIVE.

reform, re-form. See RE(-).

refract makes -tor. For refractable & refrangible, of which the first is recommended, see -ABLE 2.

refrigerate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR. Refrigeratory is pronounced by the OED rifri’jeratori, not -atori—a hard nut for some jaws; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

refuse. Verb rifii’z, noun ré’fiis; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. The verb makes -sable; see MUTE E.

re-fuse. See RE(-).

refutable, irrefutable. The OED prefers the accent on -fu- in both, but allows the other also. The RECESSIVE-ACCENT force, & the analogy of words so familiar as (dis)reputable & (in)disputable, seem likely to result in the pronunciation here advised—(i)ré‘fatabl.

refutal. For this

SUPERFLUOUS WORD, see -AL NOUNS. regalia. The word meaning royal emblems &c. is a plural; that meaning a kind of cigar is a singular, with plural -as. regard. 1. R. in periphrasis. 2. Take r. 3. R.)(consider. 1. R. in periphrasis. The noun is much used in COMPOUND PREPOSI- TIONS; see that article for excesses

+ of the kind. The two examples that follow, in which about would have served for with r. to, & in for in r. to, are mere everyday specimens of a practice that is not strikingly bad on each occasion, but cumulatively spoils a writer’s style & injures the language:—It is well said, in every sense, that a man’s religion is the chief fact with r. to him./In r. to three other seats there will be a divided Unionist vote.

The verb is also much over-used periphrastically in as regards: Turkish rule cannoi be tolerated in future over any country the population of which is Christian as regards ihe majority of its inhabitants. This should run—any country (a) whose population is chiefly Christian, or (b) with a predominantly Christian population, or (c) in which the majority of the population is Christian, or (d) in which the majority are Christians, or (e) where Christians are in a majority. See as 8 for the disfigurements to which the very similar as to leads those who indulge in such phrases.

2. Take r. The vast majority, it would be safe to say, have patients over a field which takes no regard to borough or other boundaries. A mixture of the two phrases take account of & have regard to; see CAST-IRON IDIOM.

3. R.)(consider. I consider it monstrous or ashameis English; I regard it monstrous or a shame is not, but requires as: I r. it as monstrous, as ashame. This statement is offered, though as an opinion only, yet with confidence; but since the CED, always chary of condemnation, does not expressly condemn, an opinion must not be passed off as authoritative. The OED’s definition of the use in question runs: ‘To consider, look on, as being something. Also occasionally with other constructions’. Its quotations consist of four with the normal as (Shakspere, Addison, Cowper, Froude), one of the type I r. it a shame (J. Gilbert), one of the type I r. it to be (or do so-&-so),
