page: 492

+ haps in the verb & archaic uses of the noun, the -7- is sounded.

region. For some synonyms in the sense sphere &c., see FIELD. In the r. of for about or nearly is a bad COMPOUND PREPOSITION.

register, vb, makes -trable; the agent-noun is -trar, & in Camb. Univ. -trary.

regnal, regnant. The -gn- as in magnify &c., not as French, nor as in poignant.

regorge makes -geable; see MUTE E.

regress. The verb rigré’s, the noun ré’grés; see NOUN & VERB ACCENT.

regret makes -tied, -ttable, &c. ; see -T-, -TT-.

regretful means feeling or manifesting regret, not causing it; the latter sense belongs to regrettable. In the extracts below the wrong word has been chosen; see Pairs & SNARES. The possession of those churches was unfortunately the reason of the regretful racial struggles in Macedonia./Sir Newton Moore’s resignation of the Premiership of Western Australia was a regretful surprise to Australians in London./ It was not surprising, however regretful, that Scotland had lagged behind.

regular. The r. clergy (opp. secular, i.e. of the world) means those who are subject to one of the religious or monastic ‘ rules’ (Latin regula a rule) or special codes of discipline—monks as distinguished from parish priests & the like.

regularize makes -zable; MUTE E.

regulate makes -lable; see -ABLE 1.

regulus. Pl. -li (-i).

regurgitate, rehabilitate,

make -ttable; see -ABLE 1.

rehearse, reimburse, make -sable; see MUTE E.

reindeer. For pl.see Cotuectives,1.

reinforce, re-enforce. The ordinary form (rein-) has been so far divorced from the simple verb (formerly inforce or enforce, now always the latter) that it seldom or never means to enforce again, as when a lapsed regulation is revived. For that

+ sense re-enforce should be used; see RE(-). Both make -ceable; -ABLE 1.

reiterant. But the booing & retterant cries of * No’ grew louder, & at length he sat down. This AVOIDANCE OF THE OBVIOUS, as often, has resulted in a blunder; r. means repeating, not repeated; but, at any rate, what are booing & r. doing in one sentence?

reiterate makes -rable; see -ABLE 1.

reive(r). See REAVE(R).

reject makes -tor; see -or.

rejoin, re-join. See RE(-). The hyphened form should be restricted to actual reuniting (The paris will re-join if laid close end to end, or should be re-joined with care).

rejuvenate, -nize, make -nable, -nizable; see -ABLE 1, MUTE E.

relation, relationship, relative, as terms of kindred, have seen some changes. Relative started as an adjective meaning what we call related, but, being used as short for related person, became a noun denoting a person. Relation started as an abstract noun meaning our relationship (in its only right sense; see next article); but, being transferred from the abstract to the concrete, came also to denote a person. We have had to take to related & relationship because the others in their original senses have failed us, & now find ourselves with relation & relative as two names for the same thing, only so far different as -ive is something of a Formal word, & -ion the dominant term.

relation(ship). The word relation has many senses, most of which are abstract. It approaches the concrete in the rather rare sense a story or narrative, & it is fully concrete in the very common sense a related person, i.e. a son or mother or cousin or aunt or the like. Now, sonship, cousinship, &c., being words for which there is a use, it is entirely | natural that -ship should be affixed also to the word that summarizes them; sonship the being a son,
