page: 494

+ whether the avoidance of confusion between it & relic is not worth securing by that pronunciation.

relieve makes -vable; see MUTE E. Relievedly is a bad form; see -EDLY.

relievo. Pl. -os; see -o(£)s 6. But the form might well be dropped as a needless mixture between the Italian rilievo (rēlyā'vō) & the English relief; cf. ALTO-RELIEVO, BAS-RELIEF, MEZZO-RILIEVO.

religious. For dim r. light, see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

relume. For pronunciation, see LU.

rely. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

remain. 1. There remain(s). 2. Continue to r. 3. Ir.

1. There remains to be said a few words on the excellence of M. Vallery Radot’s book. The use of a singular verb before a plural subject is discussed in NUMBER, 7. The present example is perhaps due to confusion between It remains to say & There remain to be said.

2. Continue to r. R. (in the sense that concerns us) means in itself “continue to be’; to continue to continue to be is, except in some hardly imaginable context, a ridiculous tautology, & would not call for mention if it were not surprisingly common; see HAZINESS, PLEONASM. The counsellors of the Sultan continue to remain sceptical./And yet through it all I c. t.r. cheerful./It is expected that very soon order will be restored, although the people c. t.r. restive.

3. Ir. For this see LETTER FORMS.

remark, vb, has as one of its senses “to say by way of comment’ or “say incidentally’. It would be absurd pedantry to insist that it should never be used for say except when ‘by way of comment’ is clearly justified, & often very difficult to decide whether it is justified or not. Nevertheless, it is well to remember the qualification, & be thereby saved from two bad uses of T., (1) as a mere FORMAL WORD, & (2) as a word relied on to give by its

+ —one of the forms of WORN-OUT HUMOUR: You may drive out Nature with a pitchfork but she will always return, as Horace remarked in a language no longer quoted in tke House of Commons.

remarkable. See POSITIVE WORDS.

remedy. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6. Remediable & remedial are pronounced rimé’-, but remediless either rimé’dilis (‘the original stressing ’—OED) or ré’midilis,

remember. See RECOLLECT for the distinction. R. makes -berable or (now rarely) -brable.

remise (stabling,

fencing). Pronounce rimé’z.

remise (law vb). Pronounce rimi’z. R. makes -sable; see MUTE E.

remit makes -tted, -iting, &c.; sec -T-, -TT- ; but remissible; see -ABLE 2. Of the nouns remission & remittal, the first is better in all senses but one, viz * the act of referring a case from one court to another’ 3 See -AL NOUNS.

remonetize. For -6n- or -iin-, see PRONUNCIATION.

remonstrate is pronounced (in contrast with demonstrate) rim0‘nstrat, perhaps because the current noun is remonstrance. The other noun, -alion, is now rare, & should not be used: Although every attempt is made at this office to save people from being misled, our remonstrations have not hitherto met with success.

remote makes -er, -est; see -ER & -EST 1. R. is not one of the adjectives that can be used as QUASI- ADVERBS; it must have a noun with which it can be more reasonably conceived to agree than it can with knowledge in the following extract; read Even some distance From ee 2 Even somewhat remote from the main tourist routes the knowledge of English in shops is remarkable. remove makes -vable; see MUTE E. For r. one’s hat, the cloth, &c., see FORMAL WORDS. remunerate makes

-rable; see
