page: 496

+ fare with an enemy./I do not forget that some writers have held that a system is to be inferred./He lived practically exclusively on milk.

TWO ACCIDENTALLY SIMILAR BUT NOT PARALLEL USES OF A WORD. Some other examples may be found

in JINGLES.

Space forbids us to give a translation of the entire article, which would run to several columns; but there are several poinis which, if quoted from the rest of the article, would give the impression that . . ./In these days American revolutionary upsets appear small enough beside the other afflictions of the world; yet the situation is interesting enough./It was entitled * Le Comité de Lecture’, & it resented, in language which our feminists would strongly resent, the presence of ladies on that committee. Doubtful specimens of this kind sometimes occur in which the repetition may have been intended, but the parallel or contrast is so little significant or so untidily expressed that it was probably accidental; so:—The Japanese democracy are affronted at what they regard as an affront to their national dignity./They can, no doubt, do each other enormous injury, but the Bulgarians could only carry the trenches at enormous cost, & an offensive movement on the part of the Turks seems out of the question./The deputation asked Colonel Seely yesterday to give substantial encouragement to the British industry, pointing out the desirability of having adequate means of producing aeroplanes in this country in case of war, but at the same time pointing out that the League desired that the Government should acquire the very best machine that the world could produce./. . . spitting out its fangs when anyone entered the room; this is quite an abnormal proceeding on the part of a snake built in the ordinary way, but possibly it is suffering from the prevailing epidemic of desiring to record a protest in some novel way. HAPHAZARD REPETITION, IN A DIFFERENT SENSE, OF A WORD (or

+ such use of one of its inflexions or derivatives or other belongings).

The cure for that is clearly the alternative vote or the second ballot, the former alternative being the more preferable./This may have been due to undue power placed in his hands by the Constitution./To this last unsuccessful attempt succeeded the boredom of the trenches./We cannot believe that the Bill will be shipwrecked on this point, for that would be not only disastrous to itself, but disastrous to the reputation of the House of Lords itself./These years of his zenith were big with a bigger fate than Scotland’s./Such a misfortune would give the impression that the English do not treat their religion seriously—an impression which would have a serious effect politically as well as morally. /The vacancy should by ordinary calculation occasion no anxiety to the Liberal Party; the seat has consistently returned representatives of that faith; on this oceasion, however, it is probable that there will be a three-sided conicst./ They dug their own clay, often in front of their own front doors./There is no good putter whose wrists do not move out after the ball; indeed, the formation of the putter renders it necessary that they should do so if he intends to follow it through naturally. / If we could get the awards announced in the course of next week, it would probably help more than anything else to get to the end of this struggle./Sir William White has now received the crowning distinction of the Presidency of the Royal Association; his association with the Navy may be said to date almost from his birth./They are kept in vigour for a time by the automatic generation of enthusiasm, but after a while the ebb begins; a movement generally grows & dies with a generation. Here again it is sometimes possible to suspect a writer of what is worse than carelessness, a pointless but intended repetition that is to have the effect of a play on words or the mildest of puns: The triple bill of Bills which are down
