page: 499

+ leavings or sweepings from remainder. Residuum has plural -dua.

resignedly. Four syllables; -EDLY.

resilience, -cy. Pronounce with -zil-. The very slight difference of sense—that -ce can & -cy cannot mean an act of rebounding—does not, since there is no chance of -ce’s being confined to that special sense, make the existence of the two anything better than an inconvenience; it is therefore best to use -ce always; see -CE, -cy.

resist makes -tible;

see -ABLE 2. For resistless see -LESS.

resistance. You have likened the r. of Ulster Unionists to be driven out of the Constitution .. . to the opposition... Read to being driven; see GERUND 3.

resoluble, resolvable. Both are in use without distinction of meaning, the first being more a literary, & the other more a colloquial word. The negatives should be trresoluble, but unresolvable; see -ABLE 3; in The number of irresolvable difficulties is relatively small, correct either the prefix or the sufix.

resolute, -tion, -ble.

For pronunciation see LU.

resolution (in prosody). See TECH- NICAL TERMS.

resolution)(motion. As names for a proposition that is passed or to be passed by the votes of an assembly, the two differ in that the passing of a motion results in action, & a m. is that something be done; while a resolution is not necessarily more than an expression of the opinion that something is true or desirable. Since, however, opinion often becomes operative, & since also resolutions as well as motions are moved, i.e. are at least in one sense motions, the distinction is elusive; it is nevertheless, if not too rigidly applied, of some value.

resolvedly. Four syllables, if used; see -EDLY, & use resolutely or other , synonym.

+ resort)(re-sort. See RE(-). resort, resource, recourse. Confusion between these three is very frequent, &, since in some senses each is really synonymous with each, the confusion is, if not excusable, at least natural. The usual mistake is to say resource when one of the others is required. Of the following examples, the first four are unquestionably wrong; in the other two, the most idiomatic expression has not been chosen:—Such ships of the German Navy as remain in the Southern Seas must now have resource to the many sparsely-inhabited islands (recourse)./She will not be able to do so, in Dr Dillon’s opinion, without resource to the sword (recourse, resorting, resort)./Surely he was better employed in plying the trades of tinker & smith than in having resource to vice (recourse)./. . . should an autonomous régime for Macedonia have been agreed to by Turkey without resource to war (recourse, resort)./ ... binding all Powers to apply an economic boycolt, or, in the last resource, international force, against any Power which . . . (resort)./The question of having to send troops to Teheran is only considered as a last resort (resource).

The words are chiefly used in certain established phrases, given below; when alternatives appear in brackets, they are to be taken as less idiomatic. To resort to; to have recourse (resort) to; without recourse (resort, resorting) to. Without resources; at the end of his resources; had no other resource left; the only resource (resort); as a last resource; in the last resort. His usual resource was lying; his usual recourse (resori) was to lying; his usual resort was Brighton. A man of great or no resource; a man of many or no resources. Golf is a great resource; Hoylake is a great resort.

Without resource in the sense ‘irreparably ’, though it has been used by good writers, is rather, a GALLICISM than an English idiom. :
