page: 501

+ its author’s name)./In the Preussische Jahrbücher for May the most noteworthy articles are those respectively by Werner Weisbach, who writes on Germany in modern Italian political criticism, & by Professor Hans Delbrück, who contributes an extremely interesting comparison between ... (as in the last).

D. UNINTELLIGIBLE f.

The writing-room, silence-room, & recreation-room, have respectively blue & red arm-chairs./A certain estate is for sale; its grounds border three main roads, namely, Queen’s, Belmont, & King’s respectively.

E. T. FOR ANOTHER WORD

The writers of these mean no more than both (to be placed in the second after Fellow). The two nurses’ associations respectively organized in Scotland make no secret of their membership./He was a Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford, & of the University of London respectively.

p

REVERSAL OF SENSE

It is recognized that far too little is known by Englishmen & Americans about their r. countries; in this couniry there is only one lectureship on American history, & that is at King’s College, Strand. This can only mean that Englishmen know too little of England, & Americans know too little of America—which is no doubt true, but is not the truth that the writer wished to convey; ‘ about each other’s countries’ would have served both writer & reader.

The simple fact is that respective(ly) are words seldom needed, but that pretentious writers drag them in at every opportunity for the air of thoroughness & precision they are supposed to give to a sentence.

respire makes respirable (rispir’abl is the pronunciation preferred by the OED); see MuTE E.

respite, vb, makes -table (ré’spitab}); see MUTE E.

+ resplendence, -cy. The first is recommended; see -CE, -CY. restaurant, restaurateur.

See FRENCH WORDS. restore makes -rable; see MUTE E. restrain)(re-strain. See RE(-). restrainedly. Four syllables; -EDLY. resume makes -mable; see MUTE E. résumé. See FRENCH WORDS. resurrect. See BACK-FORMATION. resuscitate makes -itable; -ABLE 1. retable (eccl. n.). Pronounce rita’bl. retail. Verb rita, noun ré’tal; see NOUN & VERB ACCENT, retaliate makes -iable; see -ABLE 1l. retenue. See FRENCH WORDS, retina. P!. -as or -ae; see LATIN PLURALS, 1. retire makes -rable; see MUTE E. For retired admiral &c., see INTRAN- SITIVE P.P. retrace makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1. retract makes -tor; see -or. Of the two nouns retrac(ta)iion, the shorter is used in all senses, the longer only in the secondary or non-literal ones, i.e., where the meaning is not ‘ pulling backwards’, but ‘ apologizing for’ or ‘cancelling’ or ‘ revoking’. Proirusion & retraction of the tongue; Offer & retrac(ta)tion of terms; Publication & retrac(ta)tion of a libel.

retrieve makes -vable; see MUTE E. Of the nouns retrieve & retrieval, the first is used in particular phrases (beyond, past, retrieve), & the other elsewhere (for the retrieval of his fortunes &c.).

retro-. In most words the usual pronunciation is rétro; but in the commonest of all, retrospect & retrograde, it is rétro; in words derived from or allied with these two (reirospective, retrospection, retrogression, retrogressive, retrogradation) it varies, the tendency being to say rétro if the stress is shifted, as it is by most speakers in all these words, & by all in retrogradation, to the third or fourth syllable.

retrograd-, retrogress(-). There are two series: (1) adj. & vb retrograde, n. retrogradation; (2) vb retrogress, n. retrogression, adj. retrogresstwe.
