page: 502

But, as most of us have a preference

for retrograde as the adj. & retro- „gression. as the noun, & no great

liking for either verb, there is un-

fortunately little prospect that one

series will oust the other,

retroussé. See FRENCH WORDS.

return. For the returned exile &c.

see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

rev. See REVEREND.

reveille. See FRENCH WORDS.

revel: -lled, -lling, -ller; see -LL-, -L-.

Revelation(s). Though the Bible title is The Revelation of St John the Divine, the plural Revelations is quite established in ordinary speech, & to take exception to it is PEDAN- TRY; but The Revelations is a confusion of the correct The Revelation with the popular Revelations.

revenant, See FRENCH WORDS. The book is thronged, too, with revenants dæ: echoes; old familiar faces reappear, on whom years ago the reader closed the cover with a sigk. One of the literary critics? needless GALLICISMS.

revenge. For r. vb & avenge, r. n. & vengeance, see AVENGE. R. makes -geable; see -ABLE 1.

revenue. Pronounce ré’vini. *‘ The stressing reve’nuec, common or usual during the 17th & 18th centuries & until recently in legal & parliamentary usage, is now obsolescent ’ —OED.

reverberate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE J], -OR.

revere. The adjective, if used, should be -rable; see MUTE E.

reverend, rev., reverent(ial). Reverend means deserving reverence, & reverent feeling or showing it.

Reverend is abbreviated Revd or now usually Rev. For ILLITERACIES like Rev. Smiih, instead of Rev. J. Smith or the Rev. Mr or Dr Smith, see HON. Reporters giving lists of clergy have difficulties with the plural of the abbreviation; but, since reverend is an adjective (& not, like parson in the now disused ‘ Parsons Jones & Smith’, a noun), there is ucither occasion for nor correctness

in such forms as Revs & Reods; the

Rev. J. Smith, W. H. Jones, P.

Brown, & others is the way to put it; if the initials, or some `of them, are not known, it should run The Rev. J. Smith, Messrs Jones & Brown, Dr Robinson, & other clergy.

Between reverent & reverential the difference is much the same as that between PRUDENT & prudential, reverential being as applicable to what apes reverence as to what is truly instinct with it, while reverent has only the laudatory sense; but reverential is often wrongly chosen merely as a LONG VARIANT; when reverent would not be out of place, reverential is a substitute as much weaker as it is longer.

revers. See FRENCH WORDS.

reverse, n. Such phrases as ‘ remarks the r. of complimentary ’, meaning uncomplimentary remarks, are cumbrous specimens of Worn- OUT HUMOUR.

reverse, vb. For the adjective, -sable is recommended rather than -sible on general principles; see “ABLE 2; negative unreversable, or irreversible; see -ABLE 3. But -sible is the prevalent form.

reversion has various senses, chiefly legal or biological, to be found in any dictionary, & not needing to be set forth here. It suffices to say that they all correspond to the verb revert, & not to the verb Teverse,, whose noun is reversal. In the following extracts it has been wrongly given the meaning of reversal:—The reversion of our Free Trade policy would, we are convinced, be a great reverse for the working class./But to undertake a complete reversion of the Bolshevik policy is beyond their powers. revert makes -tible; see -ABLE 2, revet makes -tting, -ited; -T-, -rr-, reviewal. See -AL NOUNS, & use TeviewW n. : revile makes -lable; see MUTE E. . revisal. See -AL NOUNS. The Union demands a ‘ thorough revisal.
