page: 504

rhombus. Pl. -buses or -bt; see

| to some of those who are stirred by LATIN PLURALS.

rhotacism. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

| fads & aesthetes.

rhyme. 1. For meaning of r., & of r. royal, feminine T., &c., see under TECHNICAL TERMS.

2. thyme,rime. Nothing seems to be gained, except indeed a poor chance of the best of three reputes (learning, pedantry, & error), by changing the established spelling. The OED states that rhyme ‘ finally established itself „as the standard form’, & that the revival of rime * was to some extent due to the belief that the word was of native origin & represented OE rim’ (=number). Rhyme is in fact the same word as rhythm, & ultimately from Greek rhuthmos, though it came into English from French in the altered form rime, & was only later restored, like many other words, to a spelling more suggestive ofits origin. It is highly convenient to have for the thing meant a name differently spelt from rhythm, but that convenience rhyme gives us as fully as rime, while it has the other advantage of being familiar to everyone.

RHYTHM. Rhythmless speech or writing is like the flow of liquid from a pipe or tap; it runs with smooth monotony from when it is turned on to when it is turned off, provided it is clear stuff; if it is turbid, the smooth flow is queerly & abruptly checked from time to time, & then resumed. Rhythmic speech or writing is like waves of the sea, moving onward with alternating rise & fall, connected yet separate, like but different, suggestive of some law, too complex for analysis or statement, controlling the relations between wave & wave, waves & sea, phrase & phrase, phrases & speech. In other words, live speech, said or written, is rhythmic, & rhythmless speech is at the best dead. The rhythm of verse is outside the scope of this book, & that of prose cannot be considered in its endless detail; but a few words upon it may commend the subject as worth attention

+ the mere name to ribald laughter at

A sentence or a passage is rhythmical if, when said aloud, it falls naturally into groups of words each well fitted by its length & intonation for its place in the whole & its relation to its neighbours. Rhythm is not a matter of counting syllables & measuring the distance between accents; to that misconception is due the ridicule sometimes cast upon it by sensible people conscious of producing satisfactory English but wrongly thinking they do it without the aid of rhythm. They will tell you that they see to it, of course, that their sentences sound right, & that is enough for them; but, if their seeing to it is successfully done, it is because they are, though they do not realize it, masters of rhythm. For, while rhythm does not mean counting syllables & measuring accent-intervals, it does mean so arranging the parts of your whole that each shall enhance, or at the least not detract from, the general effect upon the ear; & what is that but seeing to it that your sentences sound right? Metre is measurement, rhythm is flow, a flow with pulsations as infinitely various as the shape & size & speed of the waves; & infinite variety is not amenable to tabulation such as can be applied to metre; so it is that the prose writer’s best guide to rhythm is not his own experiments in, or other people’s rules for, particular cadences & stress-schemes, but an instinct for the difference between what sounds right & what sounds wrong. It is an instinct cultivable by those on whom nature has not bestowed it, but on one condition only—that they will make a practice of reading aloud. That test soon divides matter, even for a far from sensitive ear, into what reads well & what reads tamely, haltingly, jerkily, lopsidedly, topheavily, or otherwise badly; the first is the rhythmical, the other
