page: 507

+ correct enough, but now unfamiliar, is a REVIVAL not to be reeommended; the word that bas taken its place is DERISORY.

risky, for French risqué, is an undesirable GALLIcIsM.

risqué, rissole. See FRENCH WORDS.

ritardando. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

rival, vb, has -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

rive. Past tense rived; p.p. riven, | rarely rived.

rivel makes -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

rivet has -eted, -eting, -eter; -T-,-TT-.

rivière. See FRENCH WORDS.

roast. 1. The use of the p.p. roast is very narrowly limited: roast beef | or hare, but roasted coffee-berries or | cheeks; | Toasted joint; is better roast(ed) than

a roast joint, but a well boiled, but should certainly be roasted. 2. For rule the r., see RULE.

Robby, -ie. See -ry, -IE, -y.

robe, vb, makes -bable; see MUTE E.

robe-de-chambre. FRENCH WORDS.

robust makes -er, -est; -ER & -EST.

robustious. One of the words | whose continued existence depends { upon a quotation (Hamlet 111. ii. 10).

rococo. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

rodomontade, not rho-.

role, rôle. Though the word is I etymologically the same as roll, I meaning the roll of MS. that con- | tained an actor’s part, the differen- Í tiation is too useful to be sacrificed { by spelling always roll. | being no other word role from which lit has to be kept distinct, both the

But, there italics & the accent might well be (abandoned. As to the sanctity of f the French form, see MORALE.

Roman-Catholic, Roman Catholic. He is a Roman Catholic; the Roman-

in Roman-Catholic

In the noun there is no need of or justification for the \ hyphen (see HypHens 3 B); in the i compound adjective it is necessary jor desirable (see HYPHENS 3 D). | Romanes, Romany, (gypsy lan-

Pronounce ro’manéz, -ni.

ROSICRUCIANS The OED treats the first as the standard form.

Rome makes Romish; see MUTE E.

rondeau, rondel. See TECHNICAL TERMS; &, for pl. of rondeau, -x.

rondo. Pl. -os; see -o(£)s 6.

Röntgen. Pronounce rù'ntyen.

roof. Pl. -fs; see -vE(D).

roomful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

root (philol.). See TECHNICAL TERMS.

root, rout, (poke about). The second form is called by the OED an ‘irregular variant of’ the first. The two, with the other verb root directly connected with the noun, naturally cause some difficulty. It would be a convenient differentiation if the spelling root could be confined to contexts in which the notion of roots is essential, & rout were adopted where search or bringing to light is the point. So we should get rooting up trees, rooting out weeds or sedition, but routing about in a lumber-room or among papers, routing out secrets, routing a person out of bed, routing up a recluse or a reference. Pigs, being equally intent on roots & search, may root or rout indifferently.

rope makes -pable, -py; see MUTE E.

roquefort. See FRENCH WORDS.

roquet. For spelling & pronunciation of inflexions see CROCHET.

rosary, -ery, (rose-garden). The first is the old word (from 15th c. in OED), direct from Latin rosarium. The second is a 19th-c. formation made presumably, from rose & -ery, by someone not aware that rosary has this sense. Rose-garden or -bed is recommended for ordinary use, & rosary for verse.

Rosicrucians, or Brethren of the Rosy Cross, much talked of in the 17th c., paid homage by their name not to anything symbolized by cross or rose, but to an alleged 15th-c. founder named Rosenkreuz (= cross of roses). ‘The writers who posed as Rosicrucians were moral & religious reformers, & utilized the technicalities of chemistry(alchemy),
