page: 508

+ & the sciences generally, to make known their opinions, there being a flavour of mysticism or occultism promotive of inquiry & suggestive of hidden meanings discernible or discoverable only by adepts ’— Ence. Brit.

rosin is by origin merely a form of resin changed in sound & spelling; but the two are now so far differentiated that resin is usual for the liquid in or taken from the tree, & as the general chemical term for substances having certain qualities, while rosin denotes the distilled solid. R. makes rosined, -iny; -N-, -NN-.

roster. Though the dictionaries are almost unanimous for r6’ster only, the army, which is the chief user of the word, says ro’ster; & Skeat remarks: ‘ The o is properly long: pron. roaster’.

rostrum. Pl.: in the original sense (ship’s beak), usually -ra; in the secondary sense (pulpit or platform), -rums or -ra. See -umM, & LATIN PLURALS.

rotate makes rotatable (see -ABLE 1), -tor (see -OR).

rota(to)ry. Rotary is not, like authoritive, deteriate, & pacifist, a shortening of a more correct form, but is a separate word: rota wheel gives rotarius (English rotary) wheellike; roto revolve gives rotatorius (English rotatory) revolving &c. On the other hand there is no important difference in meaning either essential or customary, & therefore the short rotary should be preferred & rotatory avoided as a SUPERFLUOUS WORD.

roti. See FRENCH WORDS.

rotten makes -nness. For something r. in the state of Denmark, see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION. rotund makes -er, -est; -ER & -EST. roturier, roué, rouge et noir. See FRENCH WORDS. rough(en), vv. See -EN VERBS; but the relation between this pair demands some further treatment, 1. The intransitive verb (= become Tough) is always roughen, except

+ that the addition of up occasionally enables rough to serve (the sea, his bristles, its scales, their tempers, began to rough up). 2. In the simple transitive senses also (=make rough), roughen is usual, but if wp is added rough is preferred, & rough by itself is the word for arming horseshoes against slipping (rough the shoes or the horse). 3. In the other transitive senses of to treat roughly or shape roughly (the latter usually with adverbs, in, off, out), the verb is rough: rough a horse, break it in; rough a calf, harden it by exposure; rough a person, abuse or maltreat him; rough in the outlines; rough off timber; rough out a scheme; rough a lens, shape without polishing it. 4. To take things in the rough is to rough it.

roulade, rouleau. See FRENCH worDs. Rouleau has pl. -s (or -x).

roundel, roundelay. Not, like rondeau & rondel, precise terms. Roundel is sometimes used loosely for rondeau-or-rondel, & see TECH- NICAL TERMS; roundelay is defined in the OED as * A short simple song with a refrain °.

rouse makes -sable; see MUTE £.

rout (poke about). See root.

route is pronounced, in military phrases such as route-march, column of r., rowt.

routine makes routinism, -ist (r00té’n-); see MUTE E.

rowan. The OED pronunciation is r0’an, Scotch row’an.

rowel makes -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

rowlock. Pronounce rii/lok.

-R-, -RR-. Monosyllables ending in -r double it before suffixes beginning with vowels if the sound preceding it is a single vowel (a, e, i, 0, u, y), but not if it is a diphthong or a double vowel: barring but nearing, stirred but chaired, currish but boorish. Words of more than one syllable follow the rule for monosyllables if their last syllable is accented (with the exception noted below), but otherwise do not double the r; preferred but proffered, inter-
