page: 509

+ ring but entering, abhorrent but motoring. Exception: confer, infer, prefer, refer, & transfer, though accented on the last, give adjectives in -erable, & shift the accent to the first syllable: pré’ferable &c.; see CONFER(R)ABLE. rubefy, -bify. The first is better, on the analogy of liquefy, putrefy, stupefy, than the second on the analogy of horrify, terrify, especially in view of rubefacient & rubefaction always so spelt.

rubricate makes -cable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

ruche. See FRENCH WORDS.

rucksack. Pronounce r00’ksak.

ruddle (red ochre, &, as verb, colour with this) has the two variants raddle & reddle, of which raddle is the form usually preferred as a eontemptuous synonym for rouge & rouging, & reddle is occasional instead of ruddle. Ruddle itself is applied chiefly to sheep-marking.

rude makes rudish; see MUTE E.

ruff (bird) has fem. recve.

ruination is not, like flirtation, floatation, & botheration, a HYBRID DERIVATIVE, being regularly formed from ruinate; but it now has the effect of a slangy emphatic lengthening of the noun ruin; this is only because the parent verb ruinate, which was common in serious use 1550-1700, is no longer heard; but the result is that ruination is better avoided except in facetious contexts.

rule. 1. The verb makes -lable; see MUTE E. 2. R. of three & r. of thumb should not be hyphened except when used as compound adjectives; see HYPHENS (*Rule of thumb). 3. Rule the roast (roost).

The OED gives no countenance to

roost, & does not even recognize that

the phrase ever takes that form;

but most unliterary persons say

roost & not roast; I have just

inquired of three such, & been

informed that they never heard of

rule the roast, & that the reference is

to a cock keeping his hens in order.

+ Against this tempting piece of popular etymology the OED offers us nothing more succulent than ‘None of the early examples throw any light on the precise origin of the expression’. In seven out of the eight pre-18th-c. examples quoted the spelling is not roast but rost or roste; but the OED philologists would doubtless tell us that rost(e) could represent Old-French rost (roast), & could not represent Old- English hrést (roost). Writers should take warning, at any rate, that rule the roast is the orthodox spelling, & that when they have written it the compositor must be watched.

rumbustious. See FACETIOUS FORMA- TIONS.

ruminate makes -nable, -tor 5

see -ABLE 1, -OR.

rumour. See -OUR & -OR.

run. For fresh-run salmon &c., see INTRANSITIVE P.P,

rune. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

rung (past tense). See RING.

rupture makes -rable; see MUTE E.

ruridecanal. Pron. rooridika‘nal.

ruse, rusé. See FRENCH WORDS.

rush ring (PU marry thee with a &c.). No hyphen; HYPHENS 3 B.

russety, not -tty; see -T-, -TT-.

rusticate makes -cable, -tor;

see -ABLE 1, -OR.

ruthless. For the war-time use as translation of German rücksichtslos (regardless or reckless, not F+); see FRIGHTFULNESS.

S

*s, 1. For for conscience sake &c., see SAKE.

2. For Achilles’, Jones’s, &¢., sec

POSSESSIVE PUZZLES.

3. For England’s &c. & of England

&c., see °S INCONGRUOUS, & PER-

SONIFICATION 1. In no part of the

world, says Ontario’s Prime Minister,

will the returned soldier find a more

appreciative public than in this pro-

vince.

4. For such corrections as to use &

word of Coleridge instead of of Cole-

ridge’s, see OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN.
