page: 511

+ abbreviation (see PERIOD IN ABBR.); Pl. Sts or SS.

St Stephen’s. See SOBRIQUETS. sake. For God’s s., for mercy’s s., for Jones’s s., for Phyllis’s s.; but when the enclosed word is both a common noun & one whose possessive is a syllable longer than its subjective, the s of the possessive is not used; an apostrophe is often, but not always, written; for conscience s., for goodness’ s., for their office s., for peace’ s.

salable. So spelt; see MuTE E.

salad days (one’s raw youth) is one of the phrases whose existence depends on single passages (see Ant. & Cleop. 1. v. 73). Whether the point is that youth, like salad, is raw, or that salad is highly flavoured & youth loves high flavours, or that innocent herbs are youth’s food as milk is babes’ & meat is men’s, few of those who use the phrase could perhaps tell us; if so, it is fitter for parrots’ than for human speech.

salamander. This, gnome, sylph, & nymph, are spirits of fire, earth, air, & water, in Paracelsus’s system,

salary makes salaried.

Salic, Salique. In the most frequent use, i.e. in the name of the law excluding females from dynastic succession, ‘still often spelt Salique | & pronounced salé’k ’"—OED.

salicylic. So spelt.

saline. Pronounce sa‘lin, & see FALSE QUANTITY.

salivary. Pronounce sa’livari, & see FALSE QUANTITY (on doctrinal).

salle-a-manger, d’attente. See FRENCH WORDS.

sallow makes -er, -est; -ER & -EST 2.

Sally. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -y.

sally, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

salmi. See FRENCH WORDS.

salmon. See COLLECTIVES 1, 4.

Salomonic has not, like Salomon, passed out of use; but Solomonic is now the usual form.

salon. See FRENCH WORDS.

Salonica. Pronounce saloni‘ka (or -é’ka), not salé’nika.

saloon. S. deck, s. pistol, s. rifle. | No hyphen; see Hypurns 3 B.

salt. A bath of salt water (no hyphen), but a salt-water bath; see HYPHENS 3 B, 3 A.

saltus. Pl. saltiis; see -us.

salubrious, salutation, salute. For pronunciation see Lu.

salve. The noun & verb meaning remedy are pronounced sahy. The verb meaning save or rescue is an entirely separate one, a Back- FORMATION from salvage, pronounced salv. Both verbs make -vable; see MUTE £. The Latin word meaning Hail!, & used chiefly as the name of a R.-C. antiphon, is pronounced sa‘lvé,

salvo (both nouns, reservation & volley). Pl. -os; see -o(£)s 6.

sal volatile. Pronounce sal vola’tili.

sambo (half-breed). Pi.-os;-0(z)s 6.

same. S. or the s., in the sense the aforesaid thing(s) or person(s), as a substitute for a pronoun (it, him, her, them, they) is one of the usages whose effect is discussed in ILLITER- ACIES. It has the peculiarity that it occurs chiefly in writing, not often in speech, & yet is avoided by all who have any skill in writing. As the working man puts on his Sunday clothes to be photographed, so the unliterary adorns himself with ‘ (the) same’ when he is to appear in print; each seems bent on giving the worst possible impression of himself. In all the extracts below, the writers would have shown themselves much more at their ease if they had been content with it, them, or other pronoun. Shops filled to the doors with all kinds of merchandise & people eager to acquire t. s./Are the purveyors of ‘ bowlers’ able to meet the sudden requirements for s. likely to arise immediately on the signing of peace?/Again, the doctors declaim against patients by contract, while they largely themselves set up the machinery for carrying on t. s. (the system?)./If not directly, at least through the official presence of their representatives, or by a chosen delega-
