page: 513

+ sapid, unlike its negative insipid, is a merely LITERARY WORD. sapient. Chiefly a LITERARY WORD, & usually ironical. saponaceous, apart from its use in chemistry, is a favourite Poty- SYLLABIC HUMOUR word. sapor. A merely LITERARY WORD; for the spelling -or, see -OUR & -or. Sapphic, Sappho. Pronounce săf-. Sapphics. See TECHNICAL TERMS. sarcasm does not necessarily involve irony, & irony has often no touch of sarcasm. But irony, or the use of expressions conveying different things according as they are interpreted, is so often made the vehicle of sarcasm, or the utterance of things designed to hurt the feelings, that in popular use the two are much confused. The essence of sarcasm is the intention of giving pain by (ironical or other) bitter words. See also rrony, & HUMOUR.

sarcoma. Pl. -ata.

sarcophagus. Pl. -ī7; for pronunciation see GREEK G.

Pro-

sardine (stone; Rev. iv. 3). nounce sar’din.

sardonic. See HUMOUR for some rough distinction between this, cynical, sarcastic, &c. The word is perhaps over-used in NovELESE:— The hollow laugh or at least the sardonic grin that is a sine qua non of every self-respecting potsoner.

Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 3.

sargasso.

Pl. -ae.

sarissa.

sartorial. See PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

Sassenach. Pronounce with -ch as in loch.

Satanic(al). The -al form ‘now rare ’—OED; see -IC(AL).

satchel makes -lled; see -LL-, -L-.

sate makes -table; see MUTE E. For sateless, see -LESS.

sati. For this improvement on suttee, see PRIDE OF KNOWLEDGE.

satiate. Adj. -at, vb -at; see Parriciptes 5 B. The verb makes -tiable; see -ABLE 1.

satiety. Pronounce sati‘iti.

satire. For rough distinction from some synonyms, see HUMOUR.

1351

+ _Satiric(al). The senses addicted to, intending, good at, marked by, satire are peculiar to the long form (a -al rogue; you are pleased to be -al; with -al comments; a -al glance). In the merely classifying sense of or belonging to satire (the

poems of Pope; the Latin —— writers), either form may be used, but -ic is commoner. This differentiation might well be hastened by deliberate support; but the line of demarcation between the two groups is not always clear. See -1c(AtL).

satiric)(satyric. The two spellings represent two different & unconnected words; satyric, which is in learned or literary use only, means of satyrs, & especially, in s. drama (a form of Greek play), having a satyr chorus.

satirize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

satisfy. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

satrap. Pronounce sa’trap.

saturate makes -rable; see -ABLE 1.

Saturday. For the adverbial use (shall see you S.), see FRIDAY.

Saturnalia. See LATIN PLURALS 3. The word is originally plural, but, as being the name of a festival, comes to be construed, both in literal & metaphorical use, more often as singular (the S. was, or were, at hand; now follows a s. of crime). When a real plural is required (the sack of Magdeburg, the French Revolution, & other such s. of slaughter), the form is -ia, not -ias.

Saturnian verse. TECHNICAL TERMS.

satyr. See raun for distinctions.

satyric. See SATIRIC.

sauce. Combinations such as mint s. should be two words unhyphened if, as is usual, the accent remains on sauce; see HypHEeNS 3 B. The verb makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1.

sauce piquante. See FRENCH WORDS.

sausage roll. Accent the roll, & use no hyphen; see HyPHENS 3 B.

sauté, sauve-qui-peut. See FRENCH WORDS.

savannah. So spelt.
