page: 514

Savant, savate. See FRENCH WORDS.

Save (except). 1. For s. & except, see PLEONASM 2. 2. Trench (English Synonyms, 4th ed., 1858), writing on ‘ except, excepting, but, save’, has no more to say of the last than that ‘ ‘‘ Save ” is almost exclusively limited to poetry’. He would have a surprise if he were to see a newspaper of 1920; we can still say that it ought to be, but no longer that it is, almost limited to poetry. Though nearly everyone uses except or but, not s., in speaking, & perhaps everyone in thinking, & though the natural or ‘ dominant ’ word eacept is neither undignified nor inferior in clearness, journalists have made up their minds that it is not good enough for print, & very mistakenly prefer to translate it, irrespective of context, into s.3; s. is becoming a FORMAL worp, like the reporter’s invariable proceed for go. Does anyone not a writer—& does any good writer—think that the substitution of the formal s. for the natural eacept or but in the following sentences has improved them?—The handful of ship’s officers could do nothing s. summon the aid of a detachment of the Civic Guard./ One marked trait of Dr Griffith John has been displayed in his refusal to leave China s. at long intervals./The spur proved to be so admirably adapted to its purpose that it has existed unaltered, s. in detail, to the present day./So completely surrounded by other buildings as to be absolutely invisible—s. from a balloon or an aeroplane./There can be no question, s. in the minds possibly of the Tariff Reform fanatics, that Mr Balfours retirement is a heavy blow to the Unionist Party./The baby takes no special harm, s. that it is allowed to do as it likes, & begins to walk too soon./The increased rates will take effect on the Underground lines, s. on one stretch between Bow & Barking: save, vb, makes -vable; see MUTE E. S. the mark (with variants God s., bless, God bless, the mark) is a stylistic

+ toy, of which no-one can be said to know, though different people make different guesses at, the original meaning. The OED?’s description of it, as it now survives, is: ‘In | modern literary use (after some of the examples in Shakspere), an expression of indignant scorn ap- | pended to a quoted expression or to a statement of fact’.

savoir faire, savoir vivre.

See FRENCH WORDS.

savour(y). So spelt; -OUR & -or.

saw has p.p. sawn, rarely sawed.

Sawney,s-. So spelt; -EY, -IE, -y.

SAXONISM is a name for the attempt to raise the proportion borne by the originally & etymologically | English words in our speech to those | that come from alien sources. The Saxonist forms new derivatives from English words to displace established words of similar meaning but Latin descent; revives obsolete or archaic English words for the same purpose; allows the genealogy of words to decide for him which is the better of two synonyms. Examples of the first kind are FOREWORD (earliest OED quotation, 1842) for preface, folklore (1846) & birdlore (1880) for tradition & ornithology, BODEFUL (1813) for ominous; of the second, BETTERMENT for improvement, HAPPENINGS for events, english for translate (into English), FOLK for people, & FOoREBEAR for ancestor; of the third, BELITTLE & depreciate, wheelman & cyclist, love & charity (1 Corinthians xiii, A. V. & R. V.), burgess or burgher & citizen. The wisdom of this nationalism in language—at least in so thoroughly composite a language as English— is very questionable; we may well doubt whether it benefits the language, & that it does not benefit the style of the individual, who may or may not be prepared to sacrifice himself for the public good, is pretty clear. Here is the opinion of the Dictionary of National Biography on Freeman’s English: ‘ His desire to use so far as possible only words
