page: 516

+ in OED s.v. than as erroneous, see HARDLY 2. Before or when is what should be used instead of than.

2. Not &c....s. We most of us feel safe against even saying ‘I don’t s. know’, with not & s. in hand-to-hand conflict; but, if a little space intervenes, & the negative is disguised, the same absurdity is not very rare in print:—The services of the men who have worked the railway revolution without the travelling public being scarcely aware that we are at war should not be forgotten./It has been impossible to tell the public s. anything about American naval co-operation with the British. The English for without s. realizing is either s. realizing, or without quite realizing, or not fully realizing.

scare makes -rable; see MUTE E. Scaredly is a bad form; see -EDLY.

scarf. Pl. -fs or -ves; see -vE(D).

scarify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

Scarlet Woman. See SOBRIQUETS.

scatteredly. Three syllables; see -EDLY (4).

scavenge(r), vbs. Scavenger, n., is the origin, in English, from which to scavenge is a BACK-FORMATION, the normal verb being to scavenger; cf. to soldier, to filibuster, to buccaneer, to privateer, to mountaineer, to volunteer, to solder, to bicycle, & hundreds of other verbs that are in fact verbal uses of nouns. Scavenge, however, is much commoner than the verb scavenger.

scazon. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

scena (mus.). Pronounce sha’/nah.

scene. For synonyms in the sense locale, see FIELD. sceptic &c. The OED gives skéonly, not sé-, as the pronunciation; see also GREEK G, & SKEPTIC. sceptre, -ter. See -RE & -ER. schedule. Pronounce shé’dil. schema. Pron. ské’ma. Pl. -mata. scherzando, scherzo. Pronounced skartsa’nd6, skar’tsd (pl. -os; see -OES 6); ITALIAN SOUNDS. Schiedam. Pronounce skidi’m.

schipperke. Pronounce ski’perki.

schism(atic). Pronounce si-.

schismatic(al). See -1c(sL). The desirable consummation is that the short form should be the noun, & the long one the adjective.

schist. Pronounce sh-. The odd- | ities of English treatment of Greek | words are well illustrated by schism (si-), schist (shi-), & schizomycete (ski-), all three being from the same Greek word.

schizomycetes (lit. split-funguses; pronounce skizomisé’téz). | Under this as the most comprehensive | term are here collected for comparison the OED definitions of the word itself & several others, about whose inter-relations curiosity is || natural:—s., bacterium, microbe, ` bacillus, micro-organism, germ-

Schizomycetes: a group of micro- | scopic, rodlike, unicellular organ- ' isms, multiplying by fission, variously known as Bacteria, Microbes, &e.

Bacterium: A genus of schizomycetae, microscopic unicellular rodshaped vegetable organisms, ' various species of which are found in all decomposing animal & vegetable liquids.

Microbe: An extremely minute living being, whether plant or animal; chiefly applied to the bacteria concerned in causing diseases & fermentation.

Bacillus: A genus of schizomycetae, microscopic vegetable organisms of the lowest grade among what were once called infusoria. Separated from bacterium, with which it agrees in its rodlike form, & characterized by its larger size & mode of reproduction.

Micro-organism: A microscopic animal or plant; a microbe.

Germ: A micro-organism or microbe; often one of the microbes which are believed to cause disease. schnapps. So spelt. scholar. Though there is no apparent reason why s. & ss. should not mean pupil(s) at a school, schoolboy, schoolgirl, school-children, &c.,
