page: 517

+ it is not so used by those who are or have been at the great schools. A s. at schools is one who holds a scholarship, & the use of it in the other sense implies that the user is unacquainted with school idiom. While he was a s. at Marlborough Grammar School he took part in a riot which broke out in consequence of the prohibition of a firework display one < Guy Fawkes day’./It is the sincere hope of the council that its endeavour to promote the ‘ sport’ in the schools will be recognized by the masters, & that they will bring the proposed championships to the notice of their scholars. See also GENTEELISM.

scholium. Pl. -ia; see -UM.

schoolhouse, school-house, school house. The name of the building in which a school is carried on is one word, with or without hyphen. The name of the headmaster’s as distinguished from the other boarding-houses of a large school should be two words unhyphened, since house bears the accent. See Hy- PHENS 3 B.

school (of fish &c.), shoal. The two words are etymologically one, & equally unconnected with the ordinary word school; both are also current, & without difference of sense. The form school has the disadvantage of being liable to be taken for a figurative use of the other school.

sciagraphy &c., ski-, The regular representative in English of Greek sk- (here skia shadow) is se-; but it is legitimate (see GREEK G) to pronounce c as k, ef. sceptic. This particular set of words has been taken into English twice—in the 16th c. as terms in perspective, usually with the spelling sc-, & in the 19th as equivalent to radiography (production of Réntgen-ray pictures) &c., usually with the spelling sk-. To maintain both the se- & the sk- forms is very unsatisfactory, &, with radiography in existence, also needless. It is best to abandon the Réntgen-ray sense, 517

+ restrict the words to their older use in perspective, spell only sc-, & pronounce sk-. sciamachy, sciametry. See GREEK G. science & art. S. knows, a. does; a s. is a body of connected facts, an a.is a set of directions; the facts of s. (errors not being such) are the same for all people, circumstances, & occasions; the directions of a. vary with the artist & the task. But, as there is much traffic between s. & a., &, especially, a. is often based on s., the distinction is not always clear; the a. of self-defence, & the boxer’s s.—are they the same or different? The OED, on s. ‘ contradistinguished from art’, says: ‘The distinction as commonly apprehended is that a s. is concerned with theoretic truth, & an a. with methods for effecting certain results. Sometimes, however, the term s. is extended to denote a department of practical work which depends on the knowledge & conscious application of principles; an a., on the other hand, being understood to require merely knowledge of traditional rules & skill acquired by habit’.

scilicet, usually shortened to scil. or sc., is Latin (scire licet you may know) for ‘to wit’. It is not so often misused as e.g. & i.e., not having been popularized to the same extent. Its function is to introduce: (a) a more intelligible or definite substitute, sometimes the English, for an expression already used: The policy of the I.W.W. (se. Independent Workers of the World); The Holy Ghost as Paraclete (scil. advocate): (b) a word &c. that was omitted in the original as unnecessary, but is thought to require specifying for the present audience: Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard (sc. the intent of God).

scimitar, -etar, The OED gives the first as the standard form. :

scintilla. Pl. -lae.

sciolto. Pronounce shé-; ITALIAN SOUNDS.
