page: 520

+ of gunlock, mark of burn), & for the verb (burn); sere for the adjective (withered).

seasonable. See -ABLE 4.

seasonal belongs to the class of words discussed in HYBRID DERIVA- TIVES under the name of spurious hybrids. But it does differ from some specimens (see COASTAL) in being less easily done without.

seclude makes -dable; see MUTE E.

second. 1. S. chamber. 2. S. floor. 3. S. (-)hand. 4. S. intention. 5. S. sight. 6. S., vb (mil.).

1. S. chamber, in a Parliament, is the upper house, as concerned chiefly with rejection, confirmation, & revision.

2. For s. floor & s. storey, see FLOOR.

3. S. (-)hand. The second-hand of a watch is so written. The adjective meaning not new or original, & the adverb meaning not for or in first use, are best written as one word (secondhand clothing or information; always buys secondhand); & the phrase (heard only at second hand) should be two words unhyphened.

4. For s. intention, see INTENTION.

5. Second sight. Two words unhyphened; see Hypuens 3 B.

6. The verb s. in its technical military sense, is pronounced sik6’nd or sigoo’nd.

secondary education is that which comes after the primary or elementary but before that of the universities (ages 14-19).

secundum quid. See SIMPLICITER.

secrete makes -table; see MUTE E.

secretive (pronunciation). The OED gives only sikré’tiv; but sé’kritiv is often heard, & for expletive, perhaps the closest parallel, the OED gives é’ksplitiv before iksplé’tiv. Probably those who conceive the meaning as fond of secrets say sé’kritiv, & those who conceive it as given to secreting say sikré’tiv. sect is a word whose sense is to some extent affected by its user’s notion of its etymology. The OED favours Latin sequor (follow) as the

+ origin, so that s. would mean a following, i.e. a company of followers; but the more generally known derivation is from Latin seco (cut). & this is naturally interpreted as giving ‘a part cut away’ from a Church &c., & so a company of schismatics. According to the first, & probably correct, derivation, the Church of England, or the Roman- Catholic Church, may be called a s. without offence to its members; according to the second it will not.

secular. For s. clergy, see REGULAR.

secure. The adjective makes -er, -est; see -ER & -EST 1c. makes -rable; see MUTE E.

sedate makes -er, -est; see -ER & -EST 1c.

sedge makes sedgy; see -EY & -y.

sedilia. Pron. sidi/lya. A plural noun, rarely used in singular (sedile, pr. sidi‘li).

seduce makes -cible; see -ABLE 2.

see, bishopric, diocese. A bishopric is the rank belonging to a bishop; a diocese is the district administered by a bishop; a see is (the chair that symbolizes) a bishop’s authority over a particular diocese. A b. is conferred on, a d. is committed to, a s. is filled by, such & such a man. My predecessors in the see; All the clergy of the diocese; Scheming for a bishopric.

seek. For two abuses to which the word is liable, see FORMAL WORDS, & DOUBLE PASSIVES.

seem. 1. Pleonasms with s. 2. Seem(ed) to (have) be(en). 3. To my &c. seeming. 4. As scem(s) to be the case.

1. Pleonasms. These conclusions, it seems to me, appear to be reached naturally. Such absurdities are not uncommon with s.; see PLEONASM 4, & HAZINESS.

2. For confusion between seem(s) to have been & seemed to be, very common, see PERFECT INFINITIVE 3. An example is: Lady Austen’s fashionable friends occasioned no embarrassment; they seemed to have preferred some more fashionable The verb `
