page: 521

+ place for summering in, for they are not again spoken of; here are shows that seemed is wrong. 3. To my &c. seeming. From wherever he may start, he is sure to bring us out very presenily into the road along which, to his seeming, our primitive ancestors must have travelled. To my &c. seeming has been good English in its time; its modern representative is to my &c. thinking, & to his seeming will pass only in archaic writing. That the author of the extract is an archaizer is plain independently, from the phrase ‘very presently’; but he has no business to be archaizing in a sentence made unsuitable for it by the essentially unarchaic ‘ primitive ancestors °’.

4. As seem(s) to be the case. How can the Labour Ministry acquire proper authority if it has powers so limited as seem to be the case? As seem to be the case is always impossible, because the relative pronoun as, for which see AS 5, never represents an expressed plural noun (such as powers here), but always a singular notion like fact or state of affairs, & that not expressed, but extracted out of other words. As seems to be the case is, then, the only right form of the phrase; but even that will not do here, because it involves the doubling of two parts by as, that of relative adverb, indispensable after the preceding so, & that of the relative pronoun required by the otherwise subjectless verb seems. Waat has happened is this. The writer wanted to say if it has powers so limited as its powers seem to be. He shied at the repetition of powers, & felt about for as seems to be the case as a substitute, though he forgot to alter seem to seems. But,

since so makes the relative pronoun

as impossible, the true solution was

to let the as be a relative adverb,

writing if its powers are so limited

as they seem to be.

seemly. For the adverb, see -LILY.

seer has double pronunciation &

+ meaning: & ser

sé’er beholder, $3 prophet &c. segregate. Verb -at, adj. -it or -at 5 see PARTICIPLES 5 C. Seidlitz. Pronounce séd-. seigneur &c. Spellings recognized in the OED as current: seigneur, seignior; seigneuress; seigneury, seigneurie, seign(i)orage, seign(i)ory; seigneurial, seign(i)or(i)al. The pronunciation in all begins with san followed by the y sound. Differences in meaning or use between alternative forms (as seigneur & seignior, seigneury & seigniorage) cannot be detailed here, but exist & are sometimes of importance.

seise, seisin. Pronounce séz, sé’zin. The words are sometimes but less often spelt -ze, -zin, & belong etymologically to the ordinary verb seize; but in the legal phrases to $. a person of, i.e. put him in possession of, & to be -ed of, i.e. to possess, the -sspelling is usual.

seize makes -zable; see MUTE E. For the spelling seise, see above.

seldom can be compared with -er, -est; see -ER & -EST 3.

select, vb, makes -tor; see -OR.

Seleucid. Pl. -ids or -idae.

self. As both self & wife were fond of seeing life, we decided that .. ./ He ruined himself & family by his continued experiments. Correct the first to both I & my wife, & the second to himself & his family. Such uses of s. are said by the OED to be ‘ jocular or colloquial ’ extensions of a ‘ commercial’ idiom; &, unless the jocular intent is unmistakable, they are best avoided.

self-. Self- compounds are sometimes used when the self- adds nothing to the meaning. Agricultural depression & the rural exodus had made village life self-despondent & anaemic./Hence it is self-evident that economic changes in the agricultural system must greatly affect the general well-being. There is perhaps never any difference of meaning between despondent & self-despondent. Self-evident, on the other hand,
