page: 523

+ “ feel ” (something present, a fact, state of things, etc.) not by direct perception but more or less vaguely or instinctively ’. The OED’s earliest example is dated 1872, & the meaning is not yet part of ordinary English. It has, no doubt, the advantage of brevity as compared with become conscious of, get an inkling of, & other possibilities; but whether that brevity is sufficient compensation for the irritation or suspicion of preciosity that most readers feel when confronted with it is not so certain.

sensibility. Just as ingenuity is not ingenuousness, but ingeniousness, so sensibility is not sensibleness, but sensitiveness; to the familiar contrasted pair sense & sensibility correspond the adjectives sensible & sensitive—an absurd arrangement, & doubtless puzzling to foreigners, but beyond mending; -TY & -NESS.

sensible, sensitive, susceptible. In certain uses, in which the point is the effect produced or producible on the person &c. qualified, the three words are near, though not identical, in meaning. I am sensible of your kindness, sensitive to ridicule, susceptible to beauty. Formerly sensible could be used in all three types of sentence; but its popular meaning as the opposite of foolish thas become so predominant that we are no longer intelligible if we say a sensible person as the equivalent of a sensitive or a susceptible person, & even sensible of is counted among LITERARY WORDS. The difference between sensible of, sensitive to, & susceptible to or of, is roughly that sensible of expresses emotional consciousness, sensitive io acute feeling, & susceptible to or of quick reaction to stimulus: profoundly, gratefully, painfully, regretfully, sensible of; acutely, delicately, excessively, absurdly, sensitive to; readily, often, scarcely, susceptible to or of.

sensitize is a word made for the needs of photography, & made badly. It should have been sensi-

+ tivize; one might as well omit the adjective ending of immortal, signal, fertile, human, & liberal, & say immortize, signize, fertize, humize, & liberize, as leave out the -ive. The photographers, however, have made their bed, & must lie in it; the longer the rest of us can keep clear, the better; & extra-photographic use has not yet gone very far; but the OED quotes: Education, while it sensitizes a man’s fibre, is incapable of turning weakness into strength. Just as, failing pacificist, pactst would have been better than pacifist (see -isr), so, failing sensitivize, sensize would have been better than sensitize.

sensorium. PI. (rare), -ia.

sensuous is thought to have been expressly formed by Milton to convey what had originally been conveyed by the older sensual (connexion with the senses as opposed to the intellect) but had become associated in that word with the notion of undue indulgence in the grosser pleasures of sense. At any rate Milton’s own phrase ‘simple, sensuous, & passionate’ in describing great poetry as compared with logic & rhetoric has had much to do with ensuring that sensuous shall remain free from the condemnation now inseparable from sensual.

sentence, in grammar, means a set of words complete in itself, having either expressed or understood in it a subject & a predicate, & conveying a statement or question or command or exclamation. If it contains one or more CLAUSES, it is a complez s. ; if its subject consists of more than one parallel noun &c., or its predicate of more than one verb &c., it is a compound s. ; if its subject or predicate or verb (or more) is understood, it is an elliptical sentence. One sentence does not contain two or more subjects each with its separate predicate unless all but one of such subjects & predicates are clauses subordinate to the other.

Simple sentences: I went (state-
