page: 524

+ ment); Where is he? (question); Hear thou from heaven (command); How they run! (exclamation).

Complex sentence: Where he bowed there he fell down dead.

Compound sentences: You & I would rather..see that angel; They hum’d & ha’d.

Elliptical sentences: Listen; Well played; What?

Two sentences (not one):

You commanded & I obeyed.

sentinel, sentry. The first is the wider & literary word, & the fitter for metaphorical use; the second is the modern military term. Sentinel makes -lled &c.; see -LL-, -L-.

senza. Pronounce sé’ntsa; ITALIAN SOUNDS.

separate. Verb -at, adj. -it; see PARTICIPLES 5 B. The verb makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -or. For separat(ion)ist, see -Ist B.

sepsis. Pl. (rare), sepses (-€z); see LATIN PLURALS 2.

septenarius. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

Septet(te). Spell -et; see DUET.

septillion. See BILLION.

septum. PI. -ta.

Sepulchre, -cher. See -RE & -ER.

sequelae. A plural word with rare singular sequela.

SEQUENCE OF TENSES. 1. A certain assimilation normally takes place in many forms of sentence, by which the tense of their verbs is changed to the past when they are made into clauses dependent on another sentence whose verb is past, even though no notion of past time needs to be introduced into the clause. Thus, Two will do is a sentence; turn it into a clause depending on I think, & the tense remains unaltered: J think that two will do. Next, into one depending on I thought or I should think; it becomes two would do; after I thought there is a real change in the clause to past time, & therefore would do is not only normal, but invariable; after I should think, would do is also normal, though there

+ is no change to past time; but it is not invariable, sequence of tenses being often neglected. Two will do; I think that two will do; I thought that two would do; I should think that two (normal sequence) would do, or (vivid sequence) will do. In these examples, the usually omitted that has been inserted merely to make it clear that a real clause is meant, & not a quotation such as J thought “two will do’. The point to be noticed is that the change to the past tense is normal sequence, & the keeping of the present (called vivid sequence above) is, though common & often preferable, abnormal. Some further examples are:—I wish I knew what relativity (normal) meant, or (vivid) means; I should not wonder if he (normal) came, or (vivid) comes; Would God it (normal) might, or (vivid) may, be so! Abnormal sequence was said to be often preferable; it is sometimes so much so as to be practically the only thing possible. Asking the time, I do not say Could you tell me what the time was?—which nevertheless is strictly correct—, but what the time is.

2. S. out of place. One would imagine that these prices (normal) were, or (vivid) are, beyond the reach of the poor; These prices, one would imagine, are beyond &c. The base is These prices are; if made dependent on One would imagine, are may be changed, or may not, to were; but if one would imagine is a parenthesis instead of being the main verb, the change is impossible; nevertheless it happens: The shops have never had such a display of Christmas presents, but here again the prices, one would imagine, were beyond the reach of any but the richest persons; one hundred francs ts asked for a common rag doll. The mistake, a common one, results from not knowing a parenthesis when one sees it; see PARENTHESIS 2. Seq., seqq., et seq(q)., are short for Latin et sequentes (versus) & the
