page: 525

+ subsequent lines, or et sequentia & the words &c. following. Except in writing directed to scholars, it is kinder to the reader to use foll., of which he is sure to know the meaning. sequestrate makes -trable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR. sérac. See FRENCH WORDS. seraglio. Pronounce sirah‘ly6. PI. -0S; see -O(E)S 4. serai. Pronounce siri’. seraph. Pl. -phim or -phs. sere. See SEAR. serene makes -er, -est; -ER & -EST 2. sergeant, -j-. For the military & police rank, -g- ; in legal titles (Common S. &c.), -j-- In S. at arms, the OED gives -g- (or -j-). S. major (hyphen?). The Sergeant major, but Sergeant-major Jones, & the Sergeant-major’s wife; see HyPHENS (*Court martial group).

seri(ci)culture. The full form is the right; cf. pacif(ic)ist in -1sT.

serif, ceriph, seriph. The first is now the accepted spelling.

serjeant. See SERGEANT.

serum. Pl. -rums, -ra.

servant. For the use in signatures, see LETTER FORMS.

serve makes -vable; see MUTE E.

serviceable. See -ABLE 4, 1.

serviette. NAPKIN, & GENTEELISM.

servile. Adv. servilely.

session. ‘ The term autumn session (instead of ‘autumn sitting *) is sometimes used to designate the exceptional resumption of the sittings of the Houses, after an adjournment in what is normally the autumn recess; but this use is condemned by parliamentary authorities as incorrect —OED. There is normally, whether an autumn sitting takes place or not, only one session in the year.

sestet(te), sex-. Spell sestet; DUET.

sestina., See TECHNICAL TERMS.

set(t) The extra t is an arbitrary addition in various technical senses, from a lawn-tennis to a granite set. Each class of persons has doubtless added it to distinguish the special 1

+ sense that means most to it from all others; but so many are the special senses that the distinction is now no more distinctive than an Esq. after a man’s name, & all would do well to discard it. Cf. the less futile matt for MAT. seventies, seventies. See TWENTIES. sever makes -ered &c. ; -R-, -RR-. severe has -er, -est; -ER & -EST 1 c. severely. For leave s. alone, see HACKNEYED PHRASES, & IRRELE- VANT ALLUSION. There are degrees of badness; in the first of the two following extracts, for instance, s. is less pointless than in the other:— That immortal classic which almost all other pianists are content to l. s. a. on the topmost shelf./If our imports & exports balance, exchanges will be normal, whatever the price, & I am glad ihat Mr Mason agrees that exchanges should be left s. a.

Sévres. See FRENCH WORDS.

sew. P.p. sewed or sewn. The first is, perhaps contrary to general belief, both the older form & (to judge by the OED 19th-20th c. examples) slightly the commoner in modern English.

sew(er)age. It is best to use sewage for the refuse, & sewerage for the sewers or the sewer system. Sewage is defensible as a derivative of the formerly recognized but now dialectal verb sew to ooze out.

sexcentenary. See CENTENARY.

sexillion. See BILLION.

sextet is (OED) ‘an alteration of sestet ’.

sexto, sexto-decimo, (book formats). See FOLIO. Pl. -0s; see -O(E)s 6.

sforzando. Pronounce sfortsah’nd6. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

shade, n. For colour synonymy see TINT.

shade, vb, makes -dable; see MUTEE.

shade, shadow, nn. It seems that the difference in form is fairly to be called an accidental one, the first representing the nominative & the second the oblique cases of the same

word. The meanings are as closely
