page: 527

+ get our £2,000 this year./Perhaps we will soon be surfeited by the unending stream of ‘new’ literature, & will turn with relief to . . ./We might not be able to get all the oil we wanted from our coal, but we would always get enough to prevent . . ./What exwactly was the original total of the Turkish forces in this area we do not know—c& probably never will./He was plain to read from the beginning, & could hardly, we would have supposed, have made an appeal to a girl of this character./But the late King Edward brushed aside all such nonsense; & where would we be today without the French * entente ° ?/If we traced it back far enough we would find that the origin was . . ./If we permit our contribution to be substituted for a part of the building programme, we will be casting our vote with the ‘ little navy’ people./If we compare these two statements, we will see that so far as this point goes they agree./I would not be doing right if I were to anticipate that communication./If it were true the Germans would be right, & we would be wrong./ If British trade interests are to be revived, we will stand in need of these men who know Russia./But if the re-shuffling of the world goes on producing new ‘issues’, I will, I fear, catch the fever again./To the average citizen it would appear that in forestalling this plot we would in fact be rendering the German people no less service than . . ./I think I would be a knave if I announced my intention of handing over my salary to . . -/ It is quite clear that when Home Rule is being fought in the Commons I will have to devote all my time to it./ Reporis of fighting in China are as conflicting as we would expect./I am confident that within three years we employers will be reaping benefit from it./We have collected more in consequence of that valuation than we would have done without it./We never know when we take up the morning paper, some of us, which side we will be on neat./The whole

story of the rescue of the men from

+ Kerrig Island is a heroism of the sea which we will do well to realize./ Mr J. H. Thomas’s vision of the Utopia in which we will live ‘ When Labour Rules’. In all these the idea of intention, volition, choice, &e., which goes with will or would in the first person, is plainly out of the question. Two examples follow in which such an idea is precluded not by the actual words quoted, but by the unquoted context; in such cases the offence against idiom is aggravated by the possibility of misinterpretation:—We would thus get at once the thing wanted; an opera open practicaily all the year round (idiomatic sense, We aim at getting thus: intended sense, This, if it were not unfortunately impossible, would give us)./ Who’s Who’ is entirely without a competitor; c& there is perhaps no book on our reference shelves that we would miss sooner (idiomatic sense, There is no book we should be so glad to be rid of: intended sense, There is no book we should so quickly feel the want of). Two other examples will provide for a common exception to the rule as given absolutely above. In sentences that are, actually or virtually, reported, a verb that as reported is in the first person but was originally in the second or third often keeps will or would:—People have underrated us, some even going so far as to say that we would not win a single test match (the people said You, or They, will not, which justifies, though it by no means necessitates, We would not in the report)./ He need not fear that we will be ‘sated’ by narratives like his (his fear was They, or You, will be sated, which makes we will not indeed advisable, but defensible).

2. The verbs like, prefer, care, be glad, be inclined, &c., are very common in first-person conditional statements (I should like to know &c.). In these should, not would, is the right form. ‘I would like to say’ is no more idiomatic English than ‘ I would find it hard to say ° ;
