page: 529

+ instances invariably in mutual support we would be content with but a few, but if we found even one in contradiction we should require a large body of evidence./We should have been exposed to the full power of his guns, &, while adding to our own losses, would have forgone the advantage of inflaming his./The control of Bessarabia, until such time as Russia shall be restored & the people will be free to pronounce for their return to Russia, by the League of Nations./You shall not find two leaves of a tree exacily alike, nor will you be able to examine two hands that are exactly similar./Words requiring the local authority to see that when vacancies occurred the appointments should be consistent with the terms of the trust & the teachers chosen would be qualified to give the special religious instruction. But the follies to which ELEGANT VARIATION gives rise are without number.

5. That-clauses after intend or intention, desire, demand, be anxious, &e., have shall & should for all persons. Among the é&c. are not included hope, anticipate, & the like; but the drawing of the line is not easy; roughly, shall & should are used when the word on which the that-clause depends expresses an influence that affects the result, as a demand does, but a hope or a fear does not; a serviceable illustration is expect; mistresses expect (i.e. demand) that their maids shall wear caps; but we expect (i.e. are of opinion) that tomorrow will be fine. Examples of the wrong will are:— I am anxious that, when permanently erected, the right site will be selected./ And it is intended that this will be extended to every division & important branch./The strong desire that the relations of the English-speaking peoples will be so consolidated that they may act as one people. /One of the conditions of improvement is that the help given to the deserving poor will be removed from the taint of Poor Law associations.

6. The decorative second or third

+ person shall as in the quotation following is an archaism, before using which, as before using other archaisms, a writer should be very sure that his style in general will stand comparison with that of the few who have archaized to good purpose:— You shall have watched, it may be, the ways of birds & beasts in a garden or wood for half a lifetime; & your friend, the first time that you show him your preserves, shall straightway walk up the leverets, or point out the gold crest’s nest which you have always wanted to find. No-one will suggest that that is a maliciously chosen specimen; it is better than nine out of ten that one comes upon in the newspapers; but one who has a real right to this skall would have put otherwise ‘ the first time that you show him your preserves’ & the ‘ nest which you have always wanted to find’. Distinguished from this, far less conscious & artificial, but also better avoided. is the use of second or third person shall that may be called the oracularprophetic:—It has already found an honoured place in our national collections; there will come a time when collectors shall fight for it.

shallow has -er, -est; -ER & -EST 1.

sham. S. fight should not be hyphened; see HYPHENS 3 B.

shame, vb, makes -mable; MUTE E.

shamefaced, -fast. It is true that the second is the original form, that -faced is due to a mistake, & that the notion attached to the word is necessarily affected in some slight degree by the change. But those who, in the flush of this discovery, would revert to -fast in ordinary use are rightly rewarded with the name of pedants; see PRIDE OF KNOW- LEDGE. To use shamefast as an acknowledged archaism in verse 1s another matter.

shamefacedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY.

shampoo. Past -poo’d or -pooed 3 see -ED & ’D.
