page: 530

Shanghai. Pronounce -hi; for past & p.p. -aied or -ai’d, see -ED & ’p.

shanty, sailors’ song. See cHANTY.

Shape. For in any s. or form see Pironasm 2; Lord A— states that ‘he is absolutely unconnected i. a. s. o. f. with the matter’. The verb makes -pable; see MUTE E. The p-p. is -ed, & -en is archaic.

shapely. For the adv., see -LILY.

Shard. In the sense fragment of pottery, the OED treats shard as the normal form & sherd as the variant; on the other hand, the greater familiarity of potsherd tends to keep sherd in being. In the well-known phrase ‘ the shard-borne beetle ’, the interpretation ‘ borne through the air on shards’ (i.e. the wing-cases), which has so far prevailed as to set up shard as an entomological term for wingcase, appears to be an error; the real meaning was ‘ born in shard ’, there being another word shard, now obsolete except in dialects, meaning cowdung.

share makes -rable; see MUTE E.

Sharp, adv. In such phrases as pull up s., turn s. round, at eight o'clock s., sharp is preferable to sharply; see UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

shave makes -vable; see MUTE E.

she. 1. For she & her in bad personifications (e.g. The world wants all that America can give her), see PERSONIFICATION 1, 2.

2. Case. A few violations of ordinary grammar rules may be given; cf. HE. { want no angel, only she (read her). 7 When such as her die (read she). /She found everyone’s attention directed to Mary, & she herself entirely overlooked (omit she). /But to behold her mother— she to whom she owed her being (read her). /It is himself that he cheers rather than her (doubtful; see Cases). /Isaw a young girl whom I guessed to be she whom I had come to meet (read her). / Nothing must remain that will remind us of that hated siren, the visible world, she who by her allurements is always tempting the artist away (read her). sheaf. The noun has pl. -ves. For the verb, -ve or -f, see -VE(D).

530

shear, vb, has past sheared in ordinary current senses (We sheared our sheep yesterday; A machine sheared the bar into foot-lengths, the nap quite short; This pressure sheared the rivets), shore in archaic & poetical use (shore through the cuirass, his plume away, &c.). Forthe p.p.,shorn remains commoner in most senses than sheared, but is not used in the technical sense of distorted by mechanical shear, nor usually in that of divided with metalcutting shears.

shear-hulk, shearlegs, sheer-. The spelling sheer is due to & perpetuates a mistake. Shears or shearlegs are two (or more) poles with tops joined & fect straddled (& so resembling shear-blades), used in hoisting great weights. A shear-hulk is an old ship utilized for hoisting & provided with shearlegs. The spelling sheer hulk results from confusion with the adjective sheer (i.e. mere), & the omission of the hyphen & shifting of the accent from shear to hulk naturally follows, assisted by the rhythm of the line in Tom Bowling. It would be well to restore shear-hulk & make shearlegs (already often so spelt) invariable.

sheath(e). The noun (-ih) is pronounced in sing. -th, but in pl. -dhz; see -TH & -pH. For noun (-th, so pronounced) & verb (-the, pron. -dh) see Noun & VERB 2 È.

sheave, vb. See SHEAF. Sheep. Pl.same; see COLLECTIVES.

sheer hulk. See sHEAR-HULK.

sheer(ly). They would say the money has, to the present, been sheerly wasted./A collection of brief pieces in which the sheerly poetical quality is seldom looked for & seldom occurs. / Lhe economic condition of the people in Germany is sheerly desperate. Perhaps owing to the adverbial use of sheer (fell sheer down &c.), the adverb sheerly is usually avoided, & always gives the reader a shock; though the OED quotes it from Burns, Scott, & Stevenson, it may fairly be called unidiomatic; possibly it is current in Scotland; at any
