page: 531

+ rate the OED quotations include no well-known English writer. ' sheet lightning. No hyphen; see HAyrxens 3 B. sheikh is the OED’s spelling, & its preferred pronunciation shak. shekarry. See SHIKAREE. shekinah, -chi-. Yna. The OED’s preferred spelling is the first.

shelf. There are two separate nouns, one meaning ledge, board, &ec., & the other sand-bank &c. Each has pl. -ves, verb -ve, adjectives -ved, -fy, & -vy; see -VE(D). Shelf-ful (of books &c.), n., is best written with hyphen; pl. -ls (unless the two words shelves full are suitable & preferred).

shell-less. So written.

shellac, vb, makes -cked, -cking.

shelty, -ie. The word meaning Shetland pony is usually -ie; see -EY, -IE, -y. That meaning a hut (which the OED perhaps makes out to be rarer than it is, & condemns as ‘ prob. some error ’) is usually -y.

shereef, sherif, sheriff. The Mohammedan & the English titles are not etymologically connected. For the former the spelling -eef is preferable to -if both as indicating the accent (sheré’f) of an unfamiliar word, & as avoiding assimilation to the English -2ff.

sheriffalty, sheriffdom, shrievalty. All three are four or more centuries old, & all are still current. The -dom termination is declining into one of contempt as in bumbledom, flunkeydom; shrievalty has the disadvantage of not instantly announcing its connexion with sheriff; & it is therefore likely that sheriffalty will prevail.

shew, show. ‘The spelling shew, prevalent in the 18th c. & not uncommon in the first half of the 19th c., is now obs. exc. in legal documents ’—OED. In shewbread the old spelling naturally persists.

shibboleth. For synonyms, see SIGN. 531 Pronounce shik-

+ shikaree, -i, shekarry. The first is the OED’s preferred form. Pronounce shikah‘ri. shillelagh. So spelt. Pron. -a’la. shilly-shally, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6. shingly, shiny. Not -ey; -EY & -y. shire. T'he S's. as the name of a hunting country means Leics., Northants., & Rutland; it is also ‘ applied to other parts of England by the inhabitants of East Anglia, Kent, Sussex, Essex, & Surrey ’—OED. shockedly. A bad form; see -EDLY. shoe, vb, makes shoeing (exceptionally; see MUTE E). shogun. See Tycoon. Pr.sh6’goon. shoot, chute, shute. The last is ‘app. in part a dial. form of shoot sb. & partly a variant spelling of chute’—OED. Between the English shoot & the French chute (lit. fall) there has been much confusion, & there seems to be no good reason against making shoot the only spelling & allowing it to retain such senses as it has annexed from chute.

shop. For the talk called s., as compared with cant, slang, &c., see JARGON.

shore, vb, makes -rable; see MUTE E.

short circuit as a noun should not, & as a verb should, be hyphened; see HyPHENS 8 B, C.

shorthand. So written.

short leg (cricket). No hyphen; see HyPHENS 3 B.

shortlived. Pron. -ivd; see -LIVED.

short sight. No hyphen; but short-sighted; see HyPuENs 3 B, C.

short slip. No hyphen; see Hyruens 3 B.

shot, n. For pl. shot see COLLEC- TIVES, 2.

should. For s. & would, see SHALL. For s. in inverted conditionals (s. it happen for if it s. happen), see SUBJUNCTIVE.

shoulder. 1. The cold shoulder (no hyphen, see HypuENs 3 B), but to cold-shoulder. 2. S. arms. The military sense is not to put the rifle across the s.; that is to slope arms.
