page: 532

shove makes -vable; see MUTE E.

shovel. 1. The verb makes -lled,

-lling; see -LL-, -L-. 2. Shovel hat,

not shovel-hat; see HyPHENs 8 B.

show. For spelling see sHzew. The p-p. is usu. shown, rarely showed.

shred, vb. In the p.p. shredded & shred are both old & both extant; the longer is recommended.

shriek. See SCREAM.

shrievalty. See SHERIFFALTY.

Shrilly. Pronounce the adjective (poetic by-form of shrill) shri’li, the adverb shri’‘1-li.

shrink has past shrank (arch. shrunk), p.p. usu. shrunk as verb or pred. adj., & shrunken as attrib. adj.: has shrunk, is shrunk or shrunken, her shrunken or shrunk cheeks.

shrivel makes -lled &c.; -LL-, -L-.

shy. The adj. makes shyer, shyest, shyly, shyness, shyish. The vb makes shier (shying horse). See pry, & VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

sibilant. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

Sibyl(line). The spelling (not sybi-) should be noted; see y & 1.

(sic), Latin for so, is inserted after a quoted word or phrase to confirm its accuracy as a quotation, or occasionally after the writer’s own word to emphasize it as giving his deliberate meaning; it amounts to Yes, he did say that, or Yes, I do mean that, in spite of your natural doubts. It should be used only when doubt és natural; but reviewers & controversialists are tempted to pretend that it is, because (sic) provides them with a neat & compendious form of sneer. The industrialist organ is inclined to regret that the league did not fix some definite date such as the year 1910 (sic) or the year 1912. (sic), because the reader might naturally wonder whether 1910 was meant & not rather 1911 ; a right use./The Boersen Courier maintains that ‘ nothing remains for M. Delcassé but to cry Pater peccavi to Germany & to retrieve as quickly as possible his diplomatic mistake (sic)’. Mistake is the natural term

532

+ for the quoted newspaper to have used; the quoting one very superfluously repudiates it with (sic)./ An Irish peer has issued a circular to members in the House, with an appeal for funds to carry on the work of enlightening (sic) the people of this country as to the condition of Ireland. What impudence! says (sic); but, as no-one would doubt the authenticity of enlightening, the proper appeal to attention was not (sic), but inverted commas./‘ A junior subaltern, with pronounced military & political views, with no false modesty in expressing them, & who (sic) possesses the ear of the public ... The quoter means ‘ Observe by the way this fellow’s ignorance of grammar; c& who without a preceding who!’; as the sentence is one of those in which the &-who rule of thumb is a blind guide (see WHICH), & is in fact blameless, the (sic) recoils, as often, & convicts its user of error.

sice, size, syce. For the six at dice &c., sice is better than size; for the Indian groom, syce is better than sice.

sick. The S. Man; see SOBRIQUETS.

sick, ill. The original & more general sense of sick, which has now been transferred for the most part to il, was suffering from any bodily disorder. That sense remains to it in attributive use (s. people, a s. child, &c.), but is now uncommon in predicative use (be, feel, s.), in which it means vomiting or ready to vomit. In U.S. & Scotch use the wider sense is still common, & cf. go sick as the army phrase for declaring oneself ill. Instead of either iller or sicker, more ill or more s., worse is the comparative wherever it would not be ambiguous. sick headache.

No hyphen; see HYPHeEns 3 B. sickly. For adverb see -LILY. SIDE-SLIP. The grammatical accident to which a name is here given is most often brought about by the
