page: 533

+ word of, & in the article or its nature has been so fully explained that nothing more is now required than some examples of the same accident not caused by of. In the first half-dozen quotations, other prepositions play the part of of; in the later ones the mistakes, though due also to the disturbing influence of what has been said on what is to be said, are not of quite the same pattern, & will need slightly more comment:— . . . possessing full initiative after its success, & able at will to expend a minimum force in defending itself against one half of the defeated body, & a maximum effort against destroying the other half (in, for the second against)./But there is one that deserves special mention because it lies at the root of the nation’s confidence in the Navy & in the Navy’s own cohesion as a loyal & united service (read of for the second in)./Thetr interest lies in getting through as quickly as possible in order to put in an extra journey, & consequently to avoid waiting for passengers (read in avoiding for to avotd)./In a plea for the setting aside of this accord, or at least for certain parts of the accord, by the Conference, the ‘Temps’ intimates that . . . (read of for the second for)./The Independents would then be in the position in which the pledged Liberals now are of being unable to appear on a platform or helping any Liberal movements in any of the 330 Tory constituencies (read to help for helping)./When will Englishmen allow Ireland to govern herself, rather than to persist in the hopeless task of perpetually conquering or trying to conquer her? (omit to before persist).

Miscellaneous

Today we can but be thankful that the nerve of Fisher proved cool at the crisis, & that to him we mainly owe it that we have not to record a disaster of almost historical importance in the history of the railway. Who is Fisher, that we should prefer him as saviour to other signalmen? The

+ second that is there only because the first has sent the writer off at a tangent. To mend, a, omit the second that; or, b, insert feel before it; or, c, omit ‘to him we mainly owe it that ’./It would not be surprising if this limit were reduced to £125, the German limit, while voluntary insurance were still allowed for persons with incomes up to {£160 a year. The legitimate & normal (but not necessary) subjunctive were reduced draws the writer into the abnormal & almost illegitimate were (instead of was) allowed; for the perils of subjunctive-using, see SUB- JUNCTIVE./If it can be done, & only if it can be done, shall we be in the position to re-establish civilization. The intervention of the parenthesis with its only is allowed to upset the order of words, viz we shall be, required by the start of the sentence; this variety of side-slip is further illustrated in INVERSION in parallel clauses./Whether the cessation of rioting, looting, & burning which has been secured largely by the declaration of martial law & rigorous shooting of leaders of the rabble is merely temporary or has been put an end to for good remains to be seen. If the cessation of rioting has been put an end to for good, a lively time is coming. To mend, read permanent instead of the words just italicized; & for this variety see Haziness./ He therefore came round to the view that simple Bible-teaching were better abolished altogether & that the open door for all religions were established in its place. The deadly subjunctive again; if the writer had been content with would be in place of the first were, he would certainly not have been trapped into thinking that would be gave the right sense where the second were stands; but venturing on dangerous ground, which the subjunctive always is except to skilled performers, he sideslips. See SUBJUNCTIVE.

sidle makes -dling; see MUTE E.

sidy (swaggering), not -dey; -EY &-Y.
