page: 534

Sien(n)a, Sien(n)a, Sien(n)ese. The old-established -nn -is recommended; see MAHOMET.

sieve. Pronounce siv.

sign (indication) & some synonyms. The synonyms are so many that it seems worth while to collect some of them & add sentences showing each of them in a context to which it is better suited than any, or than most, of the others. The selected words are: badge, cachet, character, characteristic, cognizance, criterion, device, differentia, emblem, hallmark, impress, index, indication, mark, motto, note, omen, prognostic, seal, shibboleth, sign, slogan, stamp, symbol, symptom, test, token, touch, trace, trait, type, watchword.

Sufferance is the badge of all our tribe. All his works have a grand cachet. These attributes of structure, size, shape, & colour, are what are called tts * specific characters’. Superstition is not the characteristic of this age. Geoffrey assumed as his cognizance the Sprig of Broom. Success is no criterion of ability. Shields painted with such devices as they pleased. To arrive at the true differentiae of Christian morals. The spindle was the emblem of woman. Lacking the hall-mark of a university degree. Lucerne bears most strongly the impress of the Middle Ages. The proverbs of a nation furnish the best index to its spirit. There is no indication that they had any knowledge of agriculture. Suspiciousness is a mark of ignorance. * Strike while the iron’s hot’ was his motto. Catholicity is a note of the true Church. Birds of evil omen fly to & fro. From sure prognostics learn to know the skies. Has the seal of death in his face. Emancipation from the fetters of party shibboleths. An outward & visible sign of an inward & spiritual grace. Our slogan is Small Profits & Quick Returns. Bears the stamp of genius. The Cross is the symbol of Christianity. Is already showing symptoms of decay. Calamity is the true test of friendship. By what token could it manifest its presence?

+ One touch of nature makes the whole world kin. Traces of Italian influence may be detected. They have no national trait about them but their language. The paschal lamb is a type of Christ. The old Liberal watchword of Peace, Retrenchment, & Reform.

signal, vb, makes -lled &c.; -LL-, -L-.

signal, single, vv. But there is intense resentment that Japan should be signalled out for special legislation./There was one figure more sinister than the rest, whom Mr Lloyd George signalled out for his | wrath in true revivalist style./The German Emperor has been spared an inglorious end in obscurity; but why has he been signalled out for the | dignity of a special trial? Three specimens of a very common Mis- PRINT or blunder; singled should be the word. Unfortunately, there is just nearness enough in meaning between the verb single on the one hand &, on the other, the adjective signal & the verb signalize to make it easy for the uncharitable to suspect writer rather than printer; & therefore especial care is called for, as with deprecate & depreciate.

signatary, -ory. The established adjective is -ory (the signatory Powers); the OED quotations for the noun are evenly balanced between -ary & -ory; & it therefore seems wise to distinguish between noun & adjective by adopting -ary for the former (the signataries); see further on MANDATARY.

signify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

Signor(a), -rina, Italian titles. Pronounce sényor’(a@), sényoré’na.

Sikh. Usu. pronounced sék; sik, however, is more, not less, correct. Silex. For pl., see -EX, -1x. silhouette. Pronounce silo0é’t. Siliceous, -cious. The first is better. silk(en). See -EN ADJECTIVES. sillabub, syl-. The OED attributes the -y- to ‘ the influence of syllable’. See y & 1 for the intrusions of y.
