page: 535

+ sillily. One of the few current -lily adverbs; see -LILY s.f.

silo. The noun has pl. -os; see -Q(E)S 6. The verb makes -o’d or -oed; see -ED & ’D.

Silvan, sylvan. There is no doubt that si- is the true spelling etymologically (Latin silva or silua a wood, changed in MSS. to syl- under the influence of Greek hulé); there is as little doubt that sy- now preponderates, & the OED does the word under that spelling, giving silvan as a variant. Silvan is here recommended, just as in y & 1 restoration of the right letter is recommended in other words. Though the false form does prevail nowadays, it is by no means universal; & it is worth notice that, out of seven Scott quotations in the OED, four show sy- & three si-. It is often too late to mend mis-spellings, but hardly so in this case.

Silvern. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

silver paper. No hyphen; see HYPuENs 3 B.

silver streak. See SOBRIQUETS.

simian. Pronounce si- ; the Latin noun is si-, but see FALSE QUANTITY.

similar is apt to bring disaster to certain writers, those namely to whom it is a FORMAL WORD to be substituted in writing for the like or the same with which they have conee ee Ő structed a sentence in thought. In the first quotation, like would stand, being both adjective & adverb, but similar, being adjective only, must be changed to similarly. In the second, the same considerations that would have been English, but similar considerations that must be corrected to s.c. to those that. It is claimed that the machine can be made to turn on its own centres, similar to the motor-boats which the inventor demonstrated at Richmond in 1912./ Nevertheless, although adjoining New York all along its northern border & in its farming, manufacturing, & general industrial development swayed by similar business considerations that govern the Empire State, its peoplewent 535 SS

+ as strongly for Roosevelt as their neighbours in New York went against him. simile. To let this specialized & literary word thrust itself, as in the following quotation, into the place of the comparison or parallel that we all expect & understand is to betray that one has & uses a synonym dictionary, which is to some journalists what the rhyming dictionary is to some poets:—The advent of Kossovo Day cannot but suggest a simile between the conflict then raging £ that in which we are engaged today. A simile is always a comparison; but a comparison is by no means always, & still less often deserves to be called, a simile.

SIMILE & METAPHOR, allegory & parable. Allegory (uttering things otherwise) & parable (putting side by side) are almost exchangeable terms. The object of each is, at least ostensibly, to enlighten the hearer by submitting to him a case in which he has apparently no direct concern, & upon which therefore a disinterested judgement may be elicited from him. Such judgement given, it is to be borne in upon him, whether or not a Thou art the man is needed, that the conclusion to which the dry light of disinterestedness has helped him holds also for his own concerns. Every parable is an allegory, & every allegory a parable. Usage, however, has decided that parable is the fitter name for the illustrative story designed to answer a single question or suggest a single principle, & offering a definite moral, while allegory is to be preferred when the application is less restricted, the purpose less exclusively didactic, & the story of greater length. The object of a parable is to persuade or convince; that of an allegory is often rather to please. But the difference is not inherent in the words themselves; it is a result of their history, the most important factor being the use of parable to denote the allegorical stories told by Christ.
