page: 536

It is of allegory that the OED gives as one of the definitions ‘an extended or continued metaphor’. But the comment may be hazarded that there is some analogy bétween the relation of allegory to parable & that of simile to metaphor, & that the OED definition would, if that is true, have been still better suited to parable than to allegory. For between simile & metaphor the differences are (1) that a simile is a comparison proclaimed as such, whereas a metaphor is a tacit com- ` parison made by the substitution of the compared notion for the one to be illustrated (the ungodly flourishing t like’ a green bay-tree is a confessed comparison or simile; if ye had not plowed with my heifer, meaning dealt with my wife, is a tacit comparison or metaphor); (2) that the simile is usually worked out at some length & often includes many points of ‘resemblance, whereas a metaphor is as often as not expressed in a single word; & (3) that in nine out of ten metaphors the purpose is. the practical one of presenting the notion in the most intelligible or convincing or arresting way, but nine out of ten similes are to be classed not as means of explanation or persuasion, but as ends in themselves, things of real or supposed beauty for which a suitable place is to be found.

It cannot be said (as it was of allegory & parable) that every simile is a metaphor, & vice versa; it is rather that every metaphor presupposes a simile, & every simile is compressible or convertible into a metaphor; there is a formal line of demarcation, implied in 1 above; the simile is known by its as or like or other announcement of conscious comparison. There is no such line between allegory & parable, but in view of distinctions 2 & 3 it may fairly be said that parable is extended metaphor & allegory extended simile. To which may be added this contrast: having read a tale, & concluded that under its surface

536

+ meaning another is discernible as the true intent, we say This is an allegory; having a lesson to teach, & finding direct exposition ineffective, we say Let us try a parable; to reverse the terms is possible, but not idiomatic.

simony. Pronounce si’moni.

simoom. See WIND, n.

simple. Adv. simply. Fee simple (not hyphened; see HypHENs, *Court Martial).

simpleness)(simplicity. -TY & -NESs.

simpliciter)(secundum quid. These convey, the first that the statement &c. referred to need not, the second that it must, be restricted to certain cases or conditions.

simplify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c¢., 6.

simulacrum. PI. -cra.

simulate makes -lable, -tor; see -ABLE Il, -OR.

sin. ‘ To sin one’s mercies °, which puzzles everyone to whom it has not been familiar from childhood, is paraphrased by the OED, but without explanation, as ‘to be ungrateful for one’s blessings or good fortune’. ‘ More sinned against than sinning ° (King Lear 111. ii. 60) has become a HACKNEYED PHRASE; descent from the height of Lear to the latest triviality of ‘tempted & fell’ lands us, naturally,in bathos, & Srock PATHOS.

sinapism. So pronounced.

since. For the very common mistake of using s. after ago, see aco. For ‘ P.S. Since writing this your issue of today has come to hand’, see UNATTACHED. The following example of a mistake as uncommon as the others are common is offered merely as a curiosity to anyone who may wish to show cause why s. should be after:—A litile more than a century since the death of William Windham the suggestion made by a reviewer in 1831 that his Life might be ‘ written by his Letters’ is made good.

sincerely. For ‘ yours s.’ &c. see LETTER FORMS.
