page: 537

+ ’S INCONGRUOUS (drink’s victims &c.). It will be a surprise, & to some an agreeable one, if at this late stage in our change from an inflexional to an analytic language we revert to a free use of the case that we formerly tended more & more to restrict. It begins to seem likely that drink’s victims will before long be the natural & no longer the affected or rhetorical version of the victims of drink. The devotees of inflexion may do well to rejoice; the change may improve rather than injure the language; & if that is so let due praise be bestowed on the newspaper press, which is bringing it about; but to the present (or perhaps already past) generation, which has been instinctively aware of differences between drink’s victims & the victims of drink, & now finds them scornfully disregarded, there will be an unhappy interim.

It is the headline that is doing it. The fewer words to the headline, the larger can the type be, & CHINA’S INTEGRITY is two words less than THE INTEGRITY OF CHINA; BEATTY & HAIG’S REPLY (i.e. that of Beatty & Haig), UGAN- DA’S POSSIBILITIES, NAVY & ARMY’S THANKS, are others; but illustration is superfluous.

We who are old saw no such possessives when we were young; but we could be content, if only the modern possessive kept to its own territory, the modern headline; even ONTARIO’S PRIME MINISTER (so are we chastened!) we can bow down before while he is in capitals; but when he comes amongst us in the ordinary garb of lower-case text, we pluck up heart again & want to kick him:— In no part of the world’ says Ontario’s Prime Minister ‘will

...’./It is barely four years since

Bulgaria’s ruler assumed the title of

Czar./ The object is to bring before

the public many ancient & modern

aspects of the Theatre’s Art which

have .../And the narrative’s charm,

which is that of ... is due to.. ./

Although not returned to Westminster

+ as Hanley’s representative till .. ./ M. de Bille has spent eighteen years in London as Denmark’s Minister. The time has perhaps not yet come when it is necessary to explain the old-fashioned restrictions on the use of possessives that are here defied; those who allow the headline style to overflow into the text are doubtless aware of what they are doing & pleased with its effect as a novelty. sinecure. The OED pronounces s/nikir, adding that ‘in Scotland & America the first vowel is freq. pronounced short ’.

sing. For the past tense ‘ recent usage has mainly been in favour of sang’—OED. Sung was formerly usual, & still lingers.

Singalese. See SINHALESE.

sing(e)ing. See MUTE £, & use the -e- in the part. of singe.

singeress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

Singhalese. See SINHALESE.

SINGULAR -S (or sibilant ending). The feeling that the z sound at the end of a noun proves it plural has played many tricks in the past; pea, caper (the herb), & Chinee, have been docked under its influence of their endings, riches is usually treated as a plural, & many other examples might be collected, philologically interesting rather than of practical importance. On the other hand it may be worth while to notice that the glasses of spectacles are lenses & not lens, that His pulse are good is a by no means extinct blunder, & that the plural of a forceps should certainly be, & probably will be again, what it unfortunately is not at’ present, forcepses. Cf. GALLOWS.

Sinhalese, Sing(h)alese, Cingalese. The first, & the last, are recognized as the standard forms in the OED.

sinister in heraldry means left (&

dexter right), but with the contrary

sense to what would naturally sug-

gest itself, the left (& right) being

that of the person bearing, not of an
