page: 539

+ engineering, & carpentry, has so far gone out of general use as to seem, in other applications, either archaic or provincial. skewbald. See PIEBALD. ski, n. Pron. shé; pl. ski, or skis. ski, vb. Skid (shéd) is preferable to skied; see -ED & °D. Agent n., skier (shé’er). skiagraphy &c. See SCIAGRAPHY. skier, skyer. The user of ski is a skier (shé’er), obviously. The skied cricket-ball is spelt sometimes with y & sometimes with i; the OED prefers skyer, which has also the advantage of saving confusion; &, as it is more reasonable to derive it from sky n. (cf. sizer &c.) than from sky vb, there is no need to make it conform to crier & flier & pliers, for which see pry &c.

skilful. So spelt; see -LL-, -L-, 4. For skilfullest, -LL-, -L-, 2.

skilled. The skilled & the unskilled are sheep & goats, distinguished by having or not having had the requisite training or practice; the two words exist chiefly as each other’s opposites, or terms of a dichotomy. The point of the limitation is best seen by comparison with skilful: skilled classifies, whereas skilful describes; you are skilled or not in virtue of your past history, but not very or most or fairly skilled (in idiomatic speech, at least); you are skilful according to your present capacity, & in various degrees.

skill-less is better than skilless. Among the OED 19th-c. quotations are skilless (6), skillless (1), & skill-less (2); but that the help to pronunciation given by the hyphen is desirable is plain enough if a few other words with short vowel to which -less may naturally be appended are thought of:—belless or bell-less, shelless or shell-less, willess or will-less, hilless or hill-less, dolless or doll-less, canalless or canal-less? The first two of these, the only ones given in the OED (1922, with willless not reached), are allowed the

+ hyphen. The reason for excluding from consideration words with long vowel, which yield keelless, soulless, &c., is that it is only after short vowels that -ll- is normally equivalent in sound to -l- & therefore deceptive. i skin. With the s. of my teeth; see MISQUOTATION. skip (servant). See SCOUT. skull. See SCULL.

Skupshtina. So spelt; pronounce sk0oo’pshtina.

sky blue. The name of the colour is sky blue; the adjective blue qualified by sky becomes sky-blue: sky blue will be best; a sky-blue tie; her eyes are sky-blue. See HYPHENS.

skyer. For spelling see SKIER.

skyey. For spelling see -EY & -y.

slack(en), vv. In the article -EN VERBS it is implied that the relation between the adjective & verb slack & the verb slacken is not simple enough to be there treated with the rest. One’s first impression after a hasty look through the OED articles on the two verbs is that whatever either means the other can mean too—an experience familiar to the synonym-fancier. The following distinctions are therefore offered with the caution that they represent idiomatic usage only, & that quotations contravening them may be found in the OED & elsewhere. 1. Slacken is the ordinary word for to become slack, & for to make (or let become) slacker: the tide, breeze, pace, demand, rope, one’s energy, slackens; we slacken our efforts, grip, speed, opposition, the girth, the regulations. 2. To slack, if it is to have such senses, is reinforced by off, out, up, &c.: the train slacked up; had better slack off; slack out the rope. 8. Slack, not slacken, trespasses on the territory of slake: slack one’s thirst, lime, the fire. 4. Slack, not slacken, means to be slack or idle: accused me of slacking. 5. Slack, not slacken, means to come short of or neglect (one’s duty &c.).

slake, slack, vv. Both are derived
