page: 540

+ from the adjective slack, & slake had formerly such senses as loosen & lessen, which have now passed to the newer verb slack owing to their more obvious sense-connexion with it; slake tends more & more to be restricted to the senses assuage, satisfy, moisten, (thirst, desire, vengeance, lips, lime).

Slakeless. See -LESS.

Slander. For synonymy, see LIBEL.

slang. For comparison with the many synonyms, see JARGON.

Slantendicular, -ingdicular.

See FACETIOUS FORMATIONS.

slate, n., makes slaty; see MUTE E.

slate, vb, makes -table; see MuTEE.

Slatternly. For adv. see -LILY.

Slave makes slavish; see MUTE E; but slavey, see -EY, -IE, -y.

slaver, slobber, slubber, vv. The three words, as well as slabber, which is perhaps obsolete, may be assumed to be of the same ultimate origin, &, though they may have reached us by different routes & had more or less separate histories, they have so far acted & reacted upon one another that for people not deep in historical philology they are now variants of one word, partly but not completely differentiated. The base meaning is to run at the mouth (1), with kissing (2), licking (3), fulsome flattery (4), emotional gush (5), & superficial smoothing over or mere tinkerin (6), as developments. All three have sometimes any of the first four senses, though slubber, which is now chiefly in archaic literary use, tends to be confined to sense 6; & in that sense slobber is exceptional & slaver not used. The difference between slaver & slobber is partly of status, the former being the more literary & dignified & the latter colloquial & vivid, & partly of extent, slaver not going beyond sense 4, while slobber covers sense 5 & even 6. Sled(ge), sleigh. Though all three are interchangeable, they tend to be distinguished in use as follows: sled, drag for transporting loads; sledge English, sleigh U.S. & Cana-

+ dian, for carriage on runners. ‘ Chiefly U.S. & Canada’ is the OED label on sleigh; but the use of sledges in Great Britain is comparatively so rare that the Canadian idiom may be expected to prevail, if it has not already done so.

sleep. For the s. of the just see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

sleigh. See SLEDGE.

sleight. Pronounce slit; it is related to sly as height to high. S. of hand; no hyphens, see HYPHENS (group *rule of thumb).

slew, slue. The first is the now accepted spelling, though the earlier examples show slue.

slice, vb, makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1.

slide, vb, makes -dable; see MUTE E. sliding door, two words without hyphen, see Hypuens 8B; similarly sliding keel, sliding rule, sliding scale, sliding seat.

slime makes slimy; see MUTE E.

sling, slink. Past tenses & p.p. slung, slunk; the OED records but does not countenance the pasts slang, slank.

Slip. Short s., long s., (cricket); no hyphen; see HyreHens 3 B.

SLIPSHOD EXTENSION. To this heading, which hardly requires explanation, reference has been made in the articles on many individual words. Slipshod extension is especially likely to occur when some accident gives currency among the uneducated to words of learned origin, & the more if they are isolated or have few relatives in the vernacular; examples are protagonist, recrudescence, optimism, meticulous, feasible, dilemma; the last two of these offer good typical illustrations. The original meaning of feasible is simply doable (L facere do); but to the unlearned it is a mere token, of which he has to infer the value from the contexts in which he hears it used, because such relatives as it has in English—feat, feature, faction, fashion, malfeasance, beneficence, &c.—either fail to show the obvious
