page: 541

+ family likeness to which he is accustomed among families of indigenous words, or are (like malfeasance) outside his range. He arrives at its meaning by observing what is the word known to him with which it seems to be exchangeable; that is possible; & his next step is to show off his new acquisition by using it instead of possible as often as he can, without at all suspecting that the two are very imperfect synonyms; for examples see FEASIBLE. He perhaps notices now & then that people look at him quizzically as if he were not quite intelligible, but this happens seldom enough to let him put it comfortably down to their ignorance of the best modern idiom.

The case of dilemma as a word liable to slipshod extension differs in some points from that of feasible, though a dilemma is confused with a difficulty just as feasible with possible. A person who has taken a taxi & finds on alighting that he has left his money at home is in a difficulty; he is not in a dilemma, but he will very likely say afterwards that he found himself in one. The differences are (1) that the mere Englishman has still less chance than with feasible of inferring the true meaning from related words, it being an almost isolated importation from Greek; (2) that the user need hardly be suspected of pretension, since dilemma is in too familiar use for him to doubt that he knows what it means. Nevertheless, he is injuring the language, however unconsciously, both by helping to break down a serviceable distinction, & by giving currency to a mere token word in the place of one that is alive.

Slipshodextension, however, though naturally more common with words of learned antecedents, is not confined to them, & in the following list will be found several that would seem too thoroughly part of the vernacular to be in danger of misuse. In many of the articles referred to, further illustration of slipshod ex-

+ tension is given:—asset; balance; calculate; chronic; commonplace (on truism); conservative; dead letter; decimate; dilemma; eke out; evidence; feasible; forgather; idola; liable; meticulous; mutual; optimism; possible (3); probable; precedent; protagonist; recrudescence; reference; relegate; tribute; verbal.

Of the above words, all or most are habitually ill treated, & should be noted as needing care. A stray example may be added of a word with which such abuse is exceptional & apparently unaccountable, that slipshod extension may not be taken for the sort of blunder against which one is safe if one attends to a limited list of dangerous words; what is required is the habit of paying all words the compliment of respecting their peculiarities. An excellent arrangement, for there are thus none of those smells which so often disfigure the otherwise sweet atmosphere of an English home. What has no figure or shape cannot be disfigured; not that the limitation need be closely pressed; not only a face or a landscape can be disfigured; so also can an action, a person’s diction, or a man’s career, (to take things of which the OED quotes instances) be disfigured, because each of them can be conceived, with the aid of metaphor, as a shapely whole; but a shapely atmosphere?

slobber. See SLAVER.

sloe-worm. See SLOW-WORM.

slogan. Though the great vogue of the word as a substitute for the older motto, watchword, rule, &ce., is of the 20th c. only, & we old fogies regard it with patriotic dislike as a Scotch interloper, it was occasionally so used earlier; the OED has a quotation from Macaulay. For some synonyms, see SIGN,

See sLoyp.

sloid.

slosh. See SLUSH.

slouch hat. Two separate words; see HyPHENS 3 B.

slough. The n. & vb meaning bog
