page: 542

+ are pronounced -ow; then. meaning cast skin &c. & the vb meaning cast or drop off are pronounced -if.

slovenly. For the adv., see -Liny.

slow(ly), advv. In spite of the encroachments of -ly (see Unrpio- MATIC -LY), slow maintains itself as at least an idiomatic possibility under some conditions even in the positive (how slow he climbs!, please read very slow, my watch goes slow), while in the comparative & superlative slower & slowest are usually preferable to more & most slowly; see -ER & -EST 3. Of the ‘ conditions’, the chief is that the adverb, & not the verb &c., should contain the real point; compare ‘ We forged slowly ahead °, where the slowness is an unessential item, with ‘ Sing as slow as you can’, where the slowness is all that matters.

slow-worm, sloe-, is not connected with either the noun sloe or the adj. slow; slow- is now the established form, & the OED calls sloe- obsolete.

sloyd, sloid. The OED prefers -yd.

Slubber. See SLAVER.

sludge. See sLUSH.

Slue. See SLEW.

sluice, vb, makes -ceable; -ABLE 1.

Slumber. Apart from mere substitutions of s. for sleep dictated by desire for poetic diction or dislike of the words that common mortals use, slumber is equivalent to the noun sleep with some adjective or the verb sleep with some adverb. Slumber is easy or light or half or broken or daylight sleep, or again mental or stolen or virtual or lazy sleep. The implied epithet or adverb, that is, may be almost anything; but the choice of slumber instead of sleep, if not due to mere stylishness (see WORKING & STYLISH WORDS), is meant to prevent the reader from passing lightly by without remembering that there is sleep & sleep. slumb(e)rous. The shorter form is recommended; cf. DEXT(E)ROUS. But analogies for either are plentiful: cumbrous, wondrous, monstrous,

+ leprous, idolatrous; but thunderous, slanderous, murderous.

slur. See PRONUNCIATION, s.f., for slurring.

slush, sludge, slosh. The differences are not very clear. There is the natural one, resulting from the stickier sound, that sludge is usually applied to something less liquid than slush or slosh, e.g. to slimy deposits or clinging mud, whereas thawing snow is typical slush; & of slush & slosh the latter is perhaps more often used to describe what is metaphorically watery stuff—twaddle or sentimentality.

sly makes slyer, slyest, slyly, slyness, slyish; for comparison with other such words, see pry.

small. Relations with little are complicated, & the task of disentangling them might excusably be shirked, if not as difficult, then as unprofitable; but examination of the differences between seeming equivalents does give an insight into the nature of idiom. Under nie some attempt has been made at delimiting the territories of great, large, & big; small & little have to divide between them the opposition to those three as well as much, & the distribution is by no means so simple & definite as the pedantic analyst might desire.

Of the possible pairs of opposites let some be called patent pairs, as being openly & comfortably used with both members expressed; & the rest latent pairs. The patent pairs start with three that are pretty clearly distinguishable in meaning. Contrasts of size or extent are given by large & small, those of quantity or amount by much & little, & those of importance or quality by great & small: ‘large & small rooms’, ‘of large or small size’, ‘large or small writing’, ‘large & small appetites ’, ‘large & small dealings, dealers’; * much or little butter, faith, exercise, damage, hesitation, study’; ‘the Great & the Small Powers’, ‘ great & small occa-
