page: 545

+ a study of an elderly widower who, on approaching sixty, finds that he knows hardly anything of his three daughiers, & sets out to do so. For similar absurdities, which are too common, see DO 3b, c. 3. The appealing so. The type is Cricket is so uncertain. The speaker has a conviction borne in upon him, & in stating it appeals, with his so, to general experience to confirm him; it means as you, or as we all, know. A natural use, but more suitable for conversation, where the responsive nod of confirmation can be awaited, than for most kinds of writing. In print, outside dialogue, it has a certain air of silliness, even when the context is favourable, i.e. when the sentence is of the shortest & simplest kind, & the experience appealed to is really general. Readers will probably agree that in all the following extracts the context is not favourable; & the only object of exhibiting so many of them is to give proof that the danger of yielding to this weakness (* feminine ° it would have been called before the ladies had learnt to write) is a real one. The principle underlying the restriction to short simple sentences is perhaps that this use of so is exclamatory. The examples are ranged from bad to worse:—JIn the case of Ophthalmology in the tropics a work of authority is so sadly overdue./Mr Stephen Walsh is, like so many of the miners’ leaders, a man who started life in the pit./ Along with so many other well-wishers for the prosperity & independence of the Ottoman Empire, I have been deeply grieved by . . ./But he does combine them ingeniously, though in instancing this very real power we feel that it might have been so much more satisfactorily expended./May I venture to ‘point out that it would be so much

better to make them freely & willingly

than to have them wrung from her?/

Beyond what so many people regard

as the consoling fact that it was not

destined for the cabinets or shelves of

an American millionaire, it was not

1351

+ known until now who was the happy purchaser./The book is written in a simple style which is foreign to so many lawyers./He was always kind, considerate, & courteous to his witnesses, this being so contrary to what we are led to expect from his successors. / Constant betel-chewing, he thinks, may be ‘the predisposing factor producing a condition of nervous irritability that so easily might degenerate into lâtah ’./The periodical discussions incidentally serve to show how in Scotland as in England so many of those interested in matters of this kind are town-dzwellers.

4. The Paterine so. This is a special form of the appealing so: In the midst of that aesthetically so brilliant world of Greater Greece is an example. The so is deliberately inserted before a descriptive adjective, & is a way of saying, at once urbanely & concisely, Has it ever occurred to you how brilliant &c. it was? ; it differs from the sos in 3, that is, in being not careless & natural, but didactic & highly artificial. Effective enough on occasion, it is among the idioms that should never be allowed to remind the reader, by being repeated, that he has already met them in the last hundred pages or so. See MANNERisms for more examples from Pater himself; & here, from imitators, are others:—Here an Englishman has set himself to follow in outline the very distinctive genius of Russia through the centuries of its difficult but always so attractive development./And still no one came to open that huge, contemptuous door with its: so menacing, so hostile air.

5. So (& such) in repetition. From the artificial to the entirely artless. So is a much used word, but not indispensable enough to justify such repetitions of it as the following:—

The pity is that for so many men who can so hardly keep pace with rising prices it should become so difficult to follow the sport./It would do away

with any suggestion of State purchase

of which the country is at the present,
