page: 548

+ stone); Granite City (Aberdeen); Great Commoner (Pitt); great unwashed (populace); handy man (sailor); Hebe (waitress); Hermit Kingdom (Corea); honest broker (Bismarck); Indian weed (tobacco); Iron Chancellor (Bismarck); Iron Duke (Wellington); iron horse (railway engine); Jeames (footman); Jehu (cabman); jolly Roger (black flag); Kingmaker (Warwick); king of beasts (lion); King of Terrors (death); Knight of the Rueful Countenance (Don Quixote); Land of Cakes (Scotland); laughing philosopher (Democritus); leather (cricket-ball); Lion of the North (Gustavus); maestro di color che sanno (Aristotle); Man of Destiny (Napoleon); Merry Monarch (Charles II); modern Athens (Edinburgh); modern Babylon (London); Mother of Parliaments (British Parliament); nation of shopkeepers (the English); Neptune (sea); N° 1 (oneself); ocean greyhound (liner); Old Gentleman (devil); Old Lady of Threadneedle Street (Bank of England); Old Pretender (James, son of James II); olive branches (children); petit caporal (Napoleon 1); Philomel (nightingale); pill (ball); Pillars of Hercules (straits of Gibraltar); Queen of the Adriatic (Venice); ramshackle Empire (Austria-Hungary); redcoats (British soldiers); Reynard (fox); Rupert of debate (Lord Derby, P.M. 1851); Sage of Chelsea (Carlyle); Sailor King (William IV); St Stephen’s (House of Commons); seagreen incorruptible (Robespierre); senior service (navy); Seraphic Doctor (St Bonaventura); Sick Man (Turkey); silver streak (English Channel); Sol (sun); sport of kings (hunting); staff of life (bread); Stagirite (Aristotle); strawberry leaves (ducal rank); Tiger (Clemenceau); tommies (British soldiers); Uncle Sam (U.S.A.); Ville Lumière (Paris); Virgin Queen (Elizabeth); Warrior Queen (Boadicea); Water Poet (John Taylor); weaker sex (women); well of English undefiled

+ (Chaucer); weary Titan (British) Empire); Wen (London); Wizard | of the North (Scott); Young! Chevalier (Charles Edward Stuart).

soc(c)age. The OED spelling is} socage (pron. sok-).

soccer. See SOCKER.

sociable) (social. For confusion between pairs of adjectives in -able | & -al, see EXCEPTIONABLE, PRAC- TICABLE. No such patent misuses occur with the present pair as with those; there is merely a tendency to use social not where it is inde- f fensible, but where the other would f be more appropriate. Roughly, social means of or in or for or used to or shown in or affording society; f & sociable seeking, or loving, or} marked by the pleasures of, com- f pany. Social is rather a classifying, & sociable rather a descriptive } adjective: man is a social being, Jones is a sociable person; people are invited to a social evening, & say afterwards (or do not say) that they had a very sociable evening. Obviously, overlapping is likely. The OED, under a definition of social that includes ‘sociable’ as an equivalent, gives two quotations in which sociable should have been preferred (His own friendly & social disposition—Jane Austen / He was very happy & social—Miss Braddon), as well as one that is just on the right side of the border (Charles came forth from that school with social habits, with polite & engaging manners—Macaulay).

socialism, communism, anarchism. The things are not mutually exclusive; the words are not an exhaustive threefold division of anything; each stands for a state of things, or | a striving after it, that differs much | from that which we know; & for | many of us, especially those who are | comfortably at home in the world as it is, they have consequently | come to be the positive, comparative, & superlative, distinguished not in kind but in degree only, of the terms of abuse applicable to
