page: 549

+ those who would disturb our peace. Little can be done in the short space available in such a book as this to clear up vague notions; but it is something gained if we realize two facts, that we are dealing neither with three degrees of the same thing, nor with three independent parallel terms.

Whatever their relations to one another, all three have in common a dissatisfaction with society as it is, & the goal of equal opportunities for all. The socialist blames our organization into classes (especially those of capitalists & wage-earners), the communist blames private property, the anarchist blames government as such, for what they all alike find unsatisfactory. The anarchist remedy is to abolish the State & leave all relations between persons & groups to be established & maintained by free contract. The communist’s, on the contrary, is, by abolishing all private property, to make the State absolute master of the individual. The socialist’s is less simple; he may accept either of the apparently opposite methods of anarchist & communist as being the shortest way to his own end; that is, anarchism & communism are sometimes forms of socialism; or he may be content with something short of communism—not abolishing all property, but transferring the control of public services & the means of large industrial production to the State or the municipality. And further, it is not a case with him, as with the others, of all or nothing; abolition of the State or of private property is for them the condition precedent of improvement, & is not to be brought about except by revolution; but, for the socialist, every curtailment of privilege, every nationalization or municipalization of a particular service, is a step forward, worth taking for itself as well as for its contribution to the gradual progress; that is, the changes required by communism & anarchism are more abrupt & violent than

+ what socialism need, but not than what it may, be actually striving to effect. It should perhaps be added that not the comparative merit of three more or less different principles, but only the meaning of three often confused terms, is here in question. sock. For the s.,=the comic stage, see BATTERED ORNAMENTS.

socker, -ccer. The -k- is recommended; accept, success, eccentrictty, accident, flaccid, coccyx, show the almost invariable sound of -ccbefore e, i, y; perhaps the sole exception is baccy, which the -ccin tobacco makes more excusable than soccer.

socketed, not -tied; see -T-, -TT-.

socle. Pronounce so’kl.

Socrates. Pronounce s6k-, & see FALSE QUANTITY.

soddenness. So spelt.

Sofi(sm). See Suri(sM).

soft. 1. For ‘s. impeachment’ see IRRELEVANTILLUSION. 2. For play, sleep, fall, &c., s., see UNrDI0- MATIC -LY.

soften. Pronounce saw’fn; see PRONUNCIATION.

soi-disant. See FRENCH WORDS. English is well provided, with selfstyled, ostensible, would-be, professed, professing, supposed, & other words, for all needs.

soilless. Hyphen unnecessary; see SKILL-LESS.

sojourn. Pronounce sii’jern; OED gives st-, S0-, SŌ-, in that order.

Sol,=the sun. See SOBRIQUETS.

solatium, Pl. -ia.

solder. The only pronunciation I have ever heard, except from the half-educated to whom spelling is a final court of appeal, is sõ'der, which is accordingly here recommended; but the OED gives it only as favoured by American dictionaries, & allows sõ'lder & sõ'der only.

soldier. S. ant, s. beeile, s. crab, s. orchis; no hyphens; see Hy- PHENS 3 B.

soldierly. For adv. see -LILY.
