page: 550

solemnness, not -mmness.

solicitor general is better without

hyphen; see HyprHens, group

*Court Martial.

solid has solider, -est; -ER & -EST 2.

solidify. For inflexions see VERBS

IN -IE &¢., 6.

soliloquy. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

solo. Pl. -os, see -o(£)s 6, or in technical use soli (-é).

so long,=goodbye. See so 2.

soluble, solvable, make insoluble, unsolvable; see IN- & -UN-. Substances are soluble (or dissolvable), not solvable; problems are soluble or solvable.

solus, sola. The stage-direction use is often transferred to descriptions in novels, where it is a harmless affectation. Applied to a woman it is awkward, because solus in stage directions was of either gender, & yet now offends the grammarconscious, while sola is unfamiliar & odd. Affectation apart, what is wrong with alone?

solution. For s. of continuity see POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

sombre, -ber. See -RE & -ER.

some. 1. S. in meiosis. 2. Some one) (someone. 3. Sometime) (some time. 4. Somewhat. 5. Somewhen.

1. Meiosis. ‘ This is some war oe with strong emphasis on some, is modern colloquial for * This is a vast war’, ‘ This is indeed a war, if ever there was one’. It is still felt as slang, & it comes to us from America; but it results from that love of meiosis (see TECHNICAL TERMS) which is shared with the Americans by us. We say a place is some distance off, meaning a long Way; we say ‘ It needs some faith to believe that’, meaning a hardly possible credulity. So far the effect is exactly parallel to the emphatic use of rather in answer to a question — Do you like it?’ ‘Rather! os meaning not somewhat, but exceedingly. The irregular development comes in when some, meiosis & all, is transferred from its proper region of quantity or number to that of

quality; some faith is a wonderful

amount of faith; but some war is

a wonderful kind or specimen of |

war, & some pumpkins (at least 70 $

years old, & said to be the original |

American phrase) were not a great

number of pumpkins, but very | superior pumpkins. It is this irregularity that makes the use both noticeable & popular; perhaps, when it has become so trite as no longer to sound humorous, it may perish. Compare with it our own equivalent, which lacks the piquant | irregularity only, ‘something like -f a war’.

2. For someone) (some one, see EVERYONE. i

3. Some time, sometime, advv. Some ` time is often used elliptically for at some time or other. There is no essential objection to writing it Í some-time or sometime, but it is convenient to keep it in two separate words for distinction from the sometime that appears in such descriptions as ‘sometime Fellow of ... i “sometime Rector of this Parish 23 meaning formerly.

4. Somewhat has for the inferior journalist what he ought not, but would be likely, to describe as ‘a somewhat amazing fascination °. Thus:—The evidence furnished in the somewhat extraordinary report of the Federation as to its waste of huge sums of money on . . ./His election experiences were somewhat wnique./ The flocks of wild geese, to which the flamingo is somewhat more or less closely allied. / The Labour motion introduced the proviso, somewhat for the first time, that the process should be gradual. These are examples selected for their patent absurdity, & their authors are doubtless so addicted to the word that they are no longer conscious of using it. What moves people to experiment first in the somewhat style is partly timidity—they are frightened by the coming strong word & would fain take precautions against shock—, & partly the notion that an air of studious under-statement is superior
