page: 551

+ & impressive; & so in our newspapers ‘the intemperate orgy of moderation is renewed every morning’. 5. Somewhen should be regarded as the progeny of somewhere & somehow, & allowed to appear in public under the wing of either or both of its parents, but not by itself. «some. The OED collects a number of adjectives in -some, grouping them according to their age. The most established words are here

iven in three sets for comparison.

A (older): buxom, cumbersome, fulsome, gamesome, gladsome, handsome, lightsome, loathsome, noisome, wholesome, winsome.

B (medium); some, darksome, gruesome, healthsome, heartsome, quarrelsome, tiresome.

C (younger): blithesome, bothersome, cuddlesome, fearsome, lithesome, lonesome.

Reading through the lists, one can hardly fail to notice that, while most words in the first are such as one feels to be independent wholes & is not tempted to resolve into root & suffix, the other lists are made up, with individual exceptions as for quarrelsome & lonesome, of artificiallooking & more or less fanciful formations. The inference is that -some has lost its efficiency as a suffix, & that it is wise to avoid such -some words, even including one or two of the older ones, as are not of quite unquestionable standing.

somersault, swmmersauli, somerset, summerset. The first spelling is recommended.

somnolence, -cy. See -CE, -cy.

sonant. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

songstress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

sonnet. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

sonor’ous. So accented.

soot, not soot.

sophistic(al). Sophistical is now the usual form. It would be well if, in accordance with what is said in the article -1c(aL), sophistic could be awesome, bright-

+ confined to the merely defining sense * of the (Greek) Sophists ’. Sophy, -ie. See -EY, -IE, -y. soprano. Pl. -os, see -o(£)s 6, or -ni (-é). sorceress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS. sore, adv. For s. afflicted, let & hindered, &c., see UNIDIOMATIC -LY. sorites(sori’téz). TECHNICALTERMS. sorrow. For ‘ more in s. than in anger’, & ‘in her &c. great s.’, see HACKNEYED PHRASES, & STOCK PATHOS.

sorry, sorrow. The two words do not, as it is natural to suppose, belong to each other, sorry being the adjective of the noun sore. Sore & sorrow, however, are so near in sense (especially in earlier & wider meanings of sore) that the mistake has perhaps no ill effects; still, the knowledge has its practical value; connexion between sore & sorry helps to account for the use of sorry, =scurvy, poor, inferior, seen in sorry rascal, meal, luck, excuse.

sort is, in the irregular but idiomatic uses touched upon under KIND, equally common, & subject to the same limitations: sort of & kind of preceding a verb (I s.o. expected it) differ from the others in being more generally confined in practice to the colloquial. It is worth mention that the OED, always chary in condemnation, records all these idioms without seriously questioning their legitimacy; & the same with the now common depreciatory of sorts; * still common colloquially, though considered grammatically incorrect °’, on these kind of men, is its severest censure. For of any sort or kind, see Preonasm 2; We can only repeat that there is no inconsistency of any sort or kind in our attitude.

sotto voce. Pronounce s6’t6 vo’cha; see ITALIAN SOUNDS.

soubrette. See FRENCH WORDS.

soubriquet. See SOBRIQUET.

Soudan(ese). Better than Sup-.

soufflé. See FRENCH WORDS.
