page: 552

sough. The pronunciation alternatives in the OED are siif, sow, & s00 followed by the breathed guttural (cf. LOUGH).

soulless. Hyphen

unnecessary; see SKILL-LESS.

sound, adv. For sleep sound(ly), see UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

soupçon, See FRENCH WORDS.

south-. Compounds (s.-east &c.) are pronounced with th. Of the derivatives, southerly, southern, southernwood, southron, have stidh- ; souther & southing have sowth-; southward(s) is sowthward(z) or siidhard(z).

southerly. For the special uses & meanings of this set of words, see EASTERLY.

sovereign, sovran. Though the latter spelling may accord better with the etymology (It. sovrano, L. superanus), the occasional attempts to introduce it come into conflict with the present pronunciation (s0’vrin or s0’verin, not sé’vran), & their success is not to be desired.

sow, vb. The p.p. sown is four times as frequent, in the OED 19th- 20th-c. quotations, as sowed.

spa. This spelling, & the pronunciation spah, have now displaced the older spaw.

space, vb, makes spaceable; -ABLE 1.

spade, vb, makes spadable; MUTE £.

spadeful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

spare makes sparable; see MUTE E.

spats. For spatterdashes; see CURTAILED WORDS.

spavined, not -nned; see -N-, -NN-.

spec,=speculation. CURTAILED WDS.

special. 1. Special) (especial. 2. S. pleading.

1. For specially) as distinguished from espectal(ly), see ESPECIAL. The two following quotations show the adverbs used each where the other would have been better:—Ample supplies of food & clothing for the prisoners are now available there, having been shipped from America especially for this purpose./The neighbourhood ts not specially well provided

+ with places where soldicrs can get amusement & refreshments.

2. S. pleading is a POPULARIZED TECHNICALITY. When we say that a person’s argument is s. p., we mean that he has tried to convince us by calling our attention to whatever makes for, & diverting it from whatever makes against, the conclusion he desires. But this is, not indeed the highest, but at any rate the almost universal, argumentative procedure. That is, it is advocacy or (in the untechnical sense) pleading, & the word special adds nothing to the meaning; why then call it special? Pleadings, in law, are a series of formal written statements by the parties to a suit designed to establish clearly, before the case is tried, what is the issue or question to be decided. S.p. is adaptation, to the particular circumstances, of the typical formulae or pleadings that may be applicable to them & are ready to be used by either party—the filling in of the details. As one consequence of modern legal reforms, pleadings are now very commonly dispensed with; but formerly the s.p. had to be done with extreme accuracy if cases were not to be lost on points of form that were of no real importance. S.p. accordingly became identified with legal quibbling, & suffered the same fate as casuistry, passing into a byword for dishonest evasion of real issues. This vague & inaccurate sense the name has retained now that the thing itself is no longer familiar outside the legal profession.

speciality, -alty. The two words, like many pairs in -1c(AL), while they seem to cry out for DIFFER- ENTIATION, have made little progress in that direction. Anyone who thinks he knows which of the chief senses belong to which, & tests his notions by looking through the OED quotations, is likely to have a surprise; he will perhaps conclude that writers use either form for any of the senses according as they
