page: 553

+ prefer its sound in general or find it suit the rhythm of a sentence. Where usage is so undecided, it would be presumptuous to offer a profitable differentiation, or to recommend either of two fully established forms for extinction. The most that can be ventured is to state two facts, first that speciality is in most senses the commoner, & secondly that specialty prevails in the legal sense, defined in OED as ‘A special contract, obligation, or bond, expressed in an instrument under seal ’.

specie(s) The OED gives precedence to the disyllabic spé’shi, spé’shéz, over the pronunciations retaining the -i- as in rabies & scabies. It is a case to which the - general principle laid down in Pro- NUNCIATION should be applied & those who are familiar with Latin allowed the three syllables in their communications with one another.

species. Pl. the same; see LATIN PLURALS.

specific(ally). These words, like RESPECTIVE(LY), though their real value need not be questioned, are often resorted to by those who have no clear idea of their meaning for the air of educated precision that they are held to diffuse. A short table of the senses of specific, showing the relation of each to the central notion of species, follows; it is in the last rather loose sense that it is wise to avoid the word & choose one of the more generally understood synonyms.

4. Characterizing a kind or species. S. gravity is that belonging to gold &c. as a kind or as such.

2. Constituting kind or species. S. difference is that which entitles courage, man, &c., to be called by those names rather than by more general ones such as fortitude, mammal. i

3. Indicating species in classification. In Pinus sylvestris maritima (Scotch Fir), the three words are the generic, specific, & subspecific names.

+ 4. Applicable to a kind only. S. remedy is one used for a particular disease or organ, not for ill health, or for the body, in general. 5. Not universal but limited, not general but particular, not vague but definite. S. directions, accusation, cause, &e.

specify. For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

specs, = spectacles. CURTAILED WDS.

spectre, -ter. See -RE & -ER.

spectrum. Pl. -tra, -ms; see -UM, & LATIN PLURALS.

speculum. Pl. -la, -lums; see LATIN PLURALS.

speechify. For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

speed. Past & p.p. sped; but s. up,=increase the s. of, makes speeded (must be speeded up &c.).

spelicans. See SPILLIKIN.

spell, vb. 1. For spelt, spelled, see -T & -ED. 2. The sense amount to, mean, involve as inevitable result, seen in Democracy spells corruption, & esp. in So-&-so spells ruin (* common in recent use >—OED), had its merit, no doubt, when new, but now ranks with WORN-OUT HUMOUR.

SPELLING POINTS. 1. Spelling reform. 2. Double & single consonants. 3. Cross references. 4. Miscellaneous.

1. Spelling reform. The notorious difficulty of English spelling, & the growing impatience caused by it, make it almost imperative to declare one’s general attitude towards reform before touching any details. The line here followed is, then: that the substitution for our present chaos of a phonetically consistent method that should not sacrifice the many merits of the old spelling would be of incalculable value; that a phonetically consistent method is in English peculiarly hard to reconcile with the keeping together of word families, owing to the havoc played on syllable sounds by variations of stress (in fraternity fraternize three vowel sounds are metamorphosed by the shifting of stress);: T3
