page: 557

+ spew, spue. The first spelling is the more frequent in the OED quotations. sphere. For synonyms in the sense province &c., see FIELD. spice makes ‘spiceable, see -ABLE 1 ; & spicy, see -EY & -y. spif(f)licate. OED spells -ifl- ; see FACETIOUS FORMATIONS. spike makes spikable, see MUTE E; & spiky, see -EY & -y. spill. For spilt -lled, see -T & -ED. spillikin, spel(ljican. The OED takes it as a diminutive from spill, & spells in the first way.

spilth. See Revivats. There is a gap of 200 years between Shakspere (who-uses it once only) & the earliest modern OED quotation.

spin. For the past tense the OED 19th-c. quotations give span & spun in exactly equal numbers; span is likely to prevail.

spinach, -nage. The first is the recognized spelling, though the other is not uncommon.

spindlage is better than spindleage; see MuTE E.

spindrift, spoon-. The first is the usual modern word, & is here recommended for preference, being now more intelligible. The original spoondrift is from an obsolete nautical verb spoon or spoom meaning (of ship or foam) to scud; there is no profit in trying to restore the correct but now puzzling form.

spinel. The OED pronounces spi’nl only.

spinet. OED prefers spi’nit to spiné’t; among its verse quotations is one in favour of each.

spinney, -nny. OED prefers the first form; pl. -eys.

Spinozism. So spelt; pron. -in6’z-.

spiny, not -ney; see MUTE E.

spiraea rather than -r@a; see Æ, Œ.

spirant. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

spire makes spiry, not -rey; MUTE E.

spirit, vb, makes -tted, -iting; -T-,-TT-.

spiritism & spiritistic mean the same as spiritualism in its most frequent & spiritualistic in its only acceptation; ‘ preferred by those

+ specially interested in the subject, as being more distinctive than spiritualism’ is the OED comment on spiritism. To ordinary people the old noun with a new meaning comes much more natural than the recent invention, & it is to be hoped that they will not let themselves be dictated to by the specially interested with their craving for distinetiveness. What first occurs to the mind of anyone who nowadays hears the word spiritualism is not the general sense, i.e. ‘tendency towards a spiritual view or estimate of things’; it is the special sense of ‘ belief that the spirits of the dead can hold communication with the living’; so true is this that the addition of ‘modern’, at first thought necessary to distinguish the special from the general sense, is no longer made. This being so, the demand for a separate word seems to imply the extravagant theory that no word should have two meanings—a theory that would require us no longer to use ‘ vessel’ in its special sense of ship, & to manufacture thousands of new words.

spiritual, -ous. The differentiation (-al of soul, -ous of liquor) is now complete, & neglect of it more often due to inadvertence than to ignorance; cf. LUXURIOUS -ant, MASTER- FUL -ly.

spirituel(le). Spell always -el. The word’s meaning is not quite clear to everyone, & is therefore here given in the OED terms:—Of a highly refined character or nature, esp. in conjunction with liveliness or quickness of mind. And on the spelling the OED remarks: The distinction between the masc. & fem. forms has not been always observed in English. That is undoubtedly so, & the spelling problem presented is an awkward one. On the one hand, the notion of m. & f. forms for adjectives is entirely alien to English, & if a French adjective is to make itself at home with us it must choose first whether it will go in
