page: 558

male or female attire & discard its

other garments; on this point cf.

NAIF & NAIVE. On the other hand, the choice is with this particular word a dilemma; if we decide for -el we are sacrificing the much more familiar of the two forms—more familiar because the word has been chiefly applied to women & in this application purposely made feminine by those who recognize both genders; but, if we decide for -elle, few of us can rid themselves of the feeling that the word is feminine & suitable only to what, for the English, is alone feminine, viz woman, so that we find ourselves debarred from describing qualities, faces, talk, & above all men, as spirituelle, & cannot give the word its proper extension.

The lesser evil is to spell always spirituel; the objection to it is not, like that to -elle, one that will endure for ever, but one that, when the form is settled, will no longer be felt.

spirt, spurt. The spelling is now very much a matter of personal fancy, & whether more than one word is concerned is doubtful. There are, however, two distinguishable main senses—that of gush, jet, or flow (vb & n.), & that of sprint, burst, hustle (vb & n.); & for the second sense the form spurt is far the commoner. It would plainly be convenient if the DIFFERENTIATION thus indicated were made absolute s a spirt of blood; works by spurts; oùl spirts up; Jones spurted past. spite makes spitable; see MUTE E. splay. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 1. splendid makes -idest; -ER & -EST A. splendiferous. See Facrerious FOR- MATIONS. splendo(u)r.

Keep the u; but see -OUR & -OR. splice makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1. SPLIT INFINITIVE. The Englishspeaking world may be divided into

| | (1) those who neither know nor care what a split infinitive is; (2) those

who do not know, but care very

much; (3) those who know & con- `

demn; (4) those who know & ap- |

prove; & (5) those who know & |

distinguish. |

1. Those who neither know nor |

care are the vast majority, & are a happy folk, to be envied by most | of the minority classes;. ‘ to really understand ’ comes readier to their lips & pens than ‘ really to understand ’, they see no reason why they should not say it (small blame to them, seeing that reasons are not their critics’ strong point), & they do say it, to the discomfort of some among us, but not to their own.

2. To the second class, those who do not know but do care, who would as soon be caught putting their knives in their mouths as splitting an infinitive but have hazy notions of what constitutes that deplorable breach of etiquette, this article is chiefly addressed. These people betray by their practice that their aversion to the split infinitive Springs not from instinctive good taste, but from tame acceptance of the misinterpreted opinion of others; for they will subject their sentences to the queerest distortions, all to escape imaginary split infinitives. * To really understand ’ is as. i. tanto really be understood ’ is as.i.; * to be really understood’ is not one; the havoc that is played with much well-intentioned writing by failure to grasp that distinction is incredible. Those upon whom the fear of infinitive-splitting sits heavy should remember that to give conclusive evidence, by distortions, of misconceiving the nature of the s.i. is far more damaging to their literary pretensions than an actual lapse could be; for it exhibits them as deaf to the normal rhythm of English sentences. No sensitive ear can fail to be shocked, if the following examples are read aloud, by the strangeness of the indicated adverbs. Why on earth, the reader wonders, is that word out of its place? He will find, on looking through again,
