page: 559

+ that each has been turned out of a similar position, viz between the word be & a passive participle. Reflection will assure him that the cause of dislocation is always the same—all these writers have sacrificed the run of their sentences to the delusion that ‘to be really understood ’ is a split infinitive. It is not; & the straitest non-splitter of us all can with a clear conscience restore each of the adverbs to its rightful place:—He was proposed at the last moment as a candidate likely generally to be accepted./ When the record of this campaign comes dispussionately to be written, & in just perspective, it will be found that . . ./The leaders have given instructions that the lives & property of foreigners shall scrupulously be respected./New principles will have boldly to be adopted if the Scottish case is to be met./This is a very serious matter, which clearly ought further to be inquired into./ There are many points raised in the report which need carefully to be explored./Only two ways of escaping from the conflict without loss, by this time become too serious squarely to be faced, have ever offered themselves./The Headmaster of a public school possesses very great powers, which ought most carefully & considerately to be exercised./The time to get this revaluation put through is when the amount paid by the State to the localities is very largely to be increased./But the party whose Leader in the House of Commons acts in this way cannot fail deeply to be discredited by the way in which he flings out & about these false charges.

3. The above writers are bogyhaunted creatures who for fear of splitting an infinitive abstain from doing something quite different, i.e. dividing be from its complement by an adverb; see further under Posi- TION OF ADVERBS. Those who presumably do know what split infinitives are, & condemn them, are not so easily identified, since they in-

+ clude all who neither commit the sin nor flounder about in saving themselves from it, all who combine with acceptance of conventional rules a reasonable dexterity. But when the dexterity is lacking, disaster follows. It does not add to a writer’s readableness if readers are pulled up now & again to wonder— Why this distortion? Ah, to be sure, a non-split die-hard! That is the mental dialogue occasioned by each of the adverbs in the examples below. It is of no avail merely to fling oneself desperately out of temptation; one must so do it that no traces of the struggle remain; that is,sentences must be thoroughly remodelled instead of having a word lifted from its original place & dumped elsewhere:—What alternative can be found which the Pope has not condemned, & which will make it possible to organize legally public worship?/If it is to do justice between the various parties & not unduly to burden the State, it will .. ./It will, when better understood, tend firmly to establish relations between Capital & Labour./Both Germany & England have done ill in not combining to forbid flatly hostilities. /Nobody expects that the executive of the Amalgamated Society is going to assume publicly sackcloth & ashes./Every effort must be made to increase adequately professional knowledge & attainments./We have had to shorten somewhat Lord Denbigh’s letter./The kind of sincerity which enables an author fo move powerfully the heart would . . ./Safeguards should be provided to prevent effectually cosmopolitan financiers from manipulating these reserves.

4. Just as those who know & condemn the s. i. include many who are not recognizable, only the clumsier performers giving positive proof of resistance to temptation, so too those who know & approve are not distinguishable with certainty; when a man splits an infinitive, he may be doing it unconsciously as a member of our class 1, or he may be
