page: 562

Springbok. So spelt. springe (snare). Pronounce -j. Springed, sprung. Carriages well cushioned & springed./Choice easy chair, with cane arms, well sprung. Springed is more reasonable, as formed from the noun; cf. STRINGED.

springhalt. See STRINGHALT.

sprint, spurt. The words are to a considerable extent interchangeable; Sprintis, at least apart from dialectal use, a 19th-c. word only, spurt going further back, but the newer word is displacing the older; a short race, or a run at high speed, is now a sprint, while for a quickening of pace, or a spasmodic effort bodily or mental, spurt is still the more usual term, but is tending to be displaced even in these senses; if that tendency could be checked, the DIFFER- ENTIATION would be useful.

spry makes spryer, spryest, spryly, spryness, spryish; see DRY.

spue, See SPEW.

spur. See PRONUNCIATION, s.f., for spurring.

spurt. For s. & spirt, see SPIRT; for s. & sprint, see SPRINT.

sputter. See SPLUTTER.

sputum. Pl. -ta. ‘spy. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c¢., 6.

squalid makes -dest; -ER & -EST, 4.

squalor, not -owr; see -OUR & -OR.

Squandermania(c). A FACETIOUS FORMATION. ‘Square makes squarable & squarish, see MUTE E; square leg should have no hyphen, see HypHens 3 B.

squeeze makes -gable; see -ABLE 1.

squib. For synonymy see LAMPOON.

squir(e)archy. Though ‘the spelling with e has been by far the more usual ° (OED), the spelling without it is preferable (see MUTE £), & Sydney Smith & FitzGerald appear among its patrons in the OED quotations.

-S-,-SS-. The general rules for the doubling or not doubling of final consonants before suffixes ean be seen in the articles -N-, -NN-, & -P-, -PP- ; so few monosyllables or words

+ accented on the last syllable end in a single -s that rules need not be here stated; it will suffice to say ~ | that: (1) The plural of bus is usually buses; this irregularity is explained by the fact that buses is still regarded as an abbreviation of the regular omnibuses; when that is forgotten (& bus is now more usual than ’bus), doubtless buses will become, as it should, busses. (2) Biases & focuses, nn. or vv., biased & focusing, are said by the OED to be ‘more regular’ than the -ssforms that are nevertheless common in England; similarly canvas (the fabric) gives -ases (pl. n.), -ased, & so | too orchises, nimbuses, portcullised, trellised, boluses, bonuses, incubuses, atlases, cuilases, &c. (3) Nonplus makes nonplussed.

St. For the question between St Peter & St. Peter &c., see PERIOD IN ABBREVIATIONS. ` i

stable, adj., makes stably, stability, stabilize, so spelt.

stadium. Pl. -dia.

staff. 1. Pl. in music & in archaic senses staves, see -VE(D); in modern senses staffs. 2. For s. of life see SOBRIQUETS.

stag. See HART.

stage makes stageable (see -ABLE 1), stagy (see -EY & -y); of the chief compounds, stage-craft & stage-siruck should be hyphened or coalesce, s. coach & s. manager should be hyphened or separated (usually the latter) according to the stress required, & most others should be two words each—stage direction, stage door, stage effect, stage fever, stage fright, stage whisper; for the principle see HypuHEens 38 B.

Stagirite. The S.; see SOBRIQUETS.

stake, vb, makes stakable; MUTE E.

Stalactite, stalagmite. Stress on the first, not the second, syllables is recommended; RECESSIVE ACCENT.

stale makes stalable, stalish, stalely; see MUTE E.

stalk, stem, trunk. Stalk is the | stem of a plant less than tree or shrub; trunk is the stem of a large
