page: 563

+ tree; stem is the general word applicable irrespective of size.

stamp,n. For synonymy, see SIGN.

stampede makes -dable; see MUTE E.

stanch, staunch. The adjective is usually staunch, the verb stanch.

stand. For stands to reason, see REASON 2. For standpoint, point of view, & poini, see POINT. For washstand, washing-stand, & wash-handstand, see WASH.

standard. S. pound, s. size, s. yard, s. lamp, &c.; no hyphens; see HYeueEnNs 3 B.

stanza. See TECHNICAL TERMS. -stanzæ’ d is preferable to -stanzaed; see -ED & ’D.

star. Shooting s. should have no hyphen; see Hyruens 3 B.

starchedly. Three syllables; -EDLY.

staring, not stareing; see MUTE E.

starlight, -lit, -litten, adjj. The first (in adj. use, e.g. a starlight night) may or may not be historically, but is certainly now to be regarded as, the noun used attributively. Attributive uses of nouns, like adverbial uses of apparent adjectives (see UNIDIOMATIC -Ly), sometimes strike people whose zeal for grammar is greater than their knowledge of it as incorrect; & starlit is perhaps often substituted for starlight owing to this notion; no harm is done, starlit being a blameless word, & indeed better in some contexts; if ‘a starlight night’ & ‘a starlit sea ° have their epithets exchanged, both suffer to the extent at least of sounding unnatural. The further step to starlitten is not so innocent, litten being not archaic but pseudoarchaic; the writer who uses starlitten is on a level with the tradesman who relies on such attractions as Ye Olde Curyosytie Shoppe.

starve makes starvable, starveling; see MUTE E.

state, n. It is a convenient distinction to write State for the political unit, at any rate when the full noun use is required (not the attributive, as in State, or state, trading), & state in other senses.

+ The following compound forms are recommended (see HYPHENS):— statecraft, state-room, State socialism, State prisoner, State trial.

state, vb. Z may state ‘ Frish Nationality ’ was recommended to me by the Vice-Reine, Lady Aberdeen. ‘State’ is one of the verbs that insist on proper ceremony & resent the omission of THAT, conj. S. makes statable, see MUTE E.

stately. For the adv., see -Liny.

static(al). See -1c(sL); there is no marked differentiation, but the -ic form seems likely to prevail.

station makes -oned; see -N-, -NN-.

stationary, -ery. The adj. (not moving), -ary; the noun (paper &c.), -ery.

Statist, statistician. The pronunciation of the first (sta’tist) is very much against it, inevitably suggesting state, & not statistics; &in fact its old sense was statesman, though now, as if it were a backformation from statistics, it means only statistician. Hither it should be abandoned & statistician always used, or it should be cut off from state by being pronounced sti‘tist; it is likely that one or other of these things will come about, but the odds are unfortunately in favour of the first, with the cumbersome statistician left in sole possession.

statistic(al), adjj. See -1c(av); the short form is almost obsolete.

status. “The status quo’ is the position in which things (1) are now or (2) have been till now or (3) were then or (4) had been till then; in senses 2 & 4 ante (t.s.q. ante) is sometimes, but need not be, added. With in the phrase becomes in statu quo (ante), without the, & with ante similarly optional. statutable, -tory. For the first, see -ABLE; the two words are hardly distinguishable in meaning; -table is considerably older, & -tory perhaps now more usual; a natural DIFFER- ENTIATION would be that -table should take the sense permitted, & -tory the sense enjoined, by statute.
