page: 564

staunch. See sTANCH.

stave, vb. The past & p.p. stove (instead of staved) is modern & (OED) ‘ chiefly Naut..

staves. Fors.as pl.ofstaff,seesTAFF.

stead, n. The atmosphere of the home life was favourable to the growth of qualities which were presently to stand him in inestimable stead. To stand one in good or better, much or more, little or less, s.; those are perhaps the limits within which the phrase can now, without affectation, be used; words like inestimable should not be substituted; see CAST-IRON IDIOM.

steadfast is now the established spelling, preferable as exhibiting the connexion with stead & steady; stedwas formerly much the commoner, & is still seen.

steam. The chief combinations beginning with steam are best written as below; for the principle, see HYPHENS,

1. As one word (or hyphened): steamboat, steambox, steampower, steamship, steamtight,

2. Hyphened: s.-boiler, s.-chest, §.-engine, s.-gauge, s.-jacket. All these have the accent on steam, except perhaps s.-boiler, for which see below.

3. As two words: s. brake, s. coal, s. crane, s. hammer, s. navvy, sS. plough, s. roller, s. tug, s. whistle. All these have the accent on the second word except in special uses, as the s.-coal trade, navvies & s.navvies.

S.-boiler is not formed in the same way as s. plough & the rest, i.e. from two nouns s. & boiler with the sense a boiler worked by steam, but from the phrase to boil steam, or create s. by boiling; it is a thing that boils s., & does not come under HYPHENS 3 B, but under Hyphers 3C (cf. weight-carrier & the like).

steepen. See -EN VERBS.

steer, n. The OED definition is: A young ox, esp. one which has been castrated (in the United States &

+ the Colonies applied to male beefcattle of any age). stele. Pronounce stē’lē; pl. -lae.

stem, n. See STALK; &, for the sense in grammar, TECHNICAL TERMS,

stemma. PI. -mata.

stencil makes -llable, -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

step. For s. this way, s. in, &c., see FORMAL WORDS.

stereo. A CURTAILED WORD for stereotype; pl. -os, see -O(E)s 5.

stereotype has -pable, -pist; MUTE E.

sterile. The older spellings (usu. -il, -ill) suggest that the pronunciation -il is modern, & it is still probably less common than -il. Superl. sometimes -ilest, see -ER & -EST 43 noun sterility (cf. tranquillity, civility).

sterilize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

stern, adj. For the sterner sex, see BATTERED ORNAMENTS.

stern, n. S. chase, two words (HYPHENS 3 B); s.-wheeler, hyphened (3C); s. sheets or s.-sheets, the accent being variable.

sternum. Pl. -na or -nwms; see LATIN PLURALS.

stethoscope. Pronounce sté-; see FALSE QUANTITY.

stevedore. Three syllables (sté’vidor).

(-)stich & equivalents. For names of verse groups based on the number of lines they contain, the -stich words are the set nearest completeness, but forms in -ain & -et exist for the groups more commonly mentioned, & are often preferred in limited senses. Half (or part of) line—hemistich; one line—(mono)stich; two lines—distich, couplet; three—tristich, triplet, tercet, tern; four—tetrastich, quatrain, quartet; five—peniastich, cinquain; six— hexastich, sixain, sextain, sestet, sextet; seven—heptastich; eight— octastich, huitain, octet, octave; nine —wanting; ten—decastich, dizain; fourteen—quatorzain; fifteen—quinzain. Pronounce -ik,

stichomyth. See TECHNICAL TERMS,
