page: 565

+ sticked, stuck. When the meaning is provided with sticks (e.g. of pea plants), the first form is the right; cf. HAMSTRING, SPRINGED. sticking-place, -point. In the Macbeth passage, -place is the word; see MISQUOTATION. stickleback, tittlebat. The first is the orthodox & etymological form, the other being (OED) ‘a variant, of childish origin ’. stigma. The plural is stigmata in the eccl., bot., med., &c., senses; stigmas only in the fig. sense of imputation or disgrace, in which a plural is rare. See LATIN PLURALS.

stigmatize makes -zable; see MUTE E. The mistake fully dealt with under REGARD 8 occurs rarely with S.: ... bravely suffering forfeiture & imprisonment rather than accept what in this same connexion Lord Morley stigmatized the ‘ bar sinister’ ; things are not stigmatized monstrous, but stigmatized as monstrous.

stile, style. Stile is the spelling for the means of passage, & for the carpentry term (stiles & rails); style for all other senses. This division is not historically correct, being due to the confusing of Latin stilus (writing-tool) with Greek stulos (column); but it is so generally accepted, & attempts to improve upon it so conflicting, that it is better to refrain, & leave the y in | all the classically derived senses; see also y & I.

stiletto. Pl. -os; see -o(z)s 6.

stilly. Pronounce the poetic adj. sti/li, the adv. sti’l-li.

stimulate makes -lable, see -ABLE 1 ; & -ator, see -OR.

stimulus. PI. -l7; LATIN PLURALS.

stimy, stymie. The first spelling is recommended. Although the OED makes the other the orthodox form, sti- occurs nine times in its quotations, & sty- not at all. See Y &1.

stink. Past stank or stunk, to which the remarks made under SPIN exactly apply.

+ stipulate makes -lable, see -ABLE 1 ; & -ator, see -on. stirring. Pronounce -er’ing rather than -t’ring; PRONUNCIATION s.f. sti’ver. So pronounced.

STOCK PATHOS. Some words & phrases have become so associated with melancholy occasions that it seems hardly decent to let such an occasion pass unattended by any of them. It is true that such trappings & suits of woe save much trouble; it is true that to mock at them lays one open to suspicion of hardheartedness; it is also true that the use of them suggests, if not quite insincerity, yet a factitious sort of emotion, & those are well advised who abstain from them. A small selection, which might be greatly enlarged, is:—In her great sorrow; The land he loved so well; The supreme sacrifice; The pity of it!; The mortal remains of; All that was mortal of; The departed; One more unfortunate; More sinned against than sinning; A lump in one’s throat; Tug at one’s heartstrings; Stricken; Loved & lost; But it was not to be.

stoep. Pronounce stoop.

stoic(al). See -1c(AL). Both forms are used as adjectives, -tc being indeed the commoner; but points of difference are discernable. Inthe predicative use stoic is rare: his acceptance of the news was stotcal, he was stoical in temper, rather than stoic. In the attributive use, stoic naturally preserves the original sense more definitely, while stoical forgets it; when we say stoic indifference, we mean such indifference as the Stoics taught or practised; when we say stoical indifference we think of it merely as resolute or composed; the stoic virtues are those actually taught by the Stoics, the stoical virtues simply those of the sterner kind. Lastly, while either epithet is applicable to abstracts, stoical is the word for persons: with stoic or stotcal composure; stoic or stoical life or tone or temper or views;
