page: 566

+ he is a stoical fellow; these stoical explorers; a stoical sufferer; my stoical young friend.

stokehold, -hole. The earliest OED quotation for the first is dated 1887 ; the -kole form goes back to 1660. The natural inference is that -hole is the true form, but is now thought undignified & has been altered. Though the OED defincs the two differently, the impression produced by its quotations is not that there are two names for two different things, but rather that stokehgle has had in its time, & perhaps still has, more than one meaning. To maintain a distinction between words at once so similar in form &, to the general public, so vague in sense, is clearly impossible. The form stokehole is recommended.

stolid makes -er, -est; -ER & -EST 2.

stomach. For gentceluse see BELLY.

stomacher, article of dress. The old pronunciation was with -cher, which should be kept to as long as the word is historical only, & not revived with the thing in modern use.

stone, n. Rolling stone should not be hyphened; rocking-stone or rocking stone according as the accent is on the first or the second word; see Hyrxens 8 B.

stone, vb, makes -nable; MUTE E.

stop, n. For the phonetic sense, see TECHNICAL TERMS.

stop, vb. Those who use stop when others would use stay (Where are you stopping? &c.) are many, & are frequently rebuked. The OED deals very gently with them: ‘ Cf. stay, which is often preferred as more correct’; & it is not a case for denunciation, but rather for waiting to see which word will win. Meanwhile, careful speakers do prefer stay; & it is in its favour, & a sign of its being still in possession, that its noun, & not stop, is certainly the right one in the corresponding sense (during our stay, not our stop). It may also be suggested that, if stop is a solecism, there are degrees

+ of enormity in the offence: Won't you stop to dinner?, I shall stop in town till I hear, We have been stopping at the Deanery, of which the last is the worst, point to a limitation— that stop is tolerable only when postponement of departure rather. than place of sojourn is in question.

STOPS &c. (comma, semicolon, colon, full stop, exclamation, question, inverted commas, apostrophe, hyphen, italics, brackets, dashes). There is: not room in this book for a treatise on punctuation, nor for discussion of principles even where the question is one between opposed views of correctness, & not between acknowledged correctness & careless or ignorant error. But, if it is assumed (1) that the reader need be warned only against mistakes that experience shows to be prevalent, & (2) that the views here taken on disputed points are sound, an article consisting almost entirely of ill stopped sentences with corrections may be of use.

COMMA

A. In enumerations. For full discussion, see AND 3, & or 3. Of the examples below, the last four show the ambiguity that makes it necessary to insist on full stopping in all enumerations, including the more usual ones, like the first nine, in which no doubt of the meaning is possible.

This new novel describes a love affair formed, precipitated, & rendered tragic by the events of the Revolution (for tragic.read tragic,)./ The resulting inquiry involves the consideration of the claims of consciousness, instinct, memory, habit, & desire to be regarded as the determining factors of psychic life (for desire read desire,)./Among presentday authors & poets Messrs Yeats, Sturge Moore, Binyon, & Davies are most in evidence (for Davies read Davies,)./The total burden imposed upon the German consumer by the duties on rye, wheat, & oats alone was £46,731,761 (for oats read oats,):/
