page: 572

+ sions! These two examples, of

| the immediate presence of the which the first shows a perhaps

| enemy. (Quotations) Strategy difdefensible straightly, & the second a certainly indefensible one, throw some light on the regrettable but progressive extinction of our old monosyllabic adverbs; it is the company of honestly that partly excuses the first straightly; see UNIDIOMATIC -Ly.

Strain)(sprain. For the not very clear distinction, see SPRAIN.

strait(en), The chief phrases in which these, & not straight(en), must be used are: the strait gate, the strattest sect, strait jacket, strait waistcoat, strait-laced, strattened circumstances, straitened (for).

strappado. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 3.

strategic(al), pronunciation. In the penult of adjj. & nn. in -ic (& the antepenult of -ical words), if -ic is preceded by a single consonant, there is an overwhelming preponderance for the short sound of the previous vowel (except wu); so erratic, barbdric, mechdnic, tragic, poetic, académic, éthic, angélic, arthritic, prolific, chrénic, exdtic, microscopic, historic, spasmddic, lyric, paralytic, & hundreds more; cf., with u, scorbitic, miisic, cūbic. Nevertheless, straté’gic is at least as often said as straté’gic; the most notable of other exceptions is scenic; the OED recognizes both pronunciations for scenic & strategic, but gives the preference to é in the first, & to č in the other.

strategy)(tactics. Etymologically, strategy is generalship, & tactics is array, & the modern antithesis retains as closely as could fairly be expected the original difference. The OED definition of strategy & note on the distinction follow, with three quotations, of which the first two are from the OED. Strategy. The art of a commander-in-chief; the art of projecting & directing the larger military movements & operations of a campaign. Usually distinguished from tactics, which is the art of handling forces in battle or in

+ fers materially from tactic; the latter belonging only to the mechanical movement of bodies set in motion by the former./Before hostile armies or fleets are brought into contact (a word which perhaps better than any other indicates the dividing line between tactics & strategy)./The study of strategy, which is the art of bringing forces into contact with the enemy, & of tactics, which is the art of using those forces when they are in contact with the enemy.

Readers should perhaps be warned against supposing that the tact of contact & of tactics is etymologically . the same, since these writers have utilized the accidental likeness; contact (Latin) is touch, tactics — (Greek) is array.

stratify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

stratum. Pl. -fa; see -um.

stratus. Pl. -fi.

strawberry. For the s. leaves see SOBRIQUETS.

strayed, adj. INTRANSITIVE P.P.

streak. Thesilvers.; sece SOBRIQUETS. ~

stress)(strain, as technical terms in Physics. In defining the use of stress in Physics, the OED remarks that it is ‘ used variously by different writers ’, & this statement is borne out by its quotations. Any close examination of such matters is outside our scope; but the layman may be glad of a rough distinction. It is perhaps safe to say that strain is the result of stress; stress being mutual action exerted by bodies or parts, strain is the alteration of form or dimensions produced by it.

strew. P.p. indifferently -ed & -n.

stria. Pl. -iae.

stricken. This archaic p.p. of strike survives chiefly in particular | phrases, & especially in senses divorced from those now usual with the verb—stricken in years, a stricken field, the stricken deer, for a stricken hour, poverty-stricken, panic-stricken.
