page: 573

+ The use of the word by itself as an adjective=afflicted, in distress, is sometimes justified, but more often comes under the description of STOCK PATHOS.

stride. Past-ode; p.p. (rare) -idden.

stringed)(strung. Accurately, a bow is stringed or unstringed according as it is provided with a string or not, & strung or unstrung according as it is bent to the string or not; cf. stringed instruments & strung nerves; so a high-sirung temperament but a gut-stringed racket. Overstrung piano, which suggests a difficulty, is right because the notion is not that of providing it with overstrings as the racket is provided with gut strings (implying formation from the noun string), but that of stringing it transversely (from the verb string with the adverb over). See HAMSTRINGED for discussion of that word & of bowstring, vb.

stringhalt, spr-. Both forms are common, & they denote the same disease; str-, which the OED regards as probably the original, might well be made the only word.

strive. Past strove, p.p. striven; but the OED adds that * many examples of strived ’ for both * occur in writers of every period from the 14th to the 19th c.’.

stroke, v., makes -kable; MUTE E.

stroma. Pl. -ata.

strophe. See TECHNICAL TERMS; pronounce stro’fi; pl. -s or -phae, see LATIN PLURALS.

strow, formerly common, is now only a by-form of strew.

struma. Pl. -mae.

strung. See STRINGED.

strychnia, -nine. See MORPHIA; but strychnia has not, like that, maintained itself in popular use.

stubbornness. So spelt.

stucco. The noun makes -os, see -O(E)s 3 ; the verb -oes, -oed or-o'd.

studding-sail. Pronounce sti’nsl.

studiedly. For the legitimacy of the form see -EDLy, rule (3).

studio. Pl. -os; see -o(r)s 4.

study, vb, stultify, stupefy. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

stupid makes -er, -est; -ER & -EST 2.

stupor, not stupour; -OUR & -OR.

STURDY INDEFENSIBLES. Many idioms are seen, if they are tested by grammar or logic, to express badly, even sometimes to express the reverse of, what they are nevertheless well understood to mean. Good people point out the sin, & bad people, who are more numerous, take little notice & go on committing it; then the good people, if they are foolish, get excited & talk of ignorance & solecisms, & are laughed at as purists; or, if they are wise, say no more about it & wait. The indefensibles, sturdy as they may be, prove one after another to be not immortal. There was a time when no-one was more ashamed to say ‘You was there’ than most of us now are to say ‘It’s me’; ‘you was ° is dead; ‘it’s me’ has a long life before it yet; it too will die, & there are much more profitable ways of spending time than baiting it. It is well, however, to realize that there are such things as foolish idioms; that a language should abound in them can be no credit to it or its users; & the drawing of attention to them is a step towards making them obsolete; a few types follow, with references to articles in which each question is touched upon:-—

It’s ME.

Don’t be longer than you can HELP.

So far from hating him, I like him (FAR 2).

The man of all others for the job (OF 7).

The worst liar of any man I know (OF 7).

A child of ten years old (oF 7).

That long nose of his (OF 7).

It is no USE complaining.

Better known than popular (-ER & -EST 7).

Were ever finer lines perverted to a meaner use? (ILLOGICALITIES).
