page: 574

+ It is a day’s work even to open, much less to acknowledge, all the letters (MUCH 2). For two reasons, neither of which are noticed by Plato (NEITHER 3).

All men do not speak German (NOT 1).

He ony died a week ago. It should not be taken roo literally.

I should not be surprisEd if it didn’t rain. sty, nn. Pl. sties. The separate spelling stye (pl. styes), sometimes used for the pimple on the eyelid, has not the support of the OED, & the danger of confusion is too slight for artificial DIFFERENTIATION. sty, vb. For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6. style)(stile. See STILE.

stylo. See CURTAILED WORDS; pl. -08, see -O(E)s 5.

stymie. See sTIMy.

Suabian, Swa-. Swa- (nearer the original German) is preferred by OED to Sua- (fr. the intermediate Latin).

sub, n. Used slangily for subaltern, subscription, & substitute, & also with help of context for other words; see CURTAILED WORDS.

subdual. See -AL NOUNS.

subduedly. A bad form; see -EDLY. Both Siegfried Sassoon & W. J. Turner speak subduedly as if in recollection of ancient bitterness, but it is poetry of a distinguished disillusionment.

subject. For synonyms in sense theme &c., see FIELD.

subjective genitive. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

subjugate makes -jugable, see -ABLE 1; & -ator, see -OR.

SUBJUNCTIVES. The word is very variously used in grammar. The subjunctives here to be considered (1) exclude those, often so called, in which the modal effect is given by an auxiliary such as may (that he may do it; cf. that he do it), let (let it be so; cf. be it so), or shall (until he shall be dead; cf. until he be dead);

+ & (2) include any verb that is understood to be modally different from the indicative but is either indistinguishable from it in form or distinguished otherwise than by an auxiliary; in ‘that he learn’ it is clear that learn is subjunctive; in ‘that we learn’ it is not; in ‘ that we, he, may learn’ there is no subjunctive that concerns us in this article; any verb of the kind that has now been loosely indicated is for our present purpose a subjunctive, whether or not it is more specifically known as imperative (sing we mer- | rily), conditional of the apodosis (it were more scemly) or of the protasis (if it please you), optative (had I but the power!), indirect question | (When I ask her if she love me), © indefinite future clause (till he die), or by any other such name.

About the subjunctive, so de- © limited, the important general facts are: (1) that it is moribund except in a few easily specified uses; (2) that, owing to the capricious influence of the much analysed classical upon the less studied native moods, it probably never would have been possible to draw up a satisfactory table of the English subjunctive uses; (8) that assuredly no-one will ever find it either possible or worth while to do so now that the subjunctive is dying; & (4) that subjunctives met with today, outside the few truly living uses, are either deliberate revivals by poets for legitimate enough archaic effect, or antiquated survivals as in pre- | tentious journalism, infecting their | context with dullness, or new arrivals possible only in an age te which the grammar of the subjunctive is not natural but artificial. |

Revival: When I ask her if she love me (prose, loves).

Survival: If this analysis be correct (normal, 7s).

Arrival: If this were so, it was in | self-defence (sense, was). Be |

We may now proceed to illustrate the four classes to which we have | been brought,

Alives, Revivals,
