page: 576

+ If the history of Christianity is, as Hoéffding suggests, but a world-drama which mythologizes in a passing symbol the inner psychological drama, if it be but a precipitate of the tides or storms of the spiritual imagination, if it be a mere projection of man’s agitated subjectivism, how can it give us ...?/These bes are not themselves wrong; they are Survival subjunctives; but the fact that the verbs associated with them, which have subjunctives ready for use just as much as to be, are allowed to remain indicative shows that the use of be too is mechanical & meaningless.

Were in conditionals: The correct type, a common enough ‘ Survival ’, is Were that true there were no more to say; the first were, of the protasis, is right only in combination with the other were, of the apodosis, or with its modern equivalent, would (should) be; & neither of them is applicable to past time any more than would be itself; their reference is to present or to undefined time, or more truly not to time at all (& especially not to a particular past time) but to utopia, the realm of non-fact. Ifit is a hard saying that were (singular) in conditionals does not refer to past time, consider some other verb of past form in like case. Such a verb may belong to past time, or it may belong to utopia: If he heard, he gave no sign (heard & gave, past time); If he heard, how angry he would be! (heard & would be, not past time, but utopia, the realm of non-fact or the imaginary); the first heard is indicative, the second is subjunctive, though the

form happens to be the same; in the verb be, conveniently enough, there happens to be still a distin-

guishable form for the subjunctive,

& what corresponds for the verb be

to the two heard sentences is If it was

(never were) so it did not appear,

If it were (or nowadays alternatively

was) so how angry we should be!.

Were (sing.) is, then, a recognizable

subjunctive, & applicable not to

+ non-facts; it is entirely out of place in an if-clause concerned with past actualities & not answered by a were or would be in the apodosis. It has been necessary to labour this explanation because for the many readers who are not at home with grammatical technicalities the matter is puzzling. Examples:—1t is stated that, during the early part of the War of Independence (1821), the Greeks massacred Mussulmans; if this were so, it was only in selfdefence./If rent were cheap, clothes were dearer than today./If the attitude of the French Government were known to our own Government last week it explains the appeal to the Dominions./ — We must not look for any particulars . as to that lost work (if it were ever written), “ The Life & Adventures of | Joseph Sell”. These four contain | if... were (sing.) in protasis—an ‘Alive’ form if the apodosis is would be or were, i.e. if the conditional is of the utopian kind, but wrong if the time of the were is a particular past. Read was in each. Examples in apodosis:—it were just & fitting that on such an occasion a Prince of the Royal House & Heirapparent to the Throne should himself have plied the fires of the record warship with coal. The newspaper is patting the Prince on the back for what he actually did, viz stoke; it means not that it would be right on an imaginary occasion, but that | it was on that past occasion right | for him to stoke; read was./The

dull winter prospect appeared so quiet

& peaceful, it were difficult to

imagine the Boches over there—on

seniry, in their dugouts, eating,

drinking, sleeping, just like the men

about me; but, proving their pre- |

sence, a miniewurfer shell passed

overhead. Paraphrasing so as to get

rid of the glamour of the word were,

we get not ‘ I should find it difficult °,

but * I found it difficult ’, as is shown |

by ‘a shell passed’; read it was )

difficult. |

Sequence: To those who have had .
