page: 578

+ people who employed him. His words were not ‘If my department be to succeed °’, but ‘isto’. The sequence change of is should be to was, & were instead ruins the sense; ‘ were to be successful ’ means ‘ succeeded ’ or ‘should succecd °’, not ‘ was to have a chance °.

The conclusion is that writers who deal in Survival subjunctives run the risks, first, of making their matter dull, secondly, of being tempted into blunders themselves, thirdly, of injuring the language by encouraging others more ignorant than they to blunder habitually, & lastly, of having the proper dignity of style at which they aim mistaken by captious readers for pretentiousness.

submerge. Gerundive usu. submersible rather than -gible.

submissible, -ittable. The second form is unexceptionable; but on the principle explained in -ABLE 2, submissible would have been expected to establish itself on the analogy of ad, 0, & per, -missible. It is in fact, to judge from the OED, hardly existent, but may nevertheless be recommended as preferable.

suborn. See FORMAL WORDS.

subpoena. Best so written, see Æ, @ 3 p.p. subpoena’ d, see -ED & ’D.

subscribe makes -bable; see MUTE E.

subsellium. Pl. -ia. :

subservience, -cy. See -CE, -cy.

subsidence. The OED gives preference to subsi’dence over su’bsidence. But residence, confidence, providence, & coincidence, all associated with verbs in -i’de, & all disregarding that fact & conforming to the Recessive accent tendency, are a very strong argument on the other side, against which perhaps no opposite instance of any weight can be brought. Sw’bsidence is therefore recommended; the Latin quantity (stdo settle) is of no importance (see FALSE QUANTITY). subsidize makes -zable; see MUTE E. substantiate makes -tiable; see -ABLE 1. For pronunciation of substantiation, see -CIATION.

substantivally, -ively. See ADJEC- TIVALLY.

substitute vb, substitution. A very rapid change—according to the view here taken, a corruption—has been lately taking place in the meaning & use of these words; so rapid, indeed, that what the OED stigmatized in 1915 as ‘ Now regarded as incorrect ’ will soon, if nothing can be done to stop it, become normal usage & oust what is here held to be the words’ only true sense. The > definition to which the OED adds the above note is (for the verb) ‘ To take the place of, replace’, & an f examination of what other dictionaries are at hand (Century, Standard, Webster, Cassell’s Encyclopaedic, & some small fry) discovers that none | of them records this sense at all, with ` the exception of the Standard, in which it is confined to Chemistry. | They all agree that the verb means | something entirely different, viz to put (a person or thing) in the place of another. It is clear, then, what the orthodox use of the verb is; the use of the noun follows it; & we can set down for comparison a sentence or two that are right & one or two that are wrong, choosing as | nouns that will make the points clear butter & margarine, Englishman & alien.

CORRECT

A. We had to substitute margarine (for butter).

B. Aliens are being substituted (for Englishmen).

C. [Aliens are replacing Englishmen. ] D. The substitution of margarine (for butter) is having bad effects. E. Let there be no more substitution of aliens (for Englishmen). F. Its substitution (for butter) is lamentable.

INCORRECT A. We had to substitute butter (by margarine). B. Englishmen are being substituted (by aliens).
