page: 579

C. Aliens are substituting Englishmen.

D. The substitution of butter (by margarine) is having bad effects.

E. Let there be no more substitution of Englishmen (by aliens).

F. Its substitution (by margarine) is lamentable.

One can hardly read those parallels, with the risks of ambiguity that they suggest, without realizing that either the old or the new must go; we surely cannot keep such a treacherously double-edged knife as substitute has become; either its original edge, or the one into which its back has been converted, must be ground off; which is it to be? Another reflection, which may not occur unsuggested to all, is that in the incorrect set the words replace or replacement would have done, whereas in the correct set they would either have been impossible or have changed the meaning. And here, probably, is what accounts for the whole perversion of our words; substitute & substitution have been seized upon by people who failed to apprehend with precision the dictionary definitions & fancied they had found equivalents in sense for the words replace(ment), which they had been ignorantly taught to regard as solecisms in the required senses (see REPLACE); so they determined (in their lingo) to substitute replace by substitute, whereas they ought to have refused (in English) to substitute substitute for replace or to replace replace by substitute.

Tosum up: The dictionary definitions are right; the new popular use is wrong & confusing, & is based upon a superstition; but it has hitherto, as the dictionaries show, almost escaped detection, & therefore it will be necessary to give a convincing array of recent quotations, to satisfy readers that this article is not an attack on the negligible. It is indeed high time that replace were reinstated & substitute reduced to its proper function. In going through the sentences, those who

579

+ are new to the question may observe that nearly all can be mended in two ways, shown for verb & noun in the first two examples—one the change to replace(ment), & the other the turning of the sentence upside down & changing of by to for. One or two exceptional types are placed at the end with special corrections.:

The ecclesiastical principle was substituted by the national, the Empire & the Papacy by the Communes (Either was replaced; or The national principle was substituted for the ecclestastical, the Communes for the Empire & the Papacy)./Chief among these innovations is the substitution of the large & unwieldy geographical unit by a small & compact local administrative unit (Either is the replacement of; or is the substitution of a compact local unit for the unwieldy geographical unii)./M. Chicherin also requested that in article VI the word * foment’ should be substituted by the word * prepare’, saying that * foment’ has too vast an acceptation./Although only a temporary, & liable to be substituted by an easervice man at any time, because I was physically unfit for the army, Lam glad to... ./If it proves successful it will be extended all along the border; y it fails it will be substituted by an arbitrary line along the lakes & rivers./Many words, such as aviation, airship, dirigible, aeroplane, aviator, &c., have been assailed & substituted by terms which lend themselves to finer expression./The * Stampa’ hopes that a definite pledge will be obiained for Greek evacuation, & that regular troops will not be substituted by “sacred battalions’./If a good raw hide gear is substituted by a set of laminated gears, they will be found quite as stlent./Mr Asquith concluded on a note of high appeal for the substitution of the Supreme Council by the League of Nations./The Greek administration should continue under the supervision of the Allies until the time comes for its substitution by a Turkish administration./The substitution of the Council by a Com-
