page: 581

+ following extracts, when a mere change of which &c. to as is not possible, the way out, or a way, is indicated:-—The Roumanian Government contends that it has only requisitioned such things of which there is abundance in the country (such things as are abundant, or as there is abundance of)./Prussia & the Kaiser were preparing for such a war which they believed would result in the German Empire (& Prussia) becoming the master of the Old World./The third year should be reserved for such additional or special subjects (elocution, for instance) which need not be regarded as essential./It was proposed to grant to such casual employees of the Council who had been continuously employed for three months, & whose employment was likely to extend over twelve months, the privilege of additional leave (read those, or any, for such)./How, then, can such of these men who trouble to think regard the results of Mr Lloyd George’s budget?/It is the bourgeois who thrive, such of them who have escaped molestation at the hands of the Bolsheviks./. . . urging tis adoption as a means of enabling such of those men who are trained in certain occupations to get io & from their work./It is subject, of course, to such possible changes of plan that any unexpected turn of events may bring about./I noticed two cars approaching in such a manner that seemed to indicate they would both arrive at the junction together./The first zone, where the regulations are not so onerous, covers such tracts where there are no real signs of war (read the or those for such; or as show for where there are).

2. Such that rel.)(such that conj. Now & then a s. that for s. as is perhaps due to the writer’s hesitating between two ways of putting a thing, one with the relative as & the other with the conjunction that, & finally achieving neither, but stumbling into the relative that. They will never learn the truth from this system of military inquiries, be-

+ cause they will only see the results if those are such that the Government would like them to see (such as the Government would like them to see? or such that the Government would like them to be seen?)./I cannot think that there is such a different level of intelligence among Englishmen & Germans that would prevent similar papers from being a profitable property in Great Britain (such... as would prevent? or such... that it would prevent?).

3. Such exclamatory or appealing. The Earl of Derby was the titular King of Man—a piece of constitutional antiquarianism of which Scott made such splendid use in ‘ Peveril of the Peak’. Such is liable to the same over-use of this kind as so; reference to so 8 will make further illustration unnecessary here. Use & over-use of an idiom are different things, & there is no need to avoid this such altogether; in the above quotation it may be noticed that if the writer had said the piece of antiquarianism instead of a piece the such would have passed well enough.

4. The illiterate such (= that, those, it, them, &¢c.). The significance of the epithet will be found explained in ILLITERACIES, & half a dozen examples with corrections will suffice:—His seven propositions for non-partisan legislation must appeal to the common-sense of every man & woman in the realm; is it too much to hope that such will combine to render them realities? (that all will)./As a Canadian, with, I trust, a fair knowledge of the causes which led to the defeat of Sir Wilfrid Laurier in the recent election, I have been somewhat amused at some of the editorial articles in portions of the British Press; the claim that the result of such election is an Imperialistic victory is very far from the truth (of that election)./We have seen during the war how those persons in humble circumstances who came suddenly into possession of moneys spent such—7.e., in . . . (spent them)./
