page: 585

+ uneducated are sometimes capable of treating s. as we all treat beiter or greater (cf. PREFER, with which the same mistake is much more frequent); the quotations are purposely given at sufficient length to show that the writers are not mere blunderers:—Mr Ernle, on the other hand, as we gather from his preface, desired first to translate Homer, & in looking about for a metre decided on the hexameter as the most appropriate & superior for this style of the heroic than the blank or rhymed verse of the great English masters (read beiter .. . than, or s. . . . to)./Whatever the conditions in the provinces—the present inquiry has dealt only with the Metropolis—able & public-spirited men have refused to accept the dictation of the B.M.A., & are giving far superior attention to the insured persons than was possible under the cheap conditions of the old club practice (read greater ... than, or s....to what).

SUPERIORITY. Surprise a person of the class that is supposed to keep servants cleaning his own boots, & either he will go on with the job while he talks to you, as if it were the most natural thing in the world, or else he will explain that the bootboy or scullery-maid is ill & give you to understand that he is, despite appearances, superior to boot-cleaning. If he takes the second course, you conclude that he is not superior to it; if the first, that perhaps he is. Soit is with the various apologies (to use an expressive colloquialism—if we may adopt the current slang—as the streetboys have it—in the vernacular phrase— the “ push-bike ”, if the word may be permitted—so to speak—in homely phrase—not to put too fine a point upon it—if the word be not too vulgar —saving the reader’s reverence) to which recourse is had by writers who wish to safeguard their dignity & yet be vivacious, to combine comfort with elegance, to touch pitch & not be defiled. They should

U3 make up their minds whether their

+ reputation or their style is such as to allow of their dismounting from the high horse now & again without compromising themselves; if they can do that at all, they can dispense with apologies; if the apology is needed, the thing apologized for would be better away. A grievance once redressed ceases to be an electoral asset (if we may use a piece of terminology which we confess we dislike)./Lurgenev had so quick an eye; he is the master of the vignette—a tiresome word, but it still has to serve. / About one thing there is complete unanimity; “ Coalition” must go; “it is not a Party name, & in any case it will not do at the next election °; to put it vulgarly, that cock won't fight./M. Baron the younger is amusing as the ** bounder ”? Olivier./When the madness motif was being treated on the stage, Shakespeare (as was the custom of his theatre) treated it “ for all it was worth” ./ With its primary postulate, ** steep ” as it is, we will not quarrel./It is a play that hits you, as the children say, “ bang in the eye ”./The annual conflict between the income-tax demand note & the January sales has ended, it seems, in the more or less complete triumph of what the Upper Fifth would call the former./These otherwise admirable paintings are not carried far enough in the ** finish” which, to use an Irishism, should be done before the painting is begun./ To make use of an overworked phrase, the wall painting requires a more severe application of “ fundamental brainwork ’’./England had been compelled, in homely phrase, to ‘ knuckle down’ to America./Its work was, if we may use a somewhat homely expression, ‘ done to time ’./Palmerston is to all appearance what would be vulgarly called * out of the swim’.

For another form of superiority, that of the famous ‘ of course ’, as often exposed & as irrepressible as the three-card trick, see COURSE. I add a note that I find scribbled by my brother in his copy of The King’s English:—Some writers use
