page: 588

surcease, n. & vb, is a good example of the archaic words that dull writers at uneasily conscious moments will revive in totally unsuitable contexts; see INcoNGRUOUS VOCABULARY. The fact is that in ordinary English the word is dead, though the pun in Macbeth (& catch, with his surcease, success) is a tombstone that keeps its memory alive; there are contexts & styles in which the ghosts of dead words may be effectively evoked; but in newspaper articles & pedestrian writing ghosts are as little in their element as in Fleet Street at midday. The following quotations are borrowed from the OED:—I¢ was carried on in all weathers ... with no surcease of keenness./Private schools for boys give four days’ surcease from lessons. / There is no surcease in the torrent of Princes . . . who continue to pour into the capital./I . . . thereupon surceased from my labors./They could never surcease to feel the liveliest interest in those wonderful meteoric changes. / Intrigues & practices . . . would of necessity surcease.

These are all from 19th or 20th c. writers; but it should be added that at least two of the verb examples are American; & if the verb is, as seems likely, still alive in the U.S., American writers are naturally exempt from criticism on the point.

surd For the phonetic sense see TECHNICAL TERMS.

surety. Pronounce shoor’ti; many verse examples show that the disyllabic sound is no innovation. surgeon. See PHYSICIAN. surloin. See SIRLOIN. surly. Adv. surlily; see -LILY s.f. 3 the change of spelling from sirly disguises the fact that -ly in surly is the ordinary suffix, & perhaps accounts for surlily on the analogy of jollily, sillily, holily. surmise, not -ize; see -ISE. surmisedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY, & use conjecturally &c. surprisal. See -AL NOUNS. Surprise. 1. Not -ize; see -ISE.

+ 2. The verb makes -sable; see MUTE E. 3. ‘I should not be surprised if the Chancellor of the Exchequer does not agree with me” Mr Asquith added that... If Mr Asquith really said what the reporter attributes to him, which may be doubted, he meant ‘agreed’ or ‘agrees’, not ‘does not agree’. The mistake, for other examples of which see NEGATIVES, & NOT, is particularly common after should not be surprised.

surprisedly. Foursyllables, if used; see -EDLY.

surtout. OED pronounces sertoo’t or sertoo’ ; it may be thought that ser’t0o represents a later development; but the word is now so little used that the question is of no importance.

surveillance. Pronounce serva‘lans.

survey. Noun ser’va, verb serva’ ; see NOUN & VERB ACCENT. For verb inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &e., 2. Agent noun, surveyor, see -or.

Survive makes -vable, see MUTE E3; & survivor, see -OR.

suspenders, = braces, is ‘ Chiefly U.S? —OED; to use it for braces in England is to throw away the advantage of having two names for two things.

suspense, suspension. In the verbal sense, = suspending, the second is the right. Suspense, though it still retains that force in suspense of judgement, has become so identified with a state of mind that to revive its earlier use puzzles the hearer. In the following quotation it is clear that suspense compels one to read the sentence twice, whereas suspension or suspending would have been understood at first sight:—The state of war is inevitably the suspense of Liberalism, & in all the nations at war there are some men who greatly hope that it may also be the death of Liberalism.

suspensible exists, but is perhaps not better than the normal suspendable; see -ABLE 2.
