page: 591

+ execution & no subordinate achievement can compensate for a central figure who is *“ unsympathetic”, & that it is better for a “ hero ” to provoke active fear or hate than indifference or half-contemptuous pity./ Macbeth is not made great by the mere loan of a poet’s imagery, & he is not made sympathetic, however adequately his crime may be explained & palliated, by being the victim of a hallucination./Let me first say that Elsie Lindtner is by no means sympathetic to the writer of this paper; if she were, the tragedy of the book would be more than one could bear. It will be seen that in these passages the word does not mean what the man in the street understands by it, i.e. capable of or prone to sympathy, but has an esoteric sense peculiar to bookreviewers & dramatic critics & familiar only to their readers, i.e. capable of evoking sympathy. In the OED there is no vestige of such a sense; but in the French dictionaries it is easily found:—II se dit de personnes qui éprouvent de la sympathie, ou qui se concilient la sympathie (Littré); qui inspire la sympathie (Larousse). It is a LITERARY CRITICS’ WORD, & a GAL- LICISM, & the possibility of confusion between the Gallic & the English senses is so obvious that the literary critic should deny himself the pleasure of showing it off.

sympathy. The exception sometimes taken to following s. with for instead of with is groundless; the OED, under the sense compassion, even puts for before with as the Focal construction. For the principle at issue, See DIFFERENT.

symposium. Pron. -6’zium; pl. -ia.

symptom. For synonyms see SIGN.

synaeresis, synaloepha, synaphea. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

synchronize is not a word that we need regret the existence of, since there is useful work that it can do better than another; but it is a word that we may fairly desire to see as seldom as we may, one of the

+ learned terms that make a passage in which they are not the best possible words stodgy & repellent; it may be compared with the lists in POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES. The extracts below, for instance, would surely have been better without it:—The lock-out mania, therefore, has synchronized [coincided?] with an increased willingness for sacrifice on the part of the men./Founder’s Day, annually observed at the Charterhouse, synchronizes this year with [is also, this year,] the tercentenary of Sutton’s Charity./A movement of Russian troops to the Caucasus was ordered ... This movement synchronized with [There were at the same time] reports of an extensive movement of Turkish troops near the Persian frontier./The winter solstice, which north of the Equator synchronizes with [determines] the first day of the winter quarter, occurs at siz minutes to eleven tonight.

syncopation. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

syncope. For the sense in grammar, see TECHNICAL TERMS. Three syllables (-pi).

synecdoche, synesis, synizesis.

See TECHNICAL TERMS.

SYNONYMS, in the narrowest sense, are separate words whose meaning, both denotation & connotation, is so fully identical that one can always be substituted for the other without change in the effect of the sentence in which it is done. Whether any such perfect synonyms exist is doubtful; gorse & furze may perhaps bea pair; but ifit is a fact that one is much more often used than the other, or prevails in a different geographical or social region, none of which distinctions is apparent from the OED quotations, then exchange between them does alter the effect on competent hearers, & the synonymy is not perfect. At any rate, perfect synonyms are extremely rare.

Synonyms in the widest sense are words either of which in one or other of its acceptations can some-
