page: 592

+ times be substituted for the other

without affecting the meaning of a

sentence; thus it does not matter

(to take the nearest possible ex-

ample) whether I say a word has

“two senses’ or ‘two meanings’,

& sense & meaning are therefore loose synonyms; but if ‘ He is a man of sense’ is rewritten as ‘ He is a man of meaning’, it becomes plain that sense & meaning are far from perfect synonyms; see FIELD, & SIGN, for sets of this kind.

Synonyms, or words like in sense but unlike in look or sound, have as their converse homonyms & homophones, or words like in look or sound but unlike in sense. The pole of a tent or coach or punt, & the pole of the earth or the sky or a magnet, are in spite of their identical spelling separate words & homonyms. Gauge & gage, not spelt alike, but so sounded, are homophones.

Misapprehension of the degree in which words are synonymous is responsible for much bad writing of the less educated kind. From the notion that CONSERVATIVE is a synonym of moderate, as it is when compared with radical in politics, come the absurdities, illustrated under the word, of its use with estimate &c.; so with PROTAGONIST (& champion), METICULOUS (& scrupulous), REGARD (& consider), OPTIM- ISTIC (& hopeful), SUBSTITUTION (& replacement), DILEMMA (& difficulty), ERE (& before), save (& except), EXTENUATE (& excuse), FEASIBLE (& possible), 11K (& name), PER- CENTAGE (& part), PROPORTION (& portion), RE (& concerning), as well as numberless others. To appreciate the differences between partial synonyms is therefore of the utmost importance. There are unluckily two obstacles to setting them out in this book. One is that nearly all words are partial synonyms, & the treatment of them all from this point of view alone would fill not one but many volumes; the other is that synonym books in which

+ differences are analysed, engrossing as they may have been to the active party, the analyst, offer to the passive party, the reader, nothing but boredom. Everyone must, for the most part, be his own analyst; & no-one who does not expend, whether expressly & systematically or as a half-conscious accompaniment of his reading & writing, a good deal of care upon points of synonymy is likely to write well. A writer’s concern with synonyms is twofold. He requires first the power of calling up the various names under which the idea he has to express can go; everyone has this in some degree; everyone can develop his gift by exercise; but copiousness in this direction varies, & to those who are deficient in it ready-made lists of synonyms are a blessed refuge, even if the ease they bring has as doubtful an effect on their style as the old Gradus ad Parnassum on the schoolboy’s elegiacs. Such lists, to be of much use, must be voluminous, & those who need them should try Roget’s Thesaurus or some other work devoted to that side of synonymy. Secondly, he requires the power of choosing rightly out of the group at his command, which depends on his realizing the differences between its items. As has been implied already, such differences cannot be expounded for a language in anything less than a vast dictionary devoted to them alone; no attempt at it has been made in this book except in cases where experience shows warnings to be necessary. Still, a book concerned like the present with English idiom in general cannot but come into frequent touch with synonymy; & those who wish to pursue that particular branch of idiom will find the following list of articles (in addition to those previously referred to) useful as a guide:—act (n.), admission, apt, asset, assure, authentic, behalf, benign, besides, big, bloom, broad, burlesque, category, cease, cere-
