page: 596

+ conjoined, as in save & except. Again, the word is sometimes applied to identical propositions such as ‘I don’t like my tea too hot’; for such statements see the truism section of COMMONPLACE.

What remains to be illustrated here is the way in which writers who are careless of form & desirous of emphasis often fail to notice that they are wasting words by expressing twice over in a sentence some part of it that is indeed essential but needs only one expression. It is true that words are cheap, &, if the cost of them as such to the writer were the end of the matter, it would not be worth considering; the intelligent reader, however, is wont to reason, perhaps unjustly, that if his author writes loosely he probably thinks loosely also, & is therefore not worth attention. A few examples follow, & under BOTH 2 & EQUALLY AS 2 will be found collections of the same kind of t. :—The motion on constitutional reforms aims at placing women on the same equality with men in the exercise of the franchise (As no other equality has been in question, same & equality are tautological; in the same position as, or on an equality with)./The wool profits were again made the subject of another attack by Mr Mackinder last night (Omit either again or another)./May I be permitted to state that the activities of the Club are not limited only to aeronautics? (Limited & only are tautological; limited to, or directed only to)./It is sheer pretence to suppose that speed & speed alone is the only thing which counts (Omit either & speed alone, or only). tax & some synonyms—cess, customs, due, duty, excise, fee, gabelle, heriot, impost, levy, octroi, rate, scot & lot, toll, tribute. With such sets of words it is often convenient to have a conspectus of the distinctions & be saved the labour of turning them up for comparison in separate dictionary articles. Such convenience

+ is all that is here aimed at, a rough definition of each word being given after the OED’s definition of tax itself & its note thereon.

OED on tag:—(Definition) A compulsory contribution tothesupportof government, levied on persons, property, income, commodities, transactions, etc., now at fixed rates, mostly proportional to the amount on which the contribution is levied. (Note) ‘Tax’ is the most inclusive term for these contributions, esp. when spoken of as the matter of taxation, & in such phrases as direct & indirect tax, including also similar levies for the support of the work of such local or specific bodies as county or municipal councils, poor law or school boards, ete. But in British practice few of theindividual imposts are called by the name, the most notable being the Income tax, Land tax, & Property tax (also dog-tax, matich-tax, window-tax), the rest being mostly styled ‘ duties’, as excise, import, export, estate, house, stamp, death duties, etc. The ‘ taxes’ levied by local bodies are usually called ‘rates’, e.g. borough, county, poor, school, water rate, ete.

cess,=rate or tax, but chiefly in local use, esp. in Ireland, Scotland, & India.

customs, payment levied upon imports from foreign countries; cf. excise.

due, any obligatory payment, the nature being usually specified by an attributive noun, as harbour, market, dues.

duty, tax levied on specific articles or transactions, not on persons; see also the note on tag above.

excise, duty charged on home goods before they can be sold; cf. customs. fee, regulation sum payable to public official or to professional man for a particular service performed. gabelle, a tax, but esp. the French pre-Revolution salt-tax. heriot, payment in money or kind due to lord of manor on tenant’s decease. impost, a tax in the more inde-
