page: 600

+ follows from the known goodness of God. that God is good is known from the excellence of the world he has made.

argumentum ad —— (Log.); ‘ argument directed to ARCATA hominem, one calculated to appeal to the individual addressed more than to impartial reason; a.a. crumenam (purse), one touching the hearer’s pocket; a. a. baculum (stick) or argumentum baculinum, threat of force instead of argument; a. a. ignorantiam, one depending for its effect on the hearer’s not knowing something essential; a. a. populum, one pandering to popular passion; a. a. verecundiam (modesty), one to meet which requires the opponent to offend against decorum.

arsis (Pros.); ‘raising’. The more emphatic part of a foot, e.g. the first syllable of a dactyl or trochee, & the last of an anapaest or iambus; opp. thesis. This is the Latin & the prevailing modern use, reversed from the original Greek; since the Greek meanings are still sometimes preferred, confusion is not unknown. The accented syllables are in arsis in Fro’ggy wou’ld a wooing go’ Whe'ther his mo’ther would let him or no’; And so’ the poor do’g had no’ne.

aspirate (Gram.); ‘ breathed’. Sound of the letter h when not fused with another as in Philip (ph=f) or thin or this or shin or chin or loch, but pure as in hot & greenhouse. Also used loosely of ph, th, & Scotch ch, & of other letters now usually called spirant or fricative.

assimilation (Gram.); ‘making like °. The changing of a sound into another identical with or nearer to a neighbouring sound, as when the d of godsibb (related in God) becomes s in gossip, or when the dental of in not becomes the labial m before the labial p in impius impious.

asyndeton (Rhet.); ‘not bound together ’. The omission, for effect, of conjunctions by which words or sentences would in normal speech be connected.

+ The first sort by their own sugges-

tion fell, Self-tempted, A self-depraved; A

Man falls, deceived By the other first: Man, therefore,

shall find grace;

A The other, none.

attraction (Gram.); A tendency less commonly operative in English (except in mere blunders) than in Latin & Greek, by which a word is changed from the correct case, number, or person, to that of an adjacent word. When him [whom] we serve ’s away; The wages of sin is death. And (as a blunder) The small amount of classics which are still held to be necessary.

ballad (Uit.); ‘ dancing-song °’. Originally a song as accompaniment to dancing; later any simple sentimental song esp. of two or more verses each to the same melody, e.g. Jonson’s Drink to me only—; a separate modern use is as the name of simple narrative poems in short stanzas, such as Chevy Chase.

ballade (Lit.); ‘ dancing-song °’. An elaborate poem consisting of three eight (or ten) line stanzas & a four (or five) line envoy, all on three (or four) rhymes only in the same order in each stanza, & with the same line ending each stanza & the envoy. An old French form, revived in France & England in the 19th c. The Pompadour’s Fan (ballade, by

Austin Dobson) Chicken-skin, delicate, white,

Painted by Carlo Vanloo, Loves in a riot of light,

Roses & vaporous blue;

Hark to the dainty frou-frou! Picture above, if you can,

Eyes that could melt as the dew,— This was the Pompadour’s fan! See how they rise at the sight,

Throngingthe @ilde Beufihrough, Courtiers as butterflies bright,

Beauties that Fragonard drew,

Talon-rouge, falbala, queue, Cardinal, Duke, to a man,

Eager to sigh or to sue,— This was the Pompadour’s fan!
