page: 602

+ that in some particular context, but have acquired an unfortunate popularity & come into general use even where they are not more but less suitable to the context than plain speech. Such are ‘to be made the recipient of’ for to be given, ‘ the devouring element’ for fire, ‘ make the supreme sacrifice’ for die in battle, ‘stand to reason’ for be obvious; & see for other examples HACKNEYED PHRASES.

climax (Rhet.); ‘ladder’. Arrangement of a series of notions in such an order that each is more impressive than the preceding. (1) Eye hath not seen, (2) nor ear heard, (3) neither have entered into the heart of man,/the things which God hath prepared; three progressive stages of strangeness.

cognate (Gram.); ‘akin’. A noun that expresses again, with or without some limitation, the action of a verb to which it is appended in a sentence is distinguished from the direct object of a transitive verb (expressing the external person or thing on which the action is exerted) as the cognate, or the internal, or the adverbial, object or accusative: is playing whist (cognate); I hate whist (direct); lived a good life (internalor cognate); spent his life well (direct); looked daggers (adverbialor cognate). In the last example daggers is a metaphor for a look of a certain kind, & therefore cognate with the verb.

coliectives. Applied primarily (A) to nouns denoting a whole made up of similar parts, such as crew, flock, firm, Cabinet. These are also called nouns of multitude (see NUMBER, 6). But other nouns, or uses of them, are often described by the term, & confusion may be saved by separating these. (B) Nouns whose plural is in form not distinguishable from the singular, as sheep, deer, salmon, grouse, counsel (= advocate); (C) Nouns whose singular is sometimes used instead of their plural, as duck, fish, shot, cannon; (D) Nouns denoting either a thing or

+ a material consisting of many of them, as hair, straw; (E) Nouns denoting either a material or a collection of things made of it, as linen, silver, china; (F) Nouns denoting either a thing or some or all of them, as fruit, timber; (G) Abstract singulars used instead of concrete plurals, as accommodation (=rooms), kindling (=pieces of wood), royalty (= royal persons), pottery (=pots); & even (H) Nouns denoting substances of indefinite quantity,as butter, water.

COMEDY (Lit.); ‘festival song’.

COMMON (Gram.).

complement (Gram.); ‘filling up ’. That which completes, or helps to complete, the verb, making with it the predicate. This (A) is the widest sense of the word, not excluding e.g. the direct object of a transitive verb, or adverbs; it is possibly the most reasonable application of the term; it is also the least useful, & the least used. (B) Often the direct object is excluded, but all other modifications or appendages of the verb are called complements; a sense found convenient in schemes of sentence analysis, but too wide to be precise & too narrow to be logical. (C) A further restriction admits only such words or phrases as are so essential to the verb that they form one notion with it & its meaning would be incomplete without them; thus in He put his affairs in order the verb put is essentially incomplete without its complement in order, whereas in He replaced the volumes in order a new detail merely is added by the adverb in order to the complete verb replaced; some verbs are in their nature incomplete, e.g. the auxiliaries, &, in must go, go is the complement of must. A serviceable use, especially if it were established as the only one. (D) Lastly, in the narrowest sense, c. is applied only to the noun or adjective predicated by means of a copulative verb (be, become, &c.) or of a factitive verb (make, call, think, &c.) of the subject (He is a fool; He grew wiser; He
