page: 603

+ was made king) or of the object (Call no man happy); in such examples as the last, the complement is called an objective or an oblique c. A sense frequent in Latin grammars.

concessive (Gram.); ‘ granting’. The name given to subordinate clauses beginning with though or although, to those or equivalent conjunctions, & to participles used with the corresponding effect, as in ‘ Accepting your facts, I dispute your inference ’.

concords (Gram.); ‘ agreement’. The rules that an adjective is of the same number, case, & gender, as its noun, a verb of the same number & person as its subject, & a noun of the same case as that to which it is in apposition.

conjugation (Gram.); * yoking together’. Inflexion of verbs, or any class of verbs inflected in a particular way (first &c., strong &c., c.); cf. declension below.

conjunction (Gram.); ‘ joining together’. A word whose function is to join like things together, i.e. a noun or its equivalent with another noun or its equivalent, an adjective &e. with another, adverb &c. with adverb &c., verb with verb, or sentence with sentence; cf. prepositions, which attach a noun to something different, especially to verbs. The relation between the things joined is shown by the particular conjunction chosen (but, and, or nor; if, although, or because; that or lest; since or until). Some conjunctions, in joining two sentences, convert one into a dependency of the other, or clause in it, & are called subordinating or strong cc., the others being co-ordinating or weak (strong—I hate him because he is a Judas: weak—I hate him; for he is a Judas). Many words are sometimes conjunctions & sometimes adverbs (therefore, so, however, since, &c.); & such words as when & where, though often in effect cc., are more strictly described as relative adverbs with expressed or im-

+ plied antecedent (I remember the time when, i.e. at which, it happened; I will do it when, i.e. at the time at which, J see fit).

CONJUNCTIVE (Gram.);

‘ joining together ’.

consecutive (Gram.); ‘ following’. A c. clause is a subordinate clause that expresses the consequence of the fact &c. stated in the sentence on which it depends; & a c. conjunction, in English that corresponding to a preceding so or such, is the word joining such a clause to the sentence (He was so angry that he could not speak).

continuant (Gram.); Another name for fricative (below).

copulative (Gram.); ‘linking’. Copulative verbs are such as, like the chief of them, be, link a complement to the subject (He is king; we grow wiser); among them are included the passives of factitive verbs (This is considered the best). For copulative conjunctions, see disjunctive below.

correlatives (Gram.); ‘ mutual reference’. Pairs or sets of words such that each implies the existence, though not necessarily the mention, of the other: cause & effect, parent & child, either & or, then & when, so & as, &.

couplet (Pros.); ‘joining’. Two lines of verse, especially when of equal metre, rhyming, & forming a whole. See -STICH.

crasis (Gram.); ‘mixture’. The running of two separate vowel sounds into one, as when cocaine & naive, originally pronounced k6’kain & nah-é’v, become koka’n & nav. Confined in Greek grammar to such combinations between the last vowel sound of one word & the first of the next, as in kdgo for kai ego.

cretic (Pros.); ‘of Crete’. The foot —U—, as in the words o’tio’se & su’ppleme’nt when pronounced with two equal accents.

‘ running °’.

cursive (Palaeogr.); See uncial below.

dactyl (Pros.); ‘ finger’. The foot —vy, as in pottery or Julia.
