page: 604

declension (vb decline) (Gram.); ‘ down-falling °. Inflexion of nouns & adjectives, or the nouns inflected in a particular way (first &c., i &c., strong &c., d.). Cf. conjugation above.

deduction (Log.); ‘down-drawing’. Reasoning from the general to the particular; basing the truth of a statement upon its being a case of a wider statement known or admitted to be true. If I argue that I shall die because I have been credibly informed that all men do so, & I am a man, I am performing d. Cf. induction below.

deliberative (Gram.); ‘ weighing well’. A name given, especially in Greek & Latin grammar, to the subjunctive (& optative) used in what may be called an interrogative command, corresponding to the English Shall we go?, What was I to do?

dénouement (Lit.); < untying °. The clearing up, at the end of a play or tale, of the complications of the plot. A term often preferred to the English catastrophe because that has lost in popular use its neutral sense.

dental (Gram.); ‘ of teeth’. Consonants produced by applying the tongue-tip to the upper teeth or to the gum close behind them (t, d, th, n).

deponent (Gram.); ‘ laying aside’. Verbs passive in form but active in sense are so called, especially in Latin grammar, as utor I use, labor I slip.

desiderative (Gram.); ‘of desire’. From some Greek & Latin verbs secondary verbs are formed with special suffixes expressing the wish to do, or the being on the point of doing, the action. Thus the Latin for be hungry, be in labour, is esurio from edo I eat & parturio from pario I give birth to; these are d. verbs, & -urio, & in Greek -iao, -seio, are d. terminations. diaeresis (Gram.); ‘taking asunder’. The pronouncing of two successive vowels as separate sounds & not as a single vowel or diphthong;

+ or the mark (:* over the second) sometimes used to indicate such separation, as in Chloé, aérated. A peculiarity in the French use of the mark may be mentioned by way of || warning; in such words as aiguë, cigué, the mark means not that the e is separate from the u, but that ue is not silent as in fatigue & vogue, but forms a distinct syllable.

dialogue (Lit.); ‘cross-talking’. Conversation as opposed to monologue, to preaching, lecturing, speeches, narrative, or description; neither confined to nor excluding talk between two persons; see DUOLOGUE.

digraph (Gram.); ‘ two-writing ’. Any two written consonants expressing a sound not analysable into | two, as ph, dg, ch; or any two written vowels expressing a vowel sound, whether simple or com- pound, that is pronounced in one | syllable, as (simple) eain beat or head, | ee in heed, au, ui in fruit, (diphthong) ` oi, oa in boat, ow. Digraphs therefore include all diphthongs except those, common in English, that are written as single letters (e.g. the a, i, 6, heard in ale, white, no) & are consequently often supposed not to be diphthongs.

dimeter (Pros.). See -meter below.

disjunctive (Gram.); ‘ unjoining ’. Conjunctions implying not combination but an alternative or a contrast (as or, but) are so called, the others (as and) being copulative. The distinction is of some importance in determining the number of verbs after compound subjects; see NuMBER 2, 8.

dissimilation (Gram.); ‘making unlike °’. Change in sound due to dislike of the same sound in neighbouring syllables, as when the noun from negotiate (-shiat) is pronounced with -siashn, not -shiashn, or when the Latin cinnamomum becomes in English not cinnamom but cinnamon.

distich (Pros.); ‘two-line’. See -STICH. distributive (Gram.); Those adjectives & pronouns are so called which expressly convey that what is said
