page: 611

+ u & r in curly (earlier crulle: With lokkes crulle as they were leyd in presse—Chaucer).

-meter (Pros.); ‘measure’. <A little used sense of the word metre is the unit (itself consisting sometimes of one foot, sometimes of two) that is repeated a certain number of times in a line of verse. But the compounds made from it—monometer, dimeter, trimeter, tetrameter, pentameter, hexameter—are in regular use as one part of the full technical . ames of metres (e. g. iambic trimeter acatalectic); the feet of which two & not one make a metre in this sense are the iambus, trochee, & anapaest, so that six iambi (or equivalents) make a trimeter, but six dactyls (or equivalents) make a hexameter.

metonymy (Rhet.); *name-change’. Substitution of an attributive or other suggestive word for the name of the thing meant, as when the Crown, Homer, wealth, stand for the sovereign, Homer’s poems, & rich people.

middle (article) (Lit.). Newspaper article of a kind so called from having stood between the leading articles & the book reviews, & being a short essay usually of some literary pretensions on some subject of permanent & general rather than topical or political interest.

middle term (Log.).

See syllogism below.

middle voice (Gram.). Greek verbs may have, besides or without the active & passive voices, another called the middle, in most tenses identical in form with the passive, but expressing ‘reflexive or reciprocal action, action viewed as affecting the subject, or intransitive conditions °’ (OED).

minor (Log.). See syllogism below.

minuscule (Palaeography); ‘ somewhat smaller’. See uncial below.

monologue (Lit.); ‘sole speech’. This & soliloquy are precisely parallel terms of Greek, & Latin, origin; but usage tends to restrict soliloquy to talking to oneself or thinking aloud without consciousness of an

+ audience whether one is in fact overheard or not, while monologue, though not conversely restricted to a single person’s discourse that is meant to be heard, has that sense much more often than not, & is especially used of a talker who monopolizes conversation, or of a dramatic performance or recitation in which there is one actor only.

monometer (Pros.). See -meter above.

mute (Gram.). The letters p, b, d, t, g, k, are variously called mutes, explosives, or stops; see explosive & fricative above.

nasal (Gram.); ‘of the nose’. Sounds requiring the nose passage to be open, as in English those of m, n, & ng, are so called.

nominativus pendens (Gram.); ‘hanging nominative’. A form of anacoluthon in which a sentence is begun with what appears to be the subject, but before the verb is reached something else is substituted in word or in thought, & the supposed subject is left in the air. The most familiar & violent instance is which used in Sarah Gamp’s manner (which fiddle-strings is weakness to expredge my nerves this night); but the irregularity is not uncommon even in writing, & is always apt to occur in speech. Cf., in Shakspere, *‘ They who brought me in my master’s hate/I live to look upon their tragedy ’ (Rich. II, WY. 112-57).

non sequitur (Log.); ‘does not follow’. The fallacy of assuming an unproved cause. Thus: It will be a hard winter, for holly-berries (which are meant as provision for birds in hard weather) are abundant. The reasoning called post hoc, ergo propter hoc is a form of n. s.

objective genitive (Gram.). The genitive that stands to a verbal noun or noun of action in the same relation as the object to a verb. In fear God, God is the object of the verb, &, in put the fear of God in them, God is in the same relation to the noun fear, & is called the
