page: 613

palatal (Gram.); ‘ of the palate’. Sounds made by placing the middle of the tongue against or near the palate—intermediate between gutturals & dentals. The y in yet is palatal; & in English the so-called gutturals (k, g) tend to become palatals by being made with the middle instead of with the root of the tongue.

paradigm (Gram.); ‘showing side by side °’. A table of inflexion forms, e.g. of a particular declension of nouns or conjugation of verbs.

PARENTHESIS (Gram.); ‘side insertion ’.

parisyllabic (Gram.); ‘ equal-syllabled’. A name given to those Greek & Latin nouns which have the same number of syllables in the other cases as in the nominative, as nom. collis, gen. collis.

parody (Lit.);

°

‘side-song’. See BURLESQUE.

paronomasia (Rhet.); ‘ word-shunting’. Puns, plays on words, making jocular or suggestive use of similarity between different words or of a word’s different senses. The best known of all (though concealed in English) is perhaps that of Matt. xvi. 18: Thou art Peter (Greek Petros), & upon this rock (Greek petra) I will build my church; & another is non Angli sed angeli, not Angles but angels.

partitive (Gram.); ‘of division’. P. words are such nouns & pronouns as by their nature imply the separating or distinguishing of a part of some whole from the rest, such as part, portion, half, much, superlatives, some, any, each; the p. genitive is that of the word denoting the whole, which is made to depend on a p. word by being put in the genitive in fully inflected languages, but in English attached to it by of. But the greatest of these is charity; greatest is the p. word, & of these the p- genitive. paulo-post future (Gram.); * about to be a little later’. A name for the future perfect (I shall have died) especially in Greek grammar, in

+ which a peculiar use of it justifies a peculiar name; the Greek for I shall have died, It will have been done, is better represented by I shail be a dead man, It will be a done thing or fait accompli, i.e., a future state, resulting from a less distantly future event, is described. Except with reference to this Greek usage, there is no reason for preferring the name to the ordinary intelligible future perfect; but it is often used, & often misused.

pentameter (Pros.); ‘ five-measure’. Sometimes applied to the English heroic metres, i.e. blank verse or heroic couplet; but an iambic p. should mean (see -meter above) ten iambic feet. The line universally called p. is the second line in elegiacs (see above); it was used in these couplets only, not by itself. The scheme is: HWW f/-ey /—//—vv fv /Y

with invariable caesura. This line also is not in fact a dactylic p- but a pair of dactylic trimeters catalectic in succession. Two examples of English imitation are given under elegiacs above.

penthemimerat (Pros.); ‘of five halves’. The p. caesura in Latin hexameters (& pentameters) is that after two & a half feet; see caesura.

penult (Gram.); ‘nearly last’. The last syllable but one of a word.

period (Rhet.); ‘circuit’. Strictly, any complete sentence; but applied usually to one consisting of a number of clauses in dependence on a principal sentence, & so, in the plural, to a style marked by elaborate arrangement. peripeteia (Lit.); ‘ falling round’. A sudden change of fortune in a drama or tale, e. g., in The Merchant of Venice, the downfall of Shylock, with Gratiano repeating to him his own words ‘ O learned judge ’. PERIPHRASIS (adj. -phrastic) (Rhet.); ‘ roundabout speech ’. persiflage (Rhet.); ‘ whistle-talk °. Irresponsible talk, of which the hearer is to make what he can with-
