page: 614

+ out the right to suppose that the speaker means what he seems to say; the treating of serious things as trifles & of trifles as serious. ‘ Talking with one’s tongue in one’s cheek’ may serve as a parallel. Hannah More, quoted in the OED, describes French p. as ‘the cold compound of irony, irreligion, selfishness, & sneer’; irony, paradox, & levity, are perhaps rather the ingredients of the compound as now conceived.

PERSONIFICATION (Rhet.);

< making into a person ’.

petitio principii (Log.); ‘ assumption of the basis’. The fallacy of founding a conclusion on a basis that as much needs to be proved as the conclusion itself. Arguing in a circle (see above) is a common variety of p. p. That foxhunting is not cruel, since the fox enjoys the fun, & that one must keep servants, since all respectable people do so, are other examples of begging the question or p. p., in which the argument is not circular.

Pindarics (Lit.); ‘of Pindar’. The form of English verse in which a poem consists of several stanzas often of unequal length, with the rhymes within the stanza irregularly disposed, & the number of feet in the lines arbitrarily varied. In Pindar’s own odes, the structure is an elaborate one of strophe, antistrophe (see above), & epode, far removed from irregularity; but the English imitators noted the variety of metre within his strophes & neglected the precise correspondence between them; P. came consequently to be the name for verse in which regularity of metre was scorned under the supposed impulse of high emotion.

PLEONASM (Rhet., Gram.); ‘ exceeding ’.

post hoc, ergo propter hoc (Log.); ‘ after it, therefore due to it’. The fallacy of confusing consequence with sequence. On Sunday we prayed for rain; on Monday it rained; therefore the prayers caused the rain.

prefix (Gram.); ‘attached in front’. An affix (see above) attached to the beginningof a word orstem to makea f compound word, as re-, ex-, be-, a-, in reform, ex-officer, belabour, arise.

pregnant construction (Gram.). ‘But Philip was found at Azotus’ is in the Greek ‘ But Philip was found to Azotus’; i. e., the expressed sentence contains an implied one— Philip was conveyed to & Philip was found at Azotus. Though we cannot (except in the dialect of Devon &c.) say He was found to Azotus, we do habitually say Put it in your pocket, meaning Put it in(to & keep it in) your pocket.

premise (Log.); ‘thing sent before’. See syllogism below. rivative (Gram.); ‘ taking away’. |) p g ya Prefixes that deny the presence of the quality denoted by the simple ff word are called p. or negative. The |i a- of aseptic & the in- of innocent [i are privative, whereas the a- of arise & the in- of insist are not.

proclitic (Gram.); ‘ forward-leaning’. In Greek, certain words that coalesce in speech with the following word to the extent of not having, like other words, a written accent of their own. Applied in English to words like a or an, the, & prepositions normally placed, i.e. before their nouns.

prolate, -lative (Gram.); ‘ carrying forward °. Many verbs have meanings that are not self-sufficient, but need to be carried forward by an- | other verb in the infinitive; such | are the auxiliaries, & other verbs meaning be able or willing or wont || or desirous, begin, cease, seem, be | said, &c. This infinitive is called | prolate or prolative.

prolepsis (adj. -ptic) (Gram.);‘ an- | ticipating °’. Anticipatory use of an || epithet, i.e. the applying of it as if already true to a thing of which it | only becomes true by or after the | action now being stated. A strong | example is i So the two brothers & their mur-

derd man Rode past fair Florence
