page: 618

Ah, who shall help us That sweet forgotten, E’en as we doubt With a rush of tears Love comes back to ROUNDEL OF A roundel is wrought as a ring With craft of delight & with That the heart of the hearer A roundel Its jewel of music is carven of Love, laughter, or That fancy may fashion to hang As a bird’s quick song runs Pause answer to pause, & again So moves the device whence, A roundel

soot (Gram.). Roots are the ultimate elements of language not admitting of analysis. In the word unhistorically, un-, -ly, -al, -ic, -tor, ean all be set aside as successive affixes modifying in recognized ways the meaning of what each was added to. There remains HIS, which would be called the root if unhistorically were an isolated word; investigation shows that the same element, with phonetic variations that are not arbitrary, is present in many other words, e.g. in English wit, in the Latin-derived vision, & in tthe Greek-derived idea; & that the Indo-European or Aryan root is VID, with the sense sight or knowledge. Cf. stem below.

roundel. See rondeau above.

rune (Lit.); ‘secret’. In the plural, the letters of the earliest ‘Teutonic alphabet, used especially by Scandinavians & Anglo-Saxons, .& developed perhaps in the 2nd or 8rd century by modifying Roman or Greek letters to facilitate the carving of inscriptions. In the singular, a name given to certain Finnish (& sometimes incorrectly to old Scandinavian) poems or their ‘cantos.

saga (Lit.); ‘story’. ‘ Any of the Marrative compositions in prose that

SATIRE from over-spelling forbidden lore! in our hearts once more, to our eyelids welling, his vacant dwelling. SWINBURNE or a starbright sphere, cunning of scund unsought, may smile if to pleasure his ear is wrought. all or of aught— mourning—remembrance of rapture or fear— in the ear of thought. round, & the hearts in us hear the same strain caught, round as a pearl or tear, is wrought. were written in Iceland or Norway during the middle ages; in English use often applied spec. to those which embody the traditional history of Icelandic families or of the kings of Norway ’—OED.

sapphics (Pros.); ‘of Sappho’. A Greek & Latin stanza metre

=v———/vv—=v-—Y ter

—vuv-Y often imitated, but with grotesque ` misrepresentation of the rhythm, in English. Hookham Frere, joint author with Canning of the bestknown example, ‘Needy knifegrinder ’, illustrates the departure from the Latin rhythm by printing an English sapphic with the impossible quantities required: Cold was thé night wind; drifting

fast thé snows féll; Wide wére thé downs, and shéltérléss

and nakéd, Whén ă poor wand’reér striiggléd on

hér journéy Wéary And waysdre. Real sapphics would require a strong accent on the italic syllables, & no accent on drift-, shel-, & strug-, besides minor differences.

SARCASM (Lit.); ‘ flesh-tearing ’.

satire (Lit.); ‘medley’. See HUMOUR.
