page: 622

+ genitive, & man’s creation (or usually the creation of man) an objective genitive.

suffix (Gram.); ‘ attached below ’. An affix (see above) at the end of a word or stem to make a derivative, as -cy, -ship, -ful, in tenan(t)cy, lordship, & fearful.

suggestio falsi (Rhet.); ‘ suggestion of the untrue’. The making of a statement from which, though it is not actually false, the natural & intended inference is a false one. E.g., if A, asked whether B is honest, replies, though he in fact knows no harm of B, that his principle is to live & let live & he is not going to give away his old friend, the questioner infers that A knows B to be dishonest. Cf. suppressio veri below.

supine (Gram.); ‘lying face up’. A Latin-grammar term for two verbal nouns (or adverbs) ending in -um, -u, of no importance in English grammar except as an occasional name for the infinitive with to (to go) as distinguished from the infinitive without to (go).

suppressio veri (Rhet.); * suppression of the true’. Intentional withholding of a material fact with a view to affecting a decision &c. ; cf. suggestio falsi above.

surd (Gram.); ‘ deaf, dumb’. See sonant above.

syllepsis & zeugma (Gram., Rhet.); ‘ taking together’, ‘ yoking’. Two figures distinguished by scholars, but confused in popular use, the second more familiar word being applied to both. Examples of syllepsis are: Miss Bolo went home in a flood of tears & a sedan chair./ He lost his hat & his temper./The flood of enthusiasm & flowers was terrific. /She was seen washing clothes with happiness & Pears’ soap.

Examples of zeugma are: Kill the boys & the luggage!/The pineapple was eaten & the apples neglected./With weeping eyes & hearts./See Pan with flocks, with fruits Pomona crowned. What is common to both figures is

+ that a single word (that italicized in each example) is in relations that seem to be but are not the same with a pair of others. The difference is that syllepsis is grammatically correct, but requires the single word to be understood in a different sense with each of its pair (e.g., in the last with expresses first accompaniment, but secondly instrument), whereas in zeugma the single word actually fails to give sense with one of its pair, & from it the appropriate word has to be supplied—destroy or plunder the luggage, the apples were neglected, bleeding hearts, Pan surrounded.

syllogism (Log.); ‘ combined reasoning’. Deduction, from two propositions containing three terms of which one appears in both, of a conclusion that is necessarily true if they are true; a s. of the simplest form is: All men are mortal; All Germans are men; Therefore all Germans are mortal. The predicate of the conclusion (here mortal) is called the major term, & the preliminary proposition containing it the major premise; the subject of the conclusion (here Germans) is called the minor term, & the preliminary proposition containing it the minor premise. The term common to both premises (here men) is called the middle term.

synaeresis (Gram.); ‘taking together’. The opposite of diaeresis (see above); i.e., the making of two separate vowel sounds into one, as when aerial is pronounced like Ariel, naive like nave, extraordinary as -trord-, or cocaine (originally three Syllables) as -cane.

synaloepha (Pros.); ‘ smearing together’. The non-sounding of a final vowel before an initial vowel, whether indicated by written elision as in Greek verse or left to the reader’s perception as in Latin verse. Cf. crasis & prodelision above, & synizesis below.

synaphea (Pros.); ‘joining together’. In most Latin & Greek
