page: 623

+ verse, the last syllable of each line is exempt from the strict metrical requirements, i.e. it may be either long or short, & is not, if it ends in a vowel, subject to elision before a vowel beginning the next line. But regularly in some metres, & by exception in others, the end of a line is regarded as continuous with the next line, & e.g. a syllable more than is needed to complete the metre of the line may be used, & elided. The treatment of lines as continuous is called synaphea; verse treated on the ordinary principle that each line is metrically detached from the next is said to have no s. English blank verse has no s., as is shown by the fact that the fifth foot may have one or even two extra (unaccented) syllables after the accented one that completes the metre. E.g., the line Look, where he comes! Not poppy nor mandragora is not an alexandrine, but a five-foot line with mandrag(ora) as the fifth foot.

syncopation (Gram., Mus.); ‘ cutting together’. In grammar, the use of syncope (see below). In music (a use lately much popularized by the advent of ragtime songs, jazz dances, &c.) the OED definition is: The action of beginning a note on a normally unaccented part of the bar & sustaining it into the normally accented part, so as to produce the effect of shifting back or anticipating the accent; the shifting of accent so produced.

syncope. (Gram.); ‘cutting together’. The shortening of a word by omission of a syllable or other part in the middle; cf. aphaeresis & apocope above. Symbology & pacifist & idolatry for symbolology, pacificist, & tdololatry, are examples.

synecdoche (Rhet.); ‘inclusive extended acceptation °. The mention of a part when the whole is to be understood, as in A fleet of fifty sail (i.e. ships), or vice verså as in England (i.e. the English cricket XI) won.

synesis (Gram.); ‘meaning’. The

+ adapting of the number &c. of a word to the meaning instead of to the grammatical form of the word that should determine it, as in A large number were (instead of was) killed.

synizesis (Pros.); ‘sitting together’. In Greek verse, the counting of two long vowels, the first ending & the second beginning a word, as one syllable, without written elision; rare except in certain combinations, as ère cv.

SYNONYM (Rhet.); ‘ with-name ’.

syntax (Gram.); ‘combined order’. The part of grammar concerned not with the etymology, formation, & inflexion, of words, but with the arrangement of them in sentences. Cf. accidence above.

tercet (Pros.); ‘third’. A threeline group, especially one of those composing terza rima (see below), or half the sestet of a sonnet (see above). Cf. -STICH.

term (Log.). For major, minor, middle, t. see syllogism above.

terza rima (Pros.); ‘third rhyme °. Dante’s metre in the Divina Commedia—lines of five iambic feet with an extra syllable, so rhymed that every rhyme occurs thrice in alternate lines, except the rhymes of the first & last lines of a canto, which occur twice only. In every tercet (see above) reckoned from the beginning, the first & third lines rhyme while the second introduces a new rhyme to be carried on by the first & third of the next tercet, giving an effect of unending continuity to the piece. The last tercet is converted by an extra line into a quartet, to avoid the leaving of a line unrhymed. Dante’s t. r. has double or feminine rhyme throughout. English imitations, since English has no such abundance of trochaic endings as Italian, have mostly single or masculine rhymes & ten instead of the Italian eleven syllables. The following lines of Byron, being three tercets & a line, show the same rhyme scheme at beginning & end as if they were a whole canto:—
