page: 625

Which marks security to please;

And scenes, long past, of joy &

pain,

Came wildering

o’er his aged

brain—

He tried to tune his harp in vain!

The pitying duchess praised its

chime,

And gave him heart, & gave him

time,

Till every string’s according glee

Was blended into harmony.

tristich (Pros.); ‘three-line’. See

-STICH.

trochee (Pros.); ‘running’. The

foot —v, as in manner or body.

tu quoque (Rhet.); ‘thou also’.

The meeting of a charge or argument not by disproof &c. but by

retorting it upon its user. E.g., Why don’t you go yourself? to a

civilian urging one to enlist.

turn-over (Lit.). A light newspaper | article named from beginning near

the end of the first page & continuing

into the second, & resembling the | middle article (see above), but _ usually of a more journalistic & less | literary tone. | ultima (Gram.); ‘last’. The last

syllable of a word; see antepenult | above.

uncial (Palaeog.); ‘inch’. The style of writing, consisting of large

letters, some of them rounded from

the angular capital forms, but not

run together, found in early Greek _& Latin MSS. The later & smaller

writing in MSS., in which the letters | are further rounded, slanted, & run

together, is called cursive. The

terms majuscule & minuscule are sometimes used as synonyms of | uncial & cursive, but strictly majus-

cule includes both capital & uncial | writing, whereas minuscule & cursive, applied to MSS., are coextensive.

undistributed middle (Log.). A | fallacy (see above). The u. m. is the Jogical name for a middle term that

is not made universal; see syllogism _above, where the middle term men

+ is necessary to the validity of the conclusion, & the fallacy of the u. m. consists in allowing a middle term that is not universalized to pass as universally true. Thus we know or believe that wet feet result in colds; we catch cold, & say ‘I must have got my feet wet’; i.e., in syllogistic form: Colds are wet-feet products. My trouble is a cold. Therefore my trouble is a wet-feet

product. Which would be sound if colds meant all colds, but not if it merely means some colds.

unvoiced (Gram.). See sonant above.

velar (Gram.); ‘of the curtain (i.e. the soft palate)’. Applied to gutturals made farther back than the hard palate, esp. in dealing with the original Indo-European language; see guttural & palatal above. vers libre (Lit.); ‘free verse’. Versification or verses in which different metres are mingled, or prosodical restrictions disregarded, or variable rhythm substituted for definite metre. A number of short specimens follow, collected from notices in the Times Literary Supplement:—

1. Colour, thick as dust, lay

Spattered about the highway—

Colour so bright that one would

think

White, blue, cherry-pink

Were made to clutch and

drink.

Colour that made one stop and

say:—

‘Earth, are you Heaven to-day?’

Colour that made one pray.

Lumps of colour, liquid and cool,

Cool and near,

Clear and gay,

Tumbled about my way. 2. Life—give me life until the end,

That at the very top of being,

The battle-spirit shouting in my

blood, 5 VERS LIBRE
