page: 629

+ 2. T. & inversion. No tariff-armed nation has got better entry for its potatoes in the U.S.A. market than has Ireland./The evidence could not now be given in the same sense, any more than could Mr Chamberlain’s speeches of 1903 be now delivered./ The success of the offensive will depend upon its ability to compel the enemy to lose men in a far heavier proportion than do his assailants./The visit will be much more direct in its effect upon the war than could be any indiscriminate bombing of open towns. Such inversions are deprecated; see INVERSION, esp. the section on inversion after relatives & comparatives, group 2 & comment 2.

3. Infinitive, or gerund &c., after rather t. They were all in favour of * dying in the last ditch’ rather than sign their own death-warrant. The justification of sign instead of signing is discussed in -ING 5.

4, Hardly t., scarcely t. But hardly had I landed at Liverpool than the Mikado’s death recalled me to Japan. Read no sooner for hardly, or when for than; & see under HARDLY 2, SCARCELY 1.

5. T. after the more, the less, &c. If we simply take the attitude of accepting her theory of naval policy, we make it so much the less probable that she will change her law than if we enter into violent contention. See THE for the wrongness of this construction.

6. T. as strong conjunction, weak conjunction, & preposition. In You treat her worse than I treat her, t. is a strong or subordinating conjunction, attaching an adverbial clause to its owner worse. In You treat her worse than I, the same account may be given with the explanation that there is an ellipsis of treat her; or t. may be called a weak or coordinating conjunction linking the two similarly constructed nouns you & I. In You treat her worse than me, the same two names for t. are possible, but the ellipsis is of you treat (not treat her), or the similarly constructed nouns are her & me (not you

+ & me); those are the possibilities if the sentence is said with the only sense that an educated person gives it. But an uneducated person may mean by it You treat her worse than I treat her; &, if it is to be so taken, ¢. is not a conjunction of either kind, but a preposition governing me. Doubts whether a word is a preposition or a conjunction or both are not unknown; see e.g. BUT 1 with regard to such phrases as all but he (conj.) & all but him (prep.); usage, also, changes in such matters with time. It is obvious, however, that recognition of ~ as a preposition makes some sentences ambiguous that could otherwise have only one meaning, & is to that extent undesirable. The OED statement on the preposition use is that, with the special exception of t. whom, which is preferred to t. who unless both are avoided, ‘it is now considered incorrect’. That incorrectness occurs in the four following examples, where us, him, & them, should be we, he, they:—That international accord will finish by reaching the great mass of the Socialist proletariat of Germany; no one wishes it more than us./On the other hand, the moment he should become weaker than us .. ./The butcher of the last few months has been a good deal more obliging than him of the war period./ Do not let us split up our energy by having more than one society; the idea is more than them all.

On the other hand, the subjective hes that follow had better have been him on the weak-conjunction principle, since the ellipsis required for the strong-conjunction explanation is in each piece awkward, esp. * no other artist than he was ° :—Jf ever Captain O’Connor gives us a second volume, we beg him to engage no other artist than he who illustrated the first./The Entente had no better friend than he on the other side of the Atlantic.

7. Double standard of comparison; more & moret. A ludicrous example
