page: 630

+ of conflicting thans, which almost any reader would detect, is: ‘I have less confidence than Mr Orr in the valuers being obliged to adopt his method of valuation than that we all shall be compelled to adopt theirs’. Less is clearly unequal to its two jobs; it can put Mr Orr in his place with regard to J, or the valuers with regard to us, but not both. Such a freak sentence would not be worth quoting but for the light it throws on a less flagrant but more frequent absurdity of the same kind, the following of more & more with than:—My eyes are more & more averse to light than ever./The order has gradually found more & more room for educational & learned work than was possible in the early centuries. Both sentences would be right if & more were omitted; but the introduction of it implies the tacit introduction of other thans which conflict with those that are expressed. More & more means more yesterday than the day before, & more today than yesterday; to combine that shifting date with the unshifting dates ever & in early centuries is impossible. T. should never be used after more & more.

8. T. after non-comparatives. Else, other, & their compounds, are the only words outside true comparatives whose right to be followed by t. is unquestioned; & ‘true comparatives ’ is to be taken as excluding such Latin words as superior & inferior, senior & junior, all of which, as well as prefer(able), require not t., but to; the use of t., on the analogy of other t., after different, diverse, opposite, &c., is * now mostly avoided’ (OED). Two examples follow of irregularities that should not appear in print; for what... t. read what... but or what else... t. ; & for increased, greater:—What, then, remains if this measure of agreement still continues than to dispose of the Bill by fair discussion in reasonable time?/There is obviously a vastly increased number of people who can £ do follow reasoned arguments in

+ books & newspapers than there was } before. educational methods were so } efficient. F|

9. T. with ellipsis or brachylogy Some kinds of ellipsis are so customary in the member of a sentence beginning with ¢. that to write out the whole sense would be much more noticeable than the ellipsis. f But hasty writers are encouraged by | this to think that any slovenliness will pass muster:—Many of them take tea & coffee to excess, & I am convinced myself the evil consequences | of excess of these beverages is much | greater than alcohol (are much } greater than those of alcohol)./The | procecdings were more humiliating to ourselves, to a great party, than I can recollect in the course of my political . experience (than anything I)./The interpretations of the words are more uniformly admirable than could, perhaps, have been produced by any other person (than any other person, perhaps, could have made them)./ This was due to the feeling that the Bill went further than public opinion warranted or was justified in the case of a private member’s measure (than what public opinion warranted or what was).

10. Flounderings. There is often a difficulty in getting the things to be compared into sufficient grammatical conformity to stand on either side of a than; but writers who take so little trouble about it as the authors of the following sentences must not be surprised if their readers are indignant:—In countries where a Referendum is a recognized part of the constitutional machinery, the House of Representatives is much more ready to pass, provisionally, constitutional reforms, & submit them to the electorate, than are Bills passed by the Houses of Parliament in a country like ours./ The Awkward Age, which was just published, was being received with a little more intelligence & sympathetic comprehension than had been the habit of greeting his productions.
