page: 632

+ that is justified as meaning ‘the well-known’. Compare also: The world needs peace. You will always find us at your side to preserve that peace bought by so much blood. Here the justification of that is its referring back to the peace of the previous sentence.

The misuse here objected to is still commoner in the plural; see THOSE.

that conj. 1. Kinds of clause attached by ¢. conj. 2. Omission of t. in substantival clauses. 3..7. & whether with doubi(ful). 4. Interim it. 5. T. & as after (tn) so far. 6. Non-parallel ¢.-clauses in combination.

1. Kinds of clause attached by t. conj. In adjectival or relative clauses that begin with t., it is a relative pronoun, not a conjunction; see for these the next article. T. conj. attaches a substantival clause to the verb, noun, &c., to which it is object (I hear that he is dead), subject (T. pain exists is certain), in apposition (The fact t. pain exists), &c. 3 or else an adverbial clause to the word &c. modified (The heat is such that it will boil water). The only point needing to be insisted on is that in either case, whether the t.-clause is substantival or adverbial, the sentence‘out of which it is made by prefixing ¢. must be of the statement form, not a question, command, or exclamation. Sentences of those other kinds can be subordinated or turned into clauses, but not by prefixing t. The mistake is not made by good writers, but yet occurs often enough to need mention. One way of avoiding it is so to arrange that there is unsubordinated quotation of the question &c., & the other is, before subordinating, to convert the question &c. into a statement giving the same meaning. Of the following examples all but the third are of impossible substantival clauses, & that (Crises. . .) adverbial:—ZJ should like to point out to Reformer that, had the brave, defender of Ladysmith known

+ he could hold out for another 2} months, would he not have informed General Buller of the fact? (a. I should | Had .. . D'be would surely have informed)./Your | like to ask R. this: correspondent suggests that if we lend money let us send it to Canada for railways there (a. suggests: If... b. we should send). /Crises, international or national, arise so rapidly in these ` days that who can say what a few years may bring forth? (a. arise rapidly in these days; who... | b. that none can)./One can only comment that if such a refuge was open to the Romans, how much more | available is it to our own people, with i their vast territories over the seas, comprising some of the suavest climes | & most fertile soils on our planet! . (a. comment: If... b. Romans, it is much more available).

2. Omission of ¢. in substantival clauses. I know that my Redeemer liveth: I know I can trust you. These are equally good English; if that were shifted from the first to the second, both would still be grammatically correct, idiomatic than as itis. That is, the use or omission of the t. of a sub- but each less | stantival clause depends partly on | whether the tone colloquial. But a glance at the is elevated or following examples of obviously | wrong omission will show that there | is not free choice after all verbs or | in all constructions:—I assert the feeling in Canada today is such | against annexation that . . ./Sir,—In reply to Mr Baker, may I point out in the circular entitled ‘A Word to English Women’ the opposition of South Africa to the Plumage Bill is. expressly proclaimed?/Sir,—I am abashed to see in my notice of Mr Bradley Birt’s book **“ Sylhet” Thackeray’ I have credited the elder W. M. Thackeray with ‘ sixteen’ children./For instance, you state the | exemption of incomes under £250 from income-tax would reduce taxpayers by six millions./The enormous rents which would be asked for new houses would naturally render owners
