page: 635

+ have received & are bound to work with. It does not follow that the use we are now making of it is the best it is capable of; & perhaps the line of improvement lies in clearer differentiation between that & which, & restoration of that to the place from which, in print, it tends to be ousted.

A supposed, & misleading, distinction is that that is the colloquial & which the literary relative. That is a false inference from an actual but misinterpreted fact; it is a fact that the proportion of thats to whichs is far higher in speech than in writing; but the reason is not that the spoken thats are properly converted into written whichs, but that the kind of clause properly begun with which is rare in speech with its short detached sentences, but very com- -mon in the more complex & continuous structure of writing, while the kind properly begun with that is equally necessary in both. This false inference, however, tends to verify itself by persuading the writers who follow rules of thumb actually to change the original that of their thoughts into a which for presentation in print.

The two kinds of relative clause, to one of which that & to the other of which which is appropriate, are the defining & the non-defining; & if writers would agree to regard that as the defining relative pronoun, & which as the non-defining, there would be much gain both in lucidity & in ease. Some there are who follow this principle now; but it would be idle to pretend that it is the practice either of most or of the best writers.

A defining relative clause 1s one that identifies the person or thing meant by limiting the denotation of the antecedent: Each made a list of books that had influenced him; not books generally, but books as defined by the that-clause. Contrast with that: I always buy his books, which have influenced me_ greatly; the clause does not limit his books,

+ a reason (=for they have), or adds a new fact (=& they have). There is no great difficulty, though often more than in this chosen pair, about deciding whether a relative clause is defining or not; & the practice of using that if it is, & which if it is not, would also be easy but for certain peculiarities of that. The most important of these is its insistence on being the first word of its clause; it cannot, like whom & which, endure that a preposition governing it should, by coming before it, part it from the antecedent or the main sentence; such a preposition has to go, instead, at the end of the clause; that is quite in harmony with the closer connexion between a defining, (or that-) clause & the antecedent than between a non-defining (or which-) clause & the antecedent; but it forces the writer to choose between ending his sentence or clause with a preposition, & giving up that for which. In the article PREPOSITION AT END it is explained that to shrink with horror from ending with a preposition is no more than foolish superstition; but there are often particular reasons for not choosing that alternative, & then the other must be taken, & the fact accepted that the preposition-governed case of that is borrowed from which, & its possessive from who; its cases are, then: subj. that; obj. that; poss. whose; prep.-preceded (in, by, from, for, &c.) which. Another peculiarity of that is that in the defining clauses to which it is proper it may, if it is not the subject, be omitted & yet operative (The man you saw means the same as The man that you saw), while which in the non-defining clauses to which it is proper must be expressed (This fact, which you admit, condemns you cannot be changed without altering the sense to This fact, you admit, condemns you).

The following sentences (or parts of sentences) are re-writings, in Conformity with the account already given of the difference between that
