page: 637

+ shortly here what is explained more fully under wHICH WITH AND OR BUT, that a defining & a nondefining clause, whether that is used in both or which in both, or that in one & which in the other, ought not to be coupled by and or but as if they were parallel things. The verbatim extracts are:—It examines the rat which carries the flea which harbours the germ which infects the poor Indian.

b. The Bishop of Salisbury is the third bishop which his family has -given to the world.

c. Even the greatest enemy which this country may possess at this hour cannot fail to admire...

d. Visualize the wonderful things the airman sees & all the feelings which he has. Two thats, one that, or no expressed relative (=a suppressed that) will do equally well.

e. It seems that the Derna that arrived safely was sent in the ordinary way. The defining that-clause would be right only if there were several Dernas, of which only one arrived safely.

f. It is extremely unwise to try to reinforce a bond, which is quite adequate, with others which might only prove disruptive.

. Among other distinguished visitors which the Crawfords had at Rome was Longfellow.

h. The greater proportion of Consols are held by persons or corporations which never place them on the market.

i. Even in the cathedral organ-loft there are grievances which fiourish & reforms that call for attention. The change from which to that is mere ELEGANT VARIATION, to which even two whichs would be preferable.

k. It is necessary to root out the autocratic principles which underlie German militarism, that threatens the peace of the world. ELEGANT VARIATION again; which, having been wrongly chosen the first time, is wrongly rejected the second time for variety’s sake.

l. King George & Queen Mary have been welcomed with the pomp & cir-

+ cumstance which may well attend an event which is new in the experience of India. That is the right relative in both places; but, though its repetition is no worse than that of which, it is as well to avoid it.

m. A hatred of the rule that is not only unable to give them protection, but which strikes at them blindly & without discrimination. - What has caused the change from that to which here is the writer’s realizing that but that is somehow undesirable; it is so, because of the repugnance of that, mentioned above, to being parted from its antecedent; but the way out is to let the previous that carry on for both clauses, a task it is quite equal to.

n. He provides a philosophy which disparages the intellect & that forms a handy background for all kinds of irrational beliefs.

o. She cannot easily retain conirol of the threads of culture which she has let drop, & now lie in muddled tangles at her feet. The first clause is defining, & should have that; the second is defining or non-defining, being unessential to the identification & yet capable of being regarded as helping it. Against allowing the that to carry on, as in m, there is the objection, disregarded indeed by the writer, that the two relatives are in different cases; it is therefore best to make the second clause nondefining, & use which, without and.

p- President Wilson has been very prompt with his reply to the Note which Dr Solf sent to President Wilson, & was received in Washington yesterday morning. Similar to o, except that this time the second clause is certainly non-defining.

q. The life-work for which Acton collected innumerable materials but never wrote was a History of Liberty. Restoration of the defining that often solves the difficulty seen here & in the next piece, that of a relative under double government, first by a preposition, & then by a verb; the postponing of the preposition, abnormal though possible with which,
