page: 638

+ is with that not only normal but necessary.

r. You give currency to a subtle fallacy across which one often comes, but does not like to see in one’s favourite paper.

s. After a search for several days he found a firm which had a large quantity of them & which they had no use for. Both clauses are defining, & that is required; but the relatives have not the same antecedent, & the and is therefore (see WHICH WITH AND OR BUT) wrong. But there is a legitimate choice between that... for & for which, & the latter gives an escape from one thatclause depending on another.

t. No one can fail to be struck by the immense improvement which they have wrought in the condition of the people, & which often is quite irrespective of the number of actual converis. Defining &non-defining clauses joined by and; see above.

v. There will be a split in the Lutheran Church comparable to the quarrel that has broken out in the Catholic Church on the question of modernism, but which seems to have run its course. The second clause may be either defining or non-defining; if defining, that (or rather nothing, cf. m) is required instead of which; if non-defining, but must be omitted, & which kept.

w. The class to which I belong & which has made great sacrifices will not be sufferers under the new plan. Defining & non-defining wrongly coupled; omit and, & naturally prefer (that) I belong to to the equally legitimate to which I belong as better both in clearness & in sound.

x. The Pan-German papers are calling for the resignation of Herr von Kiihlmann. in consequence of the speeches which he has just made in the Reichstag, & in which he admitted that it was impossible for Germany to win by force of arms.

y. All honour to these men for the courage & wisdom they have shown, & which are of infinitely greater value to the country than... The second

+ clause is clearly non-defining; the and should go, whether or not the difference between that & which is — accepted.

2. That-ism. As has been explained, the tendency in modern writing is for which to supersede that even in the functions for which ¢. is better fitted. On the other hand some writers seem deliberately, where most other people would use which,to choose that under the impression that its archaic sound adds the grace of unusualness to their style. A few examples will show that in non- © defining clauses to be certainly noticeable, & the reader will perhaps conclude that its noticeability is not a grace:—But her fate, that has lately ` been halting in tis pursuit of her, ` overtakes her at last./This is clearly recognized by Mr Macfall in his eloquent & well illustrated monograph, ° that is more than a mere record of | the fortunes of its titular subject./ Our policy in Mesopotamia, our suppression of Egyptian mantfestations, & the Amritsar tragedy, have all earned severe criticism among Americans in Europe, that in turn has found an exaggerated reflection in the United Siates./At Lingard’s shout for Jorgenson, that in the profound silence struck his ears ominously, he raised his eyes./Netther ..., nor..., nor .. . will save the country if the town, that has all the power in its hands, is content to let it die./His arguments on these points were heard by the great audience of business men in almost unbroken silence, that gave place to an outburst of applause when heni:

3. Elliptical that as relative adverb. The familiar yet remarkable fact that a preposition governing that does not precede it but follows it at a distance has been mentioned in 1. The idiom now to be noticed may be traceable to that fact. In the five following examples that serves as a sort of relative adverb, equivalent to which with a preposition:—It cannot treat any section of Labour with the inconsequence & variability
