page: 645

+ natural sound though they happen

This account of the mistake finds support in: He remarked that the opposition to them increased with the more territory that they occupied, where the really is the adjective (or ‘ article’) & that is therefore not ungrammatical, but where it is nevertheless plain that the writer had in his head the double the construction: the more territory we occupy, the greater is the opposition. Otherwise he would certainly not have said ‘ with the more territory °, but ‘ with the territory ’.

It may perhaps, then, safely be laid down that when, in the measure clause of a the . . . the construction, the question arises whether a relative pronoun should be inserted, the answer is no. But the quotation last used in reaching that result, with its halting between the construction we are considering & another, suggests the need of paying proper respect to this exceedingly neat idiom, of not confusing it with other forms of expression, & of using it in its most effective shape & in the most suitable context. A pair of specimens, one good & one bad in various ways, May serve as text:—

A, good

4

The more the merrier.

B, bad

The economic welfare of a community is likely to be greater (1) the larger is the average volume of the national dividend, (2) the larger is the average share of the national dividend that accrues to the poor, & (3) the less variable are the annual volume of the national dividend & the annual share that accrues to the poor.

The idiom may be described as a sliding scale stating that one process of inerease or decrease varies with the variation in another, & the two parts are the measure & the thing measured. Points of merit are: brevity; close correspondence between the two parts; occurrence of

+ the in both parts; measure first & thing measured afterwards; no inversion in measure clause; no inversion in thing measured if it stands first, but inversion common if it has its normal later place. Al these points are found in A, except that its elliptical brevity leaves the inversion question open; but the completion could only give The more we are (not are we) the merrier shall we (or we shall) be. B fails in almost all of them; it is long; the compound nature of the measure prevents neat correspondence; the thing measured lacks its the; the thing measured stands first; & there is inversion in all three parts of the measure. Most of these faults are curable by some such rewriting as this: The larger the average volume of the national dividend is, & the larger average share of this. accrues to the poor, & the less this volume & this share vary from year to year, the greater is the economic welfare of the community likely to be. But the fact is that this idiom is suitable chiefly to short emphatic pointed sentences, & should not have been set to so elaborate a task.

A specimen or two may be added with comments:—The wider was the League the greater it would be. A suitable case; but read The wider the League was, the greater would it (or it would) be; for the rights & wrongs of inversion, see the article so named, especially the section Afier relatives & comparatives./The less distinct was the message which he felt impelled to deliver, the more beautiful is often the speech in which he proclaims it. A particularly suitable case, in spite of its length, because of the detailed correspondence of the two parts; but read the message was instead of was the message./The less likely is the satisfaction of France’s claims—moraily just, but practically impossible—the more frantic grow these appeals to force on the part of certain deputies. An unsuitable case, because the parenthesis, & the last phrase (omr
