page: 646

+ &c.), disturb the correspondence. If these two could be omitted, the sentence would be well enough, except that the inversion should be got rid of by either shifting is to after claims or omitting it—the latter for choice.

theatre, -ter. See -RE & -ER.

their, as the possessive of they, is liable to the same kinds of misuse, for discussion of which see THEY. A mere specimen or two will here suffice without further comment than that in each their is wrong:— Dr Hollander has brought within 200 pages a vast amount of evidence from “the medical literature of the entire civilized world’ ; this is arranged in chapters according to their origin./ A Unionist journal, having discovered a mare’s nest in tts attempt to show - - +, is now trying to inflict a sort of revenge upon Mr Lloyd George for their own mistake by . . ./But each knew the situation of their own bosom, & could not but guess at that of the other./But does anyone in their heart really believe that Ireland is only that?/No one can be easy in their minds about the present conditions of examination./But every one of them must be present at the Durbar io pledge their loyalty to their King- Emperor.

theirs. See ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES.

theism. See prism for the difference.

them. For misuses common to them & they, see THEY. The reflexive use of them= themselves is archaic, & as such usually to be avoided; but the following quotation is enough to show that with an archaic verb it is not well to avoid the archaic reflexive: Together the two—employce & director—hied themselves to the Great Central Company’s loco. superintendent’s office. Read hied them to.

theoretic(al). Except that -ic, -ics, are the noun forms, & that -ical is probably more often used in all adjective senses than -ic, the two words are indifferent. See -10(A1).

there. In the well-known special use of there before be, exist, & such | verbs, two things call for notice. First, the use is anticipatory, i.e. | there accompanies & announces inversion of verb & subject, standing in the place usually occupied before the verb by the subject; consequently, when there is no inversion, this there is out of place, & should be struck out, e.g., in: Bombay is without a doubt the headquarters of whatever cricket there exists in India today. An exception must however be made for the verb be ` itself; * whatever cricket there is’, or ‘who there was to see it’, is English, though ‘ whatever cricket | there exists’ & ‘who there wit- | nessed it’ are not. The reason is easy to see: there has become, | where there is inversion, so regular , an attendant on is, are, was, &c., in their very frequent use as parts of the substantive verb or verb of existence that even when there is no inversion the need is felt of inserting it as a sign of the particular sense (i.e. as substantive verb) in which is &c. is to be taken; but with other verbs, whose meaning is not obscured by the doubt whether they are here & now substantive or auxiliary or copulative, no such sign is wanted, & there is used only with inversion.

Secondly, since in the there idiom verb precedes subject, there is a danger of the verb’s being hastily put into the wrong number; for examples see NUMBER, 7.

thereafter, thereat, therein, thereof. See remark under THEREFOR.

thereanent is in the same kind of use aS ANENT.

thereby. 1. The use of t. after a number &c. (half a dozen or t.) is Scotch, the English idiom being or thereabouts or or so. 2. A special tribunal will be constituted to try the accused, thereby assuring him the guarantees essential to the right of defence. For this use of t. with an UNATTACHED PARTICIPLE (assuring’s
