page: 647

+ noun is not tribunal, but an inferred constitution), see that article & THUS, which is more frequently resorted to in similar difficulties. In the following example it is clear that thereby means by the salary &c.; but whether affording agrees with salary &c., so that the salary affords encouragement by the salary, or with ‘firm ’ looming in the distance, the writer probably knows as little as we:—The latter is usually the recipient of a liberal salary & expenses, with periodical increments, holidays, & security, thereby affording every encouragement to promote the interests of his firm.

therefor, therefore. ‘The two are now distinct in accent & meaning as well as in spelling. Therefor is accented on the second syllable, therefore on the first; & therefor is - to be used only where for that, for it, for them, &c., could stand equally well. In grammatical terms, therefore is an adverbial conjunction, & therefor an adverbial or adjectival phrase (adverbial in He was punished therefor, & adjectival in The penalty therefor is death). The essential function of therefore is to make clear the relation of its sentence to what has gone before; that of therefor is the same as that of thereafter, thereat, therein, & thereof, to give a touch of formality or archaism to the sentence in which it is substituted for the for it &c. of natural speech.

therefore. Apart from the danger of meaning therefor & writing therefore, the only caution needed is that commas should be used or not used with discretion before & after the class of words to which ¢. belongs. Like then, accordingly, nevertheless, consequently, & many others, it is an adverb often (itself, indeed, almost always) used as a conjunction; & it is a matter of taste whether such adverbial conjunctions shall or shall not be comma’d off from the rest of the sentence in which they stand. Light punc-

647

+ tuators usually omit the commas (or comma, if t. stands first), heavy punctuators usually give them, & both are within their rights. But it must be remembered that the putting of a comma before t. inevitably has the effect of throwing a strong accent on the preceding word, & that some preceding words are equal to that burden, & some are not. From the three following examples it will be at once apparent that although can bear the commas, & the ands cannot:—Although, therefore, the element of surprise could not come into play on this occasion, the Germans were forced to withdraw./ It would be impossible for the State to pay such prices, and, therefore, we must content ourselves with . . ./ Malaria was the cause of avery large proportion of the sickness, and, therefore, the disease deserves especial study by...

Again, the word 7 is one that can seldom be emphasized & consequently abhors a comma’d therefore such as follows it in:—ZIt, therefore, comes rather as a shock to find simultaneously in many papers this morning articles declaring . . ./It, therefore, behoves ihose who have made the passage of the Bill possible to attend once more. But where emphasis can reasonably be laid on čí, & it can mean ‘it more than others’ or the like, the commas become at least tolerable; so: It is a concrete & definite idea, the embodiment of which in practicable shape is by far the most urgent constructive problem of international statesmanship; & it, therefore, calls for the most careful examination.

Many words, however, are neither naturally emphatic like although nor naturally unemphatic like and & it; & after them care should be taken not to use the commas with therefore except when emphasis is intended. The personal pronouns are good examples; in the following, we ought to be able to conclude from the commas that ‘we’ are being deliberately contrasted with others
