page: 648

+ who believe otherwise: We, therefore, find great comfort in believing that Canadian loyalty depends not OI: ss NOT OT wit o OULION -a TETO: bably that is the case, & the commas are justified; but if the light punctuation were generally accepted as the rule with these adverbial conjunctions, & commas used only when emphasis on the preceding word was desired, one of the numberless small points that make for lucidity would be gained.

A curious specimen may be added: We therefore are brought again to the study of symptoms. Here it is obvious that We is unemphatic; but the writer, though he has rightly abstained from commas, has been perverse enough to throw an accent on We by other means, viz by putting therefore before instead of after are; see POSITION OF ADVERBS A.

thesis. Pl. thesés, see LATIN PLURALS. Pron. thé- or thé-. For the metrical sense, see TECHNICAL TERMS.

they, them, their. 1. One, anyone, everybody, nobody, &c., followed by their &c. 2. Confusions with nouns of multitude & _ personifications. 3. Unsatisfactory pronoun reference. 4. Case.

1. One &c. followed by their &c. The grammar of the recently issued appeal to the Unionists of Ireland, signed by Sir Edward Carson, the Duke of Abercorn, Lord Londonderry, & others, is as shaky as its arguments. The concluding sentence runs: ‘ And we trust that everybody interested will send a contribution, however small, to this object, thereby demonstrating their (sic) personal interest in the anti- Home Rule campaign’. Archbishop Whately used to say that women were more liable than men to fall into this error, as they objected to identifying ‘everybody’ with ‘him’. But no such excuse is available in this case. Their should be his; & the origin of the mistake is clearly reluctance to recognize that the right shorten-

+ ing of the cumbersome he or she, his or her, &c., is he or him or his though the reference may be to both sexes. Whether that reluctance is less felt by the male is doubtful; at any rate the OED quotes examples from Fielding (Everyone in the house were in their beds), Goldsmith, Sydney Smith, Thackeray (A person can’t help their birth), Bagehot (Nobody in their senses), & Bernard Shaw. It also says nothing more severe of the use than that it is t Not favoured by grammarians’ ; that the grammarians are likely, nevertheless, to have their way on the point is suggested by the oldfashioned sound of the Fielding & Thackeray sentences quoted; few good modern writers would flout the grammarians so conspicuously. The question is discussed in NUMBER, 11; examples of the wrong their, in addition to those that follow, will be found under THEIR; & the article ONE, 5, 6, 7, may be useful. The lecturer said that everybody loved their ideals. / Nobody in their senses would give sixpence on the strength of a promissory note of that kind./Elsie Lindtner belongs to the kind of person — who suddenly discovers the beauty of the stars when they themselves are dull & have no one to talk with. The last is amusing by the number of the emendations that hurry tothe rescue: E. L. is one of the people who discover...; ... kind of people who discover ...3; ... when he himself is|... 3 ... when she herselfis -mins . . . the kind of woman who discovers ... when she herself is... As to *... when she herself is .. .” without further change, it is needless to remark that each, one, person, &c., may be answered by her instead of him & his when the reference, though formally to both sexes, is especially, as here, to the female.

2. Confusions with nouns of multitude & personifications. What is meant appears from the quotations following, with Government, is, & them, in the first, & journal, its, is, & their, in the second:—The Govern-
