page: 650

+ ABLE. Protection is only a thinkable expedient on the assumption that competition in the home market is to be made unprofitable.

thirty. The thirties, ’thirties. See TWENTIES.

thirty-twomo, 32mo. See FOLIO., Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 6.

this. 1. This three weeks, this five years, &c., are as good English as these &c., the numeral & the plural noun being taken as the singular name of a period; but the modern grammatical conscience is sometimes needlessly uneasy about it.

2. For I will not do &c. this thing, see NOVELESE, & STOCK PATHOS.

thistle. The -t- is silent; see PRONUNCIATION.

thither. See HITHER. An OED quotation shows how the word is still available, though rarely indeed, when real ambiguity would result from there; it is from a guidebook: The road thither leaves the main road at right angles.

-TH NOUNS. The remarks made in the article -AL NOUNS apply also to the invention of new or revival of obsolete nouns in -rH. There are large numbers of well established words such as truth, depth, growth; but the suffix is no longer a living one (on this point see HYBRID DE- RIVATIVES), & the use of new or revived -th nouns is chiefly a poetasters’ trick. Some specimens are: greenth, gloomth, & blueth, all made by Horace Walpole; blowth (blossom &c.), more or less obsolete; spilth, a revival; & illth, made by Ruskin as antithesis to wealth in its older & wider sense.

those. 1. For those kind of, those sort of, see KIND, SORT.

2. Those (adj.)+noun+adjective. (Lhe winner will be selected from) those persons named; persons is the noun, & named the adjective. This arrangement is now very common in newspaper writing of the inferior kind, but is so little warranted by good literary usage that the OED,

+ which illustrates the constructions of which this is a hybrid product, does not quote a single example of | it; cf. what is said of the same construction under THAT adj., 2. The word adjective in the formula above is to be taken as including participles active or passive, & adjectival phrases, as well as simple adjectives—whatever, in fact, is equivalent to a defining relative clause (those persons following, those persons named, those persons in the list below, those persons present—all equivalent to the persons that &c.). Those named is a proper substitute for (the) persons named, the pronoun (not adjective) those taking the place of the noun persons with or without the; & (the) persons named is itself a shortening of the persons that are named. But those persons named is a mixture of the long form (the) persons that are named & the short form those named, in which mixture what was gained by using the pronoun those instead of the persons is thrown away by reinserting the noun & making those an adjective. It is true that there is another legitimate form in which those does appear as an adjective, viz those persons who are named; but that is a form in which not lightness & brevity, but on the contrary formality & precision, are aimed at; it is therefore not one that should be abbreviated.

All this is offered not as a proof that those persons named is impossible grammar, but as a reasonable explanation of what is believed to be the fact, that good writers do not say it, but say either (the) persons named or those named. The following quotation is useful as containing samples both of the right & of the wrong usage: Jt depends upon the extent to which those in authority understand their responsibility, & are able so to make their influence felt as to enlist the active support of those boys with most influence in the school. Those in authority is right, whereas those persons in authority
