page: 651

+ would have been wrong; & those boys with most influence is wrong, & should be either the boys, or those, with &c. Several examples follow with corrections:—Moreover, the Valley of Kings lacks those conveniences & facilities essential to expeditious & efficient work (read lacks the)./On several of those points concerned with the practical application of the general principles there is room for discussion (read the points)./The best advice the Allies can give to those peoples bordering on Russia is to ... . (read the peoples)./For he possessed just those qualities needed—courage, energy, driving power, & ... (read just the)./The fitting of such a contrivance must give to those people employing it a considerable advantage (read to people, to the people, or to those, employing)./The Bishop of Oxford combines a personal appreciation of Dr Driver with a reply to those recent charges made by Canon Rashdall & Professor Bethune-Baker of inconsistency in his own attitude towards Biblical criticism (read to the)./This simply expressed estimate will be endorsed by all those friends on this side of Mr Howells. This means ‘ by all those friends of Mr Howells who are on this side (of the Atlantic)’; but this particular development of the newfangled those makes the sentence almost unintelligible; the friends is at least better.

The following use of those is quite another matter, & of no importance, but worth giving as a curiosity: It is impossible for the Ambassador to issue invitations to those other than Americans.

though. 1. Though)(although. 2. As though. 3. (Al)though with participle or adjective. 4, Illogical use.

1. Though)(although. The definite differences between the two hardly need stating; they are: first, that though can & although cannot be used as an adverb, placed last (He said he would come; he didwt, though); & secondly that though is alone possible

+ in the as though idiom. In the use common to both forms, i.e. as a complete conjunction, no definite line can be drawn between them, & either is always admissible; but it is safe to say, in the first place, that though is much commoner, & secondly that the conditions in which although is likely to occur are (a) in the more formal style of writing, (b) in a clause that does not follow but precedes the main sentence, & (c) in stating an established fact rather than a mere hypothesis: He wouldn't take an umbrella though it should rain cats & dogs; Although he attained the highest office, he was of mediocre ability.

2. As though. It is not as though there has been cruelty & injustice. Had, in place of has, is the only right English; see as, 4, for discussion & examples.

3. (Although with participle or adjective. Like other conjunctions (if, when, while, &c.), (al)though is often followed by the significant word only of its clause, the subject & the auxiliary or copulative verb being readily supplied; so Though annoyed, I consented. The convenience of this is obvious, but care is needed, as appears from the two quotations that follow:—Though new to mastership herself, a lady master is not new to the pack, for she follows Mrs Garvey in the position. / Though sympathizing as I do with Poland, I cannot resist the impression that it would be doing Poland an ill service to... The point shown by the first is that the omission must not be made when it leaves the participle or adjective apparently attached to a wrong noun; new in fact belongs to she, but seems to belong to a lady master; if she is had not been omitted after though, all would have been in order. In the Poland sentence, the correction really required is to omit though, ‘ sympathizing as I do’ being selfsufficient; but, even if we suppose as I do omitted, there is a wrong sound about though sympathizing
