page: 654

+ a business word in certain technical senses, it has become archaic in its general meaning of tillage or tilled land; &, being therefore a favourite with those who affect poetic diction, it has unfortunately begotten a progeny that has not its own claims to respect; see -TH NOUNS.

timbale. See FRENCH WORDS.

timbre. See FRENCH WoọoRrDs; it has been proposed to substitute the spelling & pronunciation tămber.

time. Under this, as the most general term, may be collected some synonyms. Of the five following words cach is given a single definition with a view merely to suggesting the natural relation between them. ‘Though each is often used in senses here assigned not to it but to another (or not mentioned at all), the words date, epoch, era, period, cycle, form a series when they are strictly interpreted, & to keep that series in mind is helpful in choosing the right word.

A date is the identifiable or intelligibly stated point of time at which something occurs.

An epoch is the date of an occurrence that starts things going under new conditions.

An era is the time during which the conditions started at an epoch continue.

A period is an era regarded as destined to run its course & be succeeded by another.

A cycle is a succession of periods itself succeeded by a similar succession.

A time, & an age, are words often exchangeable with all or most of the above, & less precise in meaning. Cf. also the words term, span, spell, season, duration, juncture, moment, occasion. time, v., makes -mable; see MUTE E. timeous. See TIMOUS. timid makes -EST; sec -ER & -EST, 4. timous, timeous. Omit the -e- ; see Mute E. Whereas its sole function is to preserve the i sound, the OED states that it actually results

+ in the erroneous

pronunciations ti’mius & ti’mius.

tinge makes -geable, see -ABLE 1; but tinging, see MUTE E.

tinker, v. It was an undesirable thing to be always tinkering with this particular trade. The idiomatic preposition is at, not with; the latter is probably due to confusion with tamper with; see ANALOGY.

tinsel makes -lled, -lly; see -LL-, -L-.

tint, shade, hue. All are available as substitutes for the dominant word colour. Different hues are, so far as meaning goes, simply different colours, so called because for good or bad reasons the everyday word is held to be unworthy of the context. Different tints & shades are properly speaking not different colours but varieties of any particular colour, tints produced by its modification with various amounts of white, & shades by various admixtures of black. These distinctions, however little present to the mind, have a growing influence in determining the choice of a synonym for colour.

tintinnabulum. PI. -la.

-tion & other -ion endings. Turgid flabby English of the kind common in inferior leading articles is full of abstract nouns; the commonest ending of abstract nouns is -tion; & to count the -ion words in what one has written, or, better, to cultivate an ear that without special orders challenges them as they come, is one of the simplest & most effective means of making oneself less unreadable. It is as an unfailing sign of a nouny abstract style that a cluster of -ion words is chiefly to be dreaded; but some nouny writers are so far from being awake to that aspect of it that they fall into a still more obvious danger, & so stud their sentences with -ions that the mere sound becomes an offence. These points are so simple that quotations need not be multiplied:— Speculation on the subject of the constitution of the British representation at the Washington inaug-
