page: 656

+ factors are the obvious necessity to put

an end once & for all to the Turkish

misrule over alien races, & the...

To assert & to put should clearly be

of asserting & of putting. Discussion

will be found under GERUND 8 ; but

it may be added here that it is not

difficult to account for this very

common lapse, sequences apparently similar being familiar enough. There is, for instance, nothing against saying It was an impossibility to assert himself, or It is an obvious necessity to put an end; the difference is that to assert &c. & to put &c. are not there, as in the examples, adjectival appendages of impossibility & necessity, but the real subjects of the sentences, which might have run To assert himself was an impossibility, & To put an end to so-&-so is a necessity.

toady, v. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

tobacco. PI. -os; see -o(£)s 3.

tobacconist. For the form, see -1s7.

toboggan makes -aner, -aning; see -N-, -NN-.

toco, -ko. Usually spelt with Cs no plural. `

today, tomorrow, tonight. The lingering of the hyphen, which is still usual after the to of these words, is a very singular picce of conservatism; it helps no-one to pronounce, it distinguishes between no words that without it might be confused, &, as the fo retains no vestige of its original meaning, a reminder that the words are compounds is useless. Moreover, it is probably true that few people in writing ever dream of inserting the hyphen, its omission being corrected every time by those who profess the mystery of printing. toffee. The successive forms seem tô have been taffy, toffy, toffee; it mmay be guessed that the last is due to the influence of coffee, but it is now established. together. All t. must be carefully distinguished from ALTOGETHER, often written instead of it. toilet, -ette. The word should be

completely anglicized in spelling &

sound (not -e’tte, nor twahlé’t). The —

verb, =to wash, dress, &c., is chiefly

U.S. ; adj. & p.p. -eted, see -T-, -TT-.

toilless. So written, but pronounced with two separate ls; see SKILL- LESS s.f.

token. For synonyms see SIGN. By the same t., more by t., are phrases that probably those who know most about their meaning are least likely to use; the one thing clear is that, when they were part of everyday English, they did not mean what they are usually made to by those who now adorn their writings with them. See Warpour STREET.

toko. See roco.

Toledo. Pl. -os; see -o(E£)s 6.

toll. For synonyms see TAX.

tomato. Pl. -oes; see -o(E)S 1.

Tommy. See SOBRIQUETS.

tomorrow, to-m-. See TODAY.

ton (fashion). See FRENCH WORDS.

ton (weight). Ton, the weight; tun, the cask, vat, & wine-measure.

tondo. Pl. tondos, see -o(r)s 6; or tondi (-é).

tone, v., makes -nable; see MUTE E.

tonight, to-n-. See TODAY.

tonneau. See FRENCH WORDS.

tonsil makes tonsillitis; -LL-, -L-.

tonsorial. A word used almost only in PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

tonsure, v., makes -rable; MUTE £E.

too. 1. With passive participle. 2. Illogical uses.

1. With passive participles t. is subject to the same limitations, though the point has been less noticed, as VERY; the line, however, between the adjectival & the verbal p.p. is often hard to draw; in the following two quotations the addition of with &c. & in &c. to the participles turns the scale, & too much should have been written instead of too:—Belfast is too occupied with its own affairs, too confident of itself, to be readily stirred to any movement which would endanger its prosperity. /But he was too engrossed in Northern Europe to realize his failure. 6 TOO 2. Illogical uses. These are very
