page: 658

tout court, tout ensemble. See

| pronunciation. See also FALSE FRENCH WORDS.

tow- & towing-. There is perhaps an impression that in the compounds

| Trade mark & trade union, no hy- (e.g. -boat, -line, -net, -path, -post,

| phens, see Hypuens 3B. In -rope) towing- is the correct form, & tow- a slovenly modern abbreviation. But it appears from the OED that tow-boat & tow-line are the only forms recorded for boat & line (the latter 1719), & tow-rope is about a century older than towing-rope; towing-path, however, is as much older than tow-path. There is in fact no reason for avoiding either form. Cf. wash(ing)-stand.

toward, towards, tcwardly. The adjectives toward (including the predicative use as in a storm is toward, i.e. coming) & towardly are pronounced td’ard(li). The prepositions are best pronounced tord(z), but in recent use the influence of spelling is forcing toowor’d(z) on the half educated. The adjectives in all senses are obsolescent, or at any rate archaic. Of the prepositions the -s form is the prevailing one, & the other tends to become literary on the one hand & provincial on the other.

towel makes -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

town. T. clerk, t. council, t. hall, t. house, & t. talk, should all be written as two separate words without hyphens; see Hypsrens 3 B. For town-councillor, which should be hyphened, see TRADE-unionist.

toy, n. A toyshop or toy-shop is a shop where toys are sold; a child’s mock shop, on the other hand, is a toy shop; see HyPHENSs 8 B.

toy, v. Forinflexions see VERBS IN -IE &e., 4.

trace, n. For synonyms see SIGN.

trace, v., makes -ceable; see MUTE E.

trachea. Pronounce traké’a; pl. tracheae. The derived word in -itis is tracheitis (4 syl.), not trachitis. But the reaction of the many de- Tivatives, such as tracheotomy & tracheoscopic, in which the relative stress on the first two syllables is reversed, has made tra’kia a popular

+ QUANTITY.

trade. Writing of compounds. | trades(-)union (cf. swordsman, townsfolk, &c.) the question is not so simple, but, as that form is dying out, need not be answered. In trade-unionist the hyphen, which would be wrong in trade union, is right, since -ist belongs not to union alone, but to the compound; cf. such words as bow-legged, never bow | legged. though not obligatory (& not used in several of the OED quotations), is right if the stress is put, as the | OED marks it, on trade.

trade, v., makes -dable; see MUTE E.

trade-wind. See WIND, n.

tradition(aljism, -ist. For general question between such variants, see -IsT. In this case the longer forms are usual, probably because the words are often opposed to rationalism, -ist, the form of which is fixed by ration’s not having the necessary meaning.

traduce makes -cible; see -ABLE 2.

traffic, v., makes -icked, -icking; see -C-, -CK-.

tragédienne. See COMEDIAN.

tragic(al). See -1c(au). It may almost be said that the longer form is, in serious use, dead; though the OED quotes it once or twice from modern writers in senses that it does | not mark obsolete, in each of them tragic would have been the natural word. It survives, however, in playful use, often with a memory of the ‘ very tragicall mirth’ of Pyramus & Thisbe in Midsummer Nights Dream. For tragic (or dramatic) trony, see IRONY, 2.

tragicomedy, tragicomic, &c. forms are due to medieval Latin, & too old to be themselves corrected to | tragico-comic &c. But such syncopations should be at least noted as irregular when opportunity offers, with a view to discouraging imita- _ tions. See pacifist in the article -1stT. In trade-wind the hyphen, ` the . -icker, — The |
