page: 660

trait. The final t is sounded in America, but still usually silent in England. For synonyms, see SIGN.

traitress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

trammel makes -lled, -lling; -LL-,-L-.

tranquil makes -illest, -illity, -illize, -illy; see -LL-, -L-, 2. Mis-spellings are very common, esp. tranquility, wrong even on U.-S. principles.

transact makes fransactor; see -or.

transcendence, -cy. See -CE, -cy.

transcendent(al). These words, with their many specialized applications in philosophy, are for the most part beyond the scope of this book; but there are popular uses in which the right form should be chosen. 1. The word that means surpassing, of supreme excellence or greatness, &c., is transcendent, & the following is wrong—The matter is of transcendental importance, especially in the present disastrous state of the world. See LONG VARIANTS for similar pairs. 2. The word applied to God in contrast with IMMANENT is transcendent. 3. The word that means visionary, idealistic, outside of experience, &c., is transcendental. 4. The word applied to Emerson & his ‘ religio-philosophical teaching ’ is transcendental.

transcribe makes -bable; MUTE E.

transfer. Noun ftra’nsfer, verb transfer’, see NOUN & VERB; transferred, -erring, -errer, see -R-, -RR- ; but transferable, see CONFER(R)ABLE 3 & transference, transferee, & transferor. Of transferrer & transferor, the first is the general agent-noun, a person or mechanism that passes something on, & the second a legal term for the person who conveys his property to another, the transferee.

transfuse makes -sible; see -ABLE 2.

transgress makes transgressor; -on.

tranship, transship, trans-ship. To all who do not happen to have been reconciled by familiarity to the short form it presents itself as an odd sort of monster, which they start by pronouncing tri/nship cf.) transom), & do not at once connect

+ there are no other words in which trans is curtailed to tran when it is | prefixed to a word of English & not Latin origin like ship. indisputably better torm ftrans-ship is accordingly here recommended; but the OED accepts tranship, saying only ‘ less commonly trans-ship ’. The full & | Generations of clerks have saved | themselves trouble & nearly made away with the s & the hyphen; of 28 OED quotations, including those ` for tran(s-)shipment, nine only show s-s or ss—nine & the right against © nineteen & the wrong. translate makes -table, see MUTE E; ; & -tor, see -OR. transliterate makes -rable, see -ABLE f 1; & -tor, see -OR.

translucence, -cy. See -cr, -cy.

translucent. See TRANSPARENT. transmit makes -itted, -ttter, -ttting, |

& -issible or -ittable, as late as 1800 euphony plainly | see -T-, -TT-; see -ABLE 2.

transmogrify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

transom makes transomed; -M-,-MM-.

transparence, -ency. The second is the usual form. The first is marked rare in the OED; & indeed, in its only two -ence quotations that are accounts for the avoidance of -cy:— Motive may be detected through the transparence of tendency./Adamantine solidity, transparence, & brilliancy.

transparent, & the synonyms diaphanous, pellucid, translucent. Transparent is the general word for describing what is penetrable by sight (lit. or fig.) or by light, & it can be substituted for any of the others unless there is some point of precision or of rhetoric to be gained. All three synonyms have the rhetorical value of being less common than transparent, & therefore more often in poetical writing. regards precision, the following de-

TRANSPARENT with shipping. And they have at any rate the justification, however © little they may be aware of it, that | finitions of the words’ narrower appear | As |
