page: 661

senses are offered, & to each are

appended some specially appro-

priate nouns, & the adjective or

participle that seems most directly

opposed. | That is diaphanous which does not preclude sight of what is behind it;

garments, vapour, membrane; opp. | shrouding.

That is transparent which does not | even obscure sight of what is behind

it; glass, candour, pretence; opp. | obscuring.

That is pellucid which does not dis- | tort images seen through it; water,

literary style; opp. turbid.

That is translucent which does not | bar the passage of light; alabaster, | tortoise-shell; opp. opaque.

transpire. The notorious misuse of

this word consists in making it mean

happen or turn out or goon; & the

legitimate meaning that has been | misinterpreted into this is to emerge

from secrecy into knowledge, to leak

out, to become known by degrees. It is needless to do more than give a single example of the right use,

followed by several of the wrong:—

The conditions of the contract were not allowed to t. (right)./That strike has caused a not inconsiderable in-

crease in the cost of production, while nothing similar has transpired in Germany within the past few years to produce any such effect here./Abeken

...has a pretty fair idea, although no very accurate information, of what

was transpiring in the inner circles of Bismarck’s mind./What they de-

mand is that, after negotiations have

been carried through, a statement

should be made as to what has trans- _ pired./Both men opened in a subdued *mood in what transpired to be the last

game of this grand fight. The last of

these adds to the wrong meaning of

t. an unidiomatic construction after it in the infinitive to be. That con-

struction will not do even when #¢.

has its true sense; that sense is complete in itself, & transpired to be

is as little English as came to light

to be; here is the right sense followed

+ by the’wrong construction: They must have been aware of the possibility that the facts might be as they ultimately transpired to be.

In the literal sense, t. makes -rable, see MUTE E.

transport. Noun tra’nsport, verb transpor’t; see Noun & VERB.

transposal. See -au.

transpose makes -sable; see MUTE £.

trans-ship(ment). The better spellings; see TRANSHIP.

transubstantiation. The pronunciation -sia’shn, which is recognized as an alternative by the OED, is here recommended; see -CIATION.

trapes, traipse. The first seems to be at present the orthodox spelling; but the word in this form has so puzzling a look that it would surely be better to use the second, which is allowed by the OED as an alternative, is quoted from Swift & Pope, & can be pronounced only one way. The objection to it is that, if the supposed origin (= French trapasser = trespass) is correct, it is obscured rather more by fraipse than by trapes; but then it may not be correct.

trapezium. Pl. -ia, -ms; see -uM.

travail, travel. Distinguished in pronunciation, but rather slightly, as tra’vil & tra’vel; in the parts with an extra syllable (-ing, -er, -eth) the difference is plainer, travail making trisyllables & travel disyllables (tra’vling &c.). Travel, but not travail, makes -ller, -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-. For travelled adj. see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

traverse, v., has -sable; MUTE E.

travesty. See BURLESQUE; &, for verb inflexion, VERBS IN -IE &c., 6. trayful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

treacle makes -cly; see MUTE E.

treasonable, treasonous. The meanings are not distinguishable; treasonous is now comparatively rare, & more likely to be met in verse. treasure, v., makes -rable; see MUTE E. Treasury. T. bench, T. note; no hyphens; see HYPHENS 3 B.
