page: 664

+ best cured by sinking the words’ latinity & giving them all the ordinary English plural—testa’trizes &c. instead of testatri’ces or testa’trices. For some of them the further anglicizing of -trix into -iress would also be possible. For the other escape of using the masculine form & dropping the feminine, see FEMIN- INE DESIGNATIONS.

The chief words concerned are: administratrix, cicatrix, directrix, executrix, heritrix, inheritrix, matrix, mediatrix, prosecutrix, radix, testatrix.

troche. A word that it requires some ingenuity to pronounce wrong, trésh, tréch, & trk, being all recognized; but the OED draws the line at tro’ki, which is, it appears, ‘commercial & vulgar’.

trochee. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

trois-temps. See FRENCH WORDS.

trolley. Usually so spelt; pl. -eys.

troop. Trooping the colour is the orthodox modern phrase; but in the older quotations in the OED it is colours.

trophy. OED pronounces trōwithout alternative.

trottoir. See FRENCH WORDS.

troublous. ‘Now only literary or archaic’ says the OLD; & one of its quotations shows well the bad effect of diversifying commonplace contexts with words of that sort; the ordinary troublesome was the word wanted: Mr Walpole took on himself the management of the Home Office, little knowing what a troublous business he had brought upon his shoulders.

trounce makes -ceable; see MUTE E.

trousers. So spelt. Adjective trousered, see -R-, -RR-. Compounds best made without the -s, e.g. trouser-buiton, -pocket, -stretcher.

trousseau. See FRENCH WORDS, &, for plural, -x.

trout. Pl. usually the same, see COLLECTIVES 1, 4. trouvaille, trouvère, See FRENCH

+ worDs. From time to time the rector records the arrival in this bird sanc- | or still rarer | tuary of redstarts, trouvailles (visitors?). trow, when still in ordinary use, | was pronounced tro.

trowel makes -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

truculence, -cy. See -cE, -cy; &, for pronunciation, foll.

truculent. OED gives preference to troo’ki- over tri’kti-; but the latter is gaining, chiefly, no doubt, owing to the much greater ease given by the wider dissimilation of the two vowels; cf. the substitution of 106 for lŭ in the still more difficult lugubrious & lucubration (see LU).

TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY. Eng- | lish being the one of all languages that has gathered its material from the most various sources, the study of its etymology is naturally of i exceptional interest. It is a study, however, worth undertaking for that interest, & as an end in itself, rather than as a means to the acquiring cither of a sound style or even of a correct vocabulary. What concerns a writer is much less a word’s history than its present meaning & idiomatic habits. The etymologist is aware, & the person who has paid no attention to the subject is probably unaware, that a fuse is so called not because it fuses anything, but because it is spindle-shaped; that a belfry is not named from its bell; that a child’s cot & a shceep-cot come from different languages; that Welsh rabbit is amusing & right, & Welsh rarebit stupid & wrong; that isle & island have nothing in common; & that pygmy is a more significant spelling than pigmy. But to know when it is & when it is not well to call an island an isle is worth more than to know all these etymological facts. Still, etymology has its uses, even for those whose sole concern with it is as an aid to writing & a preventive of blunders; it may save us from treating protagonist as the opposite of antagonist, or from supposing a
