page: 666

+ MOOD (gram.),=mode, not mood

(temper) MOULD, several words pen, pencil, unconnected PIGMY, deceptive -i- for -y- PROTAGONIST, Gk prdios first, not

pro for recover, not E cover repair, two separate verbs river, not L rivus river scale, several words scarify, not E scare scissors, not L scindo sciss- cleave SORRY, SORROW, unconnected TUBEROSE, not tube or rose tureen, not Turin vile, villain, unconnected WATERSHED, neither a store of water

nor a place that sheds water WELSH RABBIT, not rare bit.

truffle. OED gives precedence to the pronunciation trti’fl, which is the natural English; but association with French cookery leads many people to partly assimilate the sound to that of the differently spelt French word, & say troo’fl.

truism. The word’s two meanings have been compared both with each other & with some synonyms under COMMONPLACE. It is not permissible to be too sanguine of the outcome of the Conference, & A leading personage at the Conference declares that there is no cause for undue alarm, are examples of the sort of t. that writers should not allow themselves; mend them by changing too into very & undue into much, & see Too 2. As to the use of the word itself, the temptation to say that a thing is a truism when no more is meant than that it is true, because it has a smarter sound, should be resisted; so: It probably owes much to the dialect in which it is played; but that is a truism of almost every Irish or Scotch play. truly. See LETTER FORMS. trumpet makes -eting, -eted, -eter; see -f-,-TT-. T. major; no hyphen; see Hypnens (Group *Court Martial). truncate. See -ATABLE.

trunk. T. drawers, t. hose, t. road, no hyphens, see HYPHENS 3 B.

trunkful. Pl. -ls; see -FuL.

trunnion makes -oned; -N-,-NN-. |

trust. The OED’s definition of the» commercial sense is here given, for? comparison with CARTEL: A body/ of producers or traders in some class į of business, organized to reduce or? defeat competition, lessen expenses, , & control production & distribution | for their common advantage; spec., . such a combination of commercial or’ industrial companies, with a central governing body of trustees which. holds a majority or the whole of the stock of each of the combining firms. thus having a controlling vote in theconduct & operation of each. i

trustworthy, -ily. The generation is perhaps nearly extinct that held | it a duty to thrust this good word . into places where it was in obvious discomfort in order that the naughty reliable might be kept out. The OED quotes from the Daily News of | 1870 ‘I am trustworthily informed that . . .’, with other specimens. See RELIABLE.

truth. Pl. pron. -dhz; -Tu & -DH.

try. The idiom t. & do something is described as colloquial for t. to do Its use is almost confined to exhortations & promises: Do t. æ. stop coughing; I will t. & have ti ready for you. And it is hardly | applicable to past time; He tried & made the best of it is not English in | the sense required, though He did t. & make the best of it is conceivable. | It is, therefore, colloquial, if that means specially appropriate to actual | speech; but not if coloquial means — below the proper standard of literary | dignity. Though ¢. to do can always be substituted for t. & do, the latter has a shade of meaning that justifies its existence; in exhortations it

| implies encouragement—the effort

| succeed. Itis anidiom thatshouldbe | not discountenanced, but used when will succeed— ; in promises it implies assurance—the effort shall it comes natural. See PEDANTRY.
