page: 667

trysail. Pronounce tri’sl. Tsar. ‘The now prevalent spelling’ —OED. tsetse. So spelt; pron. tsé’tsi. _-T-, -TT-. Words ending in -t are very numerous, & there seems to be some hesitation about making them conform to the rules that prevail for most consonants: forms like rivetter, blanketty, docketted, are often seen, though good usage is against them. Monosyllables ending in -t double it before suffixes beginning with vowels if the sound preceding it is a single vowel (a, e, i, o, u), but not if it is a diphthong or a doubled vowel or a vowel &r: pettish, potted, cutter, but flouting, sooty, skirting. Words of more than one syllable follow the rule for monosyllables if their last syllable is accented (coquettish, but repeater); but otherwise they do not double it: discomfited, riveter, combatant, wainscoting, snippety, pilotage, balloted. | tub. For the Tub in philosophic slang, see ACADEMY. | tube makes tubing; see MUTE E. : tuber is the darling of the lower class of ELEGANT-VARIATIONists— the class that indulges in the practice not as a troublesome duty but for pleasure. A potato is a t., but the fact should be left in the decent obscurity of agricultural textbooks. There was no difjiculity in getting potatoes one day—the next, so to speak, you could search Paris without | discovering a single tuber./The potato crop in South Lincolnshire is in grave danger owing to the shortage of labour; the tubers, which by this time should be nearly all lifted, are still in the ground./Sir Walter Raleigh popularized them, & in ail probability Sir Francis Drake was the first to | bring the tuber that is ‘ doing its bit’ in the war from the New World. | tuberose. Pronounce tii’berGs (not | tū'brōz); not from tube or rose, but from (Polianthes) tuberosa=tuberous, or grown from tubers.

tubful. PI. -ls; see -FUL.

+ Tuesday. For (on) T., see FRIDAY. tug. For ¢. at one’s heartstrings, see STOCK PATHOS. tulle. See FRENCH WORDS. tumblerful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL. tumbrel, -bril. OED gives the two spellings in this order. tumefy. So spelt, not tumi-; for inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &e. 6. tumidity, tumidness. -TY & -NESS.

tumultuary)(tumultuous. The distinction between the two is not very definite, & sentences may easily be made in which either might be used & give the same sense. But it may first be said that -twous is now the much commoner word, which should be chosen unless there is good reason to prefer the other; &, secondly, what is emphasized by -tuous is rather the violence & impetus & force, while -tuary emphasizes the irregularity & unorganized nature, of the thing described: tumultuous applause, seas, attack, joy, crowd; tumultuary forces (hastily levied), thoughts (thronging confusedly), risings (sporadic).

tumulus. PI. -Jz.

tun. See TON.

tune makes tunable & tuny; see MUTE £, & -EY & -y.

tunnel makes -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

tu quoque. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

turban makes -aned; see -N-, -NN-.

turbid makes -esi; see -ER & -EST 4.

turbidity, turbidness. -TY & -NESS.

turbine. OED recognizes only the pronunciation with -in; & that with -in, now often heard, & due only to misguided reverence for spelling, will doubtless pass away.

Ture-. See Turk.

Turcoman (pl. -ans) is the form accepted by the OED in preference to Turkoman & Turkman; cf. TURK.

tureen. The right pronunciation is teré’n, in accordance with the derivation (terra earth) & the older English spelling (terrene &c.); but it is now more often said as tiré’n, & perhaps associated with Turin.

turf. Pl.; -fs & -ves appear an equal number of times in the post-
