page: 668

+ 18th-c. quotations of the OED, which itself uses -fs. See -ve(D).

turgid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4. For turgidity, -idness, see -TY & -NESS.

Turk makes Turco, & Turco- (in compounds, as Turcophil, -phobe, -mania), but Turkery, Turkic, Turkism, & Turkize (as well as Turkey & Turkish).

turkey. Pl. -eys.

Turk(o)man. See TURCOMAN.

turn, v. In the age idiom three constructions are recognized: I have turned 20, I am turned of 20, & Iam turned 20; the last (see for the construction INTRANSITIVE P.P.) is apparently of more recent origin than the second, but is said by the OED to be now more usual in England; the ‘of’ has certainly an oldfashioned or provincial sound.

turnip makes -ipy; see -P-, -PP-.

turn-over. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

turps. See CURTAILED WORDS.

turquoise. Pronunciation debatable. With Ben Jonson, Shakspere, Milton, & Tennyson, all for ter’kiz (or something like it), it is a pity that we cannot return to that; but the adoption of the later French spelling has corrupted us, & the OED labels ter’kiz archaic; it refuses, on the other hand, to recognize the kw sound for the -qu- & complete the triumph of spelling; ter’koiz seems the best solution.

turret makes -eted; see -T-, -TT-.

tusser, tussore. The first, though now the less used, is preferable not only as keeping the sound of the last syllable closer to the original, but also as preventing a shift of the accent from the tus-. T. is a sufficient name for the material without the addition of silk. tutoress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS. tuyere. Pronounce twer. twelvemo, 12mo. See Forro. Pl. -0S 3 see -O(E)s, 6. twenties, thirties, &c. These words do not require an apostrophe (the "twenties &c.) when used for the years 20-29 &c. of a century, & still less for those of a person’s life.

twentymo, twenty-fourmo, 20mo, 24mo. See rouio. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

twilit. The earliest OED quotation for the word is 1869, so that it is, whatever its merits may be, not venerable. Its formation implies a verb to iwilight made from the noun; & that verb, though unknown to most of us, is recorded to have been used; it also implies that to twilight has p.p. twilit rather than twilighted, which is not impossible. — But, though ¢wilit can therefore not be absolutely ruled out, it is better | to use twilight attributively where, as usually, that does the work as well, & elsewhere to do without. In the two following quotations, twilight | would have served at least as well:— ` Iie found himself free of a fanciful world where things happened as he preoferred—a twilit world in which substance melted into shadow./The years of the war were a clear & brilliantly lit passage between two periods of twilit entanglement.

twine, v., makes -nable; see MUTE E.

TWOPENCE COLOURED. The insertion of irrelevant details, resort to needless rhetoric, & such devices for the heightening of effect, move the reader (as Mr Burchell ‘ at the conclusion of every sentence would cry out “ Fudge ” °) to exclaim in more modern phrase ‘twopence coloured!’. A couple of specimens of what meets us every day must suffice; it will be noticed that cantons & heights & plains have ` nothing to do with the matter; & that the rhetoric of the second extract has a very factitious sound:— Again, I look around & see in the Cantons of Switzerland, on the heights of Quebec, & in the plains of Hungary, Protestants & Roman Catholics living, as a rule, in harmony & peace together. /The glib, thin-lipped Burian, the soulless hybrid product of Magyar arrogance & of the Vienna Ballplatz diplomacy, has already been swept away with the polished formulas on which he thought to ride the storm.
