page: 669

+ -TY & -NESS. The number of legitimate words in -ness is limited only by that of the adjectives that exist in English; but, though any adjective may be formed into a noun on occasion by the addition of -ness, the nouns of that pattern actually current are much fewer, there being hundreds, usually preferred to the -ness forms, that are made from Latin adjectives with -ty, -ety, or -ity, as their ending. Thus from one & loyal & various we can make for special purposes oneness, loyalness, & variousness; but ordinarily we prefer unity, loyalty, & variety. Of the -ty words that exist, a very large majority are for all purposes commoner & better than the corresponding -ness words, usage & not anti-Latinism being the right arbiter. Scores of words could be named, such as ability, honesty, notoricty, prosperity, sanity, stupidity, for which it is hard to imagine any good reason for substituting ableness, notoriousness, &ce. On the other hand words in -ness that are better than existent forms in -ty are rare; ae acuteness & conspicuousness

ave the advantage of acuity & conspicuity; & if perspicuousness could be established in place of perspicuity it might help to obviate the common confusion with perspicacity; but in general a -ty word that exists is to be preferred to its rival in -ness, unless total or partial differentiation has been established, or is designed for the occasion. Total differentiation has taken place between ingenuilty & ingenuousness, casualty & casualness, sensibility & sensibleness, enormity & enormousness; the use of either form instead of the other necessarily changes or destroys the meaning. Partial differentiation results from the more frequent use made of the -ty words; both terminations have, to start with, the abstract sense of the quality for which the adjective stands; but while most of the -ness words, being little used, remain abstract & still denote quality only, many of the -ty

+ words acquire by much use various concrete meanings in addition; e.g., humanity, curiosity, variety, beside the senses ‘being human, curious, various °, acquire those of ‘all human beings ’, ‘ a curious object °, & ‘a sub-species’, Or again they are so habitually applied in a limited way that the full sense of the adjective is no longer naturally suggested by them; preciosity is limited to literary or artistic style, maturity suggests the moment of reaching rather than the state of matureness, purity & frailty take a sexual tinge that pureness & frailness are without, poverty is more nearly confined to lack of money than poorness. It is when lucidity requires the excluding of some such meaning or implication attached only to the -ty form that a -ness word may reasonably be substituted.

One or two articles under which special remarks will be found are BARBARISM &C., ENORMOUS, OBLI- QUENESS, OPACITY, POVERTY, PRE- CIOSITY, SENSIBILITY. For similar distinctions between other nearly equivalent terminations, see -CE, -CY, -IC(AL), -ION & -NESS, -ION & -MENT, -ISM & -ITY.

A few specimens may be added & classified that have not been cited above, but are notable in some way. A. Some words in -ty for which, the Latin adjective not having been taken into English, there is no companion in -ness: celerity, cupidity, debility, fidelity, integrity, lenity, utility. B. Some more in which the -ty word has a marked concrete or limited sense not shared by the other: capacity, commodity, fatality, festivity, monstrosity, nicety, novelty, speciality, subtlety. C. Some of the few in -ness that are as much used as those in -ty, or more, though the -ty words exist: clearness (clarity), crudeness, falseness, graciousness, inevitableness, jocoseness, literalness, litigiousness, morbidness, moroseness, passiveness, ponderousness, positiveness, punctiliousness, spaciousness, sub-
