page: 670

+ limeness, tenseness, unctuousness. D. Some -ness words that have no corresponding form in -ty, though the adjective is of Latin origin & might have been expected to produce one: crispness, facetiousness, firmness, largeness, massiveness, naturalness, obsequiousness, pensiveness, proneness, robustness, rudeness, seriousness, tardiness, tediousness, tenderness (tenerity), vastness, vileness.

tycoon, shogun. Two separate titles of different meanings, describing the same person; t.=great prince, s.=army-leader. The official so named was the military ruler of Japan in the times (before 1867) when the Mikado’s temporal power was usurped; & the title tycoon was substituted in diplomatic dealings for that of shogun, used at home, in order to represent him to foreigners as the real sovereign.

tyke, tike. The earliest quotations show y, & in modern use (from 1800) it is, in the OED, six times as common asi; see Y & I.

tyle(r). See TILE(R).

tympanum. Pl. -na.

type. 1. For some synonyms of the noun, see SIGN. 2. The verb makes -pable; see Mure E. 3 (below). Sizes of printing-type. 4. (below). Type, prototype, &c. 5. (below). Type-writer) (typist.

3. Sizes of printing-type. The following list of size-names, in order from small to large, may be useful: brilliant, diamond, pearl, ruby, nonpareil, emerald, minion, brevier (briver’), bourgeois (berjoi’s), long primer, small pi’ca, pi’ca, English, great pri’mer, canon.

4. Type, prototype, antitype, antetype. There is much confusion & other misuse of these words, as in all the following extracts & in some others given under PROTOTYPE:— Foremost among them is the aged Wu Ting Fang, an Oriental prototype of the Vicar of Bray (should be antitype, or better parallel)./People may wonder whether he always knows the meaning of the words he uses

+ when they find him calling a wooden copy of the Queen Elizabeth put up to deceive the Germans her * prototype ” (antitype, if any type, but better counterfeit)./The fees of the most successful barristers in France do not amount to more than a fraction of those earned by their prototypes in England (should be fellows or confrères or likes)./The type of mind which prompted that policy finds its modern prototype in Unionist Ulster (should be antitype or manifesta- tion)./‘ I presume you bring this war — figure into dramatic contrast with his anti-type.— Yes; & with the other | types of the...’ (should be opposite).

The word antetype may be set aside as one that should hardly ever be | used, first because its similarity in | sound & opposition in sense to the ` established antitype is inconvenient, secondly as being liable to confusion ~ with prototype also from their close- ` ness in meaning, & thirdly because forerunner & anticipation are ready to take its place when it really does not mean prototype. Even with that ruled out, the relations between the other three are such as to make mistakes likely, but not pardonable. Prototype & antitype both owe their existence to type, & have no meaning except with reference to it; but type has many meanings besides that in which alone it has anything to de with prototype & antitype; that meaning is symbol or emblem or presage or pattern or model con- sidered with regard to the person or > object or fact or event in the sphere of reality that answers to its speci- | fications; this answering reality, or thing symbolized &c., is called the antitype, anti (against) conveying the notion of match or answer or correspondence. Type & antitype, then, are a complementary pair, or correlatives & opposites. It is very different with type & prototype; far from being opposed to a type, a prototype is a type, & serves as a synonym for it, limitations; it is preferred to type, first when stress is to be laid on the though with.
