page: 672

+ i’zhial. 4. After s & z there is a tendency to convert the orthodox i to 60 or 00, e.g. in superior, Susan, Supreme, suzerain, suicide, suet, suit, presume, Zulu; this class is comparable to the lu words, but the decline of i is far less marked. 5. Outside the positions stated, ū rarely changes to 00 ; dds (deuce), std0’ard (steward), 100’ard (leeward), are often heard, but these & others are generally regarded as carelessnesses or vulgarities.

uglily is less rare than most adverbs in -LILY.

uhlan. So spelt; pronounce 60/lan or wlan.

ukase. Pronounce ika’s.

-ULAR. Adjectives ending thus are something of a trap to those who like words to mean what they seem to say. They are made from diminutive nouns, but no diminutive sense can be reckoned upon in them; a glandule is necessarily a small gland; but glandular is as likely to mean ‘of glands’ as ‘of small glands’. The ending -ular has become a favourite with adjectivemakers, & such an adjective is often preferred to one that is or might be made directly from the simple noun instead of from the diminutive. So auricular for aural, glandular for glandal, globular for globose, granular for graneous or granose, tubular for tubal, valvular for valvar.

Ulema. Pronounce 60’/lima or oolimah’. ulna. Pl. -nae. ultima. See TECHNICAL TERMS. ultimatum. Pl. -ta, -tums; see LATIN PLURALS. Considering that -tums is about 200 years old (Swift is quoted in OED), it is strange that anglicization is still delayed, & that -ta is in a large enough majority to justify OED in presenting it alone as the plural; -twms is here recommended. ultimo, ult. See INSTANT. ultra, originally a Latin preposition & adverb meaning beyond, is now

+ used in English as a noun (pl. -as) meaning a person who goes beyond others 1n opinion or action of the kind in question. This is no doubt a development of the use as a prefix in such adjectives (& nouns) as ulira-fashionable(s), ultra-revolutionary (-ries). Such compounds were curtailed into ultra adj. & n.; but it is no longer felt to be, like sub when used for subaltern or subscrip- f tion, a CURTAILED WORD; it has J rather won independence of any second element, its own meaning being sufficient, & is a synonym for | extremist.

ultramontane. With the full or exact meaning of ultramontanism as f now understood we need not concern ` ourselves, beyond defining it roughly as the policy of raising the authority _ of the Pope in all matters to the . highest possible level. But to those who are not content to accept words as arbitrary tokens, & do not see why a papal zealot should be an ‘ over-the-hills’ man, an explanation may be welcome. The mountains are the Alps, & beyond the mountains means, to an Italian, outside Italy, &, to others, in Italy. | So, when there were differences in the Church about the right relation between the Italian bishops & the extra-Italian, each party could describe the other as the Ultramontanes, which makes the historical use of the word confusing; in modern use it is applied, chiefly by opponents, to the party of Italian predominance, whose principle is the absolute supremacy of the Pope, & the denial of independence to national Churches.

ultra vires. Pronounce -ir’éz.

ululate, -ation. OED gives precedence to ŭlū- over tla-, & it may know that it is stating the prevalent usage; but the pronunciation of words seldom heard is hard to be sure of; &, unless there are reasons against it, it seems plain that the imitative effect got by repeating the same sound should not be sacrificed;
