page: 675

+ May will you kindly favour us with cheque in settlement per return, & much oblige. The reply ran:— Sirs,— You have been misinformed. I have no wish to clear your books. It may be hoped that the desire on which they based their demand was ultimately (though not per return) satisfied, but they had certainly imputed it to the wrong person by attaching being desirous not to the noun it belonged to (we), but to another (you). The duty of so arranging one’s sentences that they will stand grammatical analysis is much more generally recognized than it formerly was, & it is now not a sufficient defence for looseness of this kind to produce parallels, as can very easily be done, even from great writers of past generations; on this see ILLOGICALITIES. On the other hand it is to be remembered that there is a continual change going on by which certain participles ar adjectives acquire the character of prepositions or adverbs, no longer needing the prop of a noun to cling to; we ean say Considering the circumstances you were justified, or Roughly speaking they are identical, & need not correct into I acquit you & I should call them identical in order to regularize the participles. The difficulty is to know when this development is complete; may I write Referring to your letter, you do not state . . . or must it be I find you do not state...? i.e.,is referring still undeveloped? In all such eases, itis best to put off recognition. A good example of what may prove to have been such a development caught in the act is the phrase due to. Every illiterate in the land is now treating due to as though due had passed into an adverb not needing a noun to agree with, just as owing, in owing to, has actually done. ‘The prepositional use of owing to is more than a century old; but of a similar use of due to there is not a vestige in the OED (dated 1897 for D). It is now as common as can be, though only, if the view

675 UNATTACHED PARTICIPLES

+ taken in DUE is correct, among the illiterate; that term is here to be taken as including all who are unfamiliar with good writers, & who consequently are unaware of any idiomatic difference between Owing io his age he was unable to compete, & Due to his age he was &c. Perhaps the illiterates will beat idiom; perhaps idiom will beat the illiterates; our grandsons will know.

The conscious or unconscious assumption that a participle or adjeetive has acquired the powers of preposition or adverb when it has in fact not done so perhaps accounts for most of the unattached & wrongly attached; but there are many for which no such excuse is. possible. Before proceeding to them, let us make a few sentences containing undoubtedly converted participles, sentences in which the seeming participle is not felt to need a noun:—Talking of test matches, who won the last? ; Coming to details, the spoilt ballot-papers were 17 ; They are illiterate (using the word in its widest sense); Granting his honesty, he may be mistaken; Failing you, there is no chance left; Twelve were saved, not counting the dog; Allowing for exceptions, the rule may stand. It is natural, & perhaps right, to explain this common type as originally not a participle at all, but a shortening of the gerund preceded by the old preposition a; talking of = a-talking of,i.e. in talking or while there is talk of. However that may be, it is only fanatical purists who will condemn such sentences; & a clear acknowledgement of their legitimacy should strengthen rather than weaken the necessary protest against the slovenly uses now to be illustrated. After each extract will be given in brackets first the noun, whether present or not, to which the participle or adjective ought to be attached, & secondly the noun, if any, to which careless grammar has in fact attached it:—Unlike the other great European capitals which lay themselves out
