page: 676

+ to cater for the tourist, Russian is the only language spoken (the capital in question; Russian)./A belief that a Committee of Inquiry is merely an evasion, & that, if accepted, the men will be caught out (Committee; men)./ Experiments have shown that, while affording protection against shrapnel, the direct bullet at moderate range would carry fragments of the plate into the body (plate; bullet)./Based on your figures of membership, you suggest that the Middle Classes Union has failed (suggestion; you)./I would also suggest that, while admitting the modernity, the proofs offered by him as to the recent date of the loss of aspiration are not very convincing (I; proofs)./A girl fell on a pen, which pierced her eye, &, causing meningitis, she died (which; she)./ Having muzzled the House of Lords at is difficult to see at the moment any real obstacle to the successful passage of the Bill (the Government; )-/ Whilst placing little hope in the present dynasty, it is always possible in the East for some official to rise to power who may change the destinies of his people (we; official).

unavowedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

unbeknown(st). Both forms are now out of use except in dialect or uneducated speech or in imitations of these. The -st form is more exclusively adverbial; cf. unawares as the adv. of unaware, & whiles, whilst.

unbending, as participle of to unbend, means throwing off stiffness, but as a compound of un- & bending it means never throwing off stiffness; contrasts, not usually so diametrical as this, often result from the prefixing of un- at different stages; e.g., in ‘lessons learnt & unlearnt’, unlearnt may mean either of two very different things.

unberufen. Pronounce oonbiroo’fn. It means ‘ unchallenged’, i.e. without defying Fate.

unbias(s)ed. The spelling varies; see -S-, -SS-.

uncia. PI. -ae.

+ uncial. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Uncle Sam. See SOBRIQUETS. un-come-at-able. doubtless, two or three centuries ago, a jolly daredevil hang-thegrammarians air about it; that has long evaporated; it serves no purpose that inaccessible does not; it requires a writer to choose between | five forms (uncomatable is the other extreme); & it surely deserves a place among SUPERFLUOUS WORDS.

uncommon. The old slang use as an adverb= remarkably (an u. fine | girl &c.) has nearly died out, & is no longer in place outside the dialogue of historical novels. unconcernedly, unconstrainedly. As J UNABASHEDLY.

uncontrollable. Better than in- 3; see IN- & UN-. i

uncontroHedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

undeceived. Two words of different meaning, like UNBENDING.

undependable. For the legitimacy of this & similar words, see -ABLE 4.

under, prep. See BELOW for distinctions; & UNDERNEATH.

underlay, -lie, vbs. The confusion noticed in LAY & LIE is worse confounded for the compounds; see the remarks on OVERLAY.

undermost. See -MOST.

underneath (prep.), compared with BELOW & under, is not, like BE- | NEATH, a word that tends to become archaic; on the contrary, it is still | in full colloquial as well as literary use; its range is much narrower than that of under, being almost confined to the physical relation of material things (cf. ‘ underneath the bed’ with ‘under the stimulus of competition °), but within that range it is often preferred as expressing more emphatically the notion of | being covered over, & carrying a step | further the difference pointed out | between below & under.

undeservedly, undesignedly. UNABASHEDLY.

undigested, undisciplined, undiscriminating. All better than the in- The word had | As |!
