page: 677

+ | forms; see In- & UN-. The in-, which | is at variance with the prevalent modern usage, owes its escape to the | protection afforded by indigestion, indiscipline, & indiscriminate.

undisguisedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

undistinguishable. The in- form is better; see IN- & UN-.

See TECH-

undistributed middle. NICAL TERMS,

undisturbedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

undue, -duly. There is no need for undue alarm. Well, no; that seems | likely. See Truism; in the making of truisms u. is at present the favourite ingredient.

uneconomic(al). For the distinc- | tion see ECONOMIC(AL).

unedited. Better than the in- form, which those who are literary by profession seem to prefer; see IN- & UN-.

unequal. She has been compelled to undertake an offensive for which, as events have proved, she was wholly unequal./A simplicity that seems quite unequal to treat the large questions involved. The preposition after u. is to, not for; but if a verbal phrase with to is used it must be to with the gerund, not with the infinitive; see GERUND 3 C.

UNEQUAL YOKEFELLOWS. The phrase is here used in a comprehensive sense enabling a number of faults, most of them treated at length in other articles, to be exhibited side by side as varieties of one species. They are all such as not to obstruct seriously the understanding of the passage in which - they occur, but to inflict a passing | discomfort on fastidious readers; Íl, to a writer who is not fastidious it is an irksome task to keep in mind the readers who are, & he inclines | to treat symmetry as troublesome or even obtrusive formalism; he too could be mechanically regular if he would, but he is not going to be at the pains of revising his first draft into conformity with niceties that are surely of no consequence. It is | true that such revising is an un-

+ grateful task; but there must be something wrong with a writer who is not free, by the time he is through his apprenticeship, of the need for this sort of revision; to shape one’s sentences aright as one puts them down, instinctively avoiding lopsidedness & checking all details of the framework, is not the final crown of an accomplished writer, but part of the rudiments; if one has neglected to acquire that habit in early days, one has no right to grumble at the choice that later confronts one between slovenliness & revision.

Conspicuous among the slights commonly inflicted upon the minor symmetries are those illustrated below:—

Between demands and, but—The nine employees whose record of service ranged between 61 down to 50 years. See BETWEEN.

Both demands and, but—The enemy despairs both of victory on land or of such success as will give him a compromise peace. See BOTH.

Neither demands nor, but—Diderot presented a bouquet which was neither well or ill received. See NEITHER 6.

Neither this nor that demands a singular verb, but—Neither John nor Richard were English. See NEITHER 4.

Scarcely (temporal) demands when or before, but—Scarcely was the drain finished than several sickened with diphtheria. See SCARCELY.

Each demands a singular verb, but —The opportunities which each are capable of turning to account. See EACH.

Has & does as auxiliaries demand different continuations, but—The Government has never & does not now close the door to overtures. See ELLIPSIS.

A subjunctive in one of two parallel clauses demands a subjunctive in the other, but—JZf the appeal be made & results in... See SUB- JUNCTIVES (arrivals).

Similarly with inversion in parallel clauses, but—Even were this tract of
