page: 679

+ remember the story of the detective who died murmuring to himself ‘ More clues!” & towards the end of the book, surely enough, more clues there are.

But much more to be deprecated than all the particular departures from idiom already mentioned is the growing notion that every monosyllabic adjective, if an adverb is to be made of it, must have a -ly clapped on to it to proclaim the fact. Of very many that is not true; see MOST, RIGHT, & STRAIGHT, for wrong or needless uses of mosily, rightly, & straighily. Two such words may here be taken for special treatment, much(ly) as the least, & hard(ly) as the most, important of all. We do all know that much can be an adverb, & probably most of us would

uess that muchly was a modern acetious formation, perhaps meant to burlesque the ultra-grammatical, & at any rate always used jocosely. We should be wrong; it is 300 years old, its earliest use was serious, & even now it may rarely be met in contexts where the point of the joke is not apparent: Many players who were in the habit of relying muchly upon the advice of their caddies found themselves completely at sea. Nevertheless, as it seems from the OED to have lain dormant for over 200 years, our guess is not so far out, & its revival in the 19th c. illustrates the belief that adverbs must end in -ly. Mauchly does not often make its way into print, except in dialogue as a recognized symbol of the mildly jocose talker, & has been worth attention only in contrast with hardly. That, as will appear, is _ substituted in print for the idiomatic hard neither seldom nor with any burlesque intention, but seemingly in ignorance. Ignorance that hard can be an adverb seems incredible when one thinks of It froze hard, Hit him hard, Work hard, Try hard, & so forth; the ignorance must be of idiom rather than of grammar. Neglect of idiom is, in this case, aggravated by the danger 679

+ that hardly, written as meaning hard, may be read as meaning scarcely; for some proofs that that danger is real, see the article HARD- Ly. The examples that here follow are free from such ambiguity, but in each of them idiom demands expulsion of the -ly:—How hardly put io it the Tories are for argument is shown by . . ./Another sign of how hardly the great families are pressed in these times./The invasion of Henley by the fashionable world bears very hardly on those who go only for the sport./But what about the agriculturist, who is so hardly hit by our present system?/They have been as hardly hit as any class in the community by the present state of trade./ If there is a man more hardly hit by existing conditions than the average holder of a season ticket he is hard to find (harder hit).

Other such adverbs are wide, late, deuced, high, each spoilt in the appended extracts by an unidiomatic -ly:—And then hed know that betting & insurance were widely apart./ Several drawings in the new volume are dated as lately as August & September, 1922./1 bite it—it is deucedly big—I light it & inhale./ M. Millerand has played highly, but he has lost his stake. Middling, soft, & sharp, are specimens of the many others that might be named.

unify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

unimpassionedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

unique. A watertight definition or paraphrase of the word, securing it against confusion with all synonyms that might be suggested, is difficult to frame. In the first place, it is applicable only to what is in some respect the sole existing specimen, the precise like of which may be sought in vain. That gives a clean line of division between it & the many adjectives for which the illiterate tend to substitute it— remarkable, exceptional, rare, marvellous, & the like. In the qualities
