page: 680

+ represented by those epithets there are degrees; but. uniqueness is a matter of yes or no only; no unique thing is more or less unique than another unique thing, as it may be rarer or less rare; the adverbs that u. can tolerate are e.g. quite, almost, nearly, really, surely, perhaps, absolutely, or in some respects; & it is nonsense to call anything more, most, very, somewhat, rather, or comparatively u. Such nonsense, however, is often written:—M. Georges Buisson, in recognition of his valuable services as shorthand writer to the Chamber of Deputies, has been made an Officer of the Legion of Honour; this is a rather unique distinction./ I have just come across the production of a boy aged seven which is, in my experience, somewhat unique. /Sir,— I venture to send you a copy of a rather unique inscription on a tombstone./A very unique child, thought I.

But, secondly, there is another set of synonyms—sole, single, peculiar to, &e.—from which u. is divided not by a clear difference of meaning, but by an idiomatic limitation of the contexts to which it is suited. It will be admitted that we improve the two following sentences if we change u. in the first into sole, & in the second into peculiar:—In the always delicate & difficult domain of diplomatic relations the Foreign Minister must be the unique medium of communication with foreign Powers. / He relates Christianity to other religions, & notes what is unique to the former & what is common to all of them. The emendations are easy to make or accept; to explain the need of them is more difficult; but the reason why w.is unsuitable is perhaps that it belongs to the class of epithets discussed in POSITIVE WORDS.

unity. The unities, or dramatic unities, are the u. of time, the u. of place, & the u. of action. The first has been observed if all that happens in a play can be conceived as sufficiently continuous to fill only something like the same time

+ (stretched by generous reckoning to § a day) as the performance. The J second is observed when changes of scene, if any, are slight enough to spare an audience the sensation of being transported from one place to another. ‘The third is observed when nothing is introduced that has no bearing upon the central action of the play. The last only is universally recognized as among the essentials of good drama.

unlearned, -nt.

See LEARN. article may serve for this pair also; ‘}

unless & until. for other such duplications; one of the conjunctions is always superfluous, as in the still commoner iF & WHEN, the discussion in which | but a few quotations will allow the reader to judge whether ‘ unless &’ | might not in each be left out with: advantage:—Unless & until it is made possible for a builder or householder to obtain an economic rent, so long will building be at a standstill./ Speaking for himself he said that } unless & until the Second Chamber | was reformed & the constituencies were given some constitutional means of expressing their opinion, he treated every measure that proceeded from the House of Commons as at present constituted as coming from a tainted source./Provided further that any Bill shall not be presented to his Majesty | nor receive the Royal Assent under the provisions of this section unless & until it has been submitted to & approved by the electors./Sir Albert Stanley assured some alarmed manu- — facturers that a certain embargo which he had temporarily removed should be speedily reimposed & not removed again unless & until they had been consulted.

unlike, in its less simple uses, i.e. when we get beyond ‘ unlike things’, “the two cases are u.’, & ‘ this is u. that’, to ‘unlike you, I feel the cold’ & further developments, is subject to the complications set out in LIKE, though occasions for it are much fewer. In addition to what is See PLEONASM, 2, f
