page: 683

+ ground of adultery, whilst thousands of innocent sufferers under desertion, drink, cruelty, & insanity, are left outside any relief. He is plainly . Stating what he takes to be the existing position; how can that be unthinkable? read flagrant injuslice./He said we were apt to forget the lessons of the war; some people he met said ‘I want to forget’; that was, to his mind, a wrong & unthinkable attitude to adopt. Unthinking?

until. 1. Until)(till. 2. U. or till) (before or when. 3. Unless & u.

4. Uniil has very little of the archaic effect as compared with till that distinguishes unto from to, & substitution of it for till would seldom be noticeable, except in any such stereotyped phrase as true till death. Nevertheless, till is now the usual form, & until gives a certain leisurely or deliberate or pompous air; when the clause or phrase precedes the main sentence, until is perhaps actually the commoner (until his accession he had been unpopular).

2. Neither until nor till is idiomatic in sentences of a certain type, which require when or before: In one of the city parks he was seated at one end of a bench, & had not been there long until a sparrow alighted at the other end. The reason is that till & until, strictly defined, mean (if there is no negative) ‘ throughout the interval between the starting-point (i.e., here, his sitting down) & the goal (here, the sparrow’s arrival)’; or (if there is a negative) ‘ at any point in that interval’; & to say that it: was not long at any point in that interval is meaningless. The OED calls the misuse dial. & U.S.

3. For unless & until, see UNLESS. The writer of the following has evidently a praiseworthy antipathy to u. & u., which would have given, however verbosely, his meaning; but in struggling to escape he has made nonsense, which is worse than verbosity: He will still be able to

+ supply his front & to be in touch with Jerusalem by two avenues of supply, the road & the railway, until, or if, the critical point of Nablous is lost to him. untoward.

Pronounce tntd’ard.

See TECHNICAL TERMS. unvoiced. unwieldy. So spelt, not -ldly. up. 1. The phrase up to date is three words unhyphened, except when it is used as an attributive adjective; then, it is hyphened +: An up-to-date bungalow; but You are not up to date, Bring the ledger up to date. See HYPHENS, group *From hand to mouth.

2. Up against (faced or confronted with), & up to (incumbent upon), are good examples of the rapidity with which in modern English new slang phrases make their way through the newspapers into literary respectability.

1. For (up)on all fours, see

upon. FOUR.

2. Upon)(on. For a list of other such pairs, see TILL. The difference is much the same as between UNTIL & till; but euphony plays a considerable part in the choice, upon being usually rejected when its position would cause it to be pronounced as two unaccented syllables instead of with a clear -6- 5 compare upon my word with on ne account, & that depends on who it was with depend upon it; at the end of a sentence, consequently, upon is often preferred: There is very little to go upon.

For u. case, see LOWER 1.

upper.

uppermost. See -MOST.

upright, accent. Stand upri’ght; u’pright people; one of the u’prights gave way-

upstair(s). Come upstair’s; an u’pstair room. NSE,

urinal. The natural pronunciation (see RECESSIVE ACCENT) is urinal; urinal accords better with the imaginary ‘sanctity of Latin quantities; but how little that comes to is shown in FALSE QUANTITY.
