page: 685

+ been wise to defer to strict etiquette: If the Government yields to these counsels, it will simply take us back into the worst period of Anglo- | Irish contention, & its voluntary recruiting campaign will be no more use than its threat of conscription.

use, v., makes -sable; see MUTE E. Pronounce tz; but used, which is ūzd in general senses, is ūst in the senses was accustomed, & (as adj.) accustomed.

useful. See -ER & -EST, 4.

user. The words meaning (1) person who uses, & (2) right or act of using, as a legal term, are not one, but two of distinct formation.

usual. Of the _ pronunciations, i’zhl is slipshod, i’ztal pedantic, & ii’zhooal the inoffensive; see U. . usufruct. Pronounce i’zi-.

uterus. Pl. -77.

utilize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

uti possidetis. Pronounce ū'ti posideé’tis.

utmost, uttermost. See -MOST.

uvula. Pronounce i’vii-. Pl. -lae.

V

vacant. For vacantest, see -ER & -EST, 4.

vacate makes -table; see -ATABLE.

vaccinate makes -nable, see -ABLE 1; & -tor, see -OR.

vacillate. So spelt, not -cc-; pron. vi’si-. V. makes -tor, see -OR.

vacuity,-uousness. The first is the usual word; the second may reasonably be chosen when a noun is wanted for vacuous as applied to the face, eyes, expression, &c. 3 see -TY & -NESS.

vacuum. PI. -ua or -ms; see -UM. V. brake & v. cleaner need no hyphens; see HYPHENS 3 B.

vade-mecum. Four syllables.

vagary. Pronounce vagar'i; the OED gives this pronunciation only, & among its verse quotations requiring it are lines from Milton, Gay, & the Ingoldsby Legends.

+ vagina. Always pronounced vajina; but the adjective either vaji’nal or va’‘jinal; see FALSE QUANTITY. vainglory. Best written as one word without hyphen. vainness. So spelt; sometimes preferred to vanity when the notion of conceit is to be excluded. valance, drapery. The OED gives this, not -ence or -ll-, the preference. Valenciennes. The pronunciation vilensé‘nz is recommended; but OED gives only the French, for which see FRENCH WORDS. valet. Pronounce both noun & verb vi'lit; the verb makes -eted, -eling, see -T-, -TT-.

valiant. See FORMAL WORDS.

valid makes -est; see -ER & -EST, 4.

validate makes -dable; see -ABLE 1.

valise. Except in military use as the official term for a soldier’s knapsack, the word is now archaic in England, but survives in America; cf. BAGGAGE.

Valkyrie. This is the prevailing spelling in modern English; pl. -s, or (after the Old Norse) Valkyriur. The pronunciation shown in verse, & suggested by the formerly common spelling Valkery, is va lkiri; but valki’ri is often heard.

valley. Pl. -eys.

valour, valorous. For spelling see -OUR & -or, & -OUR- & -OR-.

value, n. What value will our Second Chamber be to us if it is not to exercise such control? An interesting specimen of ANALOGY. What good will it be? is unexceptionable; What use will it be? is not, but a plea has been put in for it in USE, n. ; What value will it be? is ruled out, because no instinct tells us, as about Of what use, that Of what value is a piece of pedantry. Is no good is both grammatical & idiomatic; is no use is idiomatic but not grammatical; & is no value is neither.

valve. For the preference of valcular as the adjective over valval & valvar, see -ULAR.
