page: 686

vandalish, vandalism. Not

-Ul- ; see -LL-, -L-, 2.

Van Dyck, VandyKe, vandyke. The painter’s name, originally Van Dyck, was anglicized into (Sir Anthony) Vandyke; the derived noun & verb should be, & usually is, vandyke; the painter or a picture of his may properly be called by either the first or preferably the second form, each written as above.

vanity. The Catechism phrase is The pomps & vanity of this wicked world (not vanities); see Mis- QUOTATION.

vapid makes -est; see -ER & -EST, 4. Of its nouns, vapidness is usually better than vapidity (in strong contrast with the nouns of rapid), except when the sense is a vapid remark; then -ity prevails, & still more the plural -ities; -TY & -NESS.

vapour & its belongings. For the word itself see -our & -or. Allied words are best spelt: vapourer, vapourish, vapourless, vapoury; but vaporific, vaporize (-zation, -zer), vaporous (-osity); for the principle see -OUR- & -OR-.

vapulation. PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

variability, -bleness. Both are in eonstant use, without any clear difference of sense or application. This is unusual (see -TY & -NESS); but, while -ity would be expected to prevail, -ness probably persists owing to the familiar ‘ with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning °’ (James i. 17).

varia lectio. Pl. variae lectionés.

variant, n., as compared with variation & variety, is the least ambiguous name for a thing that varies or differs from others of its kind; for it is concrete only, while the others are much more often abstract; variation is seldom concrete except in the musical sense, & variety seldom except as the classifying name for a plant, animal, mineral, &c., that diverges from the characteristics of its species. It is worth while to help on the differen-

+ tiation by preferring variant in all suitable contexts. VARIATION. The friendship between France & ourselves is rooted deep in mutual sacrifice, mutual suffering, & acommon victory. There is no change of meaning in passing from mutual to common; the latter should have been used three times. The superstition that leads to foolish variations of this sort is discussed fully in ELEGANT VARIATION.

varicose. Pronounce vié’rikés.

variegated. Five syllables (-riig-).

variorum, when used as a noun, has pl. -ms; see -UM.

various as a pronoun. ANALOGY has lately been playing tricks with the word & persuading many people that they can turn it at will, as several, few, many, divers, certain, some, & other words are turned, from an adjective into a pronoun. In the OED article, published in 1916, there is no hint of such a use, which was apparently thought too illiterate to be even worth eondemnation; but the following quotations will show that it cannot safely be passed by without a warning. To write various of them &c. is no better than to write different of them, diverse of them, or numerous or innumerable of them. Mr William Watson is only the latest of many poets—various of them Poets Laureate —who have .. ./A like series of conflagrations in various of our towns & villages./That is not so easy as at one time appeared, because various of the subsidies which were to disappear may come again into the national accounts./The fearsome noise these instruments emit when set in motion in various of the rooms within the precincts of the House./Various of those who had been prominent in her at the outset suggested . . ./In various of the territories under the control of the Colonial Powers the minimum has been exceeded./The Queen has caused large hampers of the choicest blooms to be forwarded to various of the hospitals. For subsidies, rooms,
