page: 687

+ territories, & hospitals, mere omission of of the, without the trouble of finding substitutes for v. &c., suffices. varlet. Now, outside the historical novel, a PEDANTIC-HUMOUR word. varmint, besides its reputed use as a rustic variant of vermin in the sense of rascal &c., is an established SOBRIQUET for the fox that is being hunted.

varsity is perilous stuff for those who are not familiar with universities to dealin; it plays them just the tricks that any English slang plays the foreigner; thinking that to. say the word shows intimacy with the undergraduate’s (or the Englishman’s) characteristic language, they naturally put it into places where it would never occur to him, & reveal themselves not as natives, but as foreigners. Naturally also, they sometimes use it in the right places; but it is perilous, for all that; such trifles as Varsity Extension Lectures, Varsity College, or at Cambridge Varsity (as a correction, perhaps, of at Cambridge College), will sooner or later tempt & betray.

vary. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

vasculum. Pl. -la; see -UM.

vase. So spelt (not vause), & pron. vahz (not vawz).

vaseful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

vastly. In contexts of measure or comparison, where it means by much, by a great deal, as is vastly improved, a vastly larger audience, v. is still in regular use. Where the notion of measure is wanting, & it means no more than much or to a great degree, as in I should vastly like to know, is vastly popular, it is an affectation; see WARDOUR STREET.

vaticinate makes -for; see -OR. The verb, formerly equivalent to prophesy, now usually connotes contempt, & means rather to play the prophet, to be a Cassandra; vaticination is similarly limited.

vaudeville. See FRENCH WORDS.

+ vedette, not vi-. -ve(d), -ves, &c., from words in -f & -fe. Corresponding to the change of sound discussed in -TU & -DH that takes place in the plural &c. of words ending in -th, like truth, there is one both of sound & of speliing in many words ending in -f or -fe, which become -ves, -ved, -vish, &c. As the change is far from regular, & sometimes in doubt, an alphabetical list of the chief words concerned follows; with each are given those parts in which f is changed to v; if the verb is stated to be -ve, it is to be understood that all parts of the verb (including the agent noun in -er) have v & not f; the statements (or omissions, implying retention of f) cover (a) the noun’s plural, (b) the corresponding verb, (c) the adjective in -ed, & (d) miscellaneous derivatives. Where no v form is given, the change to v does not take place, but forms in f are not mentioned except in the (d) or miscellaneous place, unless there is an alternative forminv. When alternatives are given, the first, if either, is better. beef. Pl. beeves oxen, beefs kinds of

beef; (d) beefy. belief. Vb believe. calf. Pl. calves; vb calve; -ed

plump-calved (legs) &c.; (d) calf-

ish, calves-foot or calfs-foot. elf. Pl. elves; (d) elvish, elfish. grief. Vb grieve; (d) grievous. half. Pl. halves; vb halve. hoof. Pl. hoofs, hooves; vb hoof; -ed

hoofed, hooved; (d) hoofy. knife. Pl. knives; vb knife, knive;

-ed knived. leaf. Pl. leaves; vb leaf, leave; -ed

leaved, leafed; (A) leafy, leavy. life. Pl. lives; vb live; -ed -lived;

(d) liven, lifer. loaf. Pl. loaves; vb loaf, loave; -ed

loafed, loaved; (dA) loafy. mischief. (d) mischievous. oaf. Pl. oafs, oaves; (d) oafish. proof. Vb prove. À relief. Vb relieve; (d) rilievo, relievo. roof. No v forms. safe. Vb save.
