page: 688

+ scarf. Pl. scarfs, -ed

scarves;

scarfed, scarved. scurf. (d) scurfy having scurf,

scurvy contemptible &c. self. Pl. selves; (d) selfish, selvedge. sheaf. Pl. sheaves; vb sheave, sheaf;

-ed sheaved; (d) sheafage, sheafy. shelf. Pl. shelves; vb shelve; -ed

shelved; (A) shelfy, sheloy. staff. Pl. staffs, (arch. & mus.) staves. strife. Vb strive. thief. Pl. thieves;

vb thieve; (d)

thievery, thievish. turf. Pl. turfs, turves; vb turf; (d)

turfen (adj.), turfite, turfy. wharf. Pl. wharfs, (U.S.) wharves;

(d) wharfage, wharfinger. wife. Pl. wives; vb wive; -ed

-wifed, -wived; (a) -wifery.

vehement, vehicle. Pronounce vé-, not veé’hi-, in both; but vih? kūlar.

veiledly. Three syllables, if used; see -EDLY.

veilleuse. See FRENCH WORDS.

velamen, velamentum. Plurals -amina, -amenta.

velar. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

velarium. Pl. -aria.

veld(t). The modern form is veld, but the -dt still prevails in English use, & has the advantage of not disguising the sound, which is vélt.

velleity)(volition. The first is chiefly used either in direct opposition to the second, or (when volition has its widest sense) as expressing a particular form of it that is sometimes described as ‘mere volition’. Volition meaning in the wide sense willpower or the exercise of it, & in a narrower but more usual sense such an exercise of it as shall if not baffled take effect, a choice or resolution or determination, velleity is an abstract & passive preference. The man in Browning— And I think I rather . . . woe is me!—-Yes, rather should see him than not see, If lifting a hand would seat him there Before me in the empty chair Tonight ’—is expressing a velleity, but not in the ordinary sense a volition. And the OED quotes from Bentham:

+ ‘In your Lordship will is volition, clothed & armed with power—in me, it is bare inert velleity °.

vellum. Pl. -ms, see

-UM; adj. vellumy, see -M-, -MM-.

velum. PI. -la.

velvet makes velvety; see -T-, -TT-.

vend makes vendible; see -ABLE 2. Vendor & vender are both in frequent use, with a tendency to DIFFEREN- TIATION; -or is better when the contrast or relation between seller & buyer is prominent, & -er when purveyor or dealer is all that is meant.

venerate makes -for; see -OR.

venery. The existence of homonyms, one synonymous with hunting, the other with sexual indulgence, makes it necessary to provide against ambiguity in using either— the more that neither of them is now an everyday expression.

vengeance. See AVENGE.

venison. Pronounce vé’nzn.

ventilate makes -lable, -tor; see -ABLE l, -OR.

ventre à terre.

See FRENCH WORDS.

venturesome, venturous. See AD- VENTUROUS.

venue. Pronounce vé’ni. A term formerly common in fencing (obs.— OED), still used in law as the place appointed for a jury trial (esp. lay, & change, the v.), & lately become something of a VoGuE-worD for what used to be called a rendezvous or meceting-place, e.g. for races &c. The following quotation, in which it means merely place without the meeting- (or stage?), shows it undergoing the loss of character to which vogue-words are liable: One of our most distinguished actresses acquired one of these coastal landmarks [a lighthouse] a good many years ago, & I believe the quietude of the interior provided a much apprectated venue for her dramatic work. Venus. Pl. Venuses, see -s-, -SS-. For Venus’ & Venus’s, see ’s. veranda(h). OED gives the -da form first, & there is no reason for the -h; the adjective is best written veranda’d, see -ED & °D.
