page: 689

verbal. Misuse of the word in the sense proper to oral, as in the quotation, is very common, & is to be deprecated: The Attorney General said it was really a point of no substance; the object of the provision ‘was to apply it to all contracts, whether in writing or verbal. Verbal meaning of or in words, oral meaning of or with the mouth, & words being as much used in writing as in speaking, it is obviously foolish to say ‘in words’ (verbal) when the sense wanted is ‘in spoken words ’ (oral); &, though ambiguity may not result in a particular case, & Mr Attorney may be acquitted of it, each use of the wrong word makes ambiguity more likely in the ordinary layman’s talk.

VERBS IN -IE, -Y, & -YE, sometimes give trouble in the spelling of inflexions & derivatives. The following rules apply to the normally formed parts only, & are merely concerned with the question whether -y-, -ie-, or -ye-, is to be used in the part wanted; they do not imply that a part of entirely different formation such as flew, lay, applicable, liar, may not exclude flied, lied, appliable, or lier, but merely that e.g. paid & not payed, deniable & not denyable, are right.

4. -ay: plays, played, playing, player, playable, is the form for all except lay, pay, & say, & their compounds (inlay, repay, gainsay, &c.), which use -aid instead of -ayed. Allay, assay, belay, delay, & essay, do not follow lay & say, but use -ayed.

2. -ey: conveys, conveyed, conveying, conveyer, conveyable. All follow this type, except that purvey, Survey, have purveyor, surveyor.

3. -ie: ties, tied, tying, tier, tiable; all follow the type, but -er & -able are hardly in use.

4. -oy: destroys, destroyed, destroying, destroyer, destroyable; no exceptions. -

5. -uy: buys, guyed, buying, buyer, buyable.

6. -y after consonant: tries, tried,

+ trying, trier, triable; denies, denied, denying, denier, deniable; copies, copied, copying, copier, copiable. Neither number of syllables, place of accent, nor difference between y & ý, affects the spelling.

T. -ye: dyes, dyed, dyeing, dyer, dyable; dyeing is so spelt merely to avoid confusion with dying from die (cf. singeing); abye accordingly would make abying, & so eying (5 quotations in OED) rather than eyeing (2 in OED).

verbum sap. (scil. sapienti sat est). a word is enough to the wise. Also verb. sap., verbum sat, sat verbum, or at full length. Ostensibly an apology for not explaining at greater length, or a hint that the less said the better, but more often in fact a way of soliciting attention to what has been said as weightier than it seems.

verdigris. The orthodox pronunciation is -is, the popular -és; -gris is derived not from grease, though the notion that it is probably accounts for the prevalent -és, but from Greece (green of Greece); but as the true origin no more requires -ïs than the false, there seems no reason why the -és of the majority should not be accepted by the minority.

veridical. Apart from a modern technical use in psychology, mostly a PEDANTIC-HUMOUR word.

verify. For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

verily. Apart from its occasional appearances as a stylistic ornament, & its legitimate use in the dialoguc of historical novels, v. is now perhaps confined to one single phrase—I verily believe, which has the special meaning, It is almost incredible, yet facts surprise me into the belief.

veritable, in its modern use, is probably to be classed as a journalistic Gaxurcism, & its function is, when one contemplates an exaggeration, to say compendiously, but seldom truthfully, ‘I assure you I am not exaggerating’: a veritable hail of
