page: 691

+ lime for some-one to raise a genile protest. ‘ Very much affronted’, or * highly affronted’, if you like, but surely not ‘very affronted’. Try another tense: one cannot say * your language very, affronts me’; but I can say (with truth) ‘ your language very much affronts me’. How reasonable it sounds: see different for a similar argument; but it proves too much; similarly I cannot say This very tires me; & yet, dissimilarly, I can say I am very tired; & with affronted itself I can say He wore a very affronted look; & His look was very affronted is, if not a likely expression, at least better than His look was much affronted.

The points that have to be taken into account are: 1. Has the p.p. passed into a true adjective in common use, as tired & celebrated have, & inconvenienced has not? 2. Is it used attributively (a damaged reputation), or predicatively (the car is damaged)? 3. Is the noun to which the p.p. belongs the name of the person or thing on which the verbal action is exercised (he was surprised at the question), or that of something else (his expression was surprised)? 4. Is its participial or verbal (as opp. adjectival) character unbetrayed by e.g. a telltale preposition such as by?

A word that is in form a p.p., if it is to be qualified by very instead of much (or very much), must be able to say Yes to N° 1, or to the first part of N° 2, or to the second part of N° 3, and to N° 4. That is, He is very celebrated is right (1), but Attic taste is very celebrated by the poets is wrong (4); A very worried official appeared is right (2), but The Government, very worried, withdrew the motion is wrong (2), & still more The Government, very worried with questions, withdrew &c. (4); His tone was very annoyed is right (3), but You seem very annoyed is wrong (3), & still more He was very annoyed by the interruption (4).

All this amounts substantially to

+ no more than that a participle (in -ed) that is a participle requires much, while a participle that is an adjective prefers very; but the bare rule is not very intelligible without some such expansion as has been given. In the quotations that follow, which represent fairly the proportion in which idiom is offended one way & the other, it will be noticed that there is only one much where very would be better against a large number where very should have been much (or very much):— Opera & theatre engagements are also much limited & by no means easy to get./We shall be very surprised if a good many of the suggested amendments are not clear breaches of . . ./ We should be very surprised if the Liberal agents ever received the alleged ‘warning ’./Sir Alfred said that the hostility of the Arabs was very exaggerated in this country./The latter had been very annoyed on learning that . . ./We are all very annoyed at those figures being published./A friend in Cornwall tells me that listeners-in there are very annoyed because . . ./The Evening Standard was very concerned last night to protest against * Methods of Anarchy ’./We are not very concerned about these subtle distinctions./ Both parties are very jealous, & very afraid of each other (afraid, & other purely predicative adjectives, rank with the p.p.)./He is very afraid that somebody will recognize him./ Your mind scems very exercised just now as to whether . . ./The peasant deputies consider themselves very aggrieved./* Imperialist’ is very disgusted with Earl Grey for his statements./When the husband returned, he found her manner towards him very changed.

In conclusion, the worst & the most venial misuses of very are represented by I was very inconvenienced by it, & I shall be very pleased (i.e. glad, happy) to accept.

See -vE(D).

-ves.

vesica. but

Pronounce visi’ka;
