page: 693

+ for vicegerent, & sometimes used pleonastically for regent (which word includes the notion of vice-), so that it seems to have no right to exist, & may be classed among SUPER- FLUOUS WORDS. vice-queen)(vicereine. The first is recorded from the 16th c., the second {in English) from the 19th only. Vicereine is now the regular word for viceroy’s wife, & vice-queen, in much less frequent use, is now reserved for a woman ruling as a queen’s representative—a useful DIFFERENTIATION.

viceregal)(viceroyal. There being no distinction of meaning, it would be better if there were one word only; viceregalis the better, & viceroyal may fairly becalled a SUPERFLUOUS WORD.

vicinage is now, compared with neighbourhood, a FORMAL WORD, &, compared with vicinity, a dying one.

vicious circle. See under TECH- NICAL TERMS. There is a vicious circle in which starvation produces Bolshevism, & Bolshevism in its turn feeds on starvation. What, then, produces starvation, & on what does starvation feed? The writer can no doubt retort with truth that nothing (i.e. no food) produces starvation, & that starvation feeds on nothing; but he will have proved his wit at the expense of his logic. Such blunders in stating the elements of a vicious circle are not uncommon.

victimize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

victress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

victual. The verb makes -ller, -lling, see -LL-, -L- ; pronounce vi‘tl, vi'tler, vi’tling.

vide. Pronounce vi’di; literally ‘see’ (imperative). It is properly used in referring readers to a passage in which they will find a proof or illustration of what has been stated, & should be followed by something in the nature of chapter & verse, or at least by the name of a book or author. But it has, like RE, been taken over by the illiterate, & is daily used by them in extended

+ senses with an incongruity of which the following is a comparatively mild specimen: Numbers count for nothing—vide the Coalition—it is the principles that tell. videlicet in its full form is now rare except in PEDANTIC HUMOUR, the abbreviation viz being used instead; see viz for meaning. vidimus. Pl. -uses; see -us.

Pronounce vidi-.

vie. For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &e., 8.

view forms part of three well established idioms each equivalent to a preposition, & each liable to be confused in meaning or in form with the others. These are in v. of, with av. to, & with the v. of. In view of means taking into account, or not forgetting, or considering, & is followed by a noun expressing external circumstances that exist or must be expected: In v. of these facts, we have no alternative; In v. of his having promised amendment; In v. of the Judgement to come. With a view to means calculating upon or contemplating as a desired result, & is followed by a verbal noun or a gerund or less idiomatically an infinitive: With a v. to diminution of waste, or to diminishing waste, or (less well) to diminish waste. With the view of has the same meaning as with a v. to, but is both less usual & less flexible, being naturally followed only by a gerund: With the v. of proving his sanity. It will be observed that in the first phrase v. means sight, in the second eye, & in the third purpose. The forms of confusion are giving the first the meaning of the others or vice versa, & neglecting the correspondences a & to, the & of, in the second & third. After each of the following quotations a correction, or a statement that it is right, is bracketed:— There was very little likelihood in the report of disaster to a Turkish destroyer in harbour at Preveza, in view of the fact that no Turkish destroyer was stationed there (right)./
