page: 694

+ This may be interesting in view of the fact that the atmosphere has been reeking with pugilism for some time (right)./I will ask your readers to accept a few further criticisms on matters of detail, in view of ultimately finding a workable solution (read with a v. to)./The Sultan will seek to obtain money in view of beginning for himself the preliminary reforms (read with a v. to)./If Germany has anything to propose in view of the safeguarding of her own interests, it will certainly meet with courteous consideration (read with the v. of, or with a v. to)./My company has been approached by several firms with a view of overcoming the difficulty (read to for of)./Dr Keane was educated with a view of becoming a priest (read to for of)./The time has come when it ought to be tackled effectively with a view of giving some relief (read to for of)./They have been selected with a view to illustrate both the thought & action of the writer’s life (read illustrating for illustrate)./ The question of reducing the cost of bread production, with the view both to preventing the price of the loaf from rising & of arresting any increase in the subsidy, is under consideration (ELEGANT VARIATION again? read of for to).

view-point. See POINT.

vignette. Pronounce vényé’t.

vigour, -gorous. For spellings, see -OUR & -OR, -OUR- & -OR-.

viking. Pronounce vi-.

vilayet. Pronounce vilah’yét.

vilify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

vilipend. A LITERARY worD only.

villain &c. 1. Villain)(villein. 2. Villain-)(villan-. 1. Viillain)(villein. The retention of the second form for the word meaning serf is a useful piece of DIFFERENTIATION, & the OED accordingly gives it in a separate article, though it states that ‘ the tendency to use the form villain [in this sense] has increased in recent years’. This tendency looks like PRIDE OF KNOWLEDGE,

+ the man in the street who is familiar with the two forms having to be shown that he has been under a delusion all this time.

2. Villain-)(villan-. The OED makes villainous & villainy the standard forms. Villanous & villany are & have been common also, & are not open to the objection that prevents mountain (perhaps the only analogous case) from forming mountanous instead of mountainous, i.e. that moun- precludes (see HYBRID DERIVATIVES) direct formation from Latin montanus; Latin villanus could fairly result in villanous & villany; but, while the de jure claims are equal, -ainous & -ainy seem to have established themselves de facto in the 19th c.

villanelle. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

villoggiatura. Pronounce viléjatoor’a.

ville lumière.

See SOBRIQUETS.

villus. Pl. -Iz.

vinaigrette. See FRENCH WORDS.

vinculum. Pl. -la.

vindicate makes -cable, -tor;

see -ABLE l, -OR.

See FEMININE DE-

vindicatress. SIGNATIONS.

vindictive has become so generally restricted to the notion of personal thirst for revenge or desire to hurt that the phrases in which it means punitive & not revengeful or cruel are apt to mislead; these are v. damages (designed to punish the offender & not, or not only, to indemnify the injured party), & v. (now more often retributive) justice.

vine makes viny; see -EY & -y.

vingt-et-un. See FRENCH WORDS.

vin ordinaire. See FRENCH WORDS.

viola. The flower is vi’ola, the instrument véd‘la.

violate makes -lable,

-tor; see -ABLE l, -OR.

violet makes -etish, -ety; -T-, -TT-.

violin. The victory of this over fiddle, to which it should have borne the same relation as, say, gourmet to epicure, or savant to scientist, or belles lettres to literature, or porcelain
