page: 695

+ to china, or parasol to sunshade, or robe de chambre to dressing-gown— the relation, that is, of refined journalese to ordinary plain language—, may be deplored, but hardly now reversed. Already to talk of fiddles & fiddlers & fiddling, unless with contempt or condescen- Sion, is to be suspected of eccentricity.

violoncello. pl. -os, see -o(z)s 6. For pronunciation, veolonché‘16 is the approximation to the Italian; violonsé’lé, which the OED puts first, is the complete anglicization; & violonehé16 is the usual compromise, whieh, having in its favour both violin & ’cello (ché/16), is here recommended.

Virago. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 3.

Virgil & Virgilian gain or lose as much by being corrected into Veras Manomet by the change to Muhammad.

virgin. V.Queen; see SOBRIQUETS.

Virginia(n). The noun used attributively (Virginia creeper, tobacco, &e.) has maintained itself by the side of the adjective (Virginian creeper &c.) from the early 17th c. till now in spite of a modern tendency (like that noticed under Un- IDIOMATIC -LY) to insist on an adjectival form where one is available.

virile. The pronunciation of both is varies between i & i; accent on first syllable; OED puts first vii. The proper sense is ‘having the qualities of a male adult °’, but the emphasis is on male, &, though vigorous can often be substituted for v. without affecting the required meaning, v. must not be substituted for vigorous where the notion male is out of place, as in: VIRILE AT 93: Despite her great age, Mrs Jones is fairly virile, & performs all her own household work. Probably the reporter associates v. with viridis green, not vir man, & was thinking of a green old age. So spelt (not -lin-); |

virtu. So spelt (not ver-);

pronounce verto’.

virtue. To make av. of necessity is one of the maltreated phrases illustrated in IRRELEVANT ALLUSION, being often applied to the simple doing of what one must, irrespective of the grace with which one does it.

virtuoso. Pl. -si (-sé).

virulent. The OED pronounces vi'ryoolent; in view of the difficulty of this, see vu.

virus. Pl. -uses.

visa. See vish.

visage. See COUNTENANCE.

vis-a-vis. See FRENCH WORDS. The French situation viz-d-viz Mustapha Kemal is uncertain is probably the result of spelling a foreign word by ear; see FOREIGN DANGER; viz-à-viz is, however, recorded as an obsolete form.

viscount. For V. Smith & Lord Smith, see TITLES. Of the two forms of the rank-name, viscounty & viscountcy, the first is both much older & of better formation.

visé (vé’za), in French a p.p.= ‘examined °’ or * endorsed °’, is used in English with regard to passports (1) as a noun=endorsement, for which the French noun visa is sometimes preferred, (2) as a verb= endorse, with inflexions visés, viséd, viséing, & (3) as a p.p.=endorsed, sometimes preferred to viséd.

visibility)(visibleness. See -ry & -NES9. ‘The second has always been in more frequent use than most -ness words with predominant partners in -ty, & the special sense of visibility that became so familiar in the war may be expected to throw more general work on the other.

vision, in the sense of statesmanlike foresight or political sagacity, is enjoying a noticeable vogue; °... in those days: there was no open vision’ (1 Sam., iii. 1) is perhaps what makes the word tempting to politicians who wish to be mysteriously impressive; at any rate
