page: 696

+ they are much given to imputing lack of v. to their opponents & implying possession of it by themselves when they are at a loss for more definite matter; see VOGUE-worRDs. visit, vb, makes -tor; see -or. visor &c. Visor & vizor pronounced viz-; vizard & visard pronounced viz-. The -ard forms are not etymologically significant, being merely corruptions, but they differ in meaning by being restricted to the sense mask (lit. & fig.), whereas the -or forms have also, & chiefly, the sense movable helmet-front.

vista’d is preferable to vistaed; see -ED & ’D.

visual. For the pronunciation vi’ztial there is a much better case than for ii’ziial (see USUAL), because it is a word used chiefly by the educated; for the principle, see PRONUNCIATION; the OED, however, puts vi’zhtal first.

visualize, vitalize, make -zable; see MUTE E.

vitellus. Pl. -W.

vitiate makes vitiable,

-tor; see -ABLE l, -OR.

vitrify. For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

vitriolize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

vitta. Pl. -tae.

vituperate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

viva’. See VIVA VOCE.

viva’, vivat, vive, (pronounce vé’vah, vi’vat, vév) are the Italian, Latin, & French, for ‘long live

!°; they can all be used as nouns also, with plural -s. The verbs have, like exit, plurals (vivano, vivant, vivent) for use with plural subjects—a fact forgotten in:— Cries of ‘ Vive les Anglais’ attended us till we were inside the hotel./ Triumphal arches were prepared; ‘Bienvenue à nos libérateurs °— ‘Vie les Allies’—such were the words variously devised in illuminations & in posters.

vivace. Pronounce vévah’cha.

vivandier, -ére. See FRENCH WORDS.

+ vivarium. PI. -ia. vivat. See viva’. viva voce. Pronounce vivav6’s}. Often shortened colloquially into the CURTAILED WORD viva, which is used both as noun & especially as v.t. (past & p.p. viva’d)=examine in viva voce. vive. See viva’. vivid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4. vividity. A theme worthy of poetry . . 3 here it is handled with occasional vividity & general inconsequence. V.’s ugliness is no doubt its misfortune rather than its fault; but it is as natural to prefer vividness to it as to choose the one of two otherwise equal applicants who does not squint.

vivify. For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

vivisect makes -tor; see -or.

viz, sc(il)., i.e. Full forms videlicet, scilicet, id est. The meanings are so close to one another that a less instead of the most appropriate is often chosen. Viz, as is suggested by its usual spoken representative namely, introduces especially the items that compose what has been expressed as a whole (For three good TEASONS, VIZ. 1.5) 2 oie RON EOL a more particular statement of what has been vaguely described (My only means of earning, viz my fiddle). Sc. or scil. is in learned rather than popular use, is for instance commoner in notes on classical texts than elsewhere, & has as its most characteristic function the introducing of some word that has been not expressed, but left to be ‘understood’; so His performance failed to satisfy (sc. himself),=not, as might be guessed, other people. What i.e. does is not so much to particularize like viz, or supply omissions like scil., as to interpret by paraphrasing a previous expression that may mislead or be obscure: Now you are for it, i.e. punishment; The answer is in the negative, i.e. is No; Than that he should offend (i.e. harm) one of these little ones.
