page: 697

Even the above examples suffice to show that choice may sometimes be difficult; it does not follow that it is not worth making rightly. The writing of viz rather than viz. depends partly on the principle stated in PERIOD IN ABBREVIATIONS, but partly also on the fact that z is not the letter, but the old symbol of contraction for the -et of videlicet; but viz. is the prevalent form.

vizard. See visor.

vizier, vizierate, are the established forms, variously pedanticized as > wazir-, vizir-, vezir-, &c.3; sec MAHOMET.

vizor. See VISOR.

vocabulary. See GLOSSARY.

vocalize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

VOGUE-WORDS. Every now & then a word emerges from obscurity, or even from nothingness or a merely potential & not actual existence, into sudden popularity. Itis often, but not necessarily, one that by no means explains itself to the average man, who has to find out its meaning as best he can; his wrestlings with it have usually some effect upon it; it does not mean quite what it ought to, but in compensation it means some things that it ought not to, before he has done with it. Ready acceptance of vogue-words seems to some people the sign of an alert mind; to others it stands for the herd instinct & lack of individuality; the title of this article is perhaps enough to show that the second view is here taken; on the whole, the better the writer, or at any rate the sounder his style, the less will he be found to indulge in the vogueword. It is unnecessary here to discuss in detail the specimens that will be given; most of them are to be found in their dictionary places, & they will here be slightly classified only. The reason for collecting them under a common heading is that young writers may not even be aware, about some of them, that they are not part of the normal vocabulary, but still repulsive to

+ the old & the well-read. Many, it should be added, are vogue-words in particular senses only, & are unobjectionable, though liable now to ambiguity, in the senses that belonged to them before they attained their vogue.

1. Old vogue-words. Individual & nice may be instanced; the first now past its vogue but lingering in its vogue sense as a nuisance; the second established in a loose & general sense instead of its earlier & now infrequent precise one.

2. Words owing their vogue to the ease with which they can be substituted for any of several different & more precise words, saving the trouble of choosing the right: annex; asset; intensive; mentality; optimism; unthinkable.

3. Words owing their vogue to the joy of showing that one has acquired them: conservative; feasible; hectic; idiosyncrasy; meticulous; percentage; protagonist; psychological moment; slogan; venue.

4. Words taken up merely as novel variants on their predecessors: forceful for forcible; frock for dress; happening for event; intrigue vb for interest.

5. Words made or revived to suit a literary theory: foreword; english vb.

6. Words owing their vogue to some occasion: acid test; gesture= beau geste.

7. Words of rhetorical appeal: far-flung; vision.

volatilize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

vol-au-vent. See FRENCH WORDS.

volcano. Pl. -oes; see -o(E)s 1l.

volition. See VELLEITY.

Volkslied. Pronounce f6’kslét.

volley. Pl. -eys. For verb inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE &c., 2.

volte-face. See FRENCH WORDS.

voluminous. See LU.

voluntar(y)ism, -ist. See -1sT.

volute. See LU.

vomit makes -ited, -iting; -T-, -TT-.

vortex. For plural see -EX, -Ix, 4.

votaress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.
