page: 698

vote, vb, makes -table; see MUTE E.

vouch. See AVOUCH.

voussoir, vraisemblable, -emblance. See FRENCH WORDS.

vulcanize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

vulgar(ity). For the use in apologies for slang, see SUPERIORITY.

VULGARIZATION. Many words depend for their legitimate effect upon rarity; when blundering hands are laid upon them & they are exhibited in unsuitable places, they are vulgarized. Save (prep.) & ere were in the days of our youth seldom seen in prose, & they then consoried well with any passage of definitely elevated style, lending to it & receiving from it the dignity that was proper to them. Things are now so different that the elevated style shuns them as tawdry ornament; it says what the man in the street says, before & except, & leaves ere & save to the journalists who have not yet ceased to find them beautiful— which is naturally confusing, & an injury to the language. The fate of awful is of rather earlier date, but is still remembered, & weird has, almost in our own century, been robbed of all its weirdness. One would like to represent to the makers of fountain pens that the word fount, which some of them are desecrating, is sacrosanct; but they would probably be as indignant at the notion that their touch pollutes as the writer who should be told that he was injuring faerie & evanish & mystic & optimistic & unthinkable & replica by selecting them in honourable preference to fairy & vanish & mysterious & hopeful & incredible & copy. Vulgarization of words that should not be in common use robs some of their aroma, others of their substance, others again of their precision; but nobody likes to be told that the best service he can do to a favourite word is to leave it alone, & perhaps the less said here on this matter the better.

vulgarize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

vulpicide. See PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

W wabble. See WOBBLE. wade makes -dable; see Mure E. wadi, -dy. Pronounce wah‘di. The -di form (pl. -dis) is recommended; but -dy & -dies are also common. wafer has -ery, -ered, &c.; -R-, -RR-.

wag(gjon. The OED gives precedence to wagon, but concludes its note on the two forms with: ‘In Great Britain waggon is still very commonly used; in the U.S. it is rare’. Counting its post-18th-c. quotations we find 35 waggon to 11 wagon, & it is clear that waggon is the British form.

wagon-lit. See FRENCH WORDS. wainscot has -oted, -oting; -T-, -TT-. waistcoat. The pronunciation wé’skut is recommended; see PRro- NUNCIATION.

wait. The transitive use, as in w. one’s opportunity, w. the result, w. another’s convenience or arrival, is good English, but is described by the OED as ‘ now rare’ & as being ‘ superseded’ by await & wait for; the assignment of the intransitive uses to wait & of the transitive to await is a natural DIFFERENTIATION, & may be expected to continue; see also AWAIT.

waitress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS,

waive. The broad distinction between wave & waive, viz that to wave is, & to waive is not, proper to physical motion, is now generally observed; but confusion, & especially the assumption that the two forms are mere spelling variants, still occurs, & is confirmed by the fact that till recently senses certainly belonging to waive were at least as often as not spelt wave. The following example shows the form often taken by this confusion: The problem of feeding the peoples of the Central Empires is a very serious & anxious one, & we cannot waive it aside as though it were no concern of ours. To waive is not a derivative, confined to certain senses, of to
