page: 701

+ theory of State function./Had the eighteenth century bishops more vision there would have been no Wesleyan schism./Like many other eminent scientific men—Huzley, to wit—Sir Ray Lankester has a cultivated taste./ The platform, the golf club, the bridge iable, in no whit less than the factory & the workshop, must relax their claims.

The words in small capitals are further commented upon in their dictionary places.

wardress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

-WARD(S). Words ending with -ward(s) may most of them be used as adverbs, adjectives, or nouns. The -s is usually present in the adverb, & absent in the adjective; the noun, which is rather an absolute use of the adjective, tends to follow it in being without -s; moving eastwards; the eastward position; looking to the eastward(s). This usage prevails especially with the words made of a noun+-ward(s), but is also generally true of the older words in which the first part is adverbial, such as downward. Some words, however, have peculiarities; see AFTERWARDS, FOR- WARD, ONWARD, TOWARDS.

ware, in the warning cry w. wire! &c., is usually pronounced wor.

warehouse. For the verb the pronunciation -z is recommended; see Noun & VERB 2.

warp, n. See woor.

warrant, vb, makes -tor; see -OR.

wash. The rivals wash-hand-stand, washing-stand, & wash-stand, are all in themselves justifiable, but it would be well to be rid of two of them. The first is obviously cumbrous, & there is no reason for preferring the longer second to the shorter third, especially with (Moab is my) wash-pot, wash-house, & washtub, waiting to welcome washstand, which is recommended.

washing. For take in one another’s wW., see WORN-OUT HUMOUR.

wassail. The pronunciation pre-

+ ferred by OED is w6’sl.

W. makes -ailing; see -LL-, -L-. wast)(wert. See BE 7. wastage. It is possible that sentences may be constructed in which this word is for some reason better than waste; what is certain is that in nearly all the places in which it nowadays appears it is not better; see LONG VARIANTS. waste. 1. W. makes -table;

see More E£. 2. Waste paper.

No hyphen; see Hyeuens 3 B.

wastrel. The sense spendthrift (adj. & n.), now the most frequent one, is a recent development, the older senses being a piece of waste land, & a flawed or spoilt piece of workmanship; but there is no need to object to the new sense.

watchword. Forsynonymysee SIGN.

watershed. The original meaning of the word, whether or not it is an anglicization of German Wasserscheide (lit. waterparting), was the line of high Jand dividing the waters that flow in one direction from those that flow in the other. The older of us were taught that that was its meaning, & that the senses riverbasin & area of collection & drainage-slope were mere ignorant guesses due to confusion with the familiar word shed. Such classics as Lyell & Darwin & Geikie are all quoted for the correct sense; & that being so it is lamentable that the mistaken senses should have found acceptance with those who could appreciate the risks of ambiguity; yet Huxley proposed that water-parting should be introduced to do _ watershed’s work, & watershed be allowed to mean what the ignorant thought it meant. The inevitable result is that now one has no idea, unless context happens to suffice without aid from the word itself, which meaning it has in any particular place. The old sense should be restored & rigidly maintained. OED quotations from Lyell & Geikie follow to make the old use clear, & an extract from a newspaper shows the modern mis-
