page: 702

+ use:—(Lyell) The cresis or watersheds of the Alps & Jura are about eighty miles apart./ (Geikie)The watershed of a country or continent is thus a line which divides the flow of the brooks & rivers on two opposite slopes./ (Newspaper)The Seine, between its source in the Côte d'Or & the capital, has many tributaries, & when there is bad weather in the watershed of each of these an excessive flow is bound to be the result. waterspout. See WIND, n.

wave makes -vable, -vy; see MUTE E.

wax. Wax doll, & wax candle; no hyphen; HyPuens 3 B.

waxen. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

way. 1l. For ‘at the parting of the ways’ see PARTING. 2 Under way (not weigh) is the right phrase for in motion. 3. See one’s way to. We hope that the Government will see their way of giving effect to this suggestion. What has happened? The writer doubtless knows the idiomatic phrase as well as the rest of us, but finding himself saying ‘ will see their way to give effect to’ has shied at the two tos; but he ‘should have abandoned instead of mutilating his phrase; see Our OF THE FRYING-PAN, & CAST-IRON IDIOM.

waylay. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 1.

-ways. See -WISE.

wazir. See VIZIER.

we. 1.Case. 2. National, editorial, generic, & personal uses.

4. Case. Use of us for we has been illustrated under us 1; the converse is seen in:—The Turk in his harem, this man who was entiiled to have four wives if he liked for chattels —which to we Western people, with our ideas about women, is almost uninielligible./Whether the Committee’s suggestions are dictated by Patriotism, Political expediency, or ..., is not for we outside mortals to decide.

2. National &c. uses: We may mean I & another or others, or the average man, or this newspaper, or 702

+ this nation, or several other things. The newspaper editor occasionally forgets that he must not mix up his editorial with his national we. But still, we are distrusted by Germany, & we are loth, by explaining how our acts ought to be interpreted, to put her in a more invidious position. The first we is certainly England, the second is probably the newspaper. See 1 2, & our 2, for similar confusions of different senses that are legitimate apart, but not together.

weak. For w. ending, see TECH- NICAL TERMS. For weaker sex, see SOBRIQUETS.

weal. For the word meaning stripe, see WALE.

wear. For the word meaning dam, see WEIR.

weariless. See -LESS. |

weasand. Pronounce we’znd.

weather gage. So spelt (QED) in the nautical phrase have the w. g. of, though gage is the same word as that spelt gauge; no hyphen, see Hy- PHENS 3 B.

weave. Ordinary p.p. woven; see also WOVE.

weazen. See WIZENED.

web. See woor.

wed is a poetic or rhetorical synonym for marry; & the established past & p.p. is wedded; but it is noticeable that the need of brevity in newspaper headings is bringing into trivial use both the verb instead of marry (DUKE WEDS ACTRESS), & the short instead of the long p.p. (SUICIDE OF WED PAIR); see INconcruous VOCABULARY; here is a chance for sub-editors to do the language a service, if they will. For the effect of headlines, cf. WORKLESS.

wedge makes wedgeable; MUTE E.

Wedgwood. So spelt.

Wednesday. For the adverbial use (Can you come W. ?), see FRIDAY.

weekly, adv. See -LILY 2.

ween. A WARDOUR-STREET word.

weevil makes -lled, -lly; see -LL-, -L-, 2; pronounce we’vld, wé’vli.

weft. See woor.
