page: 703

+ weigh. For under w., see WAY. weir, wear, n. The first form is recommended as obviating doubts both of identity & of pronunciation. weird. A word ruined by becoming a VYOGUE-WORD.

Welch. See WELSH. well, adv. It is time for someone to come to the rescue of the phrase as well as, which is being cruelly treated. Grammatically, the point is that as well as is a conjunction & not a preposition; or, to put it in a less abstract way, its strict meaning is not besides, but & not only; or, to proceed by illustration, English requires not You were there as well as me (as it would if the phrase were a preposition & meant besides), but You were there as well as I (since the phrase is a conjunction & means & not only). The abuses occur, however, not in simple sentences like this with a common noun or pronoun following as well as; indeed, it is usually not possible in these to tell whether the construction intended is right or wrong; in They killed women as well as men, men may be rightly meant to be governed by killed, or wrongly meant to be governed by as well as =besides; only the writer, & very likely not he, can say. They occur in places where the part of a verb chosen. reveals the grammar:—-The Territorial officer still has to put his hand in his pocket as well as giving his time. Read give; it depends on has to; or else substitute besides./ A German control of the Baltic musi vitally affect the lives of all the Scandinavian Powers as well as influencing the interesis of a maritime country like England. Read influence; it depends on must; or else substitute besides./His death leaves a gap as well as creating a byelection in Ross & Cromarty. Read creates; it is parallel to leaves; or else substitute besides./As well as closing the railway, it should make the Danube impracticable for traffic between Turkey & the Central Powers. Read besides; as well as should

+ never precede; or else read as well as close & put this after Powers./ What should be made into cheap meals ts now being used by dogbiscuit & other animal food makers as a basis of their wares, as well as converting it into manure. Read converted for converting it, continuing the construction of being. A more obviously illiterate sentence than the rest.

The process of first noticing that as well as means nearly the same as besides, & then giving it a wrong construction that would be right for besides, is illustrated in ANALOGY.

well & well-. In combinations of a participle & well there is often a doubt whether the two parts should be hyphened or left separate. The danger of wrong hyphens is greater than that of wrong separation; e.g., to write His courage is wellknown (where well known is the only tolerable form) is much worse than to write His well known courage (where well-known represents the accent more truly). Some help will be found under Hypuens (E, & group *put-up); & it may be here repeated that if a participle with well is attributive (a _ well-aimed stroke) the hyphen is desirable but not obligatory, but if the participle is predicative (the stroke was well aimed) the hyphen is wrong. Similarly in such phrases as well off: They are not well off, but Well-off people cannot judge.

well-nigh. See Warpour STREET. Archaeology had strengthened its hold on art, & went well-nigh to strangling it. The natural English would have been & came near strangling it, or & nearly strangled it. But if the writer was bent on displaying his antique, he should at least have said & well-nigh strangled it; the use of well-nigh is purely adverbial; i.e., it needs a following verb or adjective or noun to attach itself to; weli nigh worn to pieces, & well nigh dead, says Shakspere, & well nigh half the angelic name, says Milton. To say
