page: 704

+ come well-nigh to is to put the antique in an incongruous frame. As the OED has not reached well when this is written, the idiomatic restriction may be proved false, & is to be taken only as a guess.

well-read. See INTRANSITIVE P.P. Welsh, Welch. The established modern spelling is -sh, except in the official names of regiments, for which -chis used. That distinction, being meaningless, is regrettable. A much more profitable one would be that -sh should be universal for the national adjective, while -ch was assigned to the verb to welch & to welcher—& that whether the verb is or is not etymologically connected (a disputed point) with Welsh. Which spelling is in itself preferable, apart from custom, depends merely on the prevalent pronunciation, which is -sh. The analogy of French & Scotch & Dutch is irrelevant because the preceding dentals account for the harder ch in them, & that of English, Scottish, Irish, & British, because the familiar -ish, to which Welsh has not surrendered, disqualifies them.

wen. For the W., see SOBRIQUETS. were. For the subjunctive uses in the singular, as If I were you, Were he alive, It were futile, some of which are more inconsistent than others with the writing of natural English, see SUBJUNCTIVES.

werewolf, werw-. The first is recommended; it is the more familiar, it suggests the usual pronunciation, & it dates back to Old English.

wert. See BE 7.

westerly. See EASTERLY. westernmost. See -MOST.

Westminster, = Parliament.

See SOBRIQUETS. westward(s). See -warvp(s).

WH. The sounding of h in words containing wh (what, whether, nowhere, &c.) is a matter of locality or nationality, & comes under the general principle suggested in Pro- NUNCIATION.

wharf. For plural &c., see -vE(D).

wharfinger. Pronounce -jer.

what is a word of peculiar interest, because the small problems that it poses for writers are such as on the one hand yield pretty readily to analysis, & on the other hand demand a slightly more expert analysis than they are likely to get from those who think they can write well enough without stopping © | to learn grammar.

1. Wrong number attraction. 2. What singular & what plural. 3. One | what in two cases. 4. What resumed by (and, but) which. 5. Miscellaneous.

1. Wrong number attraction. In each of the examples to be given it © | is beyond question that what starts ` as a singular pronoun (=that which, or a thing that), because a singular | verb follows it; but in each also the ‘} next verb, belonging to the that of that which, or to the a thing of a thing that, is not singular but plural; this is due to the influence of a complement in the plural, & the grammatical name for such influence is attraction; all the quotations are on the pattern What is said are words, instead of What is said is words. Whether attraction of verb to complement is idiomatic in English has already been discussed in NuMBER, 1; it is here assumed that it is not; in all the quotations, which are multiplied to show how common the mistake is, the romantype verb should have its number changed from plural to singular:— What is of absorbing & permanent interest are the strange metamorphoses which this fear underwent./What is required are houses at rents that the people can pay./What seems to be needed, & what, I believe, public opinion calls for, are stringent regulations to restrict the sale./What makes the omission still more amazing are, | first, that the Allies .. .; secondly, | that . . ./What is required are three bedrooms, a good large living-room . . ./What puzzles us very much are | the constant references in the Observer's
