page: 705

+ article to Mr Borden./What is really at issue in the present conflict are not questions of territory, but the future of democracy./What is wanted to meet it are proposals which are practical./ What is wanted now are men who are Liberals today./What strikes the tourist most are the elegant Paris toilettes./ What is needed are a few recognized British financial corporations./What is of more importance in the official statement of profits are the following figures.

2. What singular & what plural. In each of the above quotations, the writer made it plain, by giving what a singular verb, that he conceived what there as a singular pronoun. But the word itself can equally well be plural: J have few books, & what there are do not help me. So arises another problem concerning the number of verbs after what, & this second one naturally gets mixed up with the first. It will here, however, be kept to itself, & the position will be that attraction has already been disposed of, & that the number of the verb has nothing whatever to do with the number of the complement, being merely the outward sign that what is singular or is plural. First comes a particular form of sentence in which plural what is better than singular, or in other words in which its verb should be plural. These are sentences in which what, if resolved, comes out as the ——s that, ——s standing for a plural noun actually present in the complement. After each quotation a correction is first given if it is _ desirable, & in any case the resolu- | tion that justifies the plural:—We | have been invited to abandon what | seems to us to be the most valuable parts of our Constitution (read seem; | abandon the parts of our Constitution that seem)./The Manchester _ City Council, for what was doubtless | good & sufficient reasons, decided not | to take any part (read were; for reasons that were)./Exception was taken to what was referred to as the

Aa * secret & dictatorial methods’ of M.

1351

+ Poincaré in the Ruhr (read were; to the methods that were)./It is a diatribe against M. Loucheur & M. Clementel, but the personal aspect is of little importance to English readers; what are important are the criticisms of the operation of protective duties in France (The criticisms that; but What is important is would have been better, what is standing for the thing that is, in contrast with aspect)./They specially approved what to Liberals was the most reactionary & disastrous parts of it (read were; approved the parts of it that to Liberals were)./Confidence being inspired by the production of what appears to be bars or bricks of solid gold (read appear; production of bars or bricks that appear)./Mr Wheatley urged a curtailment of what is called luxury buildings (read are; of buildings that are called; but probably the plural bwildings is a misprint).

But resolution of what often presents us not with a noun found in the complement, but with some other noun of wider meaning, or again with the still vaguer that which. A writer should make the resolution & act on it without allowing the number of the complement to force a plural verb on him if the most natural representative of what is that which or the thing ikat; in several of the following quotations. the necessary courage has been lacking; corrections & resolutions are given as before:—I can well believe that Mr B. Russell’s whip is heavy; however, what I wish to point out are certain instances wherein philosophy has made serious error (read is; the thing that)./No other speaker has his peculiar power of bringing imagination to play on what seems, until he speaks, te be familiar platitudes (read seem; on sayings that seem)./Instead of the stupid agitation now going on in South Wales, what are needed are regular working & higher outputs (read what is needed is; the thing that is needed—rather than things, as opp..
