page: 707

+ though permissible, sometimes makes ambiguous what without it is plain; in the last example, for instance, “ what happened ’ & ‘ what has been stamped ’ might be different things, whereas ‘what happened, & has been stamped’ is clearly one & the same thing. The reason why which has been called * impossible ’ is that what & which are of different grammatical values, which being a simple relative pronoun, while what (=that which, or a thing that) is a combination of antecedent & relative; but the second verb needs the antecedent-relative just as much as the first, if but or and is inserted; if neither but nor and is present, which will sometimes be possible, & so omission of but & and would be another cure for the last two examples.

Two specimens are added in which the remedy of simply omitting which or substituting for it a repeated what is not possible without further change. The difficulty is due to, & vanishes with, the superstition against PREPOSITION AT END, I can never be certain that I am receiving what I want & for which I am paying. Read what I want & am paying for./ But now we have a Privy Councillor & an ex-Minisier engaged daily in saying & doing what he frankly admiis is illegal, & for which he could be severely punished. Read & what he could be severely punished for. The repetition of what is required because the relative contained in the first what is subjective, & that in the second objective; see 3.

5. Miscellaneous. The beautiful conciseness belonging to what as antecedent-relative seems to lure the unwary into experiments in further concision. They must remember that both parts of it, the antecedent (that or those) & the relative (which), demand their share of attention:— What I am concerned in the present article is io show that not only theory but practice support the unrestricted exercise of the prerogative. Read concerned to do, or the which in

707

+ what is without government./What my friend paid less than a pound a day for last year he had to pay two guineas a day at a minor Brighton establishment last Easter. Read two guineas a day for, or the that in what is without government./Entering the church with feelings different from what he had ever entered a church before, he could with difficulty restrain his emotions. Read entered a church wiih, or the which of what is without government.

The following shows a different what. When one reflects what great importance it is to the success of the League of Nations that America should become a member of it. Read of what, & see VALUE.

what ever, whatever. The various uses are complicated, & cannot be all set out, for readers who are not specialists in grammar, without elaborate explanations that would demand too much space. This article will avoid all technicalities except what are needed in dealing with two or three common mistakes.

1. The interrogative use. 2. The antecedent-relative use. 3. The concessive use.

1. The interrogative use. What ever can tt mean? What ever shall we do? For the status of this, see EVER. It should never appear in print except when familiar dialogue is being reproduced, & should then be in two separate words, differing in this from all other uses. Three examples follow in which both these rules are disregarded; in the second of them we have an indirect instead of a direct question, but the same rules hold:—Which is pretty, but whatever can it mean?/Whatever you mean by ‘ patriotic’ education I do not know, but Lord Roberts’s use of the term is plain enough./ And, considering that 180,000 actually arrived in the country, whatever was the cost?

2. The antecedent-relative use. Whatever in this use is an emphatic form of what as antecedent-relative (see wuar 4, 5); i.e. while what
