page: 709

+ from or where . ..to of speech into whence & whither in print. On the other hand, let us not be ultramodernists & assume that whence & whither, even in their primary senses, are dead & buried; that must be the view of the journalist who writes: The Irregulars have been compelled to withdraw their line from Clonmel, to where it is believed they transferred their headquarters when they had to flee from Limerick. If whither was too antiquated, the alternative was ‘ to which place’, but occasions arise now & then, as in this sentence, to which whence & whither are, even for the practical purposes of plain speech, more appropriate than any equivalent.

whenever, the right form for the ordinary conjunction, should not be used instead of the colloquial when ever (When ever will you be ready?), for which see EVER.

WHERE- COMPOUNDS. A small number of these are still in free general use, though chiefly in limited applications, with little or no taint of archaism; these are whereabouts (as purely local adv. & n.), whereas (in contrasts), wherever, wherefore (as noun plural in whys & wherefores), whereupon (in narratives), & wherewithal (as noun). The many others—whereabout, whereat, whereby, wherefore (adv. & conj.), wherefrom, ‘wherein, ‘whereof, whereon, wherethrough, whereto, wherewith, & a few more—have given way in both the interrogative & the relative uses either to the preposition with what & which & that (whereof=of what?, what... of?, of which, that ... of), or to some synonym (wherefore= why); resort to them generally suggests that the writer has a tendency either to FORMAL WORDS or to PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

wherever, where ever. AS WHEN- EVER.

wherewithal. The noun, as was mentioned in WHERE- COMPOUNDS, has survived in common use (but I havewt got the w.), no doubt be-

+ cause the quaintness of it has struck the popular fancy. But the noun should remember that it is after all only a courtesy noun, not a noun in its own right; it means just ‘ with which ’, but seems to have forgotten this in: They [France’s purchases] have been merely the wherewithal with which to start business again.

whether. 1. For w. & that after doubt(ful), see DouBT(FUL). 2. W. or no(t). Whether he was there or was not there easily yields by ellipsis Whether he was there or not, & that by transposition Whether or not he was there. Whether or no he was there is not so easily accounted for, since no is not ordinarily, like not, an adverb (see No); & in fact the origin of the idiom is uncertain; but the fact remains that whether or not is (OED) ‘less frequent’ than whether or no—especially, perhaps, when the or follows whether immediately: Whether or no he did it; whether he did it or not. Whichever form is used, such a doubling of the alternative as the following should be carefully avoided: But clearly, whether or not peers will or will not have to be made depends upon the number of the Die-Hards. Omit either or not or or will not.

which. Relative pronouns are as troublesome to the inexpert but conscientious writer as they are useful to everyone, which is saying much. About which, in particular, problems are many, & some of them complicated; that the reader may not be frightened by an article of too portentous length, the two that require most space are deferred, & will be found in the separate articles WHICH)(THAT)(WHO, & WHICH WITH AND OR BUT. The points to be treated here can be disposed of with more certainty & at less length, under the headings:—

1. Relative instead of demonstrative. 2. One relative in two cases. 3. One relative for main & subordinate verbs. 4. Break-away from relative. 5. Confused construction.
