page: 711

+ which having not only to serve twice (with have beaten, & with is mentioned), but to change its case in transit; see 2.

Illustrations follow of B & C; A, being both legitimate & unusual, & having been introduced only for purposes of comparison, need not be quoted for.

B, doubtfully advisable

With a fire in her hold which he managed to keep in control, although unable to extinguish (add it?)./ Mr Masterman was a liitle troubled by ihe spirit of his past, which, if he had not evoked, no one would have remembered (evoked it?)./And it was doubtless from Weldon that he borrowed the phrase which his use of has made so famous (of it? or his use of which has made it?). This last is no more ungrammatical, though certainly more repulsive, than the others.

C, undoubtedly wrong

The programme is divided up into a series of walks, which, if the industrious sightseer can underiake, will supply him with a good everyday knowledge of Paris (undertake them)./ In general the wife manages to establish a status which needs no legal proviso or trade union rule to protect (protect it; or which it needs; or to protect which needs no... rule).

4, Break-away from relative. He shows himself extremely zealous against practices in some of which he had greatly indulged, & was himself an example of their ill effects./ It imposes a problem which we either solve or perish. Both of these are strictly ungrammatical. In_ the first, which is the easier to deal with, it will be noticed that in sense the third part (& was to the end) is clearly coupled by and not to the first part or main sentence (He shows to practices), but to the second part or relative clause (in some to indulged). Nevertheless, by the use of their it has been definitely broken away from connexion with which, & become grammatically, but il-

+ logically, a second main sentence with, for subject, the He that begins the first. There are two possible correct versions of the second & third parts, (a) some of which he had greatly indulged in & himself exemplified the ill effects of, or (b) in some of which he had greatly indulged, & of the ill effects of (some of) which he was himself an example; a will be repudiated, perhaps more justifiably than usual, by those who condemn final prepositions; b fails to give the precise sense, whether the bracketed some of is inserted or not; to both these the break-away, which is not an uncommon construction, will be preferred by some.

The other example (It imposes a problem which we either solve or perish) is, owing to Lord Grey’s t The nations must learn or perish °, of a now very popular pattern. The break-away depends on the nature of either . . . or alternatives, in which whatever stands before either must be common to both the either & the or groups. Either we solve this or we perish can therefore become We either solve this or perish, but cannot become This we either solve or perish, because this is peculiar to the either group—else the full form would be Hither we solve this or we perish this. With this as object the escape is. easy—to put this after solve— 3 with which as object that is not tolerable (we either solve which or perish), & strict grammar requires us to introduce into the or group something that can take which as object-——a problem which we either solve or perish by not solving, either solve or are destroyed by, &c. Even: those who ordinarily are prepared to treat either with proper respect (see EITHER 5, & UNEQUAL YOKE- FELLOWS) may perhaps allow themselves the popular form; if not, ‘A problem which if we do nct solve we perish’ (see 3 A) is worth considering.

5. Confused construction. He may be expected to make a determined bid for the dual réle which is his right &
