page: 712

+ duty as Prime Minister to occupy. In that sentence, is which subject to is, or object to occupy? Itisin fact, of course, the latter, occupy having no other object, & not being able to do without one; but the writer has effectually put us off the track by dropping the it that should have parted which from is. To occupy which is his right becomes, when which is given its normal place, which it is his right to occupy. This mistake is very common, & will be found fully discussed under IT 1.

6. Late position. In the examples, which are arranged as a climax, the distance between which & its antecedent is shown by the roman type. Grammar has nothing to say on the subject, but common sense protests against abuse of this freedom. The specimens given may easily be matched or surpassed by anyone who will search the newspapers. She is wonderful in her brilliant sketch of that querulous, foolish little old lady which she does so well./ Lord Hemphill made his maiden speech from the Front Opposition Bench in the House of Commons, his place on which he had won by filling the position of . . ./The whole art of clinching is explained in this little book from the concentrated harvest of wisdom in which we present some specimens to our readers./ Nothing has more contributed to dispelling this illusion than the camera, the remarkable & convincing evidence tt has been possible to obtain wtih which has enormously added to the knowledge of the habits of animals.

T. One of ihe best which has. In which case one of the greatest & most serious strikes which has occurred in modern times will take place. Has should be have. For this very common but inexcusably careless blunder see NuMBER, 5.

8. Commas. In the present article the distinctions between which & other relatives—see WHICH)(THAT) (wHo—have been left alone, & it has been assumed, as it seems to be in most matters by 99 out of 100

+ writers, that which is the relative & the relative is which. A consequence of this is that the defining & the non-defining kinds of relative clause alike begin with or contain which, & are not known apart by the difference between that & which. This being so—& it is not a mere hypothesis, but in most writers a patent fact—, it is important to have another means of distinguishing. A comma preceding which shows that the which-clause is nondefining, & the absence of such a comma shows that it is defining. He declares that the men were treated like beasts throughout ihe voyage, & he gives the worst description of the general mismanagement which was most conspicuous. There is no comma before which, & therefore the clause must be a defining one; i.e., it limits the sense of the general mismanagement by excluding from it such parts as were less conspicuous; the most conspicuous part of the mismanagement is described as very bad indeed—that is what we are told. Oris it not so, & are we to understand rather that the whole of the general mismanagement is described as very bad, & moreover that it was conspicuous? Surely the latter is meant; but the loss of the comma forbids us to take it so. The difference between the two senses (or the sense & the nonsense) is not here of great importance, but is at least perfectly clear, & the importance of not misinterpreting will vary infinitely elsewhere. That right interpretation should depend on a mere comma is a pity, but, until that & which are differentiated, so it must be, & writers must see their commas safely through the press.

9. In &c. which to. England is, however, the last country in which to say so./I have no money with which to buy food. The current English for the second is indisputably I have no money to buy food with; & there can hardly be a doubt that this has been formalized into the other by
