page: 713

+ the influence of the PREPOSITION AT END superstition. No-one need hesitate about going back to nature & saying to buy food with. And even for the first ‘ the last country to say so in’ is here recommended, though the very light word so happens to make with the other very light word in an uncomfortably weak ending; much more is ‘ a good land to live in’ superior to ‘a good land in which to live’. A confessedly amateur guess at the genesis of these constructions may possibly throw light. The assumption underlying the in which to form is obviously that there is an elliptical relative clause—perhaps This is a good land in which (one is) to live. The amateur guess is that there is no relative clause in the case at all, & that the form to live in originated in an adverbial infinitive attached to the adjective good. He is a hard man to beat; how hard? why, to beat; what Greek grammars call an epexegetic (or explanatory) infinitive. Jt is a good land to in-habit is precisely parallel, & to live-in is precisely the same as to in-habit. If this account should happen to be true, the unpleasant form ‘in which to live’ might be dismissed as a grammarians’ mistaken pedantry.

which)(that)(who. 1. General. 2. Which for that. 3. Which after superlative &c. 4. Whichin Itis... that. 5. Which as relative adverb. 6. Elegant variation. 7. That for which. 8. Which, who, & nouns of multitude. 9. Who & that.

4. General. If the evidence of a first-class writer who was no purist or pedant counts for anything, Lord Morley’s opinion exhibited below should make it worth while to master the differences between which & the other relatives. The extracts are from an article in the Westminster Gazette of 3rd Oct. 1923 by Miss Hulda Friedrichs: ‘In 1920 Messrs Macmillan published a new edition of Lord Morley’s works...

Aa2 He was determined to make it a

+ carefully revised edition, & made one or two attempts at revising it himself . . . He then asked me whether I would care to help him, & explained what my part of the work would be. It sounded rather dull, for he was particularly keen on having the word which, wherever there was the possibility, exchanged for that . . . He was always ready & very willing to go with me through the notes I had jotted down while going through a book page by page, * which ” hunting & looking out for other errors ’.

Let it be stated broadly, before coming to particular dangers, that: (A) of which & that, which is appropriate to non-defining & that to defining clauses; (B) of which & who, which belongs to things, & whe to persons; (C) of who & that, who suits particular persons, & that generic persons. (A) The river, which here is tidal, is dangerous, but The river that flows through London is the Thames. (B) The crews, which consisted of Lascars, mutinied, but Six Welshmen, who formed the crew, were drowned. (C) You who are a walking dictionary, but He is a man that is never at a loss. To substitute for the relative used in any of those six examples either of the others would be, if the principles maintained in this book are correct, a change for the worse; &, roughly speaking, the erroneous uses (if they are so) illustrated below are traceable to neglect or rejection of A, B, & C.

2. Which for that. The importance & convenience of using that as the regular token of the defining’ clause has been fully illustrated under THAT REL. PRON., & no more need be done here on that general point than to give an example or two of whichs that are misleading where thats would have been plain:—Mr E. Robertson, who spoke for the Government, admitted that ships with nucleus crews were not so efficient as ships fully manned, but the Admiralty were satisfied with them. They were
