page: 716

+ that the which is meant as a defining relative & should therefore be that; but, as a non-defining clause would here give a hardly distinguishable sense, the escape is to use one & keep which, merely inserting the necessary comma. The reader may like another example to play with: . . . was recalled to the passer-by in Pall-Mall by Foley’s fine bronze statue of the War Minister who deeply cared for the private soldier, which stood in front of the now. destroyed War Office, that has very recently given place to the palatial premises of the Royal Automobile Club.

7. That for which. After all these intrusions of which into the place of that, it must be recorded that retaliation is not quite unknown; but itis rare. In the island of South Uist, that I have come from, there is not one single tree./A really happy party was the Chiverton family, that had a carriage to itself & almost filled it. The justification of that in these would require that there should be several South Uists from one of which I have come, & several Chiverton families of which one only had a carriage to itself; but even those suppositions are precluded by the commas. Other examples are given in THAT REL. PRON. 2.

8. Which, who, & nouns of multitude. Words like section, union, world, sometimes mean all the persons composing a section &c. ; idiom then allows us to regard them as grammatically singular or plural as we prefer, but not to pass from one to the other; see PERSONIFICATION &c. 2. Now a section, if we elect to treat it as singular, is a thing; but, if we make it plural, it is persons, & by rule B which belongs to things, whereas who belongs to persons. Three examples that accordingly need correction are:—There was a strong section which were in favour of inserting the miners’ 5s. & 2s., as the debate proved (which is required by the preceding was, but in turn requires a second was instead of were)./All the world who is directly

+ interested in railway projects will have paid a visit to the Brussels Exhibition (who is possible, but only if are follows; otherwise not indeed which since the clause is defining, but that is required)./The Canon is writing in justification of the Christian Social Union, which, he tells us, are tired of the present state of things (which is, or who are, tired).

9. Who & that. It would be satisfactory if the same clear division of functions that can be confidently recommended for that & which, viz between defining & non-defining clauses, could be established also for that & who; this would give us that for all defining clauses whether qualifying persons or things, & who for persons but which for things in all non-defining. But at present there is much more reluctance to apply that to a person than to a thing. Politeness plays a great part in idiom, & to write The ladies that were present, or The general that most distinguished himself, is perhaps felt to be a sort of slight, depriving them of their humanity as one deprives a man of his gentility by writing him Mr instead of Esq. At any rate the necessarily defining that is displaced by the not necessarily defining who especially where the personal noun to be defined denotes a particular person or persons, & holds its own better when the person is a type or generic. In It was you that did it, the It defined is the doer— a type, not an individual; & such antecedents as all, no-one, a men, ask for nothing better than that. Expressions in which we may prefer that without being suspected of pedantry are: The most impartial critic that could be found; The only man that I know of; Anyone that knows anything knows this; It was you that said so; Who is it that talks about moral geography?. To increase by degrees the range of that referring to persons is a worthy object for the reformer of idiom, but violent attempts are doomed to failure. Accordingly, in the follow-
