page: 717

+ ing sentences, all exhibiting a wrong which, that should be sparingly preferredtowho,thoughitisinallof them strictly legitimate:—The greater proportion of Consols are held by persons or corporations which never placethem on the market (that, the only relative applicable to both persons & things, is here specially suitable)./With the Allies moving forward against an enemy which has nowhere been able to make a successful stand (who)./They are harassing an enemy which is moving in the open (who)./Among other distinguished visitors which the Crawfords had at Rome was Longfellow (that)./A woman who is devoted to the many dear & noble friends, famous in art, science, & literature, which she possesses (whom).

which with and or but. It is well known that and which & but which are kittle cattle, so well known that the more timid writers avoid the dangers associated with them by keeping clear of them altogether— a method that may be inglorious, but is effectual & usually not difficult. Others, less pusillanimous or more ignorant, put their trust in a rule of thumb & take the risks. That rule is that and which or but which should be used only if another which has preceded. It is not true; and-which clauses may be legitimate without a preceding which; & its natural if illogical corollary—that and which is always legitimate if another which has preceded—induces a false security that begets many blunders. On the other hand, it probably saves many more bad and-whichs than it produces. Anyone who asks no more of a rule of thumb than that it should save him the trouble of working out his problems separately, & take him right more often than it takes him wrong, should abandon the present article at this point.

Those for whom such a rule is not good enough may be encouraged to proceed by a few sentences in which it has not averted disaster:—The EK

+ defeat of M. Poincaré for the office for which he has put himself forward— & for which, by the way, he has been much criticized—would be regarded as an Anti-R. P. triumph./A special measure of support & sympathy should be extended to the Navy & Admiralty, which have certainly never been more in need of it, & to which they have never been more entitled than today./After a search for several days he found a firm which had a large quantity of them & which they had no use for./A period in which at times the most ungenerous ideas & the most ignoble aims have strutted across the stage, & which have promptly been exploited by unscrupulous journalists & politicians. True, it is easy to see the flaw in all these, viz that the two whichs have not the same antecedent, & to say that common sense is to be expected of those who apply rules; but then rules of thumb are meant just for those who have not enough common sense to do without them, & ought to be made foolproof.

Here, on the other hand, are examples in which there is no preceding which, & yet and which is blameless:—Mandates issued, which the member is bound blindly & implicitly to obey, to vote & to argue for, though conirary to the clearest conviction of his judgment & conscience— these are things utterly unknown to the laws of this land, and which arise from a fundamental mistake of the whole order & tenor of our Constitution (BURKE)./Another natural prejudice, of most extensive prevalence, and which had a great share in producing the errors fallen into by the ancients in their physical inquiries, was this (J. S. MILL)./In the case of calls within the London area, but which require more than three pennies, the same procedure is followed./The naked-eye comet discovered by Mr Brooks in the summer, and which was visible in the early evening a few weeks since, has now reappeared.

The first of these is from Burke, the second from Mill, & the other
