page: 719

+ that is not a relative clause is logically & grammatically permissible, it has often an ungainly effect & is not unlikely to convict the writer of carelessness; if he had foreseen that a relative clause was to come (& not to foresee is carelessness), he could usually have paved the way for it by throwing his first expression into the same form.

It may possibly be noticed by persons who have read other parts of the book that so far that has not been mentioned in this article, though defining & non-defining clauses have been in question. That is so; it has been assumed, to suit the large number of people for whom the relative that hardly exists in print, that which is the only relative. Mor the advantages of recognizing that & giving it its fair share of work, especially that of distinguishing the defining from the non-defining clause, see THAT REL. PRON.; & in what follows, which will consist largely of bad and-which or but-which clauses with corrections, the assumption will be, on the contrary, that which & that are, with some special exceptions, respectively the non-defining & the defining relatives.

Quotations will be arranged, with a view to their serving a practical purpose, in groups for each of which a particular cure is the best or simplest, & not according to the fault that necessitates a change. But, that any doubts about the latter may be resolved, an index letter appended to each quotation will refer to the following table: A. No preceding parallel clause or

equivalent B. Different antecedents C. Defining & non-defining expres-

sions linked D, Which instead of that E. What preceding (see WHAT 4) F. Right but ungainly

There is often room for difference of opinion either about the fault found or about the remedy offered. In some of the quotations the relative pronoun who, or the relative 719

+ adverb where (= at or in which) plays a part instead of which or thai, but need cause no difficulty.

USE DEMONSTRATIVE IN-

STEAD OF RELATIVE

I have also much Russian literature on ihat subject, but from which, out of respect to certain English prejudices, I forbear to quote (C; from this)./Every male Kaffir must go to a Pass Office & obtain a form, which he presents to his employer immediately he enters his employ, & who keeps it as long as the Kaffir is with him (A; & the latter)./The tunnel will be closed daily for several hours whilst the work is in progress, & which is expected to take two years (A; & this)./At one time there was a drop of something over 35 per cent, but from which point there has been a recovery (A; from that)./In the next act—Athens during the Trojan War—we meet Diogenes, & are entertained by many clever allusions to ancient Greek mythology, & where our millionaire tourist falls in love with Helen of Troy (A; & there)./ Motor-car accessories have been taxed in America, in the belief that the 5 per cent would be absorbed by the makers or dealers, but which in reality is being passed on to the consumer (A; but in reality it).

OMIT THE RELATIVE

A book the contributors to which come from many different countries, & who are writing under conditions which necessarily impose some restrictions upon them (A; & are writing)./How different from hers is Saint Augustine’s, whose ‘ Confessions’ are the first autobiography, & which have this to distinguish them from all other autobiographies, that they are addressed directly to God (A; & have)./An effort in this direction is, I believe, under consideration, & which, if given effect to, should be greatly in the interest of effectual unity (A; &, if)./They are from a dossier placed in Lord Dufferin’s hands in the autumn of
