page: 724

+ in print; & at least as bad is the making of one whom serve two clauses of which the first requires it as the object, & the second as subject; this practice is untidy enough with words that, like which & that, have only one form for both cases (see THAT REL. PRON. 5, wuicH 2), but is still worse with who & whom; the correct form should invariably be inserted in the second clause when a different case is wanted:—He ran upstairs & kissed two children whom he only faintly recognized, & yet were certainly his own./ But there has emerged to the final a Spaniard, in Senor Alonso, whom few people would have supposed to have a good chance a fortnight ago but is delighting the advocates of the older style by the beauty & rhythm of his strokes.

For the incorrect formula whom failing, see ABSOLUTE CONSTRUC- TION; & for than whom see THAN 6.

2. Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drown’d.—Tempest In. iii. 92. It was said in 1 that the question between who & whom illustrated by this Shakspere quotation is of importance. That is because the whom form, though probably no grammarian would have a word to say for it, is now so prevalent in the newspapers that there is real danger of its becoming one of those STURDY INDEFENSIBLES of which the fewer we have the better, & of good writers’ taking to it under the hypnotism of repetition. We have not come to that pass yet; good writers keep clear of it; but it is high time for emphatic protests. What makes people write whom in such sentences? In the Shakspere, the preceding words are ‘ while I visit’, so that Ferdinand is objective; the relative, which should be who as subject to is drown’d, may have become whom by attraction to the case of Ferdinand; or by confusion with another way of putting the thing—whom they suppose (to be) drown’d; or again a writer may have a general impression that with

+ who & whom to choose between it is usually safer to play whom except where an immediately following verb decides at once for who. Any of these influences may be at work, but none of them can avail as a defence against the plain fact that the relative is the subject of its clause; nor can Shakspere’s authority protect the modern solecist; did not the Revisers, in an analogous case, correct the whom of a more WHO & WHOM, 2 familiar & sacred sentence (But whom say ye that I am?—Matt. | xvi. 15) into conformity with modern | usage? Of the newspaper extracts that follow, the earlier show easily | intelligible whoms, because an active verb follows that could be supposed by a very careless person to be governing it, while in the later ones © a passive verb or something equi- > valent puts that explanation out of | court:—Madame Vandervelde spoke . for women, whom, she claimed, most hated war because they suffered most | from it./Mr Austen Chamberlain, whom we are glad to see has returned to lead the House./Success depended | entirely upon the attitude of the Prussians, whom Pitt believed would | assist him, but whom Mr Fortescue knows well could never be depended upon./The witness was Admiral Birileff, whom the Kaiser well knew was a thoroughly improper person te witness a document of the kind./The letter gives the name of a man whom the writer alleges was responsible for the child’s death./ Arrangements were made to accommodate a few ladies whom it was certain would not be likely to raise any Suffragist interruption./Lord Justice Y ounger,whom it is rumoured may be nominated for the Lord-Chancellorship./Mr Asquith, a statesman whom we are convinced will be more honoured by posterity than by the present generation./A very modern Japanese, one whom it may be observed spoke English fluently./ Amongst others whom it is hoped will be among the guests are . . ./Mention was made of * Ayesha’, whom it is alleged meant Mrs Bryce.
