page: 725

+ | After reading these we can perhaps ñx upon the vague impression that ‘whom is more likely beforehand to ‘be right as probably the decisive influence; but it need hardly be said that slapdash procedure of that kind deserves no mercy when it fails. That every whom in those quotations ought to be who is beyond question, .& to prove it is waste of time since the offenders themselves would admit the offence; they commit it ‘because they prefer gambling on probabilities to working out a certainty.

As, however, an unsound proof is ‘worse than no proof at all, discrediting the truth that depends on it when itseif discredited, an argument sometimes used in this matter should be abandoned. It is that the necessity of the ¢orrect form (whether who or whom) is shown when it is realized that the words between who(m) & what decides its case are parenthetic—Ierdinand who (they suppose) is drown’d. It is true that that analysis is much more often possible than impossible, e. g. in all the above examples; it is even sometimes, though rarely, probable, e.g. in the first (Vandervelde) example; but it is often impossible, as in: Jones, who I never thought was in the running, has won. That sentence is built up thus. Jones has won; I never thought that Jones was in the running: Jones, I never thought (that) who was in the running, has won: Jones, who I never thought was in the running, has won. No parenthesis there; nor, surely, in most examples where it is logically possible. A single live example of the impossible parenthesis is: Cambridge’s Vice-Chancellor lumped all these interesting & inspiring folk together as * foreigners & others’, whom he did not intend ‘should desecrate Cambridge by their presence on a Sunday. Whom should be who, not on the parenthesis argument, since ‘ he did not intend ’ cannot be parenthetic, but because the object of did not intend is the

WHO & WHOM, 4 clause ‘ that who should desecrate ’. The argument from parenthesis is unsound, unless indeed its champions are prepared to support it seriously by the analogy of ‘ You are a beauty, I don’t think ’, where the essential main statement is playfully dressed up as a parenthesis. But it is as true that who is the only right case in the quoted sentences as if the parenthesis argument were unassailable.

3. Who(m) defining & non-defining. As has been suggested in WHICH) (THAT)(WHO, 9, the thing to aim at is the establishment of that as the universal defining relative, with which & who(m) as the non-defining for things & persons respectively. That consummation will not be brought about just yet; but we contribute our little towards it every time we write The greatest poet that ever lived, or The man that I found confronting me, instead of using who & whom; see WHICH)(THAT)(WHO, 9&8. Failing the use of that as the only defining relative, it is particularly important to see that who defining shall not, & who nondefining shall, have a comma before it. Readers of the * Westminster ’, who are also readers at the great Bloomsbury institution, will be able to admire the new decorations for themselves. Those wrong commas (see Srors, Commas C) make the sentence imply that all readers of the ‘ Westminster’ frequent the British Museum.

4. And or but who(m). The use of these is naturally attended by the same dangers as that of and which. These have been fully discussed under WHICH WITH AND, & nothing need here be added beyond a few specimens containing who(m); the letters appended refer to the table of faults in WHICH WITH AND (see p. 719):—Alfred Beasley was examined as to a meeting at which Mrs Pankhurst was present & a note of whose speech he had taken (A)./A letter speaks of the sorrows of children which their parents are powerless to
