page: 726

+ assuage, & who have little experience of the joys of childhood (B)./They have noticed the apparent importance which these men seem to occupy in the councils of the nation, and who are granted passports to Russia, in order to assist our Ally in settling his domestic difficulties! (A)./The working classes, for long in enjoyment of all the blessings of * Tariff Reform’, & who are therefore fully competent to appreciate their value, are moving with a startling rapidity towards Socialism (F)./We should be glad of further assistance to pay the cost of putting up relatives of men who live in the provinces, & to whom we like io extend invitations to come & stay near them for a few days at a time (B). In this last, the antecedent of who is men, but that of whom is relatwes.

5. Person & number of who(m). To me, who has also a copy of it, it seems a somewhat trivial fragment. Read have; the relatives take the person of their antecedents; the Lord’s Prayer & the Collects, with which art, who shewest, & scores of other examples, are overwhelming evidence that who is not a thirdperson word, but a word of whichever person is appropriate.

The relatives take also the number of their antecedents—a rule broken in: The death of Dr Clifford removes one of the few Free Churchmen whose work had given him a national reputation. The antecedent of whose is not one, but Churchmen, whereas the use of him instead of them shows that the writer assigned whose to one; read either removes a Churchman whose work had given him, or removes one of the few Churchmen whose work has given them.

A less simple point is raised by:— I cannot help feeling that some of us who feel as strongly as I do that the Lord Chamberlain’s authority ought to be swept away are making ourselves a little ridiculous by protesting at the appointment of Mr Brookfield./ All of us who have not the opportunities which Mr Jonescu has

+ enjoyed wish to know all that we can of the personality of the men who play a great part in the world. In these the ourselves & the we show that wko is to be taken as firstpersonal; its antecedents, however, are some, & all, not us, & ourselves & we should in strict grammar be themselves & they. The writers have treated some of us, & all of us, as= we people, & all we. That will pass if the first writer means (which is a little doubtful) that he too is making himself ridiculous. The question sometimes arises in contexts where more turns on the

erson of who(m) than here.

6. Personification. be ventured on in personifications only with great caution. It will be admitted that in the following who is © intolerable, & which the right word: The joint operation for ‘ pinching out’ the little kingdom of Serbia, who had the — audacity to play in the Balkan Penin- ` sula a part analogous to that which the little kingdom of Piedmont had played inthe old days in Italy. Yet,if we had had little Serbia instead of the little kingdom of Serbia, who might have passed. Again, when we say that a ship has lost her rudder, we personify; yet, though She had lost her rudder is good English, The ship, who had lost her rudder is not, nor even The Arethusa, who &c.; both these can do with her, but not with who; possibly Arethusa, who (& the naval writers drop the the with | ships’ names) is blameless; if so, | it is because the name standing alone emphasizes personification, which Who(m) must must not be half-hearted or dubious | if who is to follow. See PERSONI- FICATION.

7. Who(m) & participle. been particularly struck by the unselfishness of the majority of sons & daughters, many of whom even remaining unmarried because they lacked the wherewithal to do more than help their parents. The mistake has been treated under warc 1. Read I have | | many of them remaining, or many of | whom remain.
