page: 728

+ referred to, though they were selected long before the present article was designed, supply illustrations of that; ° This book, from theconcentrated - harvest -of-wisdom-inwhich we’ would become ‘ This book, from whose concentrated harvest of wisdom we’; ‘The camera, the-remarkable-&-convincing-evidence-it-has-been-possible-toobtain-with-which has’ would þecome * The camera, whose remarkable & convincing evidence has’. To take everyday samples instead of such monstrosities, would not ‘Courts whose jurisdiction’, & ‘a game of whose rules it is ignorant ’ be clear improvements in the following?—The civilians managed to retain their practice in Courts the jurisdiction of which was not based on the Common Law./In Whistler v. Ruskin—the subject of a most entertaining paper—we have the law standing as umpire in a game of the rules of which it is quite ignorant. Of course they would, & of the convenience of whose=of &c. which there can really be no question; nor is the risk of ambiguity worth considering, so rare is it in comparison with that of artificial clumsiness. The tabooing of whose inanimate is on a level with that of the PREPOSITION AT END; both are great aids to flexibility; both are well established in older as well as in colloquial English; My thought, Whose murder yet is but fantastical (Macbeth), & The fruit Of that forbidden tree whose mortal taste Brought death into the world (Paradise Lost), are merely the first instances that come to mind. The Milton happens to be a little out of the ordinary in that whose is not a mere possessive, but an objective genitive; but that even such a use is not obsolete is shown by the following from a newspaper: Sir William Harcourt thrice refused an earldom, whose acceptance he feared might be a barrier to his son’s political carcer.

Let us, in the name of common sense, prohibit the prohibition of

+ whose inanimate; good writing is surely difficult enough without the | forbidding of things that have his- torical grammar, & present intelligi- | bility, & obvious convenience, on their side, & lack only—starch.

why. Pl. whys.

wicker makes -ered; see -R-, -RR-.

wide. 1. For the distinction between w. & broad, which is of considerable idiomatic importance, see BROAD. 2. Wide(ly). It should be remembered that there are many positions in which, though widely is grammatically possible, wide is the idiomatic form; -LY for other such adjectives; yawn wide, aim wide, wide apart, wide awake, open one’s eyes wide, is wide- | spread, are all usually better than ` widely apart &c., & there are many | more.

Wide(-)awake. A very wide-awake person; He was wearing a wideawake or wide-awake.

widely. See WIDE.

Widish, not wideish; see MUTE E.

Wife. For the verb &c. see -vE(D). Diminutive wifie, see -ry, -IF, -y. For all the world & his wife see WORN-OUT HUMOUR.

wight. A Warpour STREET word.

wild. 1. Hyphens &c. We saw a wild boar or a wild duck, but They were hunting wild-boar or wildboar or shooting wild-duck; is an untamed one of the domestic kind, a wildcat or wild-cat one of the species so named; wild oats, not wild-oats; see HypHens. 2. Wild- (ly). For play, run, shoot, talk, &c., wild, see UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

wilful.

So spelt; see -LL-, -L-, 4.

will, n.

1. Phrases like the will to power, in which a noun is tacked on | to will by to, have come from Germany & been allowed to sojourn amongst us for a time; but there is a stronger case for their deportation & repatriation than against many human aliens, & it may now | be hoped that our philosophers, if they really do require the meaning see UNIDIOMATIC |} He is wide awake; . a wild cat
