page: 731

+ trade-wind. The wind that blows constantly towards the equator from about the thirtieth parallels, north & south; its main direction in the northern hemisphere being from the north-east, & in the southern hemisphere from the southeast.

typhoon. a. A violent storm or tempest occurring in India. b. A violent cyclonic storm or hurricane occurring in the China seas & adjacent regions, chiefly during the period from July to October.

waterspout. a. A gyrating column of mist, spray, & water, produced by the action of a whirlwind on a portion of the sea & the clouds immediately above it. b. A sudden & violent fall of rain; a cloudburst.

whiff. A slight puff or gust of wind, a breath.

whirlwind. A body of air moving rapidly in a circular or upward spiral course around a vertical or slightly inclined axis which has also a progressive motion over the surface of land or water.

wind. Air in more or less rapid natural motion, breeze or gale or blast (Concise Oxf. Dict.).

zephyr. A soft mild gentle wind or breeze.

wind, verbs. Wind, wound, to twist &c. Wind, winded (or wound), to blow (a horn). Wind, winded, to give breath to or exhaust the preath of. The two latter are from the noun wind (wound being a natural corruption), & unconnected with the first.

windward(s). See -WARD(S).

wine makes winy; see MUTE E.

winning makes -est; -ER & -EST, 4.

winter. W. garden, w. quarters, w. solstice; each should be two words, unhyphened;_ see Hypuens 3B. —— ee E a For the w. of our discontent, see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

wire makes wirable, wiry; see MutE E. Wire rope should be two words unhyphened; HypxEens 3 B.

wise, n. In the phrases in no wise, in any wise, &c., wise should be a

+ separate noun unhyphened; see HYPHENS, Group *From hand to mouth; if in does not precede, there is no objection to any of the three forms no wise, no-wise, nowise. -WISE,-WAYS. 1.The ending -ways, or occasionally -way, is often used indifferently with -wise, & is very seldom the only form without one in -wise by its side—perhaps only in always. 2. In a few established words, -wise is alone, esp. clockwise, coastwise, likewise, otherwise, sunwise. 8. In other established words both forms are used, as breadth-, broad-, end-, least-, length-, long-, no-, side-, slant-. 4. In words made for the occasion from nouns, as in Use it clubwise or pokerwise, Go crabwise or frogwise, Worn cloakwise or broochwise or chainwise, Placed studwise or fencewise, -wise is now much the commoner.

wishful is a word chiefly used by those who disapprove of the phrase ANXIOUS to, & it has consequently a certain taint of purism about it. If it should ever lose that, & come into general use, it would at once relieve anxious of a meaning that is open to exception, & provide desirous with a grammatically convenient synonym; compare desirous of doing with wishful to do. In the mean time, wishful (with its ludicrous suggestion of wisiful) gives the reader a slight shock as he comes to it: We should recommend a perusal of the whole article io those wishful to understand the real nature of the conflict.

wistaria. So spelt.

wit, n. See HUMOUR; that the two are different names for the same thing is no doubt still a popular belief; but literary critics at least should not allow themselves to identify the two, as in: It is to be doubted whether the authors gifts really do include that of humour. Two jests do not make a wit.

wit, vb. Pres., wot, wottest; past wist; infin., to wit; part. witting. See WARDOUR STREET.
