page: 734

+ meant to be laudatory. Nor is it; but neither is this selection of stylish words to be taken for a blacklist of out-&-out undesirables. Many of them are stylish only when they are used in certain senses, being themselves in other senses working words; e.g., antagonize is a working word for ‘to arouse antagonism in the mind of’ or ‘make hostile’, though nothing if not stylish for “to oppose’; category is a working word in the philosopher’s sense, though stylish as a mere synonym for class; protagonist a working word for the one person upon whom the interest centres, but aggressively stylish for an advocate; college stylish for school but the working word .for—college. Others again, such as bodeful & deem & dwell & maybe, lose their unhappy stylish air when they are in surroundings of their own kind, where they are not conspicuous like an escaped canary among the sparrows.

What is to be deprecated is the notion that one can improve one’s style by using stylish words. Those in the list below, like hundreds of others, have, either in certain senses or generally, plain homely natural companions; the writer who prefers to one of these the stylish word for no better reason than that he thinks it stylish, instead of improving his style, makes it stuffy, or pretentious, or incongruous. About the words in small capitals remarks bearing on the present subject will be found in their dictionary places:— STYLISH WORKING ANGLE, vb fish ANTAGONIZE oppose assist help beverage drink BODEFUL ominous catarrh cold CATEGORY class COLLATION repast, meal COLLEGE school comestibles catables, food COMMENCE begin comprise INCLUDE

+ STYLISH WORKING CRYPTIC obscure, mysterious deem think DESCRIPTION kind, sort DWELL live ENVISAGE face, confront FEASIBLE possible FORENOON morning MAYBE perhaps PORCELAIN china . PROTAGONIST champion, advocate ` sufficient ENOUGH VIOLIN FIDDLE

workless. In the article °S INCON- GRUOUS some illustrations have been given of how the newspaper head- | line is affecting the language; see: also WED. Workless gives another example. We have all known ‘ the ~ unemployed’ as long as we can. remember. But unemployed fills up a good deal of headline; something shorter is wanted, & workless is invented for the need. But, secondly, workless by itself is shorter than the workless; so workless is turned from an adjective into an indeclinable plural noun—all to make possible such gems as: KENT WORKLESS WANT TO

SHE PREMIER

TO AID WORKLESS

world. All the w. & his wife is like the Psalmist; it has been young & nowis old; see WORN-OUT HUMOUR.

worldly. So spelt, not wordly; but the mistake is common; cf. unwieldly for unwieldy.

WORN-OUT HUMOUR. t We are not amused’; so Queen Victoria baldly stated a fact that was disconcerting to someone; yet the thing was very likely amusing in its nature; it did not amuse the person whose amusement mattered, that was all. The writer’s Queen Victoria is his public, & he would do well to keep a bust of the old Queen on his desk with the legend ‘ We are not amused’ hanging from it. His
