page: 736

+ appear when we come to examples, the mistaking of an anticipatory it for something else; c is C spoilt by worth’s having no object. A. This is worth saying. B. To say this is worth while, or

It is worth while to say this. C. Saying this is worth while, or

It is worth while saying this. a. This is worth while saying. b. To say is worth while, or

It is worth while to say. c. Saying this is worth, or

It is worth saying this. The faults are obvious enough in these naked specimens, stripped of disguising additions, except possibly in b, about which it must be remembered that the sentences are complete ones, & that there is nothing to be supplied as object to say.

The earlier examples will be simple, & it will suffice to give after each a small letter indicating the wrong type to which it belongs, & a capital for the right type to which it should be corrected:—A spare captain, to take charge of any prize that might be worth while turning into a raider (a. A)./Was not that a line worth while pursuing? (a. A)./A problem which should be quite manageable—if we make up our minds that it is worth while tackling (a. A)./An experience of weariness slashed with crowded hours of intensest life; & it was worth while putting on record (a. A)./It is worth recalling Lord Salisbury’s declaration in 1885 that, if she yielded to pressure, we should consider ourselves released from our obligations (c. B)./It is worth tabulating the more important of matters thus communicated to us (c. B).

The next two are clear examples of C, & are given merely that the reader may try whether the conversion of them to B, by the change of harking & remarking to to hark & to remark does not produce more idiomatic English:—It is not often worth while harking back to a single performance a fortnight old./It is worth while remarking on Signor Niiti’s very curious attitude toward

+ the question of responsibility for the war.

But of many sentences that are> defensible as C it is open to doubt; whether they are really C, or A gone: wrong; these are sentences in) which, while an anticipatory It is; used, there are two possible views of ’ what It stands for; an example will | first be examined, & some more on the same pattern will show how: common the type is.

It is worth while remarking that the Greek National Anthem is really avery interesting & harmonious air. Does It represent ‘ remarking . . are, or" thats. . air” ?. If thet first, the direct form is (1) Remark- | ing (2) that the Anthem is so-&-so (3) is worth while; which is exactly C (1) Saying (2) this (3) is worth | while. But if the second, the direct form is (1) That the Anthem is so-&-so (2) is worth while (3) remarking; which spoils A (1) This (2) is worth (3) saying, by having worth while instead of worth.

The reader will easily apply this te the three next examples. Hach is defensible as a C, yet it may be doubted whether it was so meant, © & also whether B (it may be worth | while to recall &c.) would not have — while | been better. Jt is worth pointing out that out of an electorate of nearly fourteen & a half millions no fewer than four & a quarter million votes were recorded in 1912 for the Socialist candidates./It is worth while saying, if one thinks so, that Mr Kipling is a great writer, some of whose work will survive as long as anything contemporary with it./It may be worth while recalling that the most interesting account of the novelist’s visit to the little German capital is contained in his letter to George Henry Lewes.

It may be asked, however, why a conversion of A should not be recommended, & only B be offered > ‘ A in the table is not provided with a conversion, which would be It is worth saying this; was the omission an oversight?’ No, it was not;
