page: 737

that conversion is impossible because

anticipatory it represents a deferred

subject of is, whereas the this in

the proposed conversion is object

of saying & cannot be also subject

of is.

The only further point that needs special discussion is the complication sometimes introduced by a relative clause. The Chinese Labour Corps & its organization was one of the side issues of the war which is well worth while to hear about. The skeleton of this, before subordination by the relative, is: The Corps was a side issue; to hear about this (issue) is worth while, or it is worth while to hear about this. Subordination by the relative should give accordingly either to hear about which is worth while, or which it is worth while to hear about. But the writer has taken that anticipatory it (=to hear about which) for the ordinary pronoun ît (=this issue), & has therefore left it out because he supposes it to mean only the same thing as the which that is to connect the clause; the result is that his which is both subject to is (which he has deprived of its it) & object to about. Correct grammar would be A which is well worth hearing about, or B which it is well worth while to hear about, or C which it is well worth while hearing about.

Some mixed examples now follow, with references to the table as before, & with a note where it seems called for. In choosing between A & B or C, it is plain that A, being incapable of conversion, is disqualified for places where the worth part of the sentence cannot comfortably be deferred owing to the length of the other part or for other reasons:— In your excellent account of the late Miss —— there is one omission, & it is worth filling it up (c. A). Observe that the first it is it anticipatory (= filling it up), & the second is the ordinary pronoun (=the omission). When it is corrected to A, the first it becomes the pronoun=the omission, & the second disappears./On

Bb

1351

that point it is worth quoting a passage from Mr Carrols election address

(c. B)./It is worth adding its opinion

upon the measures that Germany is

taking (c. B or A)./It is worth

dwelling on this method of approach

to the characters (c. B)./It is worth quoting the * Echo de Paris’, which was one of the journals which cried loudest for large reparations (c. B).

worth-while. This attributive-adjective compound recently extracted from the phrase ‘is worth while’ (a worth-while experiment from the experiment was worth while) is at the best of doubtful value; &, having been seized upon as a VOGUE-worD, it is fast losing all precision of meaning: That motherhood is a full-time job all worth-while mothers will readily admit./An attractive programme of w.-w. topics has been arranged for discussion.

worthy. The construction in which w. was treated like worth & like, governing a noun (in words worthy the occasion, a deed worthy remembrance, without of), is now rare, & appropriate only in exalted contexts.

would. The very common misuses of would for should are dealt with under WILL vb, & more fully under SHALL. A few specimens, in all of which would is wrong, are here given to enable those who doubt their mastery of the idiom to test it: If we were to go on borrowing money in this country we would keep the position of the unemployed better while borrowing, but we would have to pay for it./If we could but hear what post-Georgians will have to say on the matter we would be even less inclined to value Georgian criticism./ We would like to see a little less talk about Constantine./He might well have struck such a blow as we would have felt to the quick./I would feel safer in backing England had their batting not been so disappointing in the first Test. wove, p.p., instead of the usual
