page: 738

+ woven, is chiefly in commercial terms, as wove paper, hard-wove fabrics, wire-wove.

wraith. Pronounce the plural -ths; see -TH & -DH.

wrapt, wrapped, rapt. See RAPT for the confusion between the English adjective made from Latin raptus & the p.p. of wrap. It might perhaps be well if the form wrapt could be abandoned, so that writers would have to make up their minds between rapt & wrapped.

wrath, wrathful, wroth. It is very desirable that differentiation should be clearly established. The OED has unfortunately not yet reached the words; but it may safely be said (1) that many people ignore the existence of wroth & treat wrath as both noun & adjective, pronouncing it always rawth, & (2) that the useful arrangement would be for wrath to be noun only=anger & pronounced rawth, & for wroth to be the adjective=angry & pronounced roth. This does not put wrathful out of use; it is the attributive adjective, & wroth is the predicative: A wrathful god, but God was wroth. For wroth, the pronunciation rōth is better not only than rawth, but also than r6th, because much more easily distinguishable from the rawth of wrath.

wreath. Pronounce the plural -dhz; see -TH & -DH for this, & for wreathe, vb.

wrestle. PRONUNCIATION, silent t.

wrick. See CRICK.

wrinkle makes wrinkly; see MUTE E.

wristband. Pronounce ri’zband.

write. 1. W. with personal object. 2. Writ large.

1. W. with personal object. In I will write you the result, there are two objects, (direct object) the result, & (indirect object) you. In literary English, an indirect object is used after write only if there is also a direct object, but the direct

+ object may be used without an indirect; that is, Z will write the result, & I will write you the result, are idiomatic, but J will write you | soon, or about it, is not; if a direct object is wanting, the person written | to must be introduced by to: J will write to you about it. We wrote you yesterday, Please write us at your convenience, &c., are established in commercial use, but avoided elsewhere. The following from a novel is to be condemned: The Lady Henrietta, she who was to keep him . out of Arcadia, & who believed him to be in Cannes or Mentone, wrote him regularly through his bankers, & once in a while he wrote her. l

2. Writ large. The famous line > New Presbyter is but old Priest writ large (Milton, Sonnet On the New - Forcers of Conscience ...) owes its | fame to its double sense; priest & presbyter being derived alike from Greek presbuteros, the second word is literally a larger writing of the first; &, metaphorically, a presbyter turns out to be a priest, only more so. Nowadays, whenever a reform disappoints, the new state is said to be the old writ large; but, as circumstances seldom allow the litera! sense as well as the other, some wrong is done to the inventor of the phrase by blunting its point.

wrong is one of the words whose adverbial use should be remem- | bered; did his sum wrong is better than with wrongly, but cf. a wrongly done sum. See UNIDIOMATIC -LY. |

wroth. See WRATH.

wrought. See work.

wry makes wryer, wryest, wryly, wryness, wryish; see DRY.

wych-, wich-, witch-, in w.-elm &c. The first & third forms are those usually seen, though the second best represents the earliest spelling wice (=drooping). Of the current forms wych- has the real advantage of not suggesting connexion with witches, & is recommended.

Wykehamist. So spelt.
