page: 740

y is probably due to a vague feeling

that an unEnglish-looking word is all the better for a little aggravation of its unEnglishness. In tyler & tyre differentiation may have been at work, but without need; & on tyre it may be added that in some people’s opinion to say that tire is the American spelling is a sufficient reason for our using tyre; on the contrary, agreement between English & American spelling is much to be desired wherever it is practicable. In gipsy & pigmy, we have dissimilation, again without need; for if invisibility can carry five is, these can surely do with two ys. But the fact that stimy & stymie, not stymy, are the usual forms illustrates the power of dissimilation; & it may be guessed that the y starts in the oftener used stymied, in which the necessary i of the second syllable tends to produce y in the first; with this compare the greater frequency of the correct y in gypsies & pygmies than in gypsy & pygmy. On the words in the list that are in small capitals, further remarks will be found in the separate articles.

yankeefied. See -rirp.

yelept. See WORN-OUT HUMOUR.

y®. The pronunciation of this is the, not ye, the y being not our letter, but a representation of the obsolete single letter (p, called thorn) now replaced by th.

year. Phrases such as last year, next year, may be either nouns or adverbs (Next year may be warmer; We may have warmer weather next year); they should not be both at once, as in: Disquiet will be caused in Tariff Reform circles by the announcement that in the quinquennium ending & including last year Canada has borrowed the enormous sum of over six hundred million dollars from this country. The ‘ last year’ that the quinquennium included was a noun; the ‘ last year’ that the quinquennium ended was an adverb; indeed, far from the quinquennium’s ending the year,

+ the year ended the quinquennium. It is the same kind of mistake as making one word serve twice in two different cases, for which see, e.g., THAT REL. PRON. 5.

yearly. See -LILY 2,

ye(a)sty. The spelling & pronunciation yesty, still alive up to the 19th c., are regarded by the OED as now obsolete.

yelk, yolk. ‘The spelling yelk appears to have ceased to be frequent since the third quarter of the 19th century, but it is found in recent scientific & technical works ° —OED.

yellow. Y. fever, y. jacket, y. jaundice, y. ochre, all two words without hyphen; see HypHEns 3 B. In yellow-(h)ammer, it cannot be said with safety either that h is due to ignorant assimilation by popular etymology to hammer, or that the absence of h is mere h-dropping; each form has an_ etymological theory on its side, & OED says that both forms ‘are historically justifiable °’. The only reason for resisting the prevalent h is thus removed.

yen. PI. the same.

yeoman. Yeoman service & yeoman’s service are both in use.

yes. Pl. yeses.

yester-. Other combinations than yesterday are incongruous except in verse or in designedly poetic prose. It is true that yestereve is shorter than yesterday evening, but the saving of space is paid for by the proof that one has no literary sense.

yet. 1. Inversion. 2. Illogical pregnant use.

1. Inversion. The tendency of yet to inspire foolish inversions has been specially treated in INVERSION under the heading Yet, Especially, Rather. The effect of ill-timed rhetoric that attends it is obvious in: Mr Domville-Fife does not recommend South America to the Englishman with smal capital desirous of settling on the land & living on his own labour. Yet are there Englishmen
