page: none

+ so settled—in the Argentine & in Chile, for instance.

2. Illogical pregnant use. When yet is used to point a contrast, the opposition between the fact it introduces & that which has gone before should be direct & clear. Examples of failure in this respect must necessarily be of some length; some simpler specimens of a rather similar kind will be found under sur 3. In each of those that follow it will be noticed that the particular fact with which the Yet sentence is in contrast is by no means the essential contents of the previous sentence, but has to be got out of it at the cost of some thought. We confess to being surprised at the line taken by the railwaymen at Crewe with reference to Colonel Yorke’s conclusion that the Shrewsbury disaster occurred through the engine-driver having momentarily failen asleep. Yet at a meeting the Crewe railwaymen are very indignant at the suggestion, & denounce Colonel Yorke as an Army officer who does not understand the real working of railways. Here the Yet fact is-that the men are indignant. What is that in contrast with? Apparently with the correctness of Colonel Yorke’s conclusion; but, though many other things not in contrast with their indignation can be got out of the sentence, the correctness of the conclusion is inferable only from the newspaper’s surprise at the men’s indignation at the conclusion. If yet were omitted, the second sentence would come in logically enough as an explanation of what the men’s ‘line’ referred to had actually been.

Sir,—I doubt if sufficient attention has been drawn to the injustice of throwing on the landlord in whose house they happen to be resident the cost of a large additional insurance benefit for those who are sick. Yet, under Clause 51, a sick tenant would be able to live rent free for a year at the expense of his or her landlord. This is a less glaring case. The

+ essence of the Yet sentence is that a tenant has power to injure a landlord. What is that in contrast with? with the fact that justice would protect landlords; that is, not with the main sentence preceding, which is a statement of why the writer is writing, but with a mere inference from a noun that occurs in it, viz injustice. As in the first example, the logical work of the second sentence is to explain the nature of a noun contained in the first, viz (again) injustice, but an explanation is presented in the guise of an opposition; the sentence would do its work properly if yet were omitted.

Yiddish is not a kind of Hebrew, but a kind of German. As misconception is common, the OED definition follows: The language used by Jews in Europe & America, consisting mainly of German (orig. from the Middle Rhine area) with admixture (according to local or individual usage) of Balto-Slavic words, & printed in Hebrew characters. yodel, vb, has -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-. yoke, vb, makes -kable; see MUTE E. yokel makes yokelish; -LL-, -L-, 2. yon. See WARDOUR STREET. Yorkshire pudding. No hyphen; see HYPHENS 3 B. young. For Y. Chevalier, Y. Pretender, see SOBRIQUETS. yours. For misuses in place of your, see ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES. For epistolary uses, LETTER FORMS. youth. Plural pron.-dhz; -TH &-DH.

Z Zarathustrian. See ZOROASTRIAN. Zeitgeist. Pronounce tsi’tgist. zemstvo. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6. zephyr. See WIND, n. zero. PI. -os; see -O(E)s 3. ZEUGMA. Pl. -as or -aia. The meaning of the word & its relation to syllepsis are explained under syllepsis in TECHNICAL TERMS. Inten-
