Appendix 1: Committees Consulted

Question

“With particular reference to the war of science against disease, what can be done now to organize a program for continuing in the future the work which has been done in medicine and related sciences?”

Committee

Dr. W. W. Palmer, chairman; bard professor of medicine, Columbia University; director of medical service of Presbyterian Hospital, New York City.

Dr. Homer W. Smith, secretary; director, physiology laboratory, School of Medicine, New York University.

Dr. Kenneth B. Turner, assistant secretary; assistant professor of medicine, Columbia University.

Dr. W. B. Castle, professor of medicine, Harvard University; associate director, Thorndike Memorial Laboratory, Boston City Hospital.

Dr. Edward A. Doisy, director, department of physiology and biochemistry, St. Louis University School of Medicine (recipient of Nobel Award).

Dr. Ernest Goodpasture, professor of pathology, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University.

Dr. Alton Ochsner, professor of surgery and head of the department of surgery at Tulane University School of Medicine.

Dr. Linus Pauling, head of the division of chemistry and chemical engineering and director of the chemical laboratories at the California Institute of Technology.

Dr. James J. Waring, professor of medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine.

Question

“What can the Government do now and in the future to aid research activities by public and private organizations? The proper roles of public and of private research, and their interrelation, should be carefully considered.”

Committee

Dr. Isaiah Bowman, chairman; president of Johns Hopkins University.

Dr. J. T. Tate, vice chairman; research professor of physics, University of Minnesota.

Dr. W. Rupert Maclaurin, secretary; professor of economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Dr. Oliver E. Buckley, president of the Bell Telephone Laboratories.

Dr. Walter C. Coffey, president of the University of Minnesota.

Mr. Oscar S. Cox, deputy Administrator of the Foreign Economic Administration.

Col. Bradley Dewey, president of Dewey & Almy Chemical Co.

Dr. Clarence A. Dykstra, provost of the University of California at Los Angeles.

Dr. C. P. Haskins, director of Haskins Laboratories.

Dr. Edwin H. Land, president and director of research, Polaroid Corporation.

Dr. Charles E. MacQuigg, dean of the College of Engineering, Ohio State University.

Dr. Harold G. Moulton, president of the Brookings Institution.

Rev. J. Hugh O’Donnell, president of the University of Notre Dame.

Dr. I. I. Rabi, professor of physics, Columbia University (recipient of Nobel Award).

Dr. Warren Weaver, director for natural sciences, Rockefeller Foundation.

Dr. Robert E. Wilson, chairman of the board, Standard Oil Co. of Indiana.

Dr. William E. Wrather, director, U. S. Geological Survey.

Question

“Can an effective program be proposed for discovering and developing scientific talent in American youth so that the continuing future of scientific research in this country may be assured on a level comparable to what has been done during the war?”

Committee

Dr. Henry Allen Moe, chairman; secretary-general of the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation.

Mr. Lawrence K. Frank, secretary.

Mr. Henry Chauncey, assistant secretary.

Dr. Henry A. Barton, director of the American Institute of Physics.

Dr. C. Lalor Burdick, special assistant to the president, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.

Dr. J. B. Conant, president of Harvard University; chairman of the National Defense Research Committee.

Dr. Watson Davis, editor and director of Science Service.

Dr. R. E. Doherty, president of the Carnegie Institute of Technology.

Dr. Paul E. Elicker, executive secretary, National Association of Secondary School Principals.

Mr. Farnham P. Griffiths, lawyer, San Francisco.

Dr. W. S. Hunter, professor of psychology at Brown University.

Dr. T. R. McConnell, dean of the College of Science, Literature, and Arts at the University of Minnesota.

Mr. Walter S. Rogers, director of the Institute of Current World Affairs.

Dr. Harlow Shapley, director of the Harvard College Observatory.

Dr. Hugh S. Taylor, dean of the Graduate School, Princeton University.

Dr. E. B. Wilson, professor of vital statistics, Harvard University School of Public Health.

Question

“What can be done, consistent with military security, and with the prior approval of the military authorities, to make known to the world as soon as possible the contributions which have been made during our war effort to scientific knowledge?”

Committee

Dr. Irvin Stewart, chairman; executive secretary of the Office of Scientific Research and Development; director of the Committee on Scientific Aids to Learning of the National Research Council.

Mr. Cleveland Norcross, secretary; executive assistant to the executive secretary of the Office of Scientific Research and Development.

Dr. J. P. Baxter III, president of Williams College; historian of the Office of Scientific Research and Development.

Dr. Karl T. Compton, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; chairman of the Research Board for National Security; member of the National Defense Research Committee.

Dr. J. B. Conant, president of Harvard University; chairman of the National Defense Research Committee.

Dr. A. N. Richards, vice president of the University of Pennsylvania in charge of Medical Affairs; chairman of the Committee on Medical Research of the Office of Scientific Research and Development.

Dr. M. A. Tuve, director, applied physics laboratory, Johns Hopkins University; staff member of the department of Terrestrial Magnetism of the Carnegie Institution of Washington.

Mr. Carroll L. Wilson, executive assistant to the Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development.
