TEXT ANALYSIS — Michael Faraday, The Chemical History of a Candle (1861)
Source: Project Gutenberg #14474 (Crookes's edition), figures from Commons

WHAT THIS IS

Six lectures given to a juvenile audience at the Royal Institution over
Christmas 1860-61, taken down and edited by William Crookes. Faraday was
sixty-nine and near the end of his working life; this was the last
Christmas course he gave, and it is the most famous single course of
popular science lectures ever delivered. This edition also carries the
separate Lecture on Platinum (Royal Institution, 22 February 1861).

The conceit is total and never dropped: everything in chemistry is
reached by asking what is happening in a burning candle. Where the candle
gets its fuel (capillary action), why the flame has that shape (convection),
why it is bright (solid carbon particles glowing), what it consumes
(oxygen), what it produces (water and carbonic acid), and finally that
you yourself are a slow candle (respiration). The argument closes the
loop: the breath you exhale is the same product as the flame's.

This is the second book in the collection from the Royal Institution
Christmas Lecture tradition, after Boys' Soap Bubbles. Read
soap-bubbles/text_analysis.txt first — the register is closely related
and many decisions carry straight over.

STYLE AND TONE — WHERE FARADAY DIFFERS FROM BOYS

Both are live demonstration in the continuous present, and everything in
the Boys analysis about keeping the reader in the lecture theatre applies
here without change. The differences that matter:

  - Faraday is WARMER and more personal. He addresses "my boys" and "my
    friends", apologises for enthusiasm, and says things like "I must
    take the liberty" and "you will be pleased, I am sure". Boys is dry;
    Faraday is affectionate. Do not sand this off into neutrality.
  - He is more DIGRESSIVE and self-interrupting: he will stop mid-
    experiment to admire something, or to tell you that a point is
    beautiful. Keep the digressions and keep the admiration — the sense
    of a man delighted by his own subject is the whole reason the book
    survived.
  - He BUILDS BY QUESTION, harder than Boys does: "What is that flame?
    Why does it burn? Where does the wax go?" Sometimes several in a row.
    Preserve the interrogative sequences intact; do not collapse three
    questions into one.
  - Stage directions appear in brackets in the source, e.g. "[touching
    the gun-cotton with the hot iron]", "[Here the lecturer...]". KEEP
    THEM, in square brackets, in the same place. They are the record of
    the performance and they are often the funniest thing on the page.
  - He is a working-class self-taught bookbinder's apprentice who became
    the greatest experimentalist in Europe, and he never once condescends
    to the children. Match that: never simplify a result, only the syntax.

THE CENTRAL PROBLEM: OBSOLETE CHEMICAL NOMENCLATURE

This is the book's real translation difficulty, and it needs a consistent
policy because the names are load-bearing — Faraday reasons *with* them.

POLICY: keep Faraday's term as the primary word, gloss the modern
equivalent ONCE on first use, then continue with his term. The reader
should finish the book able to read other Victorian chemistry, not
holding a silent modernization. Locked mappings:

  carbonic acid        -> keep; gloss once as carbon dioxide
  carbonic oxide       -> keep; gloss once as carbon monoxide
  oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon        -> unchanged, he is correct
  azote                -> nitrogen (he uses both; standardise on nitrogen
                          and note the older name once if it appears)
  muriatic acid        -> keep; gloss once as hydrochloric acid
  oil of vitriol       -> keep; gloss once as sulphuric acid
  caustic potash / potassa -> keep; gloss once as potassium hydroxide
  lime, quicklime, litharge, minium        -> keep as written
  spirits of wine      -> keep; gloss once as ethanol
  ether                -> keep (diethyl ether), as in soap-bubbles
  naphtha, camphine, spermaceti, stearin, tallow, paraffine
                       -> keep; these are the candle materials themselves
                          and the differences between them are the subject
                          of Lecture I. "paraffine" -> "paraffin".
  gun-cotton           -> guncotton (matches journey-center-earth)
  voltaic battery      -> keep; gloss once as an electric battery
  philosophy / natural philosophy -> "natural philosophy" kept where he
                          means the discipline; "philosopher" in the sense
                          of scientist -> "scientist", as in soap-bubbles
  the lantern/lamp     -> as in soap-bubbles: gloss the projector once

UNITS: keep his (grains, cubic inches, feet, pints). Do not convert.
His arithmetic is exact and often the point of a passage.

SCIENCE: WHAT TO LEAVE ALONE

Faraday's chemistry is essentially all correct and needs no defending.
Two things to leave exactly as he has them, following the Verne rule:
  - His account of luminosity — that a flame is bright because solid
    particles of carbon are heated to glowing within it — is right, and
    is the intellectual centre of Lecture II. Do not "improve" it with
    modern combustion vocabulary.
  - Where his numbers are period measurements (the weight of a cubic foot
    of air, the amount of carbon a person exhales per day), reproduce them
    as written. They are close to right and they are his.

FIGURES

38 plates, carried as markers exactly as in soap-bubbles:
  source:  [Figure 12]
  modern:  [Figure 12: one descriptive sentence]

The 1861 edition gives no captions at all beyond "Fig. 12.", so the
captions are new writing, drawn from the adjacent prose — the same rule,
and the same biggest-single-improvement, as in Boys. Most of these plates
are simple line woodcuts of apparatus: a jar, a tube, a candle under a
glass. Say what the apparatus is and what it is doing. In-sentence
references stay, modernized to "(Figure 12)".

CROOKES'S NOTES

The editor's 19 explanatory notes sat in a block at the back of the 1861
book, anchored by "[7]"-style markers. prep.py has cut them loose from
their print-page headings and inlined each one as its own paragraph,
directly after the paragraph that cited it:

    Editor's note: <text>

Translate them like everything else, but keep them in CROOKES'S register,
not Faraday's — they are drier, third-person, and technical ("The fat or
tallow consists of a chemical combination of fatty acids with
glycerine"). They must never sound like the lecturer talking. Keep the
"Editor's note: " prefix exactly, and keep each ending in a period: a
short unpunctuated line with majority-capitalised words is read as a
heading by assemble.py.

Several notes are more chemically precise than the lecture (note 2 gives
the full stearin saponification; note 4 defines capillary attraction).
That is their value — do not compress them.

SENSITIVE / DATED CONTENT

Very little. Note only:
  - The lectures were given to a mixed juvenile audience but Faraday
    sometimes says "my boys". Keep his address as written; it is a
    historical document and the warmth is the point.
  - Lecture VI ends on respiration and touches on death and the body's
    slow burning. It is gentle and should stay gentle.
  - The Platinum lecture describes industrial processes with lead and
    mercury fumes. No annotation policy here — unlike Boys, this book has
    no "try it at home" appendix, so there is nothing a reader will
    attempt. Leave the processes as described.

FAMOUS PASSAGES (also in must_contain.txt)

  1. The thesis, Lecture I: there is no better, no more open door into
     the study of natural philosophy than the physical phenomena of a
     candle. Keep near-verbatim.
  2. Lecture I on the wick and capillary action, and the observation that
     the candle's beauty is that it feeds itself.
  3. The closing of Lecture VI — the most quoted passage in popular
     science, and Faraday's farewell to lecturing: the wish that his
     hearers may "be fit to compare to a candle", may "shine as lights to
     those about you", and may "justify the beauty of the taper" by
     making their deeds "honourable and effectual in the discharge of
     your duty to your fellow-men." This must survive essentially word
     for word. Modernize nothing here but the lightest connective tissue.

RATIO

English -> English modernization of spoken Victorian lecture prose, same
as soap-bubbles (which landed 1.02). Run:

  python3 verify.py candle --min-ratio 0.85 --max-ratio 1.3
