CHAPTER 1
How Candide Grew Up in a Magnificent Castle, and How He Got Kicked Out


In a castle in Westphalia, belonging to the Baron of Thunder-ten-Tronckh, there lived a young man blessed with the sweetest disposition you ever saw. His face was a perfect mirror of his soul. He had solid judgment combined with a total lack of guile, which is why, I believe, everyone called him Candide. The old servants of the household had long suspected he was actually the son of the Baron's sister by a decent, respectable gentleman from the neighborhood -- a man the young lady had flatly refused to marry because he could only prove seventy-one noble ancestors on his coat of arms. The rest of his family tree had been lost to the ravages of time.

The Baron was one of the most powerful lords in all of Westphalia, because his castle had not only a gate but also windows. His great hall was even decorated with tapestries. The dogs in his farmyard could double as a hunting pack when needed; his stable boys served as his huntsmen; and the village priest was his personal chaplain. They all called him "My Lord" and laughed at all his jokes.

The Baroness weighed roughly three hundred and fifty pounds, which naturally made her a person of enormous importance. She presided over the household with a dignity that commanded even greater respect. Her daughter Cunegonde was seventeen, rosy-cheeked, good-looking, plump, and thoroughly appealing. The Baron's son appeared to be worthy of his father in every possible way. The tutor Pangloss -- whose name literally means "all tongue" -- was the oracle of the family, and young Candide absorbed his lessons with all the innocent trust that his age and character could provide.

Pangloss was the professor of metaphysico-theologico-cosmolo-nigology. He proved brilliantly that there is no effect without a cause, and that in this best of all possible worlds, the Baron's castle was the most magnificent of all castles and the Baroness the best of all possible Baronesses.

"It's perfectly obvious," he said, "that things could not possibly be any different than they are. Since everything was created for a purpose, everything is necessarily created for the best possible purpose. Notice that noses were designed to support spectacles -- and so we have spectacles. Legs were clearly made to wear stockings -- and so we have stockings. Stones were formed to be carved and used to build castles -- and therefore my lord has a magnificent castle, because the greatest baron in the province naturally deserves the finest house. Pigs were made to be eaten -- and therefore we eat pork year-round. And so, those who have said that 'all is well' were talking nonsense. What they should have said is that all is for the best."

Candide listened carefully and believed every word, because he thought Miss Cunegonde was extremely beautiful, though he never quite worked up the nerve to tell her so. He figured that after the supreme happiness of being born Baron of Thunder-ten-Tronckh, the second-greatest happiness in the world was being Miss Cunegonde, the third was seeing her every day, and the fourth was listening to Master Pangloss, the greatest philosopher in the entire province -- and therefore the greatest in the entire world.

One day, Cunegonde was taking a walk near the castle in the little wood they generously called "the park" when she spotted something through the bushes: Dr. Pangloss was giving a private lesson in experimental natural philosophy to her mother's chambermaid, a petite brunette who was very pretty and very eager to learn. Since Miss Cunegonde had a tremendous aptitude for the sciences, she watched breathlessly as the Doctor conducted his repeated experiments. She clearly grasped the force of his reasoning, the effects, and the causes. She hurried away, thoroughly flushed, deeply thoughtful, and burning with the desire to be educated herself -- imagining that she might very well serve as a sufficient reason for young Candide, and he for her.

She ran into Candide on her way back to the castle. She blushed. Candide blushed too. She stammered a hello. Candide said something back without having the faintest idea what it was. The next day, after dinner, as everyone was leaving the table, Cunegonde and Candide found themselves behind a screen. Cunegonde dropped her handkerchief. Candide picked it up. She innocently took him by the hand. He innocently kissed her hand with remarkable energy, tenderness, and grace. Their lips met. Their eyes sparkled. Their knees trembled. Their hands wandered.

Baron Thunder-ten-Tronckh happened to walk past the screen, and upon witnessing this particular demonstration of cause and effect, he kicked Candide out of the castle with several vigorous boots to the backside. Cunegonde fainted. The Baroness slapped her across the face the moment she came to. And there was general chaos in the most magnificent and most delightful of all possible castles.
