CHAPTER III
How Candide Escaped from the Bulgarians, and What Happened Next


There was never anything so splendid, so sharp, so brilliant, and so well-organized as those two armies. Trumpets, fifes, oboes, drums, and cannons made a music that Hell itself had never heard. First, the cannons knocked down about six thousand men on each side. Then the muskets swept from this best of all possible worlds nine or ten thousand scoundrels who cluttered up its surface. The bayonet also turned out to be a *sufficient reason* for the death of several thousand more. The grand total came to around thirty thousand souls. Candide, trembling like a philosopher, hid as best he could during this heroic slaughter.

Finally, while the two kings were each having a Te Deum sung in their respective camps — victory hymns for both sides, naturally — Candide decided to go somewhere else and think about cause and effect. He picked his way over heaps of the dead and dying, and came first to a neighboring village. It was in ashes — an Abare village that the Bulgarians had burned to the ground according to the rules of war. Here, old men riddled with wounds watched their wives die, clutching their children to their bloody breasts, throats slit before their eyes. There, young women who had been raped lay disemboweled and gasping their last. Others, half-burned in the flames, begged for someone to finish them off. The ground was littered with brains, severed arms, and legs.

Candide fled as fast as he could to another village. It belonged to the Bulgarians, and the Abare heroes had treated it exactly the same way. Candide, always walking over twitching limbs or through ruins, finally made it beyond the war zone with a little food in his knapsack and Miss Cunegonde always in his heart. His food ran out by the time he reached Holland, but he'd heard that everyone in that country was rich and that they were Christians, so he had no doubt they'd treat him as well as he'd been treated in the Baron's castle — before Miss Cunegonde's bright eyes had been the cause of his getting kicked out.

He begged for charity from several respectable-looking people, all of whom told him that if he kept this up, they'd lock him in a workhouse and teach him how to earn a living.

Next he approached a man who'd been lecturing a large crowd for a solid hour on the subject of charity. This orator looked at him sideways and said:

"What are you doing here? Are you for the good cause?"

"There can be no effect without a cause," Candide answered modestly. "Everything is necessarily linked together and arranged for the best. It was necessary that I be banished from Miss Cunegonde's presence, and that I then run the gauntlet, and now it's necessary that I beg for bread until I can learn to earn it. All of this couldn't be any other way."

"My friend," said the orator, "do you believe the Pope is the Antichrist?"

"I've never heard that one way or the other," replied Candide. "But whether he is or isn't, I need bread."

"You don't deserve to eat," said the other. "Get lost, you scoundrel! Get out of here, you wretch! Don't come near me ever again!"

The orator's wife, poking her head out of the window and spotting a man who wasn't sure whether the Pope was the Antichrist, dumped the contents of a full chamber pot on his head. Good heavens — the lengths to which religious zeal will drive some people!

A man who had never been baptized — a good Anabaptist named James — witnessed this cruel and humiliating treatment of a fellow human being, a featherless biped possessing a rational soul. He took Candide home, cleaned him up, gave him bread and beer, handed him two florins, and even offered to teach him the manufacture of those Persian-style fabrics they make in Holland. Candide, practically falling at his feet, cried:

"Dr. Pangloss was right — all is for the best in this world! Your incredible generosity moves me a thousand times more than the cruelty of that gentleman in the black coat and his wife."

The next day, while out for a walk, he came across a beggar covered in sores, his eyes half-rotted, the tip of his nose eaten away, his mouth twisted to one side, his teeth black, choking on every word, racked by a violent cough, and spitting out a tooth with every spasm.
