CHAPTER V
The Storm, the Shipwreck, the Earthquake, and What Happened to Dr. Pangloss, Candide, and James the Anabaptist


Half the passengers were so wrecked by seasickness that they couldn't even register the danger they were in. The other half screamed and prayed. The sails were torn to shreds, the masts snapped, the hull split open. Everyone scrambled, but no one could hear and no one was in charge. The Anabaptist was up on deck, trying to help, when a savage sailor punched him hard and knocked him flat. But the force of his own blow sent the sailor tumbling headfirst overboard, where he caught on a piece of the broken mast. Good James rushed to help him, managed to haul him back up — and in the effort was thrown into the sea himself, right before the sailor's eyes. The sailor watched him drown without bothering to even glance his way. Candide ran to the rail and saw his benefactor surface one last time before being swallowed up by the waves forever. He was about to jump in after him when the philosopher Pangloss stopped him, demonstrating that the Bay of Lisbon had been formed specifically so that the Anabaptist could drown in it. While Pangloss was proving this *a priori*, the ship went down. Everyone perished except Pangloss, Candide, and that brute of a sailor who'd let the good Anabaptist die. The villain swam easily to shore, while Pangloss and Candide drifted in on a plank.

Once they'd recovered a little, they walked toward Lisbon. They still had some money, and they hoped it would keep them from starving — now that they'd managed not to drown. They had barely entered the city, still mourning their benefactor, when they felt the ground shake beneath their feet. The sea rose and boiled in the harbor, smashing the ships at anchor to splinters. Whirlwinds of fire and ash swept through the streets and public squares. Buildings collapsed. Roofs crashed down onto foundations, and foundations crumbled to rubble. Thirty thousand people of every age and sex were crushed beneath the ruins. (This was the great Lisbon earthquake of 1755, one of the deadliest natural disasters in European history.) The sailor whistled through his teeth, swore, and said there was loot to be had.

"What could possibly be the *sufficient reason* for this phenomenon?" said Pangloss.

"This is the end of the world!" cried Candide.

The sailor dashed into the ruins, risking death to find money. He found it, grabbed it, got drunk, and — once he'd slept it off — bought the favors of the first willing woman he came across amid the wreckage, the dying, and the dead. Pangloss tugged at his sleeve.

"My friend," he said, "this is not right. You're sinning against *universal reason*. Your timing is terrible."

"Blood and guts!" the sailor shot back. "I'm a sailor, born in Batavia. I've trampled on the crucifix four times on four different voyages to Japan" — Dutch traders were forced to step on Christian images to prove they weren't missionaries — "so to hell with your universal reason!"

Falling stones had wounded Candide. He lay in the street, half-buried in rubble.

"Please," he groaned to Pangloss, "get me some wine and oil. I'm dying."

"This earthquake is nothing new," Pangloss replied. "The city of Lima in South America had the exact same convulsions just last year. Same causes, same effects. There's certainly an underground vein of sulfur running all the way from Lima to Lisbon."

"That's very possible," said Candide, "but for the love of God, a little oil and wine."

"Possible?" said the philosopher. "I submit that the point can be rigorously demonstrated."

Candide passed out, and Pangloss fetched him some water from a nearby fountain. The next day, picking through the ruins, they found some food and managed to rebuild their strength a little. After that, they pitched in to help the other survivors. Some of the people they'd rescued gave them the best dinner that could be managed under the circumstances. True, the meal was grim, and the diners wept into their bread — but Pangloss consoled them, assuring them that things could not possibly be otherwise.

"Because," he said, "all that is, is for the best. If there's a volcano at Lisbon, it couldn't be anywhere else. It's impossible for things to be other than they are, because everything is as it should be."

A small man dressed in black — a Familiar of the Inquisition, which is to say an informer for the religious authorities — who was sitting nearby, politely interrupted him.

"So apparently, sir, you don't believe in original sin? Because if all is for the best, then there was no Fall and no punishment."

"I humbly beg Your Excellency's pardon," replied Pangloss, even more politely. "The Fall of man and the curse that followed necessarily entered into the design of the best of all possible worlds."

"Then you don't believe in free will?" said the Familiar.

"Your Excellency will forgive me," said Pangloss, "but free will is perfectly consistent with absolute necessity, because it was necessary that we should be free — for, you see, the determinate will —"

Pangloss was in the middle of his sentence when the Familiar nodded to his servant, who poured him a glass of port wine.
