CHAPTER VI
How the Portuguese Staged a Beautiful Auto-da-Fe to Prevent Further Earthquakes, and How Candide Was Publicly Flogged


After the earthquake had destroyed three-quarters of Lisbon, the wisest minds in the country could think of no more effective way to prevent total ruin than to put on a beautiful auto-da-fe for the people. (An auto-da-fe was a grand public ceremony in which the Inquisition punished heretics -- often by burning them alive.) The University of Coimbra had officially determined that burning a few people alive over a slow fire, with great ceremony, was a foolproof way to stop earthquakes.

So they rounded up a man from Biscay who'd been convicted of marrying his own godmother, and two Portuguese men who'd been caught picking the bacon out of their chicken -- a dead giveaway that they were secretly Jewish. After dinner, they came for Dr. Pangloss and his student Candide: one for speaking his mind, the other for listening with an air of agreement. They were taken to separate cells that were extremely cool, since the prisoners were never troubled by sunlight. Eight days later, they were dressed in san-benitos -- the ceremonial robes that condemned prisoners had to wear -- and their heads were decorated with paper mitres. Candide's mitre and san-benito were painted with upside-down flames and with devils that had neither tails nor claws; but Pangloss's devils had both claws and tails, and his flames pointed upward. Dressed like this, they marched in procession and listened to a very moving sermon, followed by beautiful church music. Candide was flogged in time with the hymns. The man from Biscay and the two men who hadn't wanted to eat their bacon were burned alive. And Pangloss was hanged, even though hanging wasn't the usual method.

That very same day, the earth shook again with tremendous force.

Candide, terrified, stunned, desperate, bleeding all over, trembling in every limb, said to himself:

"If this is the best of all possible worlds, what are the others like? Getting flogged -- fine, I went through that with the Bulgarians. But oh, my dear Pangloss! The greatest philosopher who ever lived -- that I had to watch you hanged, without even knowing why! Oh, my dear James, best of men -- drowned in the harbor! Oh, Miss Cunegonde, pearl among women -- that they ripped you open!"

He was stumbling along in this state -- barely able to stand, having been preached at, flogged, absolved, and blessed -- when an old woman came up to him and said:

"Take courage, my son, and follow me."
