CHAPTER IX
What Became of Cunegonde, Candide, the Grand Inquisitor, and the Jew


This Issachar was the most hot-tempered man the nation of Israel had seen since the Babylonian Captivity.

"What!" he shouted. "You Galilean slut -- the Inquisitor wasn't enough for you? Now I have to share with this lowlife too?"

As he said this, he pulled out a long dagger that he always carried on him. Not imagining that his opponent might be armed, he threw himself at Candide. But our honest Westphalian had been given a fine sword by the old woman along with the suit of clothes. He drew it, and despite his gentle nature, laid the merchant out stone dead on the cushions at Cunegonde's feet.

"Holy Mother of God!" Cunegonde cried. "What's going to happen to us? A man killed in my house! If the police come, we're done for!"

"If Pangloss hadn't been hanged," said Candide, "he'd have excellent advice for us right now -- he was a profound philosopher. Since he's not here, let's ask the old woman."

The old woman was very sensible and had just started to give her opinion when another little door opened. It was one o'clock in the morning. It was the start of Sunday. This day belonged to my Lord the Inquisitor. He walked in and found Candide -- the one who'd been flogged -- standing there with a sword in his hand, a dead man on the floor, Cunegonde in a panic, and the old woman dispensing advice.

Here is what went through Candide's mind at that moment, and how he reasoned it out:

If this holy man calls for help, he'll definitely have me burned alive. He'll probably do the same to Cunegonde. He's the one who had me flogged. He's my rival. I've already started killing. There's no time to hesitate.

This reasoning was crystal clear and instantaneous. Without giving the Inquisitor a moment to recover from his surprise, Candide ran him straight through and dumped him on the floor next to the Jew.

"Oh no, not again!" said Cunegonde. "Now there's no mercy for us -- we're excommunicated, our last hour has come. How could you? You, the gentlest person alive -- killing a Jew and a church official in two minutes flat!"

"My beautiful lady," Candide replied, "when a man is in love, jealous, and has been flogged by the Inquisition, he's capable of anything."

The old woman spoke up:

"There are three Andalusian horses in the stable, all saddled and bridled. Let brave Candide get them ready. Madame has money and jewels. Let's mount up right now. I can only ride on one buttock, but never mind that. Let's head for Cadiz. The weather is gorgeous, and there's nothing like traveling in the cool of the night."

Candide immediately saddled the three horses. He, Cunegonde, and the old woman rode thirty miles without stopping. While they were galloping away, the Holy Brotherhood arrived at the house. His Lordship the Inquisitor was buried in a beautiful church. Issachar's body was thrown on a garbage heap.

Candide, Cunegonde, and the old woman had by now reached the little town of Avacena, in the middle of the Sierra Morena mountains, and the following conversation took place at a roadside inn.
