CHAPTER X
The Troubles Candide, Cunegonde, and the Old Woman Faced Reaching Cadiz, and How They Set Sail


"Who stole my money and my jewels?" said Cunegonde, sobbing. "How are we going to live? What are we going to do? Where will I find more Inquisitors or Jewish merchants to give me more?"

"I'm afraid," said the old woman, "I have a strong suspicion about a certain Franciscan friar who slept at the same inn as us last night in Badajos. God forbid I should judge anyone unfairly, but he did come into our room twice, and he left the inn long before we did."

"Ah!" said Candide. "Dear Pangloss often proved to me that the goods of this world belong equally to all people, and that everyone has an equal right to them. By that logic, the Franciscan should have left us enough to finish our journey. You really have nothing left at all, my dear Cunegonde?"

"Not a penny," she said.

"What do we do?" said Candide.

"Sell one of the horses," replied the old woman. "I'll ride behind Miss Cunegonde -- even if I can only hang on with one buttock -- and we'll make it to Cadiz."

There happened to be a Benedictine prior at the same inn, and he bought the horse at a bargain price. Candide, Cunegonde, and the old woman passed through Lucena, Chillas, and Lebrixa, and finally arrived at Cadiz. A fleet was being assembled there, and troops were gathering to go teach a lesson to the Jesuit fathers in Paraguay, who had been accused of inciting a native tribe near San Sacramento to rebel against the kings of Spain and Portugal. Candide, having served in the Bulgarian army, performed the military drills in front of the commanding general with such grace, such confidence, such speed and precision, that he was given command of an infantry company. Just like that, he was a captain! He set sail with Miss Cunegonde, the old woman, two servants, and the two Andalusian horses that had belonged to the Grand Inquisitor of Portugal.

During the voyage, they spent a good deal of time discussing the philosophy of poor Pangloss.

"We're heading to a new world," said Candide, "and surely that's where everything really is for the best. Because I have to admit, there's reason to complain about how things work in our world -- both in terms of nature and in terms of human behavior."

"I love you with all my heart," said Cunegonde, "but my soul is still haunted by everything I've seen and been through."

"Everything will be fine," Candide replied. "The ocean in this new world is already better than our European seas -- it's calmer, the winds are steadier. The New World is clearly the best of all possible worlds."

"God, I hope so," said Cunegonde. "But I've been so terribly unhappy in this world that my heart is almost closed to hope."

"You're complaining?" said the old woman. "Please. You have no idea what real misfortune looks like."

Cunegonde almost laughed at that, finding it amusing that this old woman would claim to have suffered more than she had.

"My dear woman," said Cunegonde, "unless you've been raped by two Bulgarians, been stabbed twice in the belly, had two of your castles demolished, watched two of your mothers get hacked to pieces before your eyes, and seen two of your lovers flogged at an auto-da-fe, I really don't see how you could possibly have it worse than me. Not to mention that I was born a baroness with seventy-two generations of noble blood -- and I've been reduced to working as a cook!"

"My dear girl," replied the old woman, "you don't know the first thing about my background. And if I showed you my backside, you'd think twice before talking like that."

This remark sparked intense curiosity in both Cunegonde and Candide, and the old woman told them her story as follows.
