CHAPTER XI
The Old Woman's Story


"I haven't always had bloodshot eyes and red-rimmed eyelids. My nose hasn't always touched my chin. And I wasn't always a servant. I am the daughter of Pope Urban X and the Princess of Palestrina. Until I was fourteen, I grew up in a palace so grand that all the castles of your German barons put together would barely have served as its stables -- and a single one of my dresses was worth more than all the finery in Westphalia. I blossomed with beauty, wit, and every graceful talent, surrounded by pleasures, admirers, and hopeful suitors. I was already inspiring love. And my neck -- what a neck! White, firm, and sculpted like the Venus de' Medici. And my eyes! My eyelids! My jet-black eyebrows! The fire that blazed from my dark pupils outshone the stars themselves -- or so the local poets told me. My maids, dressing and undressing me, would practically swoon whether they saw me from the front or the back. How happy the gentlemen would have been to do that job instead!

"I was engaged to the most magnificent Prince of Massa Carara. What a prince! As handsome as I was beautiful, sweet-tempered, charming, brilliantly witty, and burning with love. I loved him the way you love for the first time -- with worship, with abandon. The wedding preparations were underway. The pomp and splendor were extraordinary; there were feasts, tournaments, and nonstop opera, and all of Italy composed sonnets in my honor -- though not a single one of them was any good. I was on the verge of reaching the absolute peak of happiness when an old marchioness, who had been my prince's former mistress, invited him over for hot chocolate. He died less than two hours later in the most horrible convulsions. But that's a minor detail. My mother, in despair and nearly as devastated as I was, decided we should get away from that cursed place for a while. She owned a beautiful estate near Gaeta. We set sail on a local galley, gilded like the high altar of Saint Peter's in Rome. And then a Moroccan pirate ship swooped down and boarded us. Our soldiers defended themselves the way the Pope's soldiers always do -- they fell to their knees, threw down their weapons, and begged the pirates for a last-rites absolution.

"They were immediately stripped naked as the day they were born. My mother, our ladies-in-waiting, and I got the same treatment. It's remarkable how quickly those people can undress you. But what surprised me most was that they stuck their fingers into a part of our bodies where we women generally don't allow anything but -- well, medical instruments. It seemed like an awfully strange ceremony to me, but that's how you think when you haven't seen the world. I later learned they were checking whether we'd hidden any diamonds. It's a time-honored practice among civilized nations that roam the seas. I was told that the very devout Knights of Malta never fail to conduct this same search whenever they capture Turkish prisoners of either sex. It's an international law they follow without exception.

"I won't bother telling you what a hardship it was for a young princess and her mother to be made slaves and shipped off to Morocco. You can imagine what we endured aboard that pirate vessel. My mother was still very beautiful; our ladies-in-waiting, even our maids, had more charm than you could find in all of Africa. As for me, I was ravishing, exquisite, grace itself -- and I was a virgin. Not for long, though. The flower that had been reserved for the handsome Prince of Massa Carara was plucked by the pirate captain. He was a revolting brute who still believed he was doing me a tremendous honor. The Princess of Palestrina and I must have been remarkably tough to survive everything we went through before reaching Morocco. But let's move on -- these things happen so often they're hardly worth mentioning.

"Morocco was drowning in blood when we arrived. The Emperor Muley Ishmael had fifty sons, each with his own followers. This had produced fifty simultaneous civil wars -- faction against faction, all across the empire. It was nonstop carnage from one end of the country to the other.

"The moment we landed, soldiers from a rival faction tried to steal my captain's plunder. After jewels and gold, we women were the most valuable things he had. I witnessed a battle the likes of which you never see in your mild European climates. Northerners don't have that heat in their blood, that raging desire, so common in Africa. You Europeans seem to have milk in your veins, but in the people of the Atlas Mountains and the surrounding lands, it's fire, it's acid. They fought with the fury of lions and tigers and serpents, all to determine who would get to keep us. One soldier grabbed my mother by the right arm while my captain's lieutenant held her by the left. Another soldier seized one of her legs and one of our pirates grabbed the other. Nearly all our women were being torn apart the same way, pulled in four directions by four men. My captain kept me hidden behind him, slashing with his scimitar at anyone who challenged him. But in the end, I saw every one of our Italian women -- and my mother -- torn to pieces, butchered by the monsters fighting over them. The captives, my companions, the men who had captured them, soldiers, sailors -- everyone of every color -- and finally my captain himself -- all were killed. I lay dying on a heap of corpses. Scenes like this were playing out across three hundred leagues of countryside -- and yet they never missed the five daily prayers required by their prophet.

"I somehow pulled myself free of that pile of slaughtered bodies and dragged myself to a large orange tree on the bank of a nearby stream, where I collapsed from terror, exhaustion, horror, despair, and hunger. Moments later, my overwhelmed senses gave way to a sleep that was more like unconsciousness than rest. I was hovering between life and death in that state of half-conscious weakness when I felt something moving on top of me. I opened my eyes and saw a white man with a kind face, who was sighing and muttering through his teeth: 'Oh, what a tragedy it is to have no testicles!'"
