CHAPTER XII
The Old Woman's Story, Continued


"Astonished and delighted to hear someone speaking my native language -- and no less surprised by what he'd said -- I told him there were far greater misfortunes than the one he was complaining about. I gave him a quick summary of the horrors I'd been through, and then I fainted again. He carried me to a nearby house, put me to bed, fed me, looked after me, comforted me, and flattered me. He told me he'd never seen anyone as beautiful as I was, and that he'd never so deeply regretted the loss of something he could never get back.

"'I was born in Naples,' he said. 'Every year they castrate two or three thousand boys there. Some of them die from the procedure; others develop voices more beautiful than any woman's; and others go on to run entire governments. The operation was performed on me with great success, and I became the music director for Her Highness the Princess of Palestrina.'

"'My mother!' I cried.

"'Your mother!' he cried, bursting into tears. 'What -- can you really be that little princess I raised until she was six years old, the one who already promised to grow up as beautiful as you are now?'

"'It's me,' I said. 'But my mother is lying four hundred yards from here, torn to pieces under a heap of corpses.'

"I told him everything that had happened to me, and he told me his own story. He'd been sent to Morocco by a Christian government to negotiate a treaty with the emperor -- a deal to supply him with gunpowder, cannons, and ships so he could help destroy the trade of rival Christian nations.

"'My mission is complete,' said this honest eunuch. 'I'm about to set sail from Ceuta, and I'll take you back to Italy. Oh, what a tragedy it is to have no testicles!'

"I thanked him with tears of gratitude. But instead of taking me to Italy, he brought me to Algiers, where he sold me to the local ruler, the Dey. I'd barely been sold before the plague -- which had already swept through Africa, Asia, and Europe -- erupted with terrible force in Algiers. You've seen earthquakes, but tell me, miss -- have you ever had the plague?"

"Never," said Cunegonde.

"Well, if you had," said the old woman, "you'd admit it's far worse than an earthquake. It's extremely common in Africa, and I caught it. Picture this: the daughter of a Pope, barely fifteen years old, who in less than three months had experienced poverty, slavery, being raped almost daily, watching her mother torn to pieces, surviving war and famine -- and now was dying of the plague in Algiers. I didn't die, though. But my eunuch died, and so did the Dey, and nearly the entire household of Algiers perished.

"As soon as the worst of the plague had passed, the Dey's slaves were put up for sale. A merchant bought me and took me to Tunis. He sold me to another merchant, who sold me to another in Tripoli. From Tripoli I was sold to Alexandria, from Alexandria to Smyrna, from Smyrna to Constantinople. Eventually I ended up the property of an Aga of the Janissaries -- an officer of the elite Turkish soldiers -- who was soon ordered to the defense of Azov, which the Russians were besieging.

"The Aga, who was quite the ladies' man, took his entire household of women along and installed us in a little fort on the shores of the Sea of Azov, guarded by two Black eunuchs and twenty soldiers. The Turks slaughtered enormous numbers of Russians, and the Russians returned the favor. Azov was burned to the ground, the inhabitants put to the sword without regard for age or sex, until only our little fort remained -- and the enemy was determined to starve us out. The twenty Janissaries had sworn an oath never to surrender. The extreme hunger they were driven to forced them to eat our two eunuchs rather than break their word. After a few more days, they decided to eat the women too.

"Fortunately, we had a very devout and compassionate imam among us, who preached them an excellent sermon and talked them out of killing us outright.

"'Just cut off one buttock from each of these ladies,' he said, 'and you'll have a fine meal. If you need to come back for more, you can have the same course again in a few days. Heaven will look favorably on such a merciful act, and surely send you relief.'

"He was very persuasive. They were convinced. We underwent this horrible operation. The imam applied the same healing balm he used on boys after circumcision. We all nearly died.

"The Janissaries had barely finished their meal -- the meal we'd provided -- when the Russians arrived in flat-bottomed boats. Not a single Janissary survived. The Russians paid no attention whatsoever to the condition we were in. But there are French surgeons everywhere in the world, and one of them, who happened to be very skilled, took care of us. He patched us up, and as long as I live I will remember that the moment my wounds healed, he propositioned me. He told us all to cheer up -- this kind of thing happened in lots of sieges, he said, and it was perfectly consistent with the laws of war.

"As soon as my companions could walk, they were marched off to Moscow. I was given to a Russian nobleman who made me his gardener and gave me twenty lashes a day. Two years later, this nobleman was broken on the wheel along with thirty other Russian lords over some court intrigue. I made the most of the opportunity and fled. I crossed the whole of Russia. I spent years as a barmaid in Riga, then did the same in Rostock, Wismar, Leipzig, Kassel, Utrecht, Leiden, The Hague, and Rotterdam. I grew old in misery and humiliation, with only half a backside, but always remembering that I was a Pope's daughter. A hundred times I wanted to kill myself, but I always found I still loved being alive. This absurd weakness is perhaps our most self-destructive trait. Is there anything more ridiculous than wanting to keep carrying a burden you could set down at any moment? To despise your own existence and yet cling to it desperately? To pet the snake that's devouring you, right up until it's eaten your heart?

"In the various countries I passed through, and the countless inns where I worked as a servant, I noticed vast numbers of people who hated their own lives -- and yet I only ever met twelve who actually put an end to their misery: three Africans, four Englishmen, four Swiss, and a German professor named Robeck. I ended up working for the Jewish merchant Don Issachar, and he placed me in your service, my fair lady. I've attached myself to your fate, and I've been far more moved by your misfortunes than by my own. I would never even have told you my story if you hadn't provoked me a little, and if it weren't the custom to pass the time on a long sea voyage by telling stories. So here's my challenge, Miss Cunegonde: I've lived and I know the world. Amuse yourself by asking every passenger on this ship to tell you their life story. And if you find a single one of them who hasn't cursed their existence a thousand times over, who hasn't told themselves they were the unluckiest person alive -- then you have my permission to throw me headfirst into the sea."
