CHAPTER XV
How Candide Killed the Brother of His Dear Cunegonde


"I will never forget that terrible day when I saw my father and mother murdered and my sister raped. When the Bulgarian soldiers pulled out, my dear sister was nowhere to be found. But my mother, my father, myself, two maidservants, and three little boys -- all of whom had been killed -- were loaded onto a cart and taken for burial at a Jesuit chapel about two leagues from our family estate. A Jesuit sprinkled holy water on us. It was horribly salty. A few drops fell into my eyes, and the priest noticed my eyelids twitch slightly. He put his hand on my chest and felt my heart beating. I was given medical care, and after three weeks I'd recovered. You remember, my dear Candide, how good-looking I was. Well, I became even better-looking, and the Reverend Father Didrie, the Superior of that house, developed the most tender friendship for me. He gave me the robes of the order. A few years later, I was sent to Rome. The Father General needed a fresh batch of young German Jesuits. You see, the rulers of Paraguay take as few Spanish Jesuits as possible -- they prefer foreign ones, who are easier to control. The Reverend Father General judged me fit to go work in this particular vineyard. So off we went -- a Pole, a man from the Tyrol, and myself. When I arrived, I was given a position as both sub-deacon and lieutenant. Today I'm a colonel and a priest. We're going to give the King of Spain's troops a very warm reception. I guarantee they'll be excommunicated and thoroughly beaten. Providence has sent you here to help us. But is it really true that my dear sister Cunegonde is right here in the area, living with the Governor of Buenos Aires?"

Candide swore on his honor that nothing was more true. Their tears started flowing all over again.

The Baron couldn't stop himself from embracing Candide. He called him his brother, his savior.

"Maybe," he said, "we can march into the city together as conquerors, my dear Candide, and rescue my sister Cunegonde."

"That's exactly what I want," said Candide. "I was planning to marry her, and I still hope to."

"You -- what?" the Baron snapped. "You'd have the nerve to marry my sister, who has seventy-two generations of noble blood? I find it absolutely staggering that you would dare mention such an outrageous idea to my face!"

Candide, stunned by this outburst, replied:

"Reverend Father, all the noble bloodlines in the world don't mean a thing. I rescued your sister from a Jewish merchant and a Grand Inquisitor. She owes me quite a lot, and she wants to marry me. Dr. Pangloss always taught me that all people are equal, and I absolutely intend to marry her."

"We'll see about that, you wretch!" said the Jesuit Baron de Thunder-ten-Tronckh -- and he slapped Candide across the face with the flat of his sword. In an instant, Candide drew his own sword and plunged it up to the hilt in the Baron's stomach. But as he pulled it out, still steaming, he burst into tears.

"Oh, God!" he cried. "I've killed my old master's son, my friend, my future brother-in-law! I'm the gentlest person in the world, and yet I've already killed three men -- and two of those three were priests."

Cacambo, who had been standing guard at the door of the pavilion, ran in.

"There's nothing left for us to do but sell our lives as dearly as we can," said Candide. "Someone's bound to come in here any minute, and we'll have to die with swords in our hands."

Cacambo, who had been through more than his share of tight spots, didn't panic. He stripped the dead Baron of his Jesuit robes, dressed Candide in them, put the square cap on his head, and got him on a horse. All of this was done in the blink of an eye.

"Let's ride, master -- fast. Everyone will think you're a Jesuit going to give orders to your men, and we'll be across the border before anyone can catch up."

He was already galloping as he said this, shouting in Spanish:

"Make way! Make way for the Reverend Father Colonel!"
