CHAPTER XVI
What Happened to Our Two Travelers with Two Girls, Two Monkeys, and the People Called the Oreillons


Candide and his servant had gotten well past the border before anyone in the camp realized the German Jesuit was dead. The quick-thinking Cacambo had made sure to fill his bag with bread, chocolate, bacon, fruit, and a few bottles of wine. On their Andalusian horses, they pushed deep into unknown territory where there wasn't a road or even a trail to be found. Eventually they came to a beautiful meadow crisscrossed by babbling streams. Here our two adventurers let their horses graze. Cacambo suggested they eat something, and led by example.

"How can you ask me to eat ham," said Candide, "when I've just killed the Baron's son, and I'm doomed never to see the beautiful Cunegonde again? What's the point of dragging out my miserable existence, far from her, drowning in remorse and despair? And what will the *Journal de Trevoux* say?" (This was a Jesuit literary magazine -- even in crisis, Candide worried about the press.)

While he was lamenting his fate, he kept on eating. The sun went down. The two wanderers heard faint cries that seemed to come from women. They couldn't tell if they were cries of pain or pleasure, but they leapt up immediately with that nervous alarm that everything inspires when you're in unknown territory. The noise was coming from two naked girls running along the meadow, pursued by two monkeys who were biting at their backsides. Candide was overcome with pity. He'd learned to shoot during his time in the Bulgarian army, and he was such a crack shot that he could knock a hazelnut off a bush without touching a single leaf. He raised his double-barreled Spanish rifle, fired, and killed both monkeys.

"Thank God! My dear Cacambo, I've rescued those two poor creatures from a terrible situation. If I committed a sin by killing an Inquisitor and a Jesuit, I've more than made up for it by saving these girls' lives. Maybe they're young ladies of good family -- and this little adventure might win us some powerful friends in this country."

He was about to say more, but stopped cold when he saw the two girls tenderly embracing the monkeys, sobbing over their bodies, and filling the air with the most heartbreaking wails.

"I didn't exactly expect this reaction," he said at last to Cacambo, who replied:

"Nice work, sir. You just killed those two young ladies' boyfriends."

"Their *boyfriends*! That's impossible! You're joking, Cacambo -- I can't believe it!"

"Dear sir," replied Cacambo, "you're always so surprised by everything. Why should you find it so strange that in some countries monkeys manage to win the affections of the ladies? They're a quarter human, after all -- just as I'm a quarter Spanish."

"Oh no," replied Candide. "I do remember Dr. Pangloss once saying that this sort of thing used to happen in ancient times, and that these mixtures produced centaurs, fauns, and satyrs -- that many people in antiquity claimed to have seen such creatures. But I always thought it was all just mythology."

"Well, now you can see it's true," said Cacambo. "And you can see what these creatures mean to people who haven't had a European education. My only worry now is that those ladies are going to make trouble for us."

These sensible reflections convinced Candide to leave the meadow and push deeper into the woods. He ate supper there with Cacambo, and after cursing the Portuguese Inquisitor, the Governor of Buenos Aires, and the Baron, they fell asleep on a bed of moss. When they woke up, they found they couldn't move -- because during the night the Oreillons, the people who lived in that region and to whom the two girls had reported them, had tied them up with ropes made from tree bark. They were surrounded by fifty naked Oreillons, armed with bows and arrows, clubs, and stone hatchets. Some were heating a large cauldron to a boil, others were sharpening spits, and they were all chanting:

"A Jesuit! A Jesuit! We'll have our revenge -- we'll eat well tonight! Let's eat the Jesuit! Eat him up!"

"I told you, sir," said Cacambo sadly, "that those two girls would make trouble for us."

Candide, seeing the cauldron and the spits, cried out:

"We're definitely going to be either roasted or boiled. What would Dr. Pangloss say if he could see human nature in its raw state? Everything may be for the best, sure, but I have to say it's pretty rough to have lost Cunegonde and then end up on a spit surrounded by Oreillons."

Cacambo never lost his head.

"Don't give up," he said to the despairing Candide. "I speak a little of these people's language. I'll talk to them."

"Just make sure," said Candide, "to point out how incredibly inhumane it is to cook people, and how very un-Christian."

"Gentlemen," said Cacambo, "so you're planning to eat a Jesuit today. Excellent -- nothing could be fairer. Nothing is more just than treating your enemies this way. The law of nature tells us to kill our neighbors, and that's common practice all over the world. If we Europeans don't eat ours, it's only because we have plenty of other food options. But you don't have the same resources, and it's certainly better to eat your enemies than to leave the spoils of victory for the crows and vultures. But, gentlemen, you surely wouldn't want to eat your *friends*. You think you're about to roast a Jesuit, but this man is actually your defender. It's the enemy of your enemies that you're about to put on the spit. As for me, I was born in your country. This gentleman is my master, and far from being a Jesuit, he's just killed one -- he's wearing the dead man's clothes. That's the source of your misunderstanding. To prove I'm telling the truth, take his robe and bring it to the nearest Jesuit outpost. Ask them whether my master killed one of their officers or not. It won't take long, and you can always eat us if you find out I've lied. But I have told you the truth. You're far too well acquainted with the principles of international law, justice, and basic decency to refuse us this courtesy."

The Oreillons found this speech very reasonable. They sent two of their leading men to verify the story as quickly as possible. The delegates carried out their mission like sensible people, and soon came back with good news. The Oreillons untied their prisoners, treated them with every courtesy, offered them girls, gave them food and drink, and escorted them to the border of their territory, shouting joyfully:

"He's not a Jesuit! He's not a Jesuit!"

Candide couldn't get over the cause of his rescue.

"What people!" he said. "What a culture! What customs! If I hadn't been lucky enough to run Cunegonde's brother through with a sword, I would have been eaten alive, no question about it. But when you think about it, unspoiled human nature isn't so bad after all -- these people, instead of eating me, showed me every possible kindness the moment they found out I wasn't a Jesuit."
