CHAPTER XIX
What Happened to Them in Surinam, and How Candide Met Martin


Our travelers spent their first day in high spirits. They were thrilled to possess more treasure than all of Asia, Europe, and Africa could scrape together. Candide, overflowing with joy, carved Cunegonde's name on the trees. On the second day, two of their llamas stumbled into a swamp, and they and their loads were lost. Two more died of exhaustion a few days later. Seven or eight starved to death in a desert. Others fell off cliffs along the way. After a hundred days of traveling, they had only two llamas left. Candide said to Cacambo:

"My friend, you can see how fleeting the riches of this world are. Nothing is truly solid except virtue -- and the hope of seeing Cunegonde again."

"I can't argue with that," said Cacambo, "but we still have two llamas carrying more treasure than the King of Spain will ever see in his life. And I can make out a town up ahead that I'm pretty sure is Surinam -- it's a Dutch colony. We're at the end of our troubles and the beginning of our happiness."

As they approached the town, they saw a man lying on the ground -- a Black man, wearing nothing but half a pair of ragged blue linen shorts. The man was missing his left leg and his right hand.

"My God!" said Candide in Dutch. "What happened to you, friend? How did you end up in this terrible state?"

"I'm waiting for my master, Mr. Vanderdendur, the famous merchant," the man answered.

"Was it Mr. Vanderdendur who did this to you?" said Candide.

"Yes, sir," said the man. "It's standard practice. Twice a year they give us a pair of linen shorts -- that's our entire wardrobe. When we're working at the sugar mills and the grinder catches a finger, they cut off the whole hand. When we try to run away, they cut off a leg. Both things happened to me. This is the price you pay for the sugar you eat in Europe. And yet, when my mother sold me for ten patagons on the coast of Guinea, she said: 'My dear child, give thanks to our gods, worship them always -- they will bring you a happy life. You have the honor of being a slave to our lords the white men, and that will be the making of your father and mother's fortune.' I don't know whether I made their fortune. What I do know is that they didn't make mine. Dogs, monkeys, and parrots are a thousand times less miserable than I am. The Dutch missionaries who converted me tell us every Sunday that we're all children of Adam -- Black and white alike. I'm no genealogist, but if those preachers are telling the truth, then we're all at least second cousins. And you have to admit, it's impossible to treat your own relatives in a more barbaric way."

"Oh, Pangloss!" cried Candide. "This is one horror you never imagined. That's it -- I'm done. I have to finally give up your optimism."

"What's optimism?" asked Cacambo.

"It's the delusion," said Candide, "that everything is wonderful when everything is terrible."

And looking at the man, he wept. Still weeping, he walked into Surinam.

The first thing they asked about was whether there was a ship in the harbor that could be sent to Buenos Aires. The man they spoke to happened to be a Spanish sea captain, who offered them a fair deal. He arranged to meet them at a tavern, where Candide and the faithful Cacambo went with their two llamas to wait for him.

Candide, who always wore his heart on his sleeve, told the Spaniard his entire life story and confessed that he planned to run off with Cunegonde.

"Then I'll be very careful not to take you to Buenos Aires," said the captain. "I'd be hanged, and so would you. The lovely Cunegonde is the Governor's favorite mistress."

This hit Candide like a thunderbolt. He cried for a long time. Finally he pulled Cacambo aside.

"Here's what we have to do, my dear friend," he said. "We've each got five or six million in diamonds in our pockets. You're smarter than I am -- go to Buenos Aires and get Cunegonde. If the Governor makes trouble, give him a million. If he still won't hand her over, give him two. You've never killed an Inquisitor, so nobody will suspect you. I'll get another ship and wait for you in Venice -- it's a free country where we'll have nothing to fear from Bulgarians, Abares, Jews, or Inquisitors."

Cacambo applauded this sensible plan. He was heartbroken at the thought of parting from such a good master, who had become a true friend, but his devotion to serving Candide outweighed the pain of leaving him. They embraced in tears. Candide told him not to forget the Old Woman. Cacambo set out that very day. He really was an exceptionally good man.

Candide stayed on in Surinam for a while, waiting for another captain to take him and his two remaining llamas to Italy. He hired some servants and bought everything he needed for a long voyage. Then Mr. Vanderdendur -- captain of a large ship -- came along and offered his services.

"How much will you charge," Candide asked, "to take me directly to Venice -- me, my servants, my luggage, and these two llamas?"

The captain asked for ten thousand piastres. Candide agreed without hesitation.

"Well, well!" Mr. Vanderdendur said to himself. "This stranger hands over ten thousand piastres just like that! He must be incredibly rich."

Coming back a little later, he informed Candide that, on second thought, he couldn't make the voyage for less than twenty thousand piastres.

"Fine, you'll have them," said Candide.

"Hmm!" the captain said to himself. "This man agrees to twenty thousand as easily as ten."

He came back again and declared he couldn't possibly take Candide to Venice for less than thirty thousand piastres.

"Then thirty thousand it is," said Candide.

"My, my!" the Dutch captain said to himself. "Thirty thousand piastres means nothing to this man. Those llamas must be carrying an unbelievable fortune. Let's not push it any further -- for now. Get the thirty thousand up front, and then we'll see."

Candide sold two small diamonds, the least valuable of which was worth more than the captain's entire fare. He paid in advance. The two llamas were loaded on board. Candide followed in a small boat to meet the ship where it was anchored offshore. The captain saw his chance, set sail, and caught the wind. Candide, dismayed and stupefied, quickly lost sight of the vessel.

"That," he said, "is exactly the kind of trick you'd expect from the old world."

He went back to shore, overwhelmed with grief -- for he'd just lost enough wealth to make twenty kings rich. He went straight to the Dutch magistrate, and in his distress, he pounded on the door a bit too loudly. He went in and told his story, raising his voice more than was strictly necessary. The magistrate started by fining him ten thousand piastres for making a disturbance. Then he listened patiently, promised to look into the matter when the captain returned, and charged Candide another ten thousand piastres to cover the costs of the hearing.

This drove Candide to despair. He'd endured misfortunes a thousand times worse, true, but the cold indifference of the magistrate and the brazenness of the captain who'd robbed him stirred up a deep bitterness and plunged him into black depression. The wickedness of humanity appeared before his mind in all its ugliness, and his thoughts turned relentlessly dark. Finally, hearing that a French ship was about to sail for Bordeaux, he booked a cabin at the regular price -- since he no longer had any diamond-laden llamas to bring along. He then announced throughout the town that he would pay the passage and meals, plus two thousand piastres, to any honest man who would travel with him, on one condition: the man had to be the most dissatisfied with his life and the most miserable person in the entire province.

So many candidates showed up that a whole fleet of ships could barely have held them. Candide, wanting to narrow the field, selected about a twentieth of the most promising applicants -- the ones who seemed the most sociable and who all claimed to deserve his preference above the rest. He gathered them at his inn and gave them dinner, on the condition that each one would swear to tell his life story truthfully. He promised to choose the man who seemed most justifiably miserable, and to give consolation prizes to the runners-up.

They sat there until four in the morning. As Candide listened to one tale of misery after another, he kept thinking of what the Old Woman had said on their voyage to Buenos Aires -- her bet that there wasn't a person on the ship who hadn't suffered enormous misfortunes. With every new story, he thought of Pangloss.

"That Pangloss," he said, "would have a hard time proving his theory now. I wish he were here. One thing's for certain: if everything is good somewhere, it's in El Dorado and nowhere else in the world."

In the end, he chose a poor scholar who had spent ten years working for the publishers of Amsterdam. He figured there was no profession on earth more likely to make a person utterly miserable.

This philosopher was an honest man -- but he'd been robbed by his wife, beaten by his son, and abandoned by his daughter, who'd run off with a Portuguese sailor. He'd just been fired from the small job he'd been scraping by on, and he was being persecuted by the Calvinist preachers of Surinam, who accused him of being a Socinian (a free-thinking heretic). Admittedly, the other candidates were at least as wretched as he was, but Candide hoped the philosopher would be good company on the voyage. All the other candidates complained bitterly that Candide had treated them unfairly, but he smoothed things over by giving each of them a hundred piastres.
