CHAPTER XX
What Happened at Sea to Candide and Martin


The old philosopher, whose name was Martin, set sail with Candide for Bordeaux. They'd both seen and suffered a great deal; and if the ship had been sailing from Surinam to Japan by way of the Cape of Good Hope, they'd have had enough material on the subjects of moral and natural evil to keep the conversation going the entire trip.

Candide, however, had one great advantage over Martin: he still hoped to see Cunegonde again. Martin had nothing at all to hope for. Besides, Candide still had money and jewels, and though he'd lost a hundred large red llamas loaded with the greatest treasure on earth, and though the swindle by the Dutch captain still weighed heavily on his mind, when he thought about what he still had left in his pockets -- and especially when he mentioned Cunegonde's name, particularly toward the end of a good meal -- he found himself leaning back toward Pangloss's philosophy.

"But you, Mr. Martin," he said to the philosopher, "what do you make of all this? What's your theory about moral and natural evil?"

"Sir," answered Martin, "the preachers back in Surinam accused me of being a Socinian, but the truth is I'm a Manichean." (Manicheans believed the world was governed by two equal forces -- one good, one evil -- locked in eternal struggle.)

"You're joking," said Candide. "There aren't any Manicheans left in the world."

"Well, there's me," said Martin. "I can't help it. I don't know how to think any other way."

"You must be possessed by the devil," said Candide.

"He's so deeply involved in the affairs of this world," replied Martin, "that he may very well be in me -- same as he is in everybody else. But I'll tell you honestly: when I look at this globe -- or rather, this little ball -- I can't help thinking that God has abandoned it to some malicious force. I make an exception, always, for El Dorado. I've hardly ever seen a city that didn't want to destroy its neighboring city, or a family that didn't want to wipe out some other family. Everywhere the weak despise the powerful while groveling before them, and the powerful treat them like sheep -- shearing their wool and selling their flesh. A million soldiers in uniform march from one end of Europe to the other, earning their bread through organized looting and murder, because there's no more honest work available. And even in the cities that seem to be at peace, where the arts are flourishing, the citizens are eaten alive by more envy, anxiety, and misery than a city under siege ever suffers. Private sorrows are crueler than public disasters. In short, I've seen so much and lived through so much that I am a Manichean."

"But surely there are some good things in the world," said Candide.

"Maybe," said Martin. "But I haven't found them."

In the middle of this debate, they heard the boom of cannon fire. It grew louder every second. Each of them pulled out a spyglass. They could see two ships locked in battle about three miles off. The wind brought both ships close enough to the French vessel that our travelers had a front-row seat for the fight. Finally one ship fired a broadside so low and so perfectly aimed that the other ship sank. Candide and Martin could clearly see a hundred men on the deck of the sinking vessel. They raised their hands toward heaven and let out terrible cries -- and the next moment the sea swallowed them all.

"Well," said Martin, "that's how human beings treat each other."

"It's true," said Candide. "There's something diabolical about this."

As he was speaking, he noticed something bright red floating in the water near their ship. They lowered the longboat to investigate. It was one of his llamas. Candide was more overjoyed at recovering this one llama than he'd been devastated at losing the hundred that had been loaded with the great diamonds of El Dorado.

The French captain soon determined that the winning ship was Spanish and the loser was a Dutch pirate -- the very same captain who had robbed Candide. The immense plunder that the villain had accumulated went down to the bottom of the sea with him. Out of all of it, only one llama was saved.

"You see," said Candide to Martin, "crime is sometimes punished. That Dutch swindler got exactly what he deserved."

"Yes," said Martin, "but did the passengers on his ship deserve to drown too? God punished the crook, and the devil drowned everyone else."

The French and Spanish ships went on their separate ways, and Candide went on with his conversation with Martin. They debated for fifteen straight days, and at the end of those fifteen days, they were no closer to agreement than they'd been at the start. But they talked, they exchanged ideas, they kept each other company. Candide stroked his llama.

"Since I've found you again," he said to it, "maybe there's a chance I'll find my Cunegonde too."
