CHAPTER XXI

Candide and Martin, Still Arguing, Approach the Coast of France


At last they spotted the coast of France.

"Have you ever been to France, Martin?" asked Candide.

"Yes," said Martin. "I've been to several provinces. In some, half the people are idiots. In others, they're too clever for their own good. In some they're weak and gullible, in others they fancy themselves witty. In all of them, the main occupation is love, the second is gossip, and the third is talking nonsense."

"But, Martin, have you been to Paris?"

"I have. All those types are there at once. It's chaos -- a confused mob where everyone chases pleasure and almost no one finds it, at least from what I could tell. I didn't stay long. The moment I arrived, I was robbed of everything by pickpockets at the Saint-Germain fair. Then I was mistaken for a thief and thrown in jail for eight days, after which I worked as a proofreader to earn enough money to walk back to Holland. I got to know the whole scribbling crowd, the political crowd, and the religious fanatic crowd. They say there are some very polite people in that city. I'd like to believe it."

"As for me, I have no interest in seeing France," said Candide. "You can easily imagine that after spending a month in El Dorado, I don't care about seeing anything on earth except Cunegonde. I'm going to wait for her in Venice. We'll just pass through France on our way to Italy. Will you keep me company?"

"Gladly," said Martin. "They say Venice is really only good for the Venetian nobility, but that foreigners are treated very well there -- as long as they have plenty of money. I don't have any. You do. So I'll follow you anywhere."

"But do you think," said Candide, "that the earth was originally a sea, as that big book belonging to the captain claims?"

"I don't believe a word of it," said Martin, "any more than I believe any of the other nonsense that's been published lately."

"But then what was this world created for?" said Candide.

"To drive us insane," answered Martin.

"Weren't you amazed," Candide continued, "by the love those two Oreillon girls had for those monkeys -- the story I told you about?"

"Not at all," said Martin. "I don't see anything strange about it. I've seen so many extraordinary things that nothing surprises me anymore."

"Do you think," said Candide, "that human beings have always slaughtered each other the way they do today? That they've always been liars, cheats, traitors, ingrates, thieves, scoundrels, gluttons, drunks, misers, social climbers, cutthroats, slanderers, perverts, fanatics, hypocrites, and fools?"

"Do you think," said Martin, "that hawks have always eaten pigeons whenever they found them?"

"Yes, of course," said Candide.

"Well then," said Martin, "if hawks have always had the same nature, why would you think human beings have changed theirs?"

"Oh!" said Candide, "there's a huge difference, because free will --"

And arguing like this, they arrived at Bordeaux.
