CHAPTER XXII

What Happened to Candide and Martin in France


Candide stayed in Bordeaux only long enough to sell a few of those El Dorado pebbles and hire a good two-seat carriage, because he simply couldn't travel without his philosopher Martin. He was sorry to part with his llama, though, which he donated to the Bordeaux Academy of Sciences. The Academy made its prize question for that year: "Why is this llama's wool red?" The prize was awarded to a learned man from the North, who proved through a formula of A plus B minus C divided by Z that the llama had to be red, and would inevitably die of the mange.

Meanwhile, every traveler Candide met at the inns along his route said the same thing: "We're going to Paris." This universal eagerness eventually gave him the desire to see the capital too, and it wasn't really that far out of the way to Venice.

He entered Paris through the suburb of Saint-Marceau, and thought he was in the filthiest village in Westphalia.

Candide had barely checked into his inn when he came down with a minor illness, brought on by exhaustion. Since he had a very large diamond on his finger, and the inn staff had noticed a suspiciously heavy box among his luggage, two doctors appeared at his bedside -- though he'd never sent for them -- along with two devout women who helpfully warmed his broths.

"I remember," said Martin, "being sick in Paris on my first visit too. But I was dead broke, so I had no friends, no devout nurses, and no doctors -- and I recovered."

Between the medicine and the bloodletting, however, Candide's illness became serious. A local priest came around with great humility to request a bill of exchange payable to the bearer in the next world. (This was a confession certificate -- the clergy required the dying to obtain one, or they'd refuse to bury you.) Candide wanted nothing to do with it, but the devout women assured him it was the latest thing. He replied that he wasn't a man of fashion. Martin wanted to throw the priest out the window. The priest swore they wouldn't bury Candide without the certificate. Martin swore he'd bury the priest if he didn't stop being a nuisance. The argument escalated. Martin grabbed the priest by the shoulders and shoved him out the door -- which caused a tremendous scandal and a lawsuit.

Candide recovered, and during his convalescence he had very good company for dinner. They played cards for high stakes. Candide couldn't understand why the ace never turned up in his hand. Martin wasn't surprised in the least.

Among those who showed Candide the sights of the town was a little Abbe from Perigord -- one of those busybodies who are always on the alert, pushy, eager to please, fawning and accommodating. They hang around waiting for wealthy foreigners passing through the capital, feed them the latest scandals, and offer them entertainment at every price point. This one first took Candide and Martin to the Comedie-Francaise, where they were performing a new tragedy. Candide happened to be seated near some of the fashionable critics. This didn't stop him from weeping at the well-acted scenes. One of the critics beside him said during intermission:

"Your tears are completely misplaced. That actress is dreadful. The actor opposite her is even worse. And the play is worse than both of them. The author doesn't know a word of Arabic, yet the scene is set in Arabia. What's more, he's a man who doesn't believe in innate ideas. Tomorrow I'll bring you twenty pamphlets written against him."

"How many plays are there in France, sir?" Candide asked the Abbe.

"Five or six thousand."

"That's a lot!" said Candide. "How many are good?"

"Fifteen or sixteen," replied the other.

"That's a lot!" said Martin.

Candide was quite taken with an actress playing Queen Elizabeth in a somewhat mediocre tragedy that was revived now and then.

"That actress," he said to Martin, "really appeals to me. She looks a bit like Cunegonde. I'd love to pay her my respects."

The Abbe from Perigord offered to introduce him. Candide, having been raised in Germany, asked what the proper etiquette was, and how queens of England were treated in France.

"It depends," said the Abbe. "In the provinces, you take them to an inn. In Paris, you worship them when they're beautiful, and throw them in the gutter when they're dead."

"Queens in the gutter!" exclaimed Candide.

"It's absolutely true," said Martin. "The Abbe is right. I was in Paris when Mademoiselle Monime -- an actress famous for playing that role -- passed from this life to the next. She was refused what they call 'the honors of burial,' which is to say the honor of rotting alongside all the beggars of the neighborhood in a shabby cemetery. Instead, her theater company had to bury her alone at the corner of the Rue de Bourgogne -- which must have distressed her greatly, because she had a noble spirit."

"That's barbaric," said Candide.

"What can you do?" said Martin. "That's how these people are. Imagine every contradiction, every possible absurdity -- you'll find them all in the government, the courts, the churches, and the public entertainments of this ridiculous nation."

"Is it true that people in Paris are always laughing?" asked Candide.

"Yes," said the Abbe, "but through clenched teeth. They complain about everything with great bursts of laughter. They even commit the most detestable acts while laughing."

"Who," said Candide, "is that big pig who was saying such horrible things about the play that made me cry, and about the actors who gave me so much pleasure?"

"He's a professional hater," answered the Abbe, "who makes his living by trashing every play and every book. He despises anything that succeeds, the way a eunuch despises those who can enjoy themselves. He's one of those literary serpents who feed on dirt and venom -- a hack critic."

"What's a hack critic?" said Candide.

"It's a pamphleteer," said the Abbe. "A Freron." (Freron was a real critic whom Voltaire loathed.)

And so Candide, Martin, and the Abbe from Perigord chatted on the staircase, watching the audience file out after the performance.

"Even though I'm dying to see Cunegonde again," said Candide, "I wouldn't mind having supper with Mademoiselle Clairon. She seems absolutely wonderful."

The Abbe was not the kind of person who could get an introduction to Mademoiselle Clairon, who only kept the best company.

"She's engaged for the evening," he said, "but I'd be honored to take you to the home of a lady of quality, where you'll get to know Paris as if you'd lived here for years."

Candide, who was naturally curious, let himself be taken to this lady's house at the far end of the Faubourg Saint-Honore. The company was occupied with a game of faro. A dozen gloomy gamblers each held a small hand of cards -- the sad ledger of their losses. A deep silence reigned. The gamblers' faces were pale with tension, the banker's face tight with anxiety. The hostess, seated near the merciless banker, watched with hawk's eyes every doubled bet and every raised stake, noting each player who bent the corner of his cards to signal a higher wager. She made them straighten the bent edges again with strict but polite insistence, showing no irritation for fear of losing her customers. The lady insisted on being called the Marchioness of Parolignac. (The name suggests "parolling" -- a gambling term for doubling down.) Her daughter, fifteen years old, sat among the gamblers and silently tipped off her mother with a glance whenever some poor player tried to cheat to recover from his bad luck. The Abbe from Perigord, Candide, and Martin walked in. Nobody stood up, nobody greeted them, nobody even looked at them. Everyone was completely absorbed in their cards.

"The Baroness of Thunder-ten-Tronckh had better manners than this," said Candide.

The Abbe whispered to the Marchioness, who half rose, honored Candide with a gracious smile, gave Martin a condescending nod, and handed Candide a seat and a deck of cards. He lost fifty thousand francs in two hands. After that they had a very cheerful supper, and everyone was astonished that Candide didn't seem the least bit bothered by his losses. The servants whispered among themselves, in the way servants do:

"He must be some English lord."

Supper began the way most Parisian suppers do -- in silence -- followed by a jumble of indistinguishable chatter, then jokes that mostly fell flat, false news, bad arguments, a little politics, and a great deal of malicious gossip. They also discussed new books.

"Have you read," said the Abbe from Perigord, "the novel by that fellow Gauchat, the so-called doctor of theology?"

"Yes," answered one of the guests, "but I couldn't finish it. We're drowning in stupid books, but all of them put together can't match the sheer idiocy of Gauchat. I'm so overwhelmed by the flood of terrible books that I've been reduced to gambling at faro."

"And what about the collected essays of Archdeacon Trublet?" said the Abbe. "What do you think of those?"

"Oh!" said the Marchioness of Parolignac. "That insufferable bore! How tediously he tells you what everyone already knows! How ploddingly he discusses things that aren't worth mentioning in passing! How gracelessly he steals other people's wit! How he ruins what he plagiarizes! How he disgusts me! -- But he won't disgust me anymore. Reading a few pages of the Archdeacon was quite enough."

There was a man of taste at the table who backed up the Marchioness. The conversation turned to tragedies. The lady asked why there were certain tragedies that were occasionally performed but were unreadable. The man of taste explained very clearly how a play could hold your interest on stage and yet have almost no literary merit. He proved in a few words that it wasn't enough to throw in one or two of those dramatic situations you find in every novel, the kind that always hook an audience. You had to be original without being bizarre, often profound and always natural. You had to understand the human heart and make it speak. You had to be a great poet without making any character in the play sound like a poet. You had to know the language perfectly -- speak it with purity and flow, without ever letting the rhythm overwhelm the meaning.

"Anyone who ignores these rules," he added, "might produce a play or two that gets applause in the theater, but he'll never be counted among good writers. There are very few good tragedies. Some are just pastoral poems in dialogue form -- well written and nicely rhymed. Others are political lectures that put you to sleep, or overblown rants that drive you away. Others are the fever dreams of a lunatic, written in barbaric style, full of long speeches addressed to the gods because the author doesn't know how to speak to human beings -- stuffed with false wisdom and pompous cliches!"

Candide listened to this speech with great attention and formed a high opinion of the speaker. Since the Marchioness had taken care to seat Candide next to her, he leaned over and took the liberty of asking who that eloquent man was.

"He's a scholar," said the lady, "who doesn't gamble. The Abbe sometimes brings him to supper. He's an expert on tragedies and books, and he's written a tragedy that was booed off the stage, and a book that's never been seen outside his publisher's shop -- except for the copy he dedicated to me."

"A great man!" said Candide. "He's another Pangloss!"

Then, turning to the scholar, he said:

"Sir, you no doubt believe that everything is for the best in the physical and moral world, and that nothing could be otherwise than it is?"

"Me, sir?" answered the scholar. "I believe nothing of the sort. I find that everything goes wrong for me. Nobody knows his proper station in life, or his duty, or what he's doing, or what he should be doing. And except at supper -- which is always pleasant enough, and where people seem to get along -- the rest of the time is spent in pointless feuds: Jansenists against Molinists, Parliament against the Church, writers against writers, courtiers against courtiers, financiers against the people, wives against husbands, relatives against relatives. It's eternal war."

"I've seen worse," replied Candide. "But a wise man -- who later had the misfortune of being hanged -- taught me that all of this is wonderful. These are just shadows in a beautiful painting."

"Your hanged man was pulling everyone's leg," said Martin. "Those shadows are hideous stains."

"They're stains made by human beings," said Candide, "and you can't have a world without them."

"Then it's not their fault," said Martin.

Most of the gamblers, who understood none of this philosophical talk, were drinking. Martin continued his debate with the scholar, and Candide told some of his adventures to the hostess.

After supper, the Marchioness took Candide into her private sitting room and seated him on a sofa.

"So then!" she said. "You're desperately in love with Cunegonde of Thunder-ten-Tronckh?"

"Yes, madame," answered Candide.

The Marchioness replied with a tender smile:

"You answer like a young man from Westphalia. A Frenchman would have said, 'It's true that I once loved Cunegonde, but now that I see you, madame, I fear I love her no longer.'"

"Alas, madame," said Candide, "I'll say whatever you'd like me to say."

"Your passion for her," said the Marchioness, "began when you picked up her handkerchief. I'd like you to pick up my garter."

"With all my heart," said Candide. And he picked it up.

"But I'd like you to put it on me," said the lady.

And Candide put it on.

"You see," she said, "you're a foreigner. I sometimes make my Parisian lovers wait two whole weeks, but I'm giving myself to you on the very first night, because one must do the honors of one's country for a young man from Westphalia."

The lady, having noticed two enormous diamonds on the young foreigner's hands, praised them with such sincere admiration that they somehow migrated from Candide's fingers to hers.

On the way home with the Abbe from Perigord, Candide felt a pang of guilt for being unfaithful to Cunegonde. The Abbe was very sympathetic about his troubles. After all, the Abbe had only gotten a small cut of the fifty thousand francs Candide lost at cards, plus a share of the two diamond rings -- half-given, half-swindled. His plan was to milk the acquaintance of Candide for everything it was worth. He talked at length about Cunegonde, and Candide told him that when he saw her again in Venice, he would beg that beautiful woman's forgiveness for his infidelity.

The Abbe redoubled his politeness and his attentions, taking a tender interest in everything Candide said, everything he did, and everything he planned to do.

"So, sir, you have a rendezvous in Venice?"

"Yes, Monsieur Abbe," answered Candide. "I absolutely must go there to meet Cunegonde."

The pleasure of talking about the woman he loved led Candide to share, as was his habit, a good part of his adventures with the fair Westphalian.

"I imagine," said the Abbe, "that Cunegonde is a woman of great wit, and that she writes charming letters?"

"I've never received any from her," said Candide, "because after I was kicked out of the castle on her account, I had no way of writing to her. Then I heard she was dead. Then I found her alive. Then I lost her again. And now I've sent a messenger to her, two thousand five hundred leagues from here, and I'm waiting for an answer."

The Abbe listened attentively, and seemed lost in thought. He soon took his leave of the two foreigners, after the most affectionate goodbye.

The next morning, Candide received, upon waking, a letter that read as follows:

"My dearest love, I have been ill in this city for a week. I have learned that you are here. I would fly into your arms if I could move. I heard about your passing through Bordeaux, where I left faithful Cacambo and the old woman, who are to follow me soon. The Governor of Buenos Aires took everything, but I still have your heart. Come! Your presence will either give me new life or kill me with joy."

This charming, unhoped-for letter sent Candide into a frenzy of joy. The illness of his dear Cunegonde, on the other hand, crushed him with grief. Torn between these two emotions, he grabbed his gold and his diamonds and hurried with Martin to the hotel where Cunegonde was supposedly staying. He entered the room trembling, his heart pounding, his voice choked with sobs. He tried to open the bed curtains and called for a candle.

"Be careful!" said the maid. "The light hurts her eyes." And she immediately pulled the curtain shut again.

"My dear Cunegonde," said Candide, weeping, "how are you? If you can't see me, at least speak to me."

"She can't speak," said the maid.

The lady then extended a plump hand from behind the curtain. Candide bathed it with his tears, then filled it with diamonds, leaving a bag of gold on the armchair.

In the middle of this emotional scene, in burst a police officer, followed by the Abbe and a squad of soldiers.

"Those are the two suspicious foreigners," the officer said. And he immediately ordered them seized and hauled off to prison.

"This is not how travelers are treated in El Dorado," said Candide.

"I'm more of a Manichean now than ever," said Martin.

"But please, sir -- where are you taking us?" said Candide.

"To a dungeon," answered the officer.

Martin, having recovered his composure, figured out what had happened. The woman pretending to be Cunegonde was a fraud. The Abbe from Perigord was a con man who had exploited Candide's trusting nature at the first opportunity. And the officer was another crook who could easily be bought off.

Candide, taking Martin's advice and eager to get to the real Cunegonde rather than risk appearing before a judge, offered the officer three small diamonds, each worth about three thousand pistoles.

"Ah, sir!" said the man with the ivory baton. "Even if you'd committed every crime imaginable, you'd still be the most honorable man in the world to me. Three diamonds! Each worth three thousand pistoles! Sir, instead of dragging you off to jail, I'd lay down my life for you. There are orders to arrest all foreigners, but leave it to me. I have a brother in Dieppe, in Normandy. I'll take you there, and if you have a diamond for him, he'll take as good care of you as I would."

"And why," said Candide, "are all foreigners being arrested?"

"Because," the Abbe from Perigord chimed in, "some poor wretch from Artois heard some foolish talk, and it drove him to attempt an assassination -- not like the one in May of 1610, but like the one in December of 1594, and like various other attempts committed in various other years by various other wretches who'd listened to too much nonsense." (These were references to real assassination attempts on French kings -- the kind of thing that made the authorities paranoid about all outsiders.)

The officer explained what the Abbe meant.

"Monsters!" cried Candide. "What horrors, from a people who supposedly dance and sing all the time! Is there no way to get out of this country quickly -- this place where monkeys provoke tigers? I've seen bears in my homeland, but real human beings? Nowhere except El Dorado. In the name of God, sir, get me to Venice, where I'm supposed to meet Cunegonde."

"I can only take you as far as Lower Normandy," said the officer.

He immediately had Candide's handcuffs removed, admitted his mistake, dismissed his men, and set off with Candide and Martin for Dieppe, where he left them in his brother's care.

There was a small Dutch ship in the harbor. The brother from Normandy, who had been transformed by three more diamonds into the most obliging man alive, put Candide and his companion on board a vessel about to sail for Portsmouth, England.

This was not the way to Venice, but Candide felt he'd escaped from hell, and figured he'd find a way to get back on course to Venice soon enough.
