CHAPTER XXIII

Candide and Martin Reach the Coast of England, and What They Saw There


"Oh, Pangloss! Pangloss! Oh, Martin! Martin! Oh, my dear Cunegonde -- what kind of world is this?" said Candide aboard the Dutch ship.

"A deeply foolish and abominable one," said Martin.

"You know England. Are they as crazy there as in France?"

"It's a different kind of crazy," said Martin. "You know these two nations are at war over a few acres of snow in Canada, and that they're spending far more on this lovely war than all of Canada is worth. As for telling you precisely whether one country has more people who belong in a madhouse than the other -- that's beyond my limited intelligence. All I can tell you is that the people we're about to visit are extremely gloomy."

Chatting like this, they arrived at Portsmouth. The shore was packed with crowds of people, all staring intently at a well-dressed man kneeling on the deck of a warship in the harbor, his eyes blindfolded. Four soldiers stood facing him. Each one calmly fired three bullets into his head, and the whole crowd went home perfectly satisfied.

"What on earth is going on?" said Candide. "And what demon rules this country?"

He asked who the well-dressed man was who'd just been killed with so much ceremony. They told him it was an admiral. (This was Admiral Byng, executed by the British navy in 1757 for failing to engage the French fleet aggressively enough at the Battle of Minorca.)

"And why kill this admiral?"

"Because he didn't kill enough people himself. He fought a battle against a French admiral, and it was determined that he hadn't gotten close enough to the enemy."

"But," said Candide, "the French admiral was just as far from the English admiral as the English admiral was from the French!"

"Undeniably true," they told him. "But in this country, it's considered useful to shoot an admiral from time to time, to encourage the others."

Candide was so stunned and horrified by what he'd seen and heard that he wouldn't even set foot on shore. He struck a deal with the Dutch skipper -- even at the risk of being robbed the way the Surinam captain had robbed him -- to take him straight to Venice without delay.

The skipper was ready in two days. They sailed along the coast of France, passed within sight of Lisbon -- and Candide shuddered. They passed through the Straits of Gibraltar, entered the Mediterranean, and at last arrived in Venice.

"Thank God!" said Candide, embracing Martin. "This is where I'll see my beautiful Cunegonde again. I trust Cacambo like I trust myself. All is well, all will be well, everything is going as well as it possibly can."
