CHAPTER XXVII
Candide's Voyage to Constantinople


The faithful Cacambo had already convinced the Turkish captain -- the one hired to transport Sultan Achmet back to Constantinople -- to take Candide and Martin aboard as well. They all embarked after paying their respects to His Miserable Highness.

"You see," said Candide to Martin as they sailed, "we just had supper with six dethroned kings, and one of them was so broke that I had to give him charity. Maybe there are other princes out there even more unfortunate. But as for me, I've only lost a hundred llamas, and now I'm flying straight into Cunegonde's arms. My dear Martin, once again Pangloss was right: all is for the best."

"I wish that were true," said Martin.

"But you have to admit," said Candide, "that was a pretty strange adventure back in Venice. Nobody has ever seen or heard of six dethroned kings eating supper together at a public inn."

"That's no more extraordinary than most of the things that have happened to us," said Martin. "It's actually quite common for kings to be dethroned. And as for the honor of dining in their company -- that's really not worth thinking about."

As soon as Candide got on board the ship, he rushed to his old servant and friend Cacambo, and threw his arms around him.

"Well!" he said. "What's the news about Cunegonde? Is she still a stunning beauty? Does she still love me? How is she? You've bought her a palace in Constantinople, I'm sure."

"My dear master," replied Cacambo, "Cunegonde is washing dishes on the shore of the Sea of Marmara, working for a prince who has very few dishes to wash. She's a slave in the household of a former king named Ragotsky, who the Grand Turk allows three crowns a day in his exile. But what's worse is that she's lost her beauty and become horribly ugly."

"Well, beautiful or ugly," replied Candide, "I'm a man of honor, and it's my duty to love her no matter what. But how did she end up in such a miserable state? I sent five or six million with you!"

"Ah!" said Cacambo. "Didn't I have to give two million to Senor Don Fernando d'Ibaraa y Figueora y Mascarenes y Lampourdos y Souza, the Governor of Buenos Aires, just to get permission for Cunegonde to leave? And then didn't a pirate rob us of everything else? This pirate dragged us to Cape Matapan, to Milos, to Nicaria, to Samos, to Petra, to the Dardanelles, to Marmara, to Scutari. Cunegonde and the Old Woman are now servants of the prince I just mentioned, and I'm a slave to the dethroned Sultan."

"What an unbelievable chain of disasters!" cried Candide. "But I still have some diamonds left, and I should be able to buy Cunegonde's freedom easily enough. Though it is a shame she's gotten so ugly."

Then, turning to Martin, he said: "Who do you think has more reason to complain -- Sultan Achmet, Emperor Ivan, King Charles Edward, or me?"

"How should I know?" said Martin. "I'd have to see inside your hearts to answer that."

"Ah," said Candide, "if Pangloss were here, he'd know the answer."

"I have no idea," said Martin, "what kind of scale your Pangloss would use to weigh human misery and calculate everyone's sorrows. All I'll say is that there are millions of people on this earth with a hundred times more to complain about than King Charles Edward, Emperor Ivan, or Sultan Achmet."

"That may well be," said Candide.

Within a few days they reached the Bosphorus. Candide started by paying a steep ransom for Cacambo. Then, wasting no time, he and his companions boarded a galley and headed along the shore of the Sea of Marmara to search for Cunegonde, however ugly she might have become.

Among the galley slaves, there were two who rowed extremely badly, and the captain -- a Levantine -- would periodically crack a leather whip across their bare shoulders. Out of instinct, Candide found himself staring at these two slaves more intently than at the other rowers, and he moved closer with a sense of pity. Their faces, though badly disfigured, bore a faint resemblance to Pangloss and to that unfortunate Jesuit -- the Westphalian Baron, Cunegonde's brother. This thought moved and saddened him. He looked at them even more carefully.

"Honestly," he said to Cacambo, "if I hadn't seen Dr. Pangloss hanged with my own eyes, and if I hadn't had the misfortune of running the Baron through with a sword, I'd swear those two were rowing in this galley."

At the names "the Baron" and "Pangloss," the two galley slaves let out a tremendous cry, froze in their seats, and dropped their oars. The captain rushed over and redoubled the lashes from his whip.

"Stop! Stop, sir!" cried Candide. "I'll pay you whatever you want!"

"What! It's Candide!" said one of the slaves.

"What! It's Candide!" said the other.

"Am I dreaming?" cried Candide. "Am I awake? Am I really on a galley? Is that the Baron I killed? Is that Dr. Pangloss I saw hanged?"

"It's us! It's us!" they cried.

"Well, well!" said Martin. "So this is the great philosopher?"

"Captain," said Candide, "how much ransom do you want for Monsieur de Thunder-ten-Tronckh, one of the foremost barons of the Holy Roman Empire, and for Monsieur Pangloss, the most profound metaphysician in all of Germany?"

"You dog of a Christian," replied the Levantine captain, "since these two dogs of Christian slaves are barons and metaphysicians -- which I have no doubt are very distinguished titles in their country -- you'll pay me fifty thousand sequins."

"You'll have them, sir. Take me back to Constantinople at once and you'll get the money immediately. Actually -- no, take me to Cunegonde first."

But at Candide's very first offer, the Levantine captain had already turned the ship around and ordered the crew to row faster than a bird can fly.

Candide embraced the Baron and Pangloss a hundred times over.

"How is it possible, my dear Baron, that I didn't kill you? And my dear Pangloss, how are you alive after being hanged? And why are you both rowing in a Turkish galley?"

"Is it true that my dear sister is in this country?" asked the Baron.

"Yes," said Cacambo.

"So I see my dear Candide once more!" cried Pangloss.

Candide introduced Martin and Cacambo. They all embraced, they all talked at once. The galley flew across the water. They were already pulling into port.

Candide immediately sent for a diamond merchant, and sold him a gem worth a hundred thousand sequins for fifty thousand -- the man swearing by Abraham that he couldn't possibly pay a cent more. Candide promptly paid the ransom for both the Baron and Pangloss. Pangloss threw himself at his rescuer's feet and wept all over them. The Baron thanked him with a stiff nod and promised to pay him back at the first opportunity.

"But is it really possible that my sister is in Turkey?" he said.

"Absolutely," said Cacambo. "She's scrubbing dishes for a Transylvanian prince."

Candide immediately sent for two more diamond dealers, sold them some more gems, and then they all set off together in another galley to rescue Cunegonde.
