CHAPTER XXVIII
What Happened to Candide, Cunegonde, Pangloss, Martin, and the Rest


"Once again, I beg your pardon," said Candide to the Baron, "reverend father, for running you through with a sword."

"Let's not talk about it," said the Baron. "I was a little too hasty myself, I'll admit. But since you want to know how I ended up as a galley slave, here's the story. After the college surgeon patched up the wound you gave me, I was attacked and kidnapped by a squad of Spanish soldiers, who threw me into a prison in Buenos Aires -- right around the same time my sister was leaving. I applied to be sent back to Rome to the head of my Order. Instead, I was appointed chaplain to the French Ambassador in Constantinople. I'd been in that position barely a week when, one evening, I ran into a young ichoglan -- a page in the Sultan's household -- who happened to be a very handsome young man. The weather was hot. The young man decided to take a bath, and I took the opportunity to bathe as well. I had no idea it was a capital crime for a Christian to be found naked with a young Muslim. A judge sentenced me to a hundred blows on the soles of my feet and condemned me to the galleys. I don't think there has ever been a greater act of injustice. But I'd very much like to know how my sister ended up as a kitchen maid for a Transylvanian prince living in exile among the Turks."

"But you, my dear Pangloss," said Candide, "how is it possible that I'm looking at you right now?"

"It's true," said Pangloss, "that you saw me hanged. I was supposed to be burned, actually, but you may recall that it was raining extremely hard when they were about to roast me. The storm was so violent that they gave up trying to light the fire, so they hanged me instead, for lack of a better option. A surgeon bought my body, brought me home, and began to dissect me. He started by making a long incision from my navel to my collarbone. Now, it would be hard to find anyone who'd been more poorly hanged than I was. The executioner of the Holy Inquisition was a sub-deacon who was excellent at burning people but had no experience with hanging. The rope was wet and didn't slide properly, and on top of that, the knot was badly tied. In short, I was still breathing when the incision made me let out such a bloodcurdling scream that the surgeon fell flat on his back. Thinking he'd been dissecting the devil himself, he ran away in a panic and nearly killed himself falling down the stairs. His wife, hearing the commotion, came running from the next room. She saw me stretched out on the table with the incision gaping open. She was even more terrified than her husband, fled screaming, and tripped right over him. When they'd both calmed down a little, I heard the wife say to her husband: 'My dear, what were you thinking, trying to dissect a heretic? Don't you know these people always have the devil inside them? I'm going to fetch a priest to perform an exorcism this instant!' At that, I shuddered, and gathering what little strength I had left, I cried out: 'Have mercy on me!'

"Eventually the Portuguese barber -- because that's what the surgeon really was -- pulled himself together. He sewed up my wounds. His wife even nursed me. I was back on my feet in two weeks. The barber found me a position as a servant to a Knight of Malta who was heading to Venice. But when it turned out my master couldn't pay my wages, I switched to working for a Venetian merchant and followed him to Constantinople.

"One day I happened to step into a mosque, where I found nobody but an old imam and a very pretty young woman saying her prayers. Her neckline was quite low, and tucked between her breasts was a lovely bouquet of tulips, roses, anemones, buttercups, hyacinths, and primroses. She dropped her bouquet. I picked it up and placed it back with the deepest reverence. But I took so long about it that the imam got angry, and seeing that I was a Christian, he called for help. They dragged me before a judge, who sentenced me to a hundred lashes on the soles of my feet and sent me to the galleys. And by an extraordinary coincidence, I was chained to the very same galley and the very same bench as the Baron. On that galley there were also four young men from Marseilles, five Neapolitan priests, and two monks from Corfu, who told us that this sort of thing happened all the time. The Baron insisted that he'd suffered a greater injustice than I had. I maintained that it was far more innocent to put a bouquet back on a woman's chest than to be found stark naked with a Sultan's page. We argued about it constantly, and got twenty lashes with a leather whip apiece, until the great chain of universal events brought you to our galley and you were kind enough to pay our ransom."

"Well, my dear Pangloss," said Candide, "when you'd been hanged, dissected, beaten, and chained to an oar -- did you still think that everything happens for the best?"

"I stand by my original position," replied Pangloss. "After all, I'm a philosopher, and it wouldn't be right for me to contradict myself. Leibniz couldn't possibly have been wrong. Besides, pre-established harmony is the most beautiful idea in the world -- along with the plenum and subtle matter."
