CHAPTER XXIX
How Candide Found Cunegonde and the Old Woman Again


While Candide, the Baron, Pangloss, Martin, and Cacambo were all telling their stories, debating whether the events of the universe were contingent or inevitable, arguing about causes and effects, about moral evil and physical evil, about free will and necessity, and about what consolation a person could possibly find while chained to an oar in a Turkish galley -- they arrived at the house of the Transylvanian prince on the shores of the Sea of Marmara.

The first thing they saw was Cunegonde and the Old Woman hanging towels out to dry.

The Baron went pale. Candide -- that tender, loving soul -- looked at his beautiful Cunegonde and saw that she was sun-scorched, her eyes were bloodshot, her neck was shriveled, her cheeks were wrinkled, and her arms were rough and red. He recoiled three steps in horror, then stepped forward again out of basic courtesy. She embraced Candide and her brother. They embraced the Old Woman. Candide paid to free them both.

There was a small farm nearby, and the Old Woman suggested that Candide rent it as a temporary arrangement until the group could figure out something better. Cunegonde had no idea she'd become ugly -- nobody had told her -- and she reminded Candide of his promise to marry her in such a forceful tone that the poor man didn't dare refuse. He therefore informed the Baron that he intended to marry his sister.

"I will not tolerate," said the Baron, "such a disgrace on her part and such an insult on yours. I will never live with that scandal. My sister's children would never be admitted to the noble chapters of Germany. No -- my sister shall marry nothing less than a baron of the Empire."

Cunegonde threw herself at his feet and soaked them with tears. He was unmoved.

"You idiot," said Candide. "I rescued you from the galleys. I paid your ransom, and your sister's too. She was scrubbing dishes, and she's very ugly, and yet I'm generous enough to still marry her -- and you're going to try to stop me? If I listened to my anger, I'd kill you all over again."

"You can kill me again if you like," said the Baron, "but you will not marry my sister as long as I'm alive."
