CHAPTER XXX
The Conclusion


Deep down, Candide had no real desire to marry Cunegonde. But the Baron's outrageous stubbornness made him determined to go through with it, and Cunegonde was pressing him so hard that he couldn't go back on his word. He consulted Pangloss, Martin, and the faithful Cacambo. Pangloss drafted an elegant legal brief proving that the Baron had no authority over his sister, and that under all the laws of the Empire, she was entitled to marry Candide in a left-handed marriage (that is, a marriage where a noblewoman weds a commoner without her husband gaining her rank). Martin's suggestion was to throw the Baron into the sea. Cacambo proposed sending him back to the galley captain and then shipping him off to the Father General of the Jesuit Order in Rome on the first available vessel. This plan was unanimously approved. The Old Woman endorsed it. They didn't breathe a word to his sister. The whole thing was carried out for a modest sum, and they had the double satisfaction of trapping a Jesuit and punishing the arrogance of a German baron.

You'd naturally think that after so many disasters, Candide -- now married and living with the philosopher Pangloss, the philosopher Martin, the resourceful Cacambo, and the Old Woman, and still in possession of a good many diamonds from the land of the ancient Incas -- would be leading a perfectly happy life. But the diamond merchants had cheated him so thoroughly that he had almost nothing left except his little farm. His wife grew uglier by the day and became more shrewish and impossible to live with. The Old Woman was falling apart physically and was even more irritable than Cunegonde. Cacambo, who worked in the garden and hauled vegetables to sell in Constantinople, was exhausted from the labor and cursed his fate. Pangloss was miserable because he couldn't shine at some German university. As for Martin, he was firmly convinced that a person would be equally miserable anywhere, so he bore it all with patience.

Candide, Martin, and Pangloss would sometimes argue about morals and metaphysics. From the windows of the farm, they often watched boats sail past carrying government officials -- Effendis, Pashas, and judges -- on their way to exile in Lemnos, Mytilene, or Erzurum. And they'd see other officials -- fresh judges, Pashas, and Effendis -- arriving to replace the exiles, only to be exiled themselves in turn. They saw severed heads, neatly impaled on stakes, being transported for display at the Sublime Porte. These spectacles fueled even more philosophical debates. And when they weren't arguing, time hung so heavily on their hands that one day the Old Woman dared to say:

"I'd like to know which is worse: to be raped a hundred times by pirates, to have a buttock sliced off, to run the gauntlet in a Bulgarian regiment, to be flogged and hanged at an auto-da-fe, to be dissected, to row in the galleys -- in short, to go through every misery we've all suffered -- or to just sit here with nothing to do?"

"That," said Candide, "is a very good question."

This remark sparked a new round of reflections. Martin, in particular, concluded that human beings were born to live in either a state of constant anxiety or one of deadening boredom. Candide didn't entirely agree, but he didn't offer an alternative. Pangloss admitted that he'd suffered horribly his whole life, but since he'd once declared that everything was going wonderfully, he continued to declare it -- even though he no longer believed it.

Something happened that confirmed Martin in his grim philosophy, left Candide more bewildered than ever, and stumped even Pangloss. One day, Paquette and Friar Giroflee showed up at the farm, absolutely destitute. They'd burned through their three thousand piastres in no time, broken up, gotten back together, fought again, been thrown in jail, escaped, and Friar Giroflee had eventually converted to Islam. Paquette had gone on plying her trade wherever she went, but it no longer earned her anything.

"I told you so," said Martin to Candide. "I knew your gifts would be squandered and would only make them more miserable. You and Cacambo once rolled in millions, and you're no happier than Friar Giroflee and Paquette."

"Ha!" said Pangloss to Paquette. "So Providence has brought you back to us, my poor girl! Do you realize you cost me the tip of my nose, one eye, and an ear? Just look at you. Just look at me. What a world this is!"

And this new development set them all philosophizing more than ever.

In the neighborhood there lived a very famous Dervish, widely considered the wisest philosopher in all of Turkey. They decided to go consult him. Pangloss was the spokesman.

"Master," he said, "we've come to ask you why such a strange creature as man was ever created."

"Why are you asking me?" said the Dervish. "Is that any of your business?"

"But reverend father," said Candide, "there is a terrible amount of evil in this world."

"What difference does it make," said the Dervish, "whether there's evil or good? When the Sultan sends a ship to Egypt, do you think he worries about whether the mice in the hold are comfortable?"

"Then what should we do?" asked Pangloss.

"Shut your mouth," said the Dervish.

"I was hoping," said Pangloss, "to discuss with you the nature of cause and effect, the best of all possible worlds, the origin of evil, the nature of the soul, and pre-established harmony."

At these words, the Dervish slammed the door in their faces.

While this conversation was taking place, word spread that two Viziers and the Grand Mufti had just been strangled in Constantinople, and that several of their associates had been impaled. This catastrophe was the talk of the town for a few hours. On their way back to the little farm, Pangloss, Candide, and Martin passed a kindly old man who was enjoying the fresh air at his front door, sitting in the shade of an orange grove. Pangloss, who was as curious as he was talkative, asked the old man the name of the Mufti who'd just been strangled.

"I have no idea," said the old man. "I've never known the name of any Mufti, or any Vizier, for that matter. The event you're describing means nothing to me. I generally assume that people who get involved in public affairs sometimes come to a bad end, and that they deserve it. But I never concern myself with what's happening in Constantinople. I'm satisfied with sending the fruits of my garden there to sell."

Having said this, he invited the strangers into his home. His two sons and two daughters served them several kinds of sherbet they'd made themselves, along with kaimak flavored with candied citrus peel, oranges, lemons, pineapples, pistachios, and Mocha coffee -- real Mocha coffee, not the watered-down stuff from Batavia or the Caribbean. After the meal, the old man's two daughters perfumed the visitors' beards.

"You must have a magnificent estate," said Candide to the old Turk.

"I have only twenty acres," replied the old man. "My children and I work them ourselves. And our labor keeps us free from three great evils: boredom, vice, and poverty."

On the walk home, Candide reflected deeply on the old man's words.

"That honest Turk," he said to Pangloss and Martin, "seems to have made himself a life far better than anything those six kings we dined with could dream of."

"Greatness," said Pangloss, "is extremely dangerous, according to all the philosophers. After all, Eglon, King of Moab, was assassinated by Ehud. Absalom was hanged by his hair and stabbed with three spears. King Nadab, son of Jeroboam, was killed by Baasha. King Elah was killed by Zimri. Ahaziah was killed by Jehu. Athaliah was killed by Jehoiada. Kings Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, and Zedekiah were all dragged off into captivity. And you know what happened to Croesus, Astyages, Darius, Dionysius of Syracuse, Pyrrhus, Perseus, Hannibal, Jugurtha, Ariovistus, Caesar, Pompey, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Richard II of England, Edward II, Henry VI, Richard III, Mary Queen of Scots, Charles I, the three King Henrys of France, and Emperor Henry IV! You know --"

"I also know," said Candide, "that we must cultivate our garden."

"You're right," said Pangloss, "because when man was first placed in the Garden of Eden, he was put there _ut operaretur eum_ -- to work it. Which proves that man was not born to sit around doing nothing."

"Let's work," said Martin, "without arguing about it. It's the only way to make life bearable."

The whole little community embraced this worthy plan, and everyone contributed according to their abilities. The small plot of land produced plentiful crops. Cunegonde was, admittedly, very ugly -- but she turned out to be an excellent pastry cook. Paquette took up embroidery. The Old Woman handled the laundry. Everyone was useful, even Friar Giroflee -- he became a fine carpenter and, eventually, a genuinely decent person.

From time to time, Pangloss would say to Candide:

"There is a chain of events in this best of all possible worlds: because if you hadn't been kicked out of a magnificent castle for the love of Cunegonde, and if you hadn't been arrested by the Inquisition, and if you hadn't wandered across the Americas, and if you hadn't run the Baron through with your sword, and if you hadn't lost all your llamas from the wonderful land of El Dorado -- you wouldn't be sitting here right now, eating candied citrus and pistachios."

"All that is very well," answered Candide, "but let us cultivate our garden."
