Preface to the Fourth Edition

The chief alterations since the First Edition have been made in the Chapter on "Classification" (Chapters II and III) and in the Book on "Propositions" (Chapters I to III). The chief additions have been the questions on words and phrases added to the Examination Papers in Chapter II, and the Notes inserted in the Notes and in the section Addressed to Teachers.

In Book I, Chapter II, I have adopted a new definition of "Classification" which lets me treat the whole Universe as a "Class", and so do away with the very awkward phrase "a Set of Things".

In the Chapter on "Propositions of Existence" I have adopted a new "normal form", in which the Class whose existence is affirmed or denied is treated as the Predicate of the Proposition rather than its Subject. This sidesteps a very subtle difficulty that besets the other form.

Difficulties of this subtle kind seem to lie at the root of every Tree of Knowledge, and they are far more hopeless to grapple with than any that turn up in its higher branches. The difficulties of Euclid's Forty-Seventh Proposition, for instance, are mere child's play beside the mental torture of trying to think out the essential nature of a straight Line. And in the present work, the difficulties of the "5 Liars" Problem in the section Addressed to Teachers are "trifles, light as air" beside the bewildering question "What is a Thing?"

In the Chapter on "Propositions of Relation" I have added a new Section containing the proof that a Proposition beginning with "All" is a Double Proposition — a fact quite independent of the arbitrary rule, laid down in the next Section, that such a Proposition is to be understood as implying that its Subject actually exists. In the earlier editions this proof was given only incidentally, in the course of the discussion of the Biliteral Diagram; but its proper place in a treatise like this is where I have now put it.

In the Sorites Examples I have made a good many changes of wording, in order to get round a difficulty which I fear will have puzzled some Readers of the first three Editions. Some of the Premisses were worded in such a way that their Terms were not Species of the Univ. named in the Dictionary, but of a larger Class of which the Univ. was only a part. In every such case it was intended that the Reader should see that whatever was asserted of the larger Class was thereby asserted of the Univ., and should ignore as superfluous whatever it asserted about the rest of that larger Class.

Thus in Example 15 the Univ. was given as "ducks in this village", and the third Premiss was "Mrs. Bond has no gray ducks" — that is, "No gray ducks are ducks belonging to Mrs. Bond." Here the Terms are not Species of the Univ. but of the larger Class "ducks", of which the Univ. is only a part. What was intended was that the Reader should see that what is asserted here of "ducks" is thereby asserted of "ducks in this village", and should treat the Premiss as though it read "Mrs. Bond has no gray ducks in this village" — ignoring as superfluous what it asserts about the other part of the Class "ducks", namely that "Mrs. Bond has no gray ducks outside this village".

In the Appendix I have given a new version of the Problem of the "Five Liars". My object in doing so is to escape the subtle and mysterious difficulties that beset every attempt to treat a Proposition as being its own Subject, or a Set of Propositions as being Subjects for one another.

It is certainly a most bewildering and unsatisfactory theory. One cannot help feeling that there is a great lack of substance in all this shadowy host — that as the procession of phantoms glides past, there is not one of them we can pounce on and say "Here is a Proposition that must be either true or false!" — that it is only a Barmecide Feast we have been invited to, and that its true prototype is that mythical island whose inhabitants "earned a precarious living by taking in each other's washing".

By the simple device of translating "telling 2 Truths" into "taking both of 2 condiments (salt and mustard)", "telling 2 Lies" into "taking neither of them", and "telling a Truth and a Lie, in unspecified order" into "taking only one condiment, it not being specified which", I have escaped all those metaphysical puzzles — and have produced a Problem which, once translated into a Set of symbolized Premisses, supplies exactly the same Data as the Problem of the "Five Liars" did.

The coined words introduced in earlier editions, such as "Eliminands" and "Retinends", hardly need any apology: they were indispensable to my system. But the new plural used here for the first time, "Soriteses", will I fear be condemned as bad English unless I say a word in its defence. We have three singular nouns in English of plural form — "series", "species" and "Sorites" — and in all three the awkwardness of using the same word for both singular and plural must often have been felt. In the case of "series" this has been remedied by coining the plural "serieses", which has already found its way into the dictionaries. So I am no rash innovator; I am merely following suit in using the new plural "Soriteses".

In conclusion, let me point out that even those who are obliged to study Formal Logic with a view to answering Examination Papers in it will find the study of Symbolic Logic a great help — throwing light on many of the obscurities in which Formal Logic abounds, and providing a delightfully easy way of testing the results arrived at by the cumbrous processes Formal Logic imposes on its devotees.

This is, I believe, the very first attempt that has been made to popularise this fascinating subject — with the exception of my own little book, The Game of Logic, published in 1886, which was a very incomplete performance. It has cost me years of hard work. But if it should prove, as I hope it may, to be of real service to the young, and to be taken up in High Schools and in private families as a valuable addition to their stock of healthy mental recreations, such a result would more than repay ten times the labour I have spent on it.

L. C.

29, Bedford Street, Strand.
Christmas, 1896.
