To Learners

[Note: some remarks addressed to Teachers will be found in the Appendix.]

The Learner who wants to test the question fairly — whether this little book does or does not supply the materials for a thoroughly interesting mental recreation — is earnestly advised to adopt the following Rules.

(1) Begin at the beginning, and do not let yourself indulge mere idle curiosity by dipping into the book here and there. That would very likely lead to your throwing it aside with the remark "This is much too hard for me!", and so losing the chance of adding a very large item to your stock of mental delights.

This Rule about not dipping is a good one with other kinds of book as well — novels, for instance, where you can easily spoil much of the enjoyment you would otherwise get from the story by dipping in further on, so that what the author meant to be a pleasant surprise reaches you as a matter of course. Some people, I know, make a practice of looking into Volume III first, just to see how the story ends: and perhaps it is as well to know in advance that all ends happily — that the much-persecuted lovers do marry after all, that he is proved entirely innocent of the murder, that the wicked cousin is completely foiled in his plot and gets the punishment he deserves, and that the rich uncle in India (Question: why in India? Answer: because somehow uncles never can get rich anywhere else) dies at exactly the right moment — before taking the trouble to read Volume I.

This, I say, is just permissible with a novel, where Volume III means something even to those who have not read the earlier part of the story. But with a scientific book it is sheer insanity: you will find the later part hopelessly unintelligible if you read it before reaching it in the regular course.

(2) Do not begin any fresh Chapter, or Section, until you are certain that you thoroughly understand the whole book up to that point, and that you have worked correctly most if not all of the examples set. So long as you are conscious that all the land you have passed through is absolutely conquered, and that you are leaving no unsolved difficulties behind you — which will be sure to turn up again later — your triumphal progress will be easy and delightful. Otherwise you will find your state of puzzlement getting worse and worse as you go on, until you give up the whole thing in utter disgust.

(3) When you come to a passage you do not understand, read it again. If you still do not understand it, read it again. If you fail even after three readings, very likely your brain is getting a little tired. In that case put the book away and take up something else; and next day, coming to it fresh, you will very likely find it quite easy.

(4) If possible, find some genial friend who will read the book along with you and talk the difficulties over with you. Talking is a wonderful smoother-over of difficulties. When I come upon anything — in Logic, or in any other hard subject — that entirely puzzles me, I find it a capital plan to talk it over aloud, even when I am quite alone. One can explain things so clearly to oneself! And then, you know, one is so patient with oneself: one never gets irritated at one's own stupidity!

If, dear Reader, you will faithfully observe these Rules, and so give my little book a really fair trial, I promise you most confidently that you will find Symbolic Logic to be one of the most fascinating of mental recreations — if not the most fascinating of all.

In this First Part I have carefully avoided every difficulty that seemed to me beyond the grasp of an intelligent child of, say, twelve or fourteen. I have taught most of its contents myself, out loud, to a good many children, and have found them take a real and intelligent interest in the subject. For those who succeed in mastering Part I, and who begin, like Oliver, "asking for more", I hope to provide in Part II some tolerably hard nuts to crack — nuts that will need every nutcracker they happen to possess.

Mental recreation is something we all need for our mental health, and you can certainly get a great deal of healthy enjoyment out of games such as backgammon, chess, and the new game "Halma". But after all, when you have made yourself a first-rate player at any one of these games, you have nothing real to show for it as a result. You enjoyed the game, and the victory, no doubt, at the time; but you have no result you can store up and get real good out of. And all the while you have been leaving a perfect mine of wealth unexplored.

Once master the machinery of Symbolic Logic and you have a mental occupation always at hand, of absorbing interest, and one that will be of real use to you in any subject you may take up. It will give you clearness of thought — the ability to see your way through a puzzle — the habit of arranging your ideas in an orderly and get-at-able form — and, more valuable than all of these, the power to detect fallacies, and to tear to pieces the flimsy illogical arguments you will meet with so continually in books, in newspapers, in speeches, and even in sermons, and which so easily take in those who have never troubled to master this fascinating Art.

Try it. That is all I ask of you.

L. C.

29, Bedford Street, Strand.
February 21, 1896.
