Book One, Chapter II: Classification

"Classification", or the forming of Classes, is a Mental Process in which we imagine that we have put certain Things together in a group. Such a group is called a "Class".

The Process can be carried out in three different ways.

(1) We may imagine that we have put together all Things. The Class so formed — that is, the Class "Things" — contains the whole Universe.

(2) We may think of the Class "Things", and imagine that we have picked out of it all the Things possessing a certain Adjunct which the whole Class does not possess. That Adjunct is said to be "peculiar" to the Class so formed. In this case the Class "Things" is called a "Genus" with regard to the new Class; the new Class is called a "Species" of the Class "Things"; and its peculiar Adjunct is called its "Differentia".

Since the Process is entirely Mental, we can carry it out whether or not there is any existing Thing that possesses the Adjunct. If there is, the Class is said to be "Real"; if not, it is said to be "Unreal", or "Imaginary".

[For example, we may imagine that we have picked out, from the Class "Things", all the Things possessing the Adjunct "material, artificial, consisting of houses and streets"; and we thus form the Real Class "towns". Here we may regard "Things" as a Genus, "Towns" as a Species of Things, and "material, artificial, consisting of houses and streets" as its Differentia.

[Again, we may imagine that we have picked out all the Things possessing the Adjunct "weighing a ton, easily lifted by a baby"; and we thus form the Imaginary Class "Things that weigh a ton and are easily lifted by a baby".]]

(3) We may think of some Class other than the Class "Things", and imagine that we have picked out of it all its Members possessing a certain Adjunct which the whole Class does not possess. That Adjunct is said to be "peculiar" to the smaller Class so formed. In this case the Class we thought of is called a "Genus" with regard to the smaller Class picked out of it; the smaller Class is called a "Species" of the larger; and its peculiar Adjunct is called its "Differentia".

[For example, we may think of the Class "towns", and imagine that we have picked out of it all the towns possessing the Attribute "lit with gas"; and we thus form the Real Class "towns lit with gas". Here we may regard "Towns" as a Genus, "Towns lit with gas" as a Species of Towns, and "lit with gas" as its Differentia.

[If, in the example above, we changed "lit with gas" into "paved with gold", we should get the Imaginary Class "towns paved with gold".]]

A Class containing only one Member is called an "Individual".

[For example, the Class "towns having four million inhabitants", which contains only one Member, namely "London".]

Hence any single Thing that we can name so as to distinguish it from all other Things may be regarded as a one-Member Class.

[Thus "London" may be regarded as the one-Member Class picked out of the Class "towns", having as its Differentia "having four million inhabitants".]

A Class containing two or more Members is sometimes regarded as one single Thing. Regarded that way, it may possess an Adjunct that no Member of it possesses on its own.

[Thus the Class "the soldiers of the Tenth Regiment", regarded as one single Thing, may possess the Attribute "formed in square", which no Member of it possesses on his own.]
