Book One, Chapter III: Division

§ 1

Introductory

"Division" is a Mental Process in which we think of a certain Class of Things and imagine that we have divided it into two or more smaller Classes.

[Thus we might think of the Class "books" and imagine that we had divided it into the two smaller Classes "bound books" and "unbound books"; or into the three Classes "books priced at less than a shilling", "shilling-books", "books priced at more than a shilling"; or into the twenty-six Classes "books whose names begin with A", "books whose names begin with B", and so on.]

A Class obtained by a certain Division is said to be "codivisional" with every Class obtained by that same Division.

[Thus the Class "bound books" is codivisional with each of the two Classes "bound books" and "unbound books".

[Similarly, the Battle of Waterloo may be said to have been "contemporary" with every event that happened in 1815.]]

Hence a Class obtained by Division is codivisional with itself.

[Thus the Class "bound books" is codivisional with itself.

[Similarly, the Battle of Waterloo may be said to have been "contemporary" with itself.]]

§ 2

Dichotomy

If we think of a certain Class and imagine that we have picked a smaller Class out of it, then plainly the Remainder of the large Class does not possess the Differentia of that smaller Class. Hence the Remainder may be regarded as another smaller Class, whose Differentia can be made out of the first one by putting the word "not" in front of it; and we may imagine that we have divided the Class we first thought of into two smaller Classes whose Differentiae are contradictory. This kind of Division is called "Dichotomy".

[For example, we may divide "books" into the two Classes whose Differentiae are "old" and "not-old".]

In carrying out this Process we may sometimes find that the Attributes we have chosen are used so loosely in ordinary conversation that it is not easy to decide which Things belong to the one Class and which to the other. In such a case we should have to lay down some arbitrary rule about where the one Class ends and the other begins.

[Thus, in dividing "books" into "old" and "not-old", we may say "Let all books printed before A.D. 1801 count as 'old', and all others as 'not-old'."]

From here on, let it be understood that if a Class of Things is divided into two Classes whose Differentiae have contrary meanings, each Differentia is to be regarded as equivalent to the other with the word "not" put in front of it.

[Thus, if "books" is divided into "old" and "new", the Attribute "old" is to be regarded as equivalent to "not-new", and the Attribute "new" as equivalent to "not-old".]

Having divided a Class by the Process of Dichotomy into two smaller Classes, we may then sub-divide each of those into two smaller Classes still; and this Process may be repeated over and over again, the number of Classes doubling at each repetition.

[For example, we may divide "books" into "old" and "new" (that is, "not-old"); we may then sub-divide each of these into "English" and "foreign" (that is, "not-English"), and so get four Classes, namely

[(1) old English;
(2) old foreign;
(3) new English;
(4) new foreign.]

[If we had begun by dividing into "English" and "foreign", and had then sub-divided into "old" and "new", the four Classes would have been]

[(1) English old;
(2) English new;
(3) foreign old;
(4) foreign new.]

[The Reader will easily see that these are the very same four Classes as before.]]
