Book One, Chapter IV: Names

The word "Thing", which conveys the idea of a Thing without any idea of an Adjunct, represents any single Thing. Any other word (or phrase) which conveys the idea of a Thing together with the idea of an Adjunct represents any Thing that possesses that Adjunct — that is, it represents any Member of the Class to which that Adjunct is peculiar.

Such a word (or phrase) is called a "Name"; and if there is an existing Thing which it represents, it is said to be a Name of that Thing.

[For example, the words "Thing", "Treasure", "Town", and the phrases "valuable Thing", "material artificial Thing consisting of houses and streets", "Town lit with gas", "Town paved with gold", "old English Book".]

Just as a Class is said to be Real or Unreal according as there is or is not an existing Thing in it, so a Name is said to be Real or Unreal according as there is or is not an existing Thing that it represents.

[Thus "Town lit with gas" is a Real Name; "Town paved with gold" is an Unreal Name.]

Every Name is either a Substantive on its own, or else a phrase made up of a Substantive and one or more Adjectives (or phrases doing the work of Adjectives).

Every Name except "Thing" can usually be expressed in three different forms:

(a) The Substantive "Thing", plus one or more Adjectives (or phrases doing the work of Adjectives) conveying the ideas of the Attributes;

(b) A Substantive conveying the idea of a Thing together with the ideas of some of the Attributes, plus one or more Adjectives (or phrases doing the work of Adjectives) conveying the ideas of the rest;

(c) A Substantive conveying the idea of a Thing together with the ideas of all the Attributes.

[Thus the phrase "material living Thing, belonging to the Animal Kingdom, having two hands and two feet" is a Name expressed in Form (a).

[If we choose to roll up together the Substantive "Thing" and the Adjectives "material, living, belonging to the Animal Kingdom" so as to make the new Substantive "Animal", we get the phrase "Animal having two hands and two feet", which is a Name — representing the same Thing as before — expressed in Form (b).]

[And if we choose to roll the whole phrase up into one word so as to make the new Substantive "Man", we get a Name, still representing the very same Thing, expressed in Form (c).]]

A Name whose Substantive is in the plural may be used to represent either

(1) Members of a Class, regarded as separate Things;
or (2) a whole Class, regarded as one single Thing.

[Thus, when I say "Some soldiers of the Tenth Regiment are tall", or "The soldiers of the Tenth Regiment are brave", I am using the Name "soldiers of the Tenth Regiment" in the first sense; it is just as if I were pointing at each of them separately and saying "This soldier of the Tenth Regiment is tall", "That soldier of the Tenth Regiment is tall", and so on.

[But when I say "The soldiers of the Tenth Regiment are formed in square", I am using the phrase in the second sense; it is just as if I were saying "The Tenth Regiment is formed in square".]]
