Book Two, Chapter I: Propositions Generally

§ 1

Introductory

Note that from here on the word "some" is to be taken as meaning "one or more".

The word "Proposition", as used in ordinary conversation, may be applied to any word or phrase that conveys information of any kind whatever.

[Thus the words "yes" and "no" are Propositions in the ordinary sense of the word; and so are the phrases "you owe me five farthings" and "I don't!"

[Words like "oh!" or "never!", and phrases like "fetch me that book!" or "which book do you mean?", do not seem at first sight to convey any information; but they can easily be turned into equivalent forms that do, namely "I am surprised", "I will never consent to it", "I order you to fetch me that book", "I want to know which book you mean".]]

But a "Proposition", as used in this First Part of Symbolic Logic, has a peculiar form which may be called its "Normal form"; and if a Proposition we want to use in an argument is not in normal form, we must reduce it to that form before we can use it.

A "Proposition" in normal form asserts, of two particular Classes called its "Subject" and its "Predicate", either

(1) that some Members of its Subject are Members of its Predicate;

or (2) that no Members of its Subject are Members of its Predicate;

or (3) that all Members of its Subject are Members of its Predicate.

The Subject and the Predicate of a Proposition are called its "Terms".

Two Propositions that convey the same information are said to be "equivalent".

[Thus the two Propositions "I see John" and "John is seen by me" are equivalent.]

§ 2

Normal form of a Proposition

A Proposition in normal form has four parts:

(1) The word "some", or "no", or "all". (This word, which tells us how many Members of the Subject are also Members of the Predicate, is called the "Sign of Quantity".)

(2) Name of Subject.

(3) The verb "are" (or "is"). (This is called the "Copula".)

(4) Name of Predicate.

§ 3

Various kinds of Propositions

A Proposition beginning with "Some" is said to be "Particular". It is also called "a Proposition in I".

[Note that it is called "Particular" because it refers to a part of the Subject only.]

A Proposition beginning with "No" is said to be "Universal Negative". It is also called "a Proposition in E".

A Proposition beginning with "All" is said to be "Universal Affirmative". It is also called "a Proposition in A".

[Note that these are called "Universal" because they refer to the whole of the Subject.]

A Proposition whose Subject is an Individual is to be regarded as Universal.

[Take as an example the Proposition "John is not well". This of course implies that there is an Individual whom the speaker means when he says "John", and whom the listener knows to be meant. Hence the Class "men referred to by the speaker when he says 'John'" is a one-Member Class, and the Proposition is equivalent to "All the men who are referred to by the speaker when he says 'John' are not well".]

Propositions are of two kinds: "Propositions of Existence" and "Propositions of Relation". They shall be discussed separately.
