Book Three, Chapter I: Symbols and Cells

First, let us suppose that the Diagram above is an enclosure assigned to a certain Class of Things which we have chosen as our "Universe of Discourse", or, more briefly, our "Univ."

[For example, we might say "Let Univ. be 'books'"; and we might imagine the Diagram to be a large table assigned to all "books".]

[The Reader is strongly advised, in reading this Chapter, not to keep looking back at the Diagram above, but to draw a large one for himself with no letters on it, to have it beside him as he reads, and to keep his finger on whichever part of it he is reading about.]

Secondly, let us suppose that we have chosen a certain Adjunct, which we may call "x", and have divided the large Class to which we assigned the whole Diagram into the two smaller Classes whose Differentiae are "x" and "not-x" (which we may call "x′"); and that we have assigned the North Half of the Diagram to the one — which we may call "the Class of x-Things", or "the x-Class" — and the South Half to the other, which we may call "the Class of x′-Things", or "the x′-Class".

[For example, we might say "Let x mean 'old', so that x′ will mean 'new'", and we might suppose that we had divided books into the two Classes whose Differentiae are "old" and "new", and had assigned the North Half of the table to "old books" and the South Half to "new books".]

Thirdly, let us suppose that we have chosen another Adjunct, which we may call "y", and have subdivided the x-Class into the two Classes whose Differentiae are "y" and "y′"; and that we have assigned the North-West Cell to the one, which we may call "the xy-Class", and the North-East Cell to the other, which we may call "the xy′-Class".

[For example, we might say "Let y mean 'English', so that y′ will mean 'foreign'", and we might suppose that we had subdivided "old books" into the two Classes whose Differentiae are "English" and "foreign", and had assigned the North-West Cell to "old English books" and the North-East Cell to "old foreign books".]

Fourthly, let us suppose that we have subdivided the x′-Class in the same way, and have assigned the South-West Cell to the x′y-Class and the South-East Cell to the x′y′-Class.

[For example, we might suppose that we had subdivided "new books" into the two Classes "new English books" and "new foreign books", and had assigned the South-West Cell to the one and the South-East Cell to the other.]

Plainly, if we had begun by dividing for y and y′ and had then subdivided for x and x′, we should have got the same four Classes. Hence we see that we have assigned the West Half to the y-Class and the East Half to the y′-Class.

[Figure 2: The same square with the four Cells filled in for the book example — old English books and old foreign books across the North Half, new English books and new foreign books across the South Half.]

[Thus, in the Example above, we should find that we had assigned the West Half of the table to "English books" and the East Half to "foreign books".

[We have in fact assigned the four Quarters of the table to four different Classes of books, as shown here.]]

The Reader should carefully remember that in a phrase like "the x-Things" the word "Things" means that particular kind of Things to which the whole Diagram has been assigned.

[Thus, if we say "Let Univ. be 'books'", we mean that we have assigned the whole Diagram to "books". In that case, if we took "x" to mean "old", the phrase "the x-Things" would mean "the old books".]

The Reader should not go on to the next Chapter until he is thoroughly familiar with the blank Diagram I have advised him to draw.

He ought to be able to name, instantly, the Adjunct assigned to any Compartment named in the right-hand column of the Table below.

He ought also to be able to name, instantly, the Compartment assigned to any Adjunct named in the left-hand column.

To make sure of it, he had better put the book into the hands of some genial friend, keeping nothing but the blank Diagram for himself, and get that genial friend to question him on this Table, dodging about as much as possible. The Questions and Answers should go something like this:

	Adjuncts of Classes. | Compartments, or Cells, assigned to them.
	x | North Half.
	x′ | South Half.
	y | West Half.
	y′ | East Half.
	xy | North-West Cell.
	xy′ | North-East Cell.
	x′y | South-West Cell.
	x′y′ | South-East Cell.

	Q. | "Adjunct for West Half?"
	A. | "y."
	Q. | "Compartment for xy′?"
	A. | "North-East Cell."
	Q. | "Adjunct for South-West Cell?"
	A. | "x′y."
	 | and so on, and so on.

After a little practice he will find he can do without the blank Diagram altogether, and will see it mentally — "in my mind's eye, Horatio!" — while answering his genial friend's questions. Once he has got that far, he may safely go on to the next Chapter.
