Book Three, Chapter IV: Interpretation of the Biliteral Diagram

The Diagram is supposed to be set before us with certain Counters placed on it, and the problem is to find out what Proposition, or Propositions, the Counters represent.

Since the process is simply the reverse of the one discussed in the previous Chapter, we can help ourselves to the results obtained there, as far as they go.

[Figure 44: A Red Counter in the North-West Cell.]

First, let us suppose that we find a Red Counter placed in the North-West Cell.

We know that this represents each of the Trio of equivalent Propositions

"Some xy exist" = "Some x are y" = "Some y are x".

A Red Counter placed in the North-East, South-West or South-East Cell may be interpreted in the same way.

[Figure 45: A Grey Counter in the North-West Cell.]

Next, let us suppose that we find a Grey Counter placed in the North-West Cell.

We know that this represents each of the Trio of equivalent Propositions

"No xy exist" = "No x are y" = "No y are x".

A Grey Counter placed in the North-East, South-West or South-East Cell may be interpreted in the same way.

[Figure 46: A Red Counter astride the partition that divides the North Half.]

Next, let us suppose that we find a Red Counter placed on the partition that divides the North Half.

We know that this represents the Proposition "Some x exist".

A Red Counter placed on the partition dividing the South, West or East Half may be interpreted in the same way.

[Figure 47: A Red Counter in each of the two North Cells.]

Next, let us suppose that we find two Red Counters placed in the North Half, one in each Cell.

We know that this represents the Double Proposition "Some x are y and some are y′".

Two Red Counters placed in the South, West or East Half may be interpreted in the same way.

[Figure 48: A Grey Counter in each of the two North Cells.]

Next, let us suppose that we find two Grey Counters placed in the North Half, one in each Cell.

We know that this represents the Proposition "No x exist".

Two Grey Counters placed in the South, West or East Half may be interpreted in the same way.

[Figure 49: A Red Counter in the North-West Cell and a Grey Counter in the North-East.]

Lastly, let us suppose that we find a Red and a Grey Counter placed in the North Half, the Red in the North-West Cell and the Grey in the North-East Cell.

We know that this represents the Proposition "All x are y".

[Note that the Half occupied by the two Counters settles what the Subject of the Proposition is to be, and that the Cell occupied by the Red Counter settles what its Predicate is to be.]

A Red and a Grey Counter may be interpreted in the same way when placed in any one of the seven similar positions:

Red in North-East, Grey in North-West;
 Red in South-West, Grey in South-East;
 Red in South-East, Grey in South-West;
 Red in North-West, Grey in South-West;
 Red in South-West, Grey in North-West;
 Red in North-East, Grey in South-East;
 Red in South-East, Grey in North-East.

Once more the genial friend must be appealed to, and asked to examine the Reader on Tables II and III, and to make him not only represent Propositions but also interpret Diagrams when they are marked with Counters.

The Questions and Answers should go like this:

Q. Represent "No x′ are y′."
A. Grey Counter in S.E. Cell.
Q. Interpret Red Counter on E. partition.
A. "Some y′ exist."
Q. Represent "All y′ are x."
A. Red in N.E. Cell; Grey in S.E.
Q. Interpret Grey Counter in S.W. Cell.
A. "No x′y exist" = "No x′ are y" = "No y are x′".
 and so on, and so on.

At first the Examinee will need to have the Board and Counters in front of him; but he will soon learn to do without them, and to answer with his eyes shut or gazing into vacancy.

[Work Examples § 1, 5–8 (Book Eight).]
