Book Six, Chapter II: Representation of Propositions of Relation

Let us take first the Proposition "Some x are y".

This, we know, is equivalent to the Proposition of Existence "Some xy exist" (see Book Three, Chapter III). So it may be represented by the expression "xy1".

The Converse Proposition "Some y are x" may of course be represented by the same expression, "xy1".

We may represent the three similar Pairs of Converse Propositions in the same way:

"Some x are y′"  = "Some y′ are x",
 "Some x′ are y"  = "Some y are x′",
 "Some x′ are y′" = "Some y′ are x′".

Let us take next the Proposition "No x are y".

This, we know, is equivalent to the Proposition of Existence "No xy exist" (see Book Three, Chapter III). So it may be represented by the expression "xy0".

The Converse Proposition "No y are x" may of course be represented by the same expression, "xy0".

We may represent the three similar Pairs of Converse Propositions in the same way:

"No x are y′"  = "No y′ are x",
 "No x′ are y"  = "No y are x′",
 "No x′ are y′" = "No y′ are x′".

Let us take next the Proposition "All x are y".

Now plainly the Double Proposition of Existence "Some x exist and no xy′ exist" tells us that some x-Things exist but that none of them have the Attribute y′ — that is, it tells us that all of them have the Attribute y; that is, it tells us that "All x are y".

And plainly the expression "x1 † xy′0" represents this Double Proposition.

So it represents the Proposition "All x are y" as well.

[The Reader will perhaps be puzzled by the statement that the Proposition "All x are y" is equivalent to the Double Proposition "Some x exist and no xy′ exist", remembering that in Book Three, Chapter III it was said to be equivalent to the Double Proposition "Some x are y and no x are y′" — that is, "Some xy exist and no xy′ exist". The explanation is that the Proposition "Some xy exist" contains more information than we need. "Some x exist" is enough for our purpose.]

This expression may be written in a shorter form, "x1y′0", since each Subscript takes effect back to the beginning of the expression.

We may represent the seven similar Propositions in the same way: "All x are y′", "All x′ are y", "All x′ are y′", "All y are x", "All y are x′", "All y′ are x" and "All y′ are x′".

[The Reader should work all of these out for himself.]

It will be handy to remember that in translating a Proposition beginning with "All" from abstract form into subscript form, or the other way round, the Predicate changes sign — that is, it changes from positive to negative, or else from negative to positive.

[Thus the Proposition "All y are x′" becomes "y1x0", where the Predicate changes from x′ to x.

[Again, the expression "x′1y′0" becomes "All x′ are y", where the Predicate changes from y′ to y.]]
