Book Seven, Chapter I: Introductory

When a Set of three or more Biliteral Propositions is such that all their Terms are Species of the same Genus, and they are also so related that two of them taken together yield a Conclusion, which taken with another of them yields another Conclusion, and so on until all have been taken, then plainly, if the original Set were true, the last Conclusion would be true as well.

Such a Set, with the last Conclusion tacked on, is called a "Sorites". The original Set of Propositions is called its "Premisses"; each of the intermediate Conclusions is called a "Partial Conclusion" of the Sorites; the last Conclusion is called its "Complete Conclusion", or, more briefly, its "Conclusion"; the Genus of which all the Terms are Species is called its "Universe of Discourse", or, more briefly, its "Univ."; the Terms used as Eliminands in the Syllogisms are called its "Eliminands"; and the two Terms that are retained, and so appear in the Conclusion, are called its "Retinends".

[Note that each Partial Conclusion contains one or two Eliminands, but that the Complete Conclusion contains Retinends only.]

The Conclusion is said to be "consequent" from the Premisses, and so it is usual to put the word "Therefore" (or the symbol "∴") in front of it.

[Note that the question whether the Conclusion is or is not consequent from the Premisses is not affected by the actual truth or falsity of any one of the Propositions making up the Sorites; it depends entirely on how they are related to one another.

[As a specimen Sorites, let us take this Set of 5 Propositions:]

[(1) "No a are b′;
(2)   All b are c;
(3)   All c are d;
(4)   No e′ are a′;
(5)   All h are e′".]

[Here the first and second, taken together, yield "No a are c′".]

[This, taken with the third, yields "No a are d′".]

[This, taken with the fourth, yields "No d′ are e′".]

[And this, taken with the fifth, yields "All h are d".]

[So, if the original Set were true, this would be true as well.]

[So the original Set, with this tacked on, is a Sorites. The original Set is its Premisses; the Proposition "All h are d" is its Conclusion; the Terms a, b, c, e are its Eliminands; and the Terms d and h are its Retinends.]

[So we may write the whole Sorites thus:]

["No a are b′;
   All b are c;
   All c are d;
   No e′ are a′;
   All h are e′.
           ∴ All h are d".]

[In the Sorites above, the 3 Partial Conclusions are the Propositions "No a are c′", "No a are d′" and "No d′ are e′"; but if the Premisses were arranged in other ways, other Partial Conclusions might be obtained. Thus the order 4, 1, 5, 2, 3 yields the Partial Conclusions "No e′ are b′", "All h are b" and "All h are c". There are nine Partial Conclusions to this Sorites altogether, and the Reader will find it an interesting task to make them all out for himself.]]
