Addressed to Teachers
(Part 1 of 2)

§ 1

Introductory

There are several matters too hard to discuss with Learners which nevertheless need explaining to any Teachers into whose hands this book may fall, so that they may thoroughly understand what my Symbolic Method is, and how it differs from the many other Methods already published.

They are these:

The "Existential Import" of Propositions.
 The use of "is-not" (or "are-not") as a Copula.
 The theory that "two Negative Premisses prove nothing."
 Euler's Method of Diagrams.
 Venn's Method of Diagrams.
 My Method of Diagrams.
 The Solution of a Syllogism by various Methods.
 My Method of treating Syllogisms and Soriteses.
 Some account of Parts II and III.

§ 2

The "Existential Import" of Propositions

The writers and editors of the Logical text-books that run in the ordinary grooves — whom I shall refer to hereafter by the, I hope inoffensive, title "The Logicians" — take on this subject what seems to me a far humbler position than is at all necessary. They speak of the Copula of a Proposition "with bated breath", almost as though it were a living, conscious Entity, able to declare for itself what it chose to mean, and as though we poor human creatures had nothing to do but find out its sovereign will and pleasure and submit to it.

Against that view, I maintain that the writer of a book is fully entitled to attach whatever meaning he likes to any word or phrase he means to use. If I find an author saying at the beginning of his book, "Let it be understood that by the word 'black' I shall always mean 'white', and that by the word 'white' I shall always mean 'black'," I meekly accept his ruling, however ill-judged I may think it.

And so, on the question whether a Proposition is or is not to be understood as asserting the existence of its Subject, I maintain that every writer may adopt his own rule — provided, of course, that it is consistent with itself and with the accepted facts of Logic.

Let us consider the views that may logically be held, and so settle which of them may conveniently be held; after which I shall hold myself free to declare which of them I intend to hold.

The kinds of Propositions to be considered are those beginning with "some", with "no", and with "all". These are usually called Propositions "in I", "in E" and "in A".

First, then, a Proposition in I may be understood as asserting, or else as not asserting, the existence of its Subject. (By "existence" I mean, of course, whatever kind of existence suits its nature. The two Propositions "dreams exist" and "drums exist" denote two entirely different kinds of "existence". A dream is an aggregate of ideas and exists only in the mind of a dreamer, whereas a drum is an aggregate of wood and parchment and exists in the hands of a drummer.)

First, let us suppose that I "asserts" — that is, asserts the existence of its Subject.

Here, of course, we must regard a Proposition in A as making the same assertion, since it necessarily contains a Proposition in I.

We now have I and A "asserting". Does that leave us free to suppose what we like about E? My answer is "No. We are tied down to the supposition that E does not assert." This can be proved as follows.

If possible, let E "assert". Then, taking x, y and z to represent Attributes, we see that if the Proposition "No xy are z" is true, some things exist with the Attributes x and y — that is, "Some x are y."

We also know that if the Proposition "Some xy are z" is true, the same result follows.

But these two Propositions are Contradictories, so one or other of them must be true. Hence this result is always true — that is, the Proposition "Some x are y" is always true!

Quod est absurdum. (See Note (A) in the Notes to the Appendix.)

We see, then, that the supposition "I asserts" necessarily leads to "A asserts, but E does not". And that is the first of the views that may conceivably be held.

Next, let us suppose that I does not "assert", and along with that let us take the supposition that E does "assert".

Then the Proposition "No x are y" means "Some x exist, and none of them are y" — that is, "all of them are not-y", which is a Proposition in A. And we know, of course, that the Proposition "All x are not-y" proves "No x are y". Now two Propositions each of which proves the other are equivalent. Hence every Proposition in A is equivalent to one in E, and therefore "asserts".

So our second conceivable view is "E and A assert, but I does not."

This view does not seem to involve any necessary contradiction with itself or with the accepted facts of Logic. But when we come to test it against the actual facts of life, we shall find, I think, that it fits them so badly that adopting it would be — to say the least of it — singularly inconvenient for ordinary folk.

Let me record a little dialogue I have just had with my friend Jones, who is trying to form a new Club, to be run on strictly Logical principles.

Author. "Well, Jones! Have you got your new Club started yet?"

Jones (rubbing his hands). "You'll be glad to hear that some of the Members — mind, I only say 'some' — are millionaires! Rolling in gold, my boy!"

Author. "That sounds well. And how many Members have joined?"

Jones (staring). "None at all. We haven't got it started yet. What makes you think we have?"

Author. "Why, I thought you said that some of the Members —"

Jones (contemptuously). "You don't seem to be aware that we're working on strictly Logical principles. A Particular Proposition does not assert the existence of its Subject. I merely meant to say that we've made a Rule not to admit any Members until we have at least three Candidates with incomes over ten thousand a year!"

Author. "Oh, that's what you meant, is it? Let's hear some more of your Rules."

Jones. "Another is that no one who has been convicted seven times of forgery is admissible."

Author. "And here again, I suppose, you don't mean to assert that any such convicts exist?"

Jones. "Why, that's exactly what I do mean to assert! Don't you know that a Universal Negative asserts the existence of its Subject? Of course we didn't make that Rule until we had satisfied ourselves that there are several such convicts now living."

The Reader can now decide for himself how far this second conceivable view would fit the facts of life. He will, I think, agree with me that Jones's view of the "Existential Import" of Propositions would lead to some inconvenience.

Thirdly, let us suppose that neither I nor E "asserts".

Now the supposition that the two Propositions "Some x are y" and "No x are not-y" do not "assert" necessarily involves the supposition that "All x are y" does not "assert" either, since it would be absurd to suppose that they assert more when combined than they do taken separately.

So the third — and last — of the conceivable views is that neither I, nor E, nor A "asserts".

The advocates of this third view would read the Proposition "Some x are y" as meaning "If there were any x in existence, some of them would be y"; and likewise for E and A.

It admits of proof that this view, as regards A, conflicts with the accepted facts of Logic.

Let us take the Syllogism Darapti, which is universally accepted as valid. Its form is

"All m are x;
 All m are y.
 ∴ Some y are x".

They would read this as follows:

"If there were any m in existence, all of them would be x;
 If there were any m in existence, all of them would be y.
 ∴ If there were any y in existence, some of them
 would be x".

That this Conclusion does not follow has been explained so briefly and clearly by Mr. Keynes (in his Formal Logic, dated 1894, pp. 356, 357) that I prefer to quote his words:

"Let no proposition imply the existence either of its subject or of its predicate.

"Take, as an example, a syllogism in Darapti:

'All M is P,
 All M is S,
 ∴ Some S is P.'

"Taking S, M, P, as the minor, middle, and major terms respectively, the conclusion will imply that, if there is an S, there is some P. Will the premisses also imply this? If so, then the syllogism is valid; but not otherwise.

"The conclusion implies that if S exists P exists; but, consistently with the premisses, S may be existent while M and P are both non-existent. An implication is, therefore, contained in the conclusion, which is not justified by the premisses."

That seems to me entirely clear and convincing. Still, to make surer, I may as well throw the above so-called Syllogism into a concrete form, which even a non-logical Reader can take hold of.

Suppose a Boys' School has been set up with this system of Rules:

"All boys in the First (the highest) Class are to do French, Greek and Latin. All in the Second Class are to do Greek only. All in the Third Class are to do Latin only."

Suppose also that there are boys in the Third Class and in the Second, but that no boy has yet risen into the First.

Plainly there are no boys in the School doing French — yet we know from the Rules what would happen if there were any.

The Data entitle us, then, to assert these two Propositions:

"If there were any boys doing French, all of them would
 be doing Greek;
 If there were any boys doing French, all of them would
 be doing Latin."

And the Conclusion, according to "The Logicians", would be

"If there were any boys doing Latin, some of them would
 be doing Greek."

So here we have two true Premisses and a false Conclusion — since we know that there are boys doing Latin and that none of them are doing Greek. So the argument is invalid.

It can be shown in the same way that this "non-existential" reading destroys the validity of Disamis, Datisi, Felapton and Fresison.

Some of "The Logicians" will no doubt be ready to reply, "But we are not Aldrichians! Why should we be answerable for the validity of the Syllogisms of so antiquated an author as Aldrich?"

Very good. Then for the special benefit of these "friends" of mine — with what ominous emphasis that name is sometimes used! "I must have a private interview with you, my young friend," says the bland Dr. Birch, "in my library, at 9 a.m. tomorrow. And you will please to be punctual!" — for their special benefit, I say, I will bring another charge against this "non-existential" reading.

It actually invalidates the ordinary Process of "Conversion" as applied to a Proposition in "I".

Every logician, Aldrichian or otherwise, accepts it as an established fact that "Some x are y" may legitimately be converted into "Some y are x."

But is it equally clear that the Proposition "If there were any x, some of them would be y" may legitimately be converted into "If there were any y, some of them would be x"? I think not.

The example I have already used — a Boys' School with a non-existent First Class — will serve admirably to illustrate this new flaw in the theory of "The Logicians".

Suppose there is yet another Rule in this School: "In each Class, at the end of the Term, the head boy and the second boy shall receive prizes."

This Rule entirely entitles us to assert — in the sense in which "The Logicians" would use the words — "Some boys in the First Class will receive prizes", since that simply means, according to them, "If there were any boys in the First Class, some of them would receive prizes."

Now the Converse of this Proposition is, of course, "Some boys who will receive prizes are in the First Class", which means, according to "The Logicians", "If there were any boys about to receive prizes, some of them would be in the First Class" — which Class we know to be empty.

Of this Pair of Converse Propositions the first is undoubtedly true; the second is just as undoubtedly false.

It is always sad to see a batsman knock down his own wicket. One pities him as a man and a brother; but as a cricketer one can only pronounce him "Out!"

We see, then, that of all the conceivable views we have considered here, there are only two that can logically be held:

I and A "assert", but E does not.
E and A "assert", but I does not.

The second I have shown to involve great practical inconvenience.

The first is the one adopted in this book. (See Book Two, Chapter III.)

Some further remarks on this subject will be found in Note (B) in the Notes to the Appendix.

§ 3

The use of "is-not" (or "are-not") as a Copula

Is it better to say "John is-not in-the-house" or "John is not-in-the-house"? "Some of my acquaintances are-not men-I-should-like-to-be-seen-with" or "Some of my acquaintances are men-I-should-not-like-to-be-seen-with"? That is the sort of question we have now to discuss.

This is no question of Logical Right and Wrong; it is merely a matter of taste, since the two forms mean exactly the same thing. And here again "The Logicians" seem to me to take much too humble a position. When they are putting the final touches to the grouping of their Proposition, just before the curtain goes up, and the Copula — always a rather fussy "heavy father" — asks them "Am I to have the 'not', or will you tack it on to the Predicate?", they are much too ready to answer, like the subtle cab-driver, "Leave it to you, Sir!" The result seems to be that the grasping Copula is constantly getting a "not" that had much better have been merged in the Predicate, and that Propositions are distinguished which had better have been recognised as precisely similar. Surely it is simpler to treat "Some men are Jews" and "Some men are Gentiles" as both of them affirmative Propositions, instead of translating the second into "Some men are-not Jews" and calling it a negative Proposition?

The fact is that "The Logicians" have somehow acquired a perfectly morbid dread of negative Attributes, which makes them shut their eyes like frightened children when they come across such terrible Propositions as "All not-x are y"; and so they exclude from their system many very useful forms of Syllogism.

Under the influence of this unreasoning terror, they plead that in Dichotomy by Contradiction the negative part is too large to deal with, so that it is better to regard each Thing as either included in, or excluded from, the positive part. I see no force in this plea, and the facts often go the other way. As a personal question, dear Reader: if you were to group your acquaintances into the two Classes, men you would like to be seen with and men you would not like to be seen with, do you really think the second group would be so very much the larger of the two?

For the purposes of Symbolic Logic it is so very much the most convenient plan to treat the two sub-divisions produced by Dichotomy on the same footing, and to say of any Thing either that it "is" in the one or that it "is" in the other, that I do not think any Reader of this book is likely to object to my taking that course.

§ 4

The theory that "two Negative Premisses prove nothing"

This I take to be another craze of "The Logicians", fully as morbid as their dread of a negative Attribute.

It is perhaps best refuted by the method of Instantia Contraria — the contrary instance.

Take the following Pairs of Premisses:

"None of my boys are conceited;
 None of my girls are greedy".

"None of my boys are clever;
 None but a clever boy could solve this problem".

"None of my boys are learned;
 Some of my boys are not choristers".

(This last Proposition is, in my system, an affirmative one, since I should read it "are not-choristers"; but in dealing with "The Logicians" I may fairly treat it as a negative one, since they would read it "are-not choristers".)

If you, dear Reader, declare after full consideration of these Pairs of Premisses that you cannot deduce a Conclusion from any of them — why, all I can say is that, like the Duke in Patience, you "will have to be contented with our heart-felt sympathy"! [See Note (C) in the Notes to the Appendix.]

§ 5

Euler's Method of Diagrams

Diagrams seem to have been used at first to represent Propositions only. In Euler's well-known Circles, each was supposed to contain a Class, and the Diagram consisted of two circles which exhibited the relations of inclusion and exclusion holding between the two Classes.

[Figure 272: Euler's Circles — a small circle lettered x lying wholly inside a larger circle lettered y.]

Thus the Diagram given here exhibits the two Classes whose respective Attributes are x and y as so related to each other that the following Propositions are all true at once: "All x are y", "No x are not-y", "Some x are y", "Some y are not-x", "Some not-y are not-x" — and, of course, the Converses of the last four.

[Figure 273: The same two circles the other way about — a small circle lettered y lying wholly inside a larger circle lettered x.]

Similarly, with this Diagram the following Propositions are true: "All y are x", "No y are not-x", "Some y are x", "Some x are not-y", "Some not-x are not-y" — and, of course, the Converses of the last four.

[Figure 274: Two circles, x and y, lying wholly apart, with no overlap at all.]

Similarly, with this Diagram the following are true: "All x are not-y", "All y are not-x", "No x are y", "Some x are not-y", "Some y are not-x", "Some not-x are not-y" — and the Converses of the last four.

[Figure 275: Two circles, x and y, overlapping in a lens-shaped area common to both.]

Similarly, with this Diagram the following are true: "Some x are y", "Some x are not-y", "Some not-x are y", "Some not-x are not-y" — and, of course, their four Converses.

Note that all Euler's Diagrams assert "Some not-x are not-y". Apparently it never occurred to him that this might sometimes fail to be true!

Now to represent "All x are y" the first of these Diagrams would do; and to represent "No x are y" the third would do. But to represent any Particular Proposition at least three Diagrams would be needed, to cover all the possible cases — and for "Some not-x are not-y", all four.

§ 6

Venn's Method of Diagrams

Let us write "not-x" as "x′".

Mr. Venn's Method of Diagrams is a great advance on the above.

He uses the last of the Diagrams above to represent any relation he likes between x and y, simply by shading a Compartment known to be empty and putting a + in one known to be occupied.

Thus he would represent the three Propositions "Some x are y", "No x are y" and "All x are y" as follows:

[Figure 276: "Some x are y" on Venn's diagram — a + in the lens where the two circles overlap.]

[Figure 277: "No x are y" — the lens where the two circles overlap shaded out.]

[Figure 278: "All x are y" — the part of x outside y shaded out, and a + in the lens.]

It will be seen that of the four Classes whose peculiar Sets of Attributes are xy, xy′, x′y and x′y′, only three are given closed Compartments here, while the fourth is allowed the rest of the Infinite Plane to range about in!

This arrangement would land us in very serious trouble if we ever tried to represent "No x′ are y′." Mr. Venn once meets this awful task, on page 281 of his own book; but he evades it in quite masterly fashion, with the simple footnote "We have not troubled to shade the outside of this diagram"!

To represent two Propositions together, when they contain a common Term, a three-letter Diagram is needed. This is the one Mr. Venn uses.

[Figure 279: Venn's three-letter diagram — three circles, x, y and m, overlapping one another so as to make seven closed compartments.]

Here again we have only seven closed Compartments to accommodate the eight Classes whose peculiar Sets of Attributes are xym, xym′, and so on.

"With four terms in request," Mr. Venn says, "the most simple and symmetrical diagram seems to me that produced by making four ellipses intersect one another in the desired manner". This, however, provides only fifteen closed compartments.

[Figure 280: Venn's four-term diagram — four ellipses, a, b, c and d, crossing one another to make fifteen closed compartments.]

For five letters, "the simplest diagram I can suggest," Mr. Venn says, "is one like this (the small ellipse in the centre is to be regarded as a portion of the outside of c; i.e. its four component portions are inside b and d but are no part of c). It must be admitted that such a diagram is not quite so simple to draw as one might wish it to be; but then consider what the alternative is if one undertakes to deal with five terms and all their combinations — nothing short of the disagreeable task of writing out, or in some way putting before us, all the 32 combinations involved."

[Figure 281: Venn's five-term diagram — five ellipses, a, b, c, d and e, with a small further ellipse in the centre that counts as lying outside c.]

This Diagram gives us 31 closed compartments.

For six letters Mr. Venn suggests that we might use two Diagrams like the one above, one for the f-part and the other for the not-f-part of all the other combinations. "This", he says, "would give the desired 64 subdivisions." It would, however, give only 62 closed Compartments, plus one infinite area, which the two Classes a′b′c′d′e′f and a′b′c′d′e′f′ would have to share between them.

Beyond six letters Mr. Venn does not go.

§ 7

My Method of Diagrams

My Method of Diagrams is like Mr. Venn's in giving separate Compartments to the various Classes, and in marking those Compartments as occupied or as empty; but it differs from his in giving the Universe of Discourse a closed area of its own, so that the Class which under Mr. Venn's liberal rule has been ranging at will through Infinite Space is suddenly dismayed to find itself "cabin'd, cribb'd, confined" in a limited Cell like any other Class! I also use straight-sided instead of curved Figures, and I mark an occupied Cell with a "I" — meaning that there is at least one Thing in it — and an empty Cell with a "O", meaning that there is no Thing in it.

For two letters I use this Diagram, in which the North Half is assigned to "x", the South to "not-x" (or "x′"), the West to y and the East to y′. So the N.W. Cell holds the xy-Class, the N.E. Cell the xy′-Class, and so on.

[Figure 282: The blank Biliteral Diagram — a square divided once across and once down into four Cells.]

For three letters I subdivide those four Cells by drawing an Inner Square, which I assign to m, the Outer Border being assigned to m′. That gives me the eight Cells needed to accommodate the eight Classes whose peculiar Sets of Attributes are xym, xym′, and so on.

[Figure 283: The blank Triliteral Diagram — the same square with an Inner Square drawn inside it, giving eight Cells.]

This last Diagram is the most complex I use in the Elementary Part of my Symbolic Logic. But I may as well take this chance of describing the more complex ones that will appear in Part II.

For four letters — which I call a, b, c, d — I use this Diagram, assigning the North Half to a (and of course the rest of the Diagram to a′), the West Half to b, the Horizontal Oblong to c and the Upright Oblong to d. We have now got 16 Cells.

[Figure 284: The blank Quadriliteral Diagram — a square of 16 Cells, the North Half a, the West Half b, a horizontal oblong across the middle c and an upright oblong down the middle d.]

For five letters — adding e — I subdivide the 16 Cells of the previous Diagram by oblique partitions, assigning all the upper portions to e and all the lower portions to e′. Here, I admit, we lose the advantage of having the e-Class all together "in a ring-fence", as the other 4 Classes are. Still, it is very easy to find, and erasing it is nearly as easy as erasing any other Class. We have now got 32 Cells.

[Figure 285: The blank Pentaliteral Diagram — the 16 Cells each cut by an oblique partition, the upper portions e and the lower e′, giving 32 Cells.]

For six letters — adding h, since I avoid tailed letters — I put upright crosses in place of the oblique partitions, assigning the 4 portions into which each of the 16 Cells is thus divided to the four Classes eh, eh′, e′h and e′h′. We have now got 64 Cells.

[Figure 286: The blank Hexaliteral Diagram — each of the 16 Cells quartered by an upright cross, giving 64 Cells.]

For seven letters — adding k — I add a little inner square to each upright cross. All 16 of these little squares are assigned to the k-Class and everything outside them to the k′-Class, so that the 8 little Cells into which each of the 16 Cells is now divided go to the 8 Classes ehk, ehk′, and so on. We have now got 128 Cells.

[Figure 287: The blank Heptaliteral Diagram — a little inner square added to each of the 16 crosses, giving 128 Cells.]

For eight letters — adding l — I put in each of the 16 Cells a lattice, which is a reduced copy of the whole Diagram; and just as the 16 large Cells of the whole Diagram go to the 16 Classes abcd, abcd′, and so on, so the 16 little Cells of each lattice go to the 16 Classes ehkl, ehkl′, and so on. Thus the lattice in the N.W. corner accommodates the 16 Classes abc′d′ehkl, abc′d′eh′kl′, and so on. This Octoliteral Diagram contains 256 Cells.

For nine letters I set 2 Octoliteral Diagrams side by side, assigning one to m and the other to m′. We have now got 512 Cells.

[Figure 288: The blank Octoliteral Diagram — a lattice, itself a reduced copy of the whole Diagram, set inside each of the 16 Cells, giving 256 Cells in all.]

Finally, for ten letters I arrange 4 Octoliteral Diagrams like the one above in a square, assigning them to the 4 Classes mn, mn′, m′n and m′n′. We have now got 1024 Cells.

§ 8

Solution of a Syllogism by various Methods

The best way, I think, to exhibit the differences between these various Methods of solving Syllogisms will be to take a concrete example and solve it by each Method in turn. Let us take as our example No. 29 (see Book Eight, Chapter I).
