Notes to the Appendix

(A) [See the Appendix, § 2.]

It may perhaps occur to the Reader who has studied Formal Logic that the argument applied here to the Propositions I and E will apply equally well to the Propositions I and A — since in the ordinary text-books the Propositions "All xy are z" and "Some xy are not z" are treated as Contradictories. So it may seem to him that the argument might have been put like this:

"We now have I and A 'asserting'. Hence, if the Proposition 'All xy are z' is true, some things exist with the Attributes x and y — that is, 'Some x are y.'

"We also know that if the Proposition 'Some xy are not-z' is true, the same result follows.

"But these two Propositions are Contradictories, so one or other of them must be true. Hence this result is always true — that is, the Proposition 'Some x are y' is always true!

"Quod est absurdum. Hence I cannot assert."

This matter will be discussed in Part II; but I may as well give here what seems to me an irresistible proof that this view — that A and I are Contradictories — is untenable, however firmly the ordinary text-books hold it. The proof is as follows.

As to the relationship holding between the Class "xy" and the two Classes "z" and "not-z", there are four conceivable states of things:

	(1) | Some xy | are z, | and | some | are not-z;
	(2) | Some xy | are z, | and | none | are not-z;
	(3) | No xy | are z, | and | some | are not-z;
	(4) | No xy | are z, | and | none | are not-z.

Of these four, No. (2) is equivalent to "All xy are z", No. (3) to "All xy are not-z", and No. (4) to "No xy exist."

Now it is quite undeniable that of these four states of things each is, a priori, possible; that some one of them must be true; and that the other three must be false.

Hence the Contradictory to (2) is "Either (1) or (3) or (4) is true." Now the assertion "Either (1) or (3) is true" is equivalent to "Some xy are not-z", and the assertion "(4) is true" is equivalent to "No xy exist." So the Contradictory to "All xy are z" can be expressed as the Alternative Proposition "Either some xy are not-z, or no xy exist" — but not as the Categorical Proposition "Some xy are not-z".

(B) [See the end of § 2 of the Appendix.]

There are yet other views current among "The Logicians" as to the "Existential Import" of Propositions which have not been mentioned in that Section.

One is that the Proposition "Some x are y" is to be read neither as "Some x exist and are y", nor yet as "If there were any x in existence, some of them would be y", but merely as "Some x can be y — that is, the Attributes x and y are compatible". On this theory there would be nothing offensive in my telling my friend Jones "Some of your brothers are swindlers"; since, if he indignantly retorted "What do you mean by such insulting language, you scoundrel?", I should calmly reply "I merely mean that the thing is conceivable — that some of your brothers might possibly be swindlers". But it may well be doubted whether such an explanation would entirely appease the wrath of Jones!

Another view is that the Proposition "All x are y" sometimes implies the actual existence of x and sometimes does not, and that we cannot tell which reading to give it without having it in concrete form. This view is, I think, strongly supported by common usage, and it will be fully discussed in Part II; but the difficulties it brings in seem to me too formidable even to be mentioned in Part I, which I am trying to keep as easily intelligible to mere beginners as I can.

(C) [See § 4 of the Appendix.]

The three Conclusions are:

"No conceited child of mine is greedy";
 "None of my boys could solve this problem";
 "Some unlearned boys are not choristers."
