page: none

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

Footnote: TO THE

FIRST GERMAN EDITION.

In laying before the Public the result of eight years' labour, I must first pay a debt of gratitude. The following investigations could not have been accomplished without the construction of new instruments, which did not enter into the inventory of a Physiological Institute, and which far exceeded in cost the usual resources of a German philosopher. The means for obtaining them have come to me from unusual sources. The apparatus for the artificial construction of vowels, described on pp. 121 to 126, I owe to the munificence of his Majesty King Maximilian of Bavaria, to Avhom German science is indebted, on so many of its fields, for everready sympathy and assistance. For the construction of my Harmonium in perfectly natural intonation, descriljcd on p. 316, I was able to use the Soemmering prize which had been awarded me by the Senckenberg Physical Society {die Senckenbergische nahirforscheiide Gesellschaft) at Frankfurt-on-the-Main. While publicly repeating the expression of my gratitude for this assistance in my investigations, I hope that the investigations themselves as set forth in this book will prove far better than mere words how earnestly I have endeavoured to make a worthy use of the means thus placed at my conmiand.

Footnote: Heidelberg: October, 1862.
H. HELMHOLTZ.

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

Footnote: TO THE

THIRD GERMAN EDITION.

The present Third Edition has been much more altered in some parts than the second. Thus in the sixth chapter I have been able to make use of the new physiological and anatomical researches on the ear. This has led to a modification of my view of the action of Corti's ai'ches. Again, it appears that the pecviliar articulation between the auditory ossicles called 'hammer' and 'anvil' might easily cause within the ear itself the formation of harmonic upper partial tones for simple tones which are sounded loudly. By this means that pecidiar series of upper partial tones, on the existence of which the present theory of music is essentially founded, receives a new subjective value, entirely independent of external alterations in the quality of tone. To illustrate the anatomical descriptions, I have been able to add a series of new woodcuts, principally from Henle's Manual of Anatomy, with the author's permission, for which I here take the opportunity of publicly thankine: him.
