page: 8

+ remains unaltered as long as it exists, and it presents no alternation of various kinds of constituents. To this then corresponds a simple, regular kind of sensation, whereas in a noise many various sensations of musical tone are irregularly mixed up and as it were tumbled about in confusion. We can easily compound noises out of musical tones, as, for example, by simultaneously striking all the keys contained in one or two octaves of a pianoforte. This shows us that musical tones are the simpler and more regular elements of the sensations of hearing, and that we have consequently first to study the laws and peculiarities of this class of sensations.

Then comes the further question: On what difterence in the external means of excitement does the difference between noise and musical tone depend 1 The normal and usual means of excitement for the human ear is atmospheric vibration. ¶ Tiie irregularly alternating sensation of the ear in the case of noises leads us to conclude that for these the vibi-ation of the air must also change irregularl}'. For musical tones on the other hand we anticipate a regular motion of the air, continiiing uniformly, and in its turn excited by an equally regular motion of the sonorous body, whose impulses were conducted to the ear by the air.

Those regular motions which produce musical tones have been exactly investigated by physicists. They are oscillations, vibrations, or swings, that is, up and down, or to and fro motions of sonorous bodies, and it is necessary that these oscillations should be regularly perioilic. By a periodic motion we mean one which constantly returns to the same condition after exactly equal intervals of time. The length of the equal intervals of time between one state of the motion and its next exact repetition, we call the length of the oscillation, vibration, or swing, or the period of the motion. In what manner the moving body actually moves during one period, is perfectly inditterent. As illustrations of periodical motion, take the ¶ of a clock pendulum, of a stone attached to a string and whirled round in a circle with uniform velocity, of a hammer made to rise and fall uniformly by its connection with a water wheel. All these motions, however different be their form, are periodic in the sense here explained. The length of their periods, which in the cases adduced is generally from one to several seconds, is relatively long in comparison with the much shorter periods of the vibrations producing nuisical tones, the lowest or deepest of which makes at least 30 in a second, while in other cases their number may increase to several thousand in a second.

Our definition of periodic motion then enables us to answer the question proposed as follows: — The sensation of a musical tone is due to a rapid periodic inotion of the sonorous body; the sensation of a noise to non-periodic motions.

The musical vibrations of solid bodies are often visible. Although they may be too rapid for the eye to follow them singly, wc easily recognise that a soundingstring, or tuning-fork, or the tongue of a reed-pipe, is rapidly vibrating between two ¶ fixed limits, and the regulai", apparently immovable image that we see, notwithstanding the real motion of the body, leads us to conclude that the backward and forward motions are quite regular. In other cases we can feel the swinging motions of sonorous solids. Thus, the player feels the trembling of the reed in the mouthpiece of a clarinet, oboe, or bassoon, or of his own lips in the mouthpieces of trumpets and trombones.

The motions proceeding from the sounding bodies are usually conducted to our ear by means of the atmosphere. The particles of air must also execute periodically recurrent vibrations, in order to excite the sensation of a musical tone in our ear. This is actually the case, although in daily experience sound at first seems to be some agent, which is constantly advancing through the air, and projjagating itself further and further. We must, however, here distinguish between the motion of the individual particles of air — which takes place periodically backwards and forwards within very narrow limits — and the propagation of the sonorous tremor. The latter is constantly advancing by the constant attraction of fresh particles into its sphere of tremor.
