page: 1

The process which goes on in the atmospheric ocean about us, is of a precisely similar nature. For the stone substitute a sounding body, which shakes the air; for the chip of wood substitute the human ear, on which impinge the waves of air excited by the shock, setting its movable parts in vibration. The waves of air proceeding from a sounding body, transport the tremor to the human ear exactly in the same way as the water transports the tremor produced by the stone to the floating chip.

In this way also it is easy to see how a body which itself makes periodical oscillations, will necessarily set the particles of air in periodical motion. A falling stone gives the surface of the water a single shock. Now replace the stone by a regular series of drops falling from a vessel with a small orifice. Every separate drop will excite a ring of wave, each ring of wave will advance over the surface of the water precisely like its predecessor, and will be in the same way followed by

¶ its successors. In this manner a regular series of concentric rings will be formed and propagated over the surface of the water. The number of drops which fall into the water in a second will be the number of waves which reach our floating chip in a second, and the number of times that this chip will therefore bob up and down in a second, thus executing a periodical motion, the period of which is equal to the interval of time between the falling of consecutive drops. In the same way for the atuiosphere, a periodically oscillating sonorous body produces a similar periodical motion, first in the mass of air, and then in the drumskin of our ear, and the period of these vibrations must be the same as that of the vibration in the sonorous body.

Having thus spoken of the principal division of sound into Noise and Musical Tones, and then described the general motion of the air for these tones, we pass on to the peculiarities which distinguish such tones one from the othei*. We are acquainted with three points of difference in musical tones, confining oiu' attention

¶ in the first place to such tones as are isolatedly produced by our usual musical instruments, and excluding the sinudtaneous sounding of the tones of different instruments. Musical tones are distinguished: —

1. By their force,

2. By their 2jifc/i,

3. By their qtialiti/.

It is unnecessary to explain what we mean by the force and pitch of a tone. By the (piality of a tone we mean that peculiarity which distinguishes the musical tone of a violin from that of a flute or that of a clarinet, or that of the hiunan voice, when all these instruments produce the same note at the same pitch.

We have now to explain what peculiarities of the motion of sound correspond to these three principal diftcrences between musical tones.

First, We easily recognise that the force of a musical tone increases and diminishes with the extent or so-called amplitude of the oscillations of the particles of ¶ the sounding body. When we strike a string, its vibrations are at first sufficiently large for us to see them, and its corresponding tone is loudest. The visible vibrations become smaller and smaller, and at the same time the loudness diminishes. The same observation can be made on strings excited by a violin bow, and on the reeds of reed-pipes, and on many other sonorous bodies. The same conclusion results from the diminution of the loudness of a tone when we increase our distance from the sounding body in the open air, although the pitch and quality remain unaltered; for it is only the amplitude of the oscillations of the particles of air which diminishes as their distance from the sounding body increases. Hence loudness must depend on this amplitude, and none other of the properties of sound do so.*

Footnote: ⁎ Mechanically the force of the oscillations no measure can be found for the intensity of
for tones of different pitch is measured by the sensation of sound, that is, for the loudness
their vis viva, that is, by the square of the of sound which will hold all pitches. [See
greatest velocity attained by the oscillating the addition to a footnote on p. 75f/, referring
particles. But the ear has different degrees of especially to this passage. — Translator.] sensibility for tones of different pitch, so that
