page: none

The second essential difference between difterent musical tones consists in their J) if c/i. Daily experience shows iis that mnsical tones of the same pitch can be prodnced upon most diverse instruments by means of most diverse mechanical contrivances, and with most diverse degrees of loudness. All the motions of the air thus excited must be periodic, because they would not otlierwise excite in us the sensation of a nmsical tone. But the sort of motion within each single period may be any whatever, and yet if the length of the periodic time of two musical tones is the same, they have the same pitch. Hence: Fitrk (Ujwnih solely on the length of time in which each single vibration is executed, or, which comes to the same thing, on the number of vibrations completed in a given time. We are accustomed to take a second as the unit of time, and shall consequently mean by the pitch number [or frequoici/] of a tone, the number of vibrations which the particles of a sounding body perform in one second of time.* It is self-evident ¶ that we find the periodic time or vibrational period, that is length of time which is occupied in performing a single vibration backwards and forwards, by dividingone second of time by the pitch number.

Musical tones are said to be higher, the greater their pi frit numbers, f/i<(t is, the shorter their vibrational periods.

The exact determination of the pitch niuuber for such elastic bodies as produce audible tones, presents considerable difficulty, and physicists had to contrive many comparatively complicated processes in order to solve this problem for each particular case. Mathematical theory and numerous experiments had to render mutual assistance. t It is consequently very convenient for the demonstration of the fundamental facts in this department of knowledge, to be able to apply a peculiar instrument for producing musical tones — the so-called siren — which is constructed in such a manner as to determine the pitch number of the tone produced, by a direct observation. The principal parts of the simplest form of ¶ the siren are shown in fig. 1, after Seebeck.

A is a thin disc of cardboard or tinplate, which can be set in rapid rotation about its axle b by means of a string f f, which passes over a larger wheel. On the margin of the disc there is punched a set of holes at equal intervals: of these

there are twelve in the figure; one or more similar series of holes at equal distances are introduced on concentric circles (there is one such of eight holes in the figure), c is a pipe which is directed over one of the holes. Now, on setting the disc in rotation and blowing through the pipe c, the air will pass freely whenever one of the holes comes under the end of the pipe, but will be ¶ checked whenever an unpierced portion of the disc comes under it. Each hole of the disc, then, that passes the end of the pipe lets a single puft" of air escape. Supposing the disc to make a single revolution and the pipe to be directed to the

Footnote: ⁎ [The pitch number was called the ' vibrational number' in the first edition of this translation. The pitch n umber of a note is commonly called the pitch of the note. By a convenient abbreviation we often write a' 440, meaning the note a' having the i^itch number 440 ; or say that the pitch of a' is 440 vib. that is, 440 double vibrations in a second. The second texxn. frequency, which I have introduced into the text, as it is much used by acousticians, properly represents Ihc number of times that any periodically recurrinq event happens in one second of time, and, applied to double vibrations, it means the same as pitch number.
The pitch of a musical instrument is the pitch of the note by which it is tuned. But as i^itch is properly a sensation, it is necessary here to distinguish from this sensation the pitch number or frcq^icncy of vibration by which it is measured. The larger the pitch number, the higher or sharper the pitch is said to be. The lower the pitch nmnber the deeper or flatter the pitch. These are all metaphorical expressions which must be taken strictly in this sense. — Translator.']
methods is given in App. XX. sect. B. — Ti-anslator.']
t [An account of the more exact modern
