page: 12

+ outer circle of holes, we have twelve puffs corresponding to the twelve holes; but if the pipe is directed to the inner circle we have only eight puffs. If the disc is made to revolve ten times in one second, the outer circle will produce 120 puffs, in one second, which would give rise to a v/eak and deep musical tone, and the inner circle eighty puff's. Generally, if we know the number of revolutions which the disc makes in a second, and the number of holes in the series to which the tube is directed, the product of these two numbers evidently gives the number of puff's in a second. This number is consequently far easier to determine exactly than in any other musical instrument, and sirens are accordingly extremely well adapted for studying all changes .in musical tones resulting from the alterations and ratios of the pitch numbers.

The form of siren here desci-ibed gives only a weak tone. I have placed it first because its action can be most readily understood,- and, by chana'inu' the disc, it

can be easily applied to experiments of very different descriptions. A stronger tone is produced in the siren of Cagniard de la Tour, shown in figures 2, 3, and 4, above. Here s s is the rotating disc, of which the upper surface is shown in fig. 3, and the side is seen in figs. 2 and 4. It is placed over a windchest A A, which is connected with a bellows by the pipe B B. The cover of the windchest A A, which lies immediately under the rotating disc s s, is pierced with precisely the same number of holes as the disc, and the direction of the holes pierced in the cover of the chest is oblique to that of the holes in the disc, as shown in fig. 4, which is a vertical section of the instrument through the line n n in fig. 3. This position of the holes enables the wind escaping from A A to set the disc s s in rotation, and by increasing the pressure of the bellows, as much as 50 or 60 rotations in a second can be produced. Since all the holes of one circle are blown through at the same time in this siren, a much more powerful tone is produced than in Seebeck's, fig. 1 (p. lie). To record the revolutions, a counter z z is
