page: 15

+ consisting of a sonnding board and box on which a single string was stretched with a scale below, so as to set the bridge correctly.*

It was not till ninch later that, through the investigations of CJalileo (1638), Newton, Euler (1729), and Daniel Bernouilli (1771), the law governing the motions of strings became known, and it was thus found that the simple ratios of the lengths of the strings existed also for the pitch numbers of the tones they produced, and that they consequently belonged to the musical intervals of the tones of all instruments, and were not confined to the lengths of strings through which the law had been first discovered.

This relation of whole numbers to musical consonances was from all time looked upon as a wonderful mystery of deep significance. The Pythagoreans themselves made use of it in their speculations on the harmony of the spheres. From that time it remained partly the goal and partly the starting point of the ¶ strangest and most venturesome, fantastic or philosophic combinations, till in modern times the majority of investigators adopted the notion accepted by Eider himself, that the human mind had a peculiar pleasure in simple ratios, because it could better understand them and comprehend their bearings. But it remained uninvestigated how the mind of a listener not versed in physics, who perhaps was not even aware that musical tones depended on periodical vibrations, contrived to recognise and compare these ratios of the pitch numbers. To show what processes taking place in the ear, render sensible the diflference between consonance and dissonance, will be one of the principal problems in the second part of this work .

Calculatiox of the Pitch Numbers for all the Tones of the Musical Scale.

By means of the ratios of the pitch numbers already assigned for the consonant ¶ intervals, it is easy, by pursuing these intervals throughout, to calculate the ratios for the whole extent of the musical scale.

The major triad or chord of three tones, consists of a major Third and a Fifth. Hence its ratios are:

C: E: G

1 : A:^

or 4:5: 6

If we associate with this triad that of its dominant G: B: D, and that of its sub-dominant F: A: C, each of which has one tone in common with the triad of the tonic C: E: G, we obtain the complete series of tones for the major scale of C, with the following ratio of the pitch numbers:

C: D: E \ F: G: A \ B: v

¶ [or 24 : 27 : 30 : 32 : 36 : 40 : 45 : 48]

In order to extend the calculation to other octaves, we shall adopt the following notation of musical tones, marking the higher octaves by accents, as is usual in (ilermany,t as follows:

1. The unaccented or small octave (the 4-foot octave on the organj): —

c d e f (J a h

Footnote: ⁎ [As the monochord is very liable to error, below the letters, which are typographically
these results were happy generalisations from inconvenient. Hence the German notation is
necessarily imperfect experiments. — Tmns- retained. — Translator.]
lator.] + [The note C in the small octave was
t [English works use strokes above and once emitted by an organ pipe 4 feet in length:
