page: 18

+ with 33 viljivations, and the latest grand pianos even down to A^^ with 27^ vibrations. On larger organs, as already mentioned, there is also a deeper Octave reaching to C„ with 16i vibrations. But the musical character of all these tones below F^ is imperfect, because we are here near to the limit of the power of the ear to combine vibrations into musical tones. These lower tones cannot therefore be vised musically except in connection with their higher octaves to which they impart a character of o-reater depth without rendering the conception of the pitch indeterminate.

Upwards, pianofortes generally reach a"" with b520, or even c" with 4224 vibrations. The highest tone in the orchestra is probably the five-times accented J" of the piccolo flute with 4752 vibrations. Appunn and W. Preyer by means of small tunino--forks excited by a violin bow have even reached the eight times accented «="" with 40,960 vibrations in a second. These high tones were very painfully unpleasant, and the pitch of those which exceed the boundaries of the musical scale was ¶ very imperfectly discriminated by musical observers."* More on this in Chap. IX.

The musical tones which can be used with advantage, and have clearly distinguishable pitch, have therefore between 40 and 4000 vibrations in a second, extendino- over 7 octaves. Those which are audible at all have from 20 to 40,000 vibrations, extending over about 11 octaves. This shows what a great variety of different pitch numbers can be perceived and distinguished by the ear. In this respect the ear is far superior to the eye, which likewise distinguishes light of different periods of vibration by the sensation of different colours, for the compass of the vibrations of light distinguishable by the eye but slightly exceeds an Octave.t

Fo7re and 2}itch were the two first differences which we found between musical tones; the third was quality of tone, which we have now to investigate. When

Footnote: of Tone,' [ilbcr die Grcnzen dcr Tonv:ahrnc]imuncj, 1876, p. 20), are in the South Kensington Museum, Scientific Collection. I have several times tried them. I did not myself find the tones painful or cutting, probably because there was no beating of inharmonic upper ^Dartials. It is best to sound them with two violin bows, one giving the octave of the other. The tones can be easily heard at a distance of more than 100 feet in the gallery of the Museum. — Translator.']
t [Assuming the undulatory theory, which attributes the sensation of light to the vibrations of a supposed luminous ' ether,' resembling air but more delicate and mobile, then the phenomena of ' interference ' enables us to calculate the lengths of waves of light in empty space, &c. , hence the numbers of vibrations"in a second, and consequently the ratios of these numbers, which will then clearly resemble the ratios of the pitch nimibers that measure musical intervals. Assuming, then, that the yellow of the spectriun answers to the tenor c in music, and Fraunhofer's ' line A ' corresponds to the G below it, Prof. Helmholtz, in his Physiological Optics, {Handbuch der physiologischen Optik, 1867, p. 237), gives the following analogies between the notes of the piano and the colours of the spectrmn:—
Octaves below the lowest tone of the Violoncello. A,„ the lowest tone of the largest pianos. C\, commencement of the 16-foot octave, the lowest note assigned to the Double
U Bass in Beethoven's Pastoral Symphony. JS,, the lowest tone of the German four-stringed Double Bass, the lowest tone mentioned in the text. F„ the lowest tone of the English four-stringed Double Bass. G,, the lowest tone of the Italian three- stringed Double Bass. A„ the lowest tone of the English three-stringed Double Bass. C, conmiencement of the 8-foot octave, the lowest tone of the Violoncello, written on the second leger line below the bass stafi. G, the tone of the third open string of the Violoncello. c, commencement of the 4-foot octave ' tenor C,' the lowest tone of the Viola, written on the second space of the bass staff, d, the tone of the second open string of the Violoncello. /, the tone signified by the bass or i^-clef. ;/, the lowest tone of the Violin, a, the tone of the highest open string of the Violoncello, c', conmiencement of the
51 2-foot octave, ' middle 6',' written on the leger line between the bass and treble staves, the tone signified by the tenor or C-clef . d', the tone of the third open string of the Violin, g', the tone signified by the treble or G-clei. a', the tone of the second open string of the Violin, the 'tuning note ' for orchestras, t", commencement of the 1-foot octave, the usual ' tuning note ' for pianos. e", the tone of the first or highest open string of the Violin, c", commencement of the ^-foot octave, g'", the usual highest tone of the Flute. Civ, commencement of the ^-foot octave. €'", the highest tone on the Violin, being the double Octave harmonic of the tone of the highest open string, a}"", the usual highest tone of large pianos. tZ^', the highest tone of the piccolo flute. c^"i, the highest tone reached by Appunn's forks, see next note. — Translator.} * [Copies of these forks, described in Prof. Preyer's essay ' On the Limits of the Perception
F 1 end of the Red. G,Iied.

Footnote: f i, Violet. ■(/, Ultra-violet.
G i Red. ^,*Red.

^t' "

Footnote: ((,„ ..
A 5, Orange-red. ^,X>range.
b, end of the solar
spectrum.
c. Yellow.
The scale there-
c it. Green.
fZ, Greenish-blue.
fore extends to
about a Fourth
d |, Cyanogen-blue. e, Indigo-blue.
beyond the oc-
tave. — 2'ransla-
/, Violet.
tor.]
