page: 19

+ we hear notes of the same force and same pitch sonnded snccessively on a pianoforte, a vioUn, clarinet, oboe, or trumpet, or by the liuman voice, the character of the musical tone of each of these instruments, notwithstanding the identity of force and pitch, is so different that by means of it we recognise witli the greatest ease which of these instruments was used. Varieties of quality of tone appear to be infinitely numerous. Not only do we know a long series of musical instruments which could each produce a note of the same pitch; not only do diflerent individual instruments of the same species, and the voices of different individual singers show certain more delicate shades of quality of tone, which our ear is able to distinguish; but notes of the same pitch can sometimes be sounded on the same instrument with several qualitative varieties. In this respect the ' bowed ' instruments (i.e. those of the violin kind) are distinguished above all other. But the human voice is still richer, and human speech employs these very qualitative varieties of tone, in order ¶ to distinguish different letters. The different vowels, namely, belong to the class of sustained tones which can be used in music, while the character of consonants mainly depends upon brief and transient noises.

On inquiring to what external physical difference in the waves of sound the different qualities of tone correspond, we must remember that the amplitude of the vibration determines the force or loudness, and the period of vibration the pitch. Quality of tone can therefore depend upon neither of these. The only possible hypothesis, therefore, is that the quality of tone should depend upon the manner in which the motion is performed within the period of each single vibration. For the generation of a musical tone we have only required that the motion should be periodic, that is, that in any one single period of vibration exactly the same state should occur, in the same order of occurrence as it presents itself in any other single period. As to the kind of motion that should take place within any single period, no hypothesis was made. In this respect then an endless variety of ¶ motions might be possibly for the production of sound.

Observe instances, taking first such periodic motions as are performed so slowly that -we can follow them with the eye. Take a pendulum, which we can at any time construct by attaching a weight to a thread and setting it in motion. The pendulum swings from right to left with a imiform motion, uninterrupted by jerks. Near to either end of its path it moves slowly, and in the middle fast. Among ¶ sonorous bodies, which move in the same way, only very much faster, we may mention tuning-forks. When a tuning-fork is struck or is excited by a violin bow, and its motion is allowed to die away slowly, its two prongs oscillate backwards and forwards in the same way and after the same law as a pendulum, only they make many hundred swings for each single swing of the pendulum.

As another example of a periodic motion, take a hammer moved by a waterwheel. It is slowly raised by the millwork, then released, and falls down suddenly, is then again slowly raised, and so on. Here again we have a periodical backwards ¶ and forwards motion; but it is manifest that this kind of motion is totally diflf'erent from that of the pendulum. Among motions wdiich produce musical sounds, that of a violin string, excited by a bow, would most nearly correspond with the hammer's, as will be seen from the detailed description in Chap. V. The string clings for a time to the bow, and is carried along by it, then suddenly releases itself, like the hammer in the mill, and, like the latter, retreats somewhat with much greater velocity than it advanced, and is again caught by the bow and carried forward.

Again, imagine a ball thrown up vertically, and caught on its descent with a blow which sends it up again to the same height, and suppose this operation to be performed at equal intervals of time. Such a ball would occupy the same time in rising as in falling, but at the lowest point its motion would be suddenly interrupted, whereas at the top it wovdd pass through gradually diminishing speed of ascent into a gradually increasing speed of descent. This then would be a third kind of alternating periodic motion, and would take place in a manner essentially different from the other two.

c 2
