page: 20

To render the law of such motions more comprehensible to the eye than is le by lengthy verbal descriptions, mathematicians and physicists are in the habit of applying a graphical method, which must be frequently employed in this work, and should therefore be well understood.

To render this method intelligible suppose a drawing point b, fig. 5, to be fastened to the prong A of a tuning-fork in such a manner as to mark a surface of pauer B B. Let the tuning-fork be moved with a uniform velocity in the direction of the upper arrow, or else the paper be drawn under it in the opposite direction, as shown by the lower arrow. When the fork is not sounding, the point will describe the dotted straight line d c. But if the prongs have been first set in vibration, the point will describe the undulating line d c, for as the prong vibrates, the attached point b will constantly move backwards and forwards, and hence be

¶

sometimes on the right and sometimes on the left of the dotted straight line d c, as is shown by the wavy line in the figure. This wavy line once drawn, remains as a permanent image of the kind of motion performed by the end of the fork during ¶ its musical vibrations. As the point b is moved in the direction of the straight line d c with a constant velocity, equal sections of the straight line d c will correspond to equal sections of the time during which the motion lasts, and the distance of the wavy line on either side of the straight line will show how far the point b has moved from its mean position to one side or the other during those sections of time.

In actually performing such an experiment as this, it is best to wrap the paper over a cylinder which is made to rotate uniformly by clockwork. The paper is wetted, and then passed over a turpentine flame which coats it with lampblack, on which a fine and somewhat smooth steel point will easily trace delicate lines.

Fig. 6 is the copy of a drawing actually made in this way on the rotating cylinder of Messrs. Scott and Koenig's Phonmttograph.

Fig. 7 shows a portion of this curve on a larger scale. It is easy to see the meaning of such a curve. The drawing point has passed with a uniform velocity in the direction e h. Suppose that it has described the section e g in -^^ of a second. Divide e g into 12 equal parts, as in the figure, then the point has been y^o^ of a second in describing the length of any such section horizontally, and the curve shows us on what side and at what distance from the position of rest the vibrating point will be at the end of ■^~-^, yf^, and so on, of a second, or, generally, at any given short interval of time since it left the point e. We see, in the figure, that after yi^ of a second it had reached the height 1, and that it rose gradually till the end of yf ^ of a second; then, however, it began to descend gradually till, at the end of Tfo = oV seconds, it had reached its mean
