page: 22

+ string, we meet with a strange and imexpected phenomenon, long known indeed to individual musicians and ph^'sicists, but commonly regarded as a mere curiosity, its generality and its great significance for all matters relating to musical tones not having been recognised. The ear when its attention has been properly' directed to the effect of the vibrations which strike it, does not hear merely that one musical tone whose pitch is determined by the period of the vibrations in the manner already explained, but in addition to this it becomes aware of a whole series of higher musical tones, which we will call the harmonic upper partial tones, and sometimes simply the iipper jMrtials of the whole musical tone or note, in contradistinction to the fundamental or prime x><irtial tone or simply the prime, as it may be called, which is the lowest and generally the loudest of all the partial tones and by the pitch of which we judge of the pitch of the whole compound musical tone itself. The series of these upper partial tones is precisely the same for all com¶ pound musical tones which correspond to a uniformly periodical motion of the air. It is as follows: —

The first upper partial tone [or second partial tone] is the upper Octave of the prime tone, and makes double the number of vibrations in the same time. If we call the prime 6', this upper Octave will be c.

The .second upper partial tone [or third partial tone] is the Fifth of this Octave, or g, making three times as mtxny vibrations in the same time as the prime.

The third upper partial tone [or fourth partial tone] is the second higher Octave or c', making four times as many vibrations as the prime in the same time.

The fourth upper partial tone [or fifth partial tone] is the major Third of this second higher Octave, or e , with five times as many vibrations as the prime in the same time.

The fifth upper partial tone [or sixth partial tone] is the Fifth of the second higher Octave, or (f , making six times as many vibrations as the prime in the ¶ same time.

And thus they go on, becoming continually fainter, to tones making 7, 8, 9, ifcc, times as many vibrations in the same time, -.s the prime tone. Or in musical notation

i^^§=^=bEL=l?

Footnote: fj
fj "/>'[? c" d' e" ^y fi" ^^'a" ~h"\) h" c"
Ordinal mmher of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Pitch mfmber 66 132 198 264 380 396 462 528 594 660 726 792 858 924 990 1054*

where the figures [in the first line] beneath show how many times the corresponding

pitch number is greater than that of the prime tone [and, taking the lowest note

to have 66 vibrations, those in the second line give the pitch numbers of all the

¶ other notes].

The whole sensation excited in the ear by a periodic vibration of the air we

Footnote: ⁎ [This diagram has been slightly altered to This slightly flattens each note, and slow beats introduce all the first 16 harmonic partials can be produced in ever_v case (except, of of C 66 (which, excepting 11 and 13, are course, 11 and 13, which are not on the given on the Harmouical as harmonic notes), instrument) up to 16. It should also be obaiid to show the notation, symbolising, both in served that the pitch of the beat is very nearly letters and on the staff, the 7th, 11th, and that of the upper {not the lower) note in each 13th harmonic partials, which are not used in case. The whole of these 16 harmonics of C 66 general music. It is easy to show on the (except the 11th and 13th) can Ije played Harmonical that its lowest note, C of this at once on the Harmonical by means of the series, contains all these partials, after the harmonical bar, first without and then with theory of the beats of a disturbed unison the 7th and 14th. The whole series will be has been explained in Chap. VIII. Keep found to sound like a single fine note, and the down the note C, and touch in succession the 7th and 14th to materially increase its richnotes c, g, c', c', cj', &c., but in touching the latter ness. The relations of the partials in this case press the fmger-key such a little way down may be studied from the tables in the footnotes that the tone of the note is only just audible. to Chap. X. — Translator.']
