page: 23

+ have called a mHsica/ tone. We now find that this is ronijjoujtd, c()ntainin<>- a series of ditt'erent tones, which we distinguish as the constituents or 2M)-tial tones of the compound. The first of these constitnents is the pritne j^artial tone of the compoiuid, and the rest its harmonic upper partial tones. The number which shows the order of any partial tone in the series shows how many times its vibrational number exceeds that of the prime tone.* Thus, the second partial tone makes twice as many, the third three times as many vibrations in the same time as the prime tone, and so on.

G. S. Ohm was the first to declare that there is only one form of vibration which will give rise to no harmonic upper partial tones, and which will therefore consist solely of the prime tone. This is the form of vibration which we have described above as pecidiar to the pendulum and tmiing-forks, and drawn in figs. G and 7 (p. 10). We will call these j^^ndular vibrations, or, since they caiuiot be ¶ analysed into a compound of diflferent tones, simple vibrations. In what sense not merely other musical tones, but all other forms of vibration, may be considered as compowid, will be shown hereafter (Chap. IV.). The terms simple or pendular vibration, f will therefore be used as synonymous. We have hitherto used the expression tone and musical tone indifferently. It is absolutely necessary to distinguish in acoustics first, a musical tone, that is, the impression made by an// periodical vibration of the air; secondW, a simple tone, that is, the impression l)roduced by a simpde or pendular vibration of the air; and thirdly a comjwund tone, that is, the impression produced by the simultaneous action of several simple tones with certain definite ratios of pitch as already explained. A musical tone may be either simjde or comptound. For the sake of brevity, tone will be used in

Footnote: ⁎ [The ordinal number of a partial tone in general, must be distinguished from the ordinal number of an upper partial tone in particular. For the same tone the former number is always greater by unity than the latter, because the partials in general include the prime, which is reckoned as the first, and the upper partials exclude the prime, which being the loudest partial is of course not an upper partial at all. Thus the partials generally numbered 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are the same as the upper partials numbered 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 respectively. As even the Author has occasionally failed to carry out this distinction in the original German text, and other writers have constantly neglected it, too much weight cannot be here laid upon it. The presence or absence of the word wppcr before the word partml must always be care-
fully observed. It is safer never to speak of an vipper partial by its ordinal number, but to call the pfth upixr partial the sixth partial, omitting the word uyper and increasing the 51 ordinal number by one place. And so in other cases. — Translator.']
popularly explained by means of the constritction in fig. 10. Suppose a point to describe the circle of which c is the centre with a uniform velocity, and that an observer stands at a considerable distance in the prolongation of the line e h, so that he does not see the surface of the circle but only its edge, in which case the point will appear merely to move up and down along its diameter a b. This up and down motion would take place exactl}- according to the law of pendular vibration. To represent this motion graphi-
t The law of these vibrations may be
cally by means of a curve, divide the length e g, supposed to correspond to the time of a single period, into as many (here 12) equal parts as the circumference of the circle, and draw the perpendiculars 1, 2, 3, &c., on the dividing points of the line e g, in order, equal in length to and in the same direction with, those drawn in the circle from the corresponding points 1, 2, 3, &c. In this way we obtain the curve drawn in fig. 10, which agrees in
form witli that drawn by the tuning-fork, fig. 6, p. 206, but is of a larger size. Mathematically expressed, the distance of the vibrating point from its mean position at any time is equal to the sine of an arc proportional to the corresponding time, and hence the form of simple vibrations are also called the sivcvibrations [and the above curve is also known as the curve of sines'].
