page: 24

+ the general sense of a musical tone, leaving the context or a prefixed tjualitication to determine whether it is simple or compound. A compound tone will often bo briefly called a note, and a simple tone will also be frequently called a imrtial, when used in connection with a compound tone: otherwise, the full expression simple tone will be employed. A note has, properly speaking, no single pitch, as it is made up of various partials each of which has its own pitch. By the 2'''^^'^^ of a note or compo^ind tone then we shall therefore mean the ^)?YcA of its lowest pjartial or prime tone. By a chord or combination of tones we mean several musical tones (whether simple or compound) produced by difl^erent instruments or diff'erent parts of the same instrument so as to be heard at the same time. • The facts here adduced show us then that every musical tone in which harmonic upper partial tones can be distinguished, although produced by a single instrument, may really be considered as in itself a chord or combination of various simple tones.*

¶

* [The above paragraph relating to the English terms used in this translation, necessarily differs in many respects from the original, in which a justification is given of the use made by the Author of certain German expressions. It has been my object to employ terms which should be thoroughly English, and should not in any way recall the German words. The word tone in English is extremely ambiguous. Prof. Tj'ndall {Lectures on Sound, 2nd ed. 1869, p. 117) has ventured to define a tone as a sini/ile lone, in agreement with Prof. Helmholtz, who in the present passage limits the German word Ton in the same way. But I felt that an English reader could not be safely trusted to keep this very peculiar and important class of musical tones, which he has very rarely or never heard separately, invariably distinct from those musical tones

¶ with which he is familiar, unless the word tone were uniformly qualified by the epithet simple. The only exception I could make was in the case of a partial tone, which is received at once as a new conception. Even Prof. Helmholtz himself has not succeeded in using his word Ton consistently for a simple tone only, and this was an additional warning to me. English musicians have been also in the habit of using tone to signify a certain musical interval, and semitone for half of that interval, on the equally tempered scale. In this case I write Tone and Semitone with capital initials, a practice which, as already explained (note, p. 13c?'), I have found convenient for the names of all intervals, as Thirds, Fifths, &c. Prof. Helmholtz uses the word Klang for a musical tone, which gene-

¶ rally, but not always, means a compound tone. Prof. Tyndall (ibid.) therefore proposes to use the English word clang in the same sense. But clang has already a meaning in English, thus defined by Webster: ' a sharp shrill sound, made by striking together metallic substances, or sonorous bodies, as the clang of arms, or any like sound, as the claiig of trumpets. This word implies a degree of harshness in the sound, or more harshness than clink.' Interpreted scientifically, then, clang according to this definition, is either noise or one of those musical tones until inharmonic upper partials, which will be subsequently explained. It is therefore totally unadapted to represent a musical tone in general, for which the simple word tone seems eminently suited, being of course originally the tone produced by a stretched string. The coiomon word note, properly the mark by

which a musical tone is written, will also, in accordance with the general practice of musicians, be used for a musical tone, which is generally compound, without necessarily implying that it is one of the few recognised tones in our musical scale. Of course, if clang could not be used. Prof. Tyndall's suggestion to translate Prof. Helmholtz's Klangfarbc by clangtint (ibid.) fell to the ground. I can find no valid reason for supplanting the time-honoured expression qualitg of tone. Prof. Tyndall [ibid.) quotes Dr. Young to the effect that ' this quality of sound is sometimes called its register, colour, or timbre'. Register has a distinct meaning in vocal music which must not be disturbed. Timbre, properly a kettledrum, then a helmet, then the coat of arms surmounted with a helmet, then the official stamp bearing that coat of arms (now used in France for a postage label), and then the mark which declared a thing to be what it pretends to be, Burns's 'guinea's stamp,' is a foreign word, often odiously mispronounced, and not worth preserving. Colour I have never met with as applied to music, except at most as a passing metaphorical expression. But the difference of tones in qualitg is familiar to our language. Then as to the Partial Tones, Prof. Helmholtz uses Theiltone and Particdtone, which are aptly Englished by partial simple tones. The words simple and tone, however, may be omitted when partials is employed, as partials are necessarily both tones and simple. The constituent tones of a chord may be either simple or compound. The Grundion or fundamental tone of a compound tone then becomes its prime tone, or briefly its prime. The Grundton or root of a chord will be further explained hereafter. Upper partial (simple) tones, that is, the partials exclusive of the prime, even when harmonic (that is, for the most part, belonging to the first six partial tones), must be distinguished from the sounds usually called harmonics when produced on a violin or harp for instance, for such harmonics are not necessarily simple tones, but are more generally compounds of some of the complete series of j)artial tones belonging to the musical tone of the whole string, selected by damping the remainder. The fading harmonics heard in listening to the sound of a pianoforte string, struck and undamped, as the sound dies away, are also compound and not simple partial tones, but as they have the successive partials for their successive primes, they have the
