page: 25

Now, since quality of tone, as we have seen, depends on the form of vibration, which also determines the occurrence of upper partial tones, we have to inquire how far differences in quality of tone depend on different force or loudness of upper partials. This inq\iiry will be found to give a means of clearing- up our conceptions of what has liitherto been a perfect enigma, — the nature of quality of tone. And we must then, of course, attempt to explain how the ear manages to analyse every musical tone into a series of partial tones, and what is the meaning of this analysis. These investigations will engage our attention in the following chapters.

CHAPTER II.

Footnote: ON THE COMPOSITION OF VIBRATIONS.

A.T the end of the last chapter we came upon the remarkable fact that the human ear is capable, under certain conditions, of separating the musical tone produced by a single musical instrument, into a series of simple tones, namely, the prime partial tone, and the various upper partial tones, each of which produces its own separate sensation. That the ear is capable of distinguishing from each other tones proceeding from different sources, that is, which do not arise from one and the same sonorous body, we know from daily experience. There is no difficulty during a concert in following the melodic progression of each individual instrument or voice, if we direct our attention to it exclusively; and, after some practice, most persons can succeed in following the simultaneous progression of several united parts. This is true, indeed, not merely for musical tones, but also for noises, and for mixtures of music and noise. When several persons are speaking ¶ at once, we can generally listen at pleasure to the words of any single one of them, and even understand those words, provided that they are not too much overpowered by the mere loudness of the others. Hence it follows, first, that many different trains of waves of sound can be propagated at the same time through the same mass of ail-, without mutual disturbance; and, secondly, that the human ear is capable of again analysing into its constituent elements that composite motion of the air which is produced by the simultaneous action of several musical instruments. We will first investigate the nature of the motion of the air when it is produced by several simultaneous musical tones, and how such a compound motion is distinguished from that due to a single musical tone. We shall see that the ear has no decisive test by which it can in all cases distinguish between the effect of a

Footnote: pitch of those partials. But these fading meaning upper, but the English preposition harmonics are not regular compound tones of over is equivalent to the German preposition the kind described on p. 22«, because the lower iiher. Compare Obcrzolm, &n 'upper tooth,' ^ partials are absent one after another. Both i.e., a tooth in the upper jaw, with UeherzaJm, sets of harmonics serve to indicate the exist- an ' overtooth,' i.e., one grown over another, ence and place of the partials. But they are a projecting tooth. The continual recurrence no more those upper partial tones themselves, of such words as cJancj, clancjtint, overtone, than the original compound tone of the string would combine to give a strange un-English is its own prime. Great confusion of thought appearance to a translation from the German, having, to my own knowledge, arisen from On the contrary I have endeavoured to put it conionndiug such ha rmunics with tqjpcr parti(il into as straightforward EngHsh as possible. tones, I have generally avoided using the am- But for those acquainted with the original and biguous substantive Af/r/iwy/uV. Properly speak- with Prof. Tyndall's work, this explanation ing the harmonics of any compound tone are seemed necessary. Finally I would caution other compound tones of which the primes are the reader against using overtones for partial partials of the original compound tone of tones in general, as almost every one who which they are said to be harmonics. Prof. adopts Prof. Tyndall's word is in the habit of Helmholtz's term Oherfihie is merely a con- doing. Indeed I have in the course of this traction for Oberpartiattonc, but the casual translation observed, that even Prof. Helmholtz resemblance of the sounds of ober and over, has himself has been occasionally misled to emled Prof. Tyndall to the erroneous translation ploy Obertone in the same loos^e manner. See overtones. The German ober is an adjective my remarks in note, p. 23f. — Translator.]
