page: 27

And yet, ;is the ear is able to distinguish all the sei)arate constituent parts of this confused whole, we are forced to conclude that all these different systems of wave coexist in the mass of air, and leave one another mntually undisturbed. But how is it possible for them to coexist, since every individual train of waves has at any particular point in the mass of air its own particular degree of condensation and rarefaction, which determines the velocity' of the particles of air to this side or that? It is evident that at each point in the mass of air, at each instant of time, there can be only one single degree of condensation, and that the particles of air can be moving with only one single determinate kind of motion, having only one single determinate amount of velocity, and passing in only one single determinate direction.

What happens under such circumstances is seen directly by the eye in the waves of water. If where the water shows large waves we throw a stone in, tiie waves thus caused will, so to speak, cut into the larger moving surface, and thislj surface will be partly raised, and partlj- depressed, by the new waves, in such a way that the fresh crests of the rings will rise just as much above, and the troughs sink just as much below the curved surfaces of the previous larger waves, as they would have risen above or svink below the horizontal surface of calm water. Hence where a crest of the smaller system of rings of waves comes upon a crest of the greater system of waves, the surface of the water is raised by the sum of the two heights, and where a trough of the former coincides with a trough of the latter, the surface is depressed by the sum of the two depths. This may be expressed more briefly if we consider the heights of the crests above the level of the surface at rest, as positive magnitudes, and the depths of the troughs as negative magnitudes, and then form the so-called algebraical sum of these positive and negative magnitudes, in which case, as is well known, two positive magnitudes (heights of crests) must be added, and similarly for two negative magnitudes (depths ¶ of troughs); but when both negative and positive concur, one is to be subtracted from the other. Performing the addition then in this algebraical sense, we can express our description of the surface of the water on which two systems of waves concur, in the following simple manner: The distance of the surface of the water at any point from its jjosition of rest is at any moment eqiial to the [alyeljraica/] sum of the distances at vjliich it ^vould have stood had each wave acted separately at the same jjlace and at the same time.

The eye most clearly and easily distinguishes the action in such a case as has been just adduced, where a smaller circular system of waves is produced on a large rectilinear system, because the two systems are then strongly distinguished from each other both by the height and shape of the waves. But with a little attention the eye recognises the same fact even when the two systems of waves have but slightly diff"erent forms, as when, for example, long rectilinear waves advancing towards the shore concur with those reflected from it in a slightly different ¶ direction. In this case we observe those well-known comb-backed waves where the crest of one system of waves is heightened at some points by the crests of the other system, and at others depressed by its troughs. The multiplicity of forms is here extremely great, and any attempt to describe them would lead us too far. The attentive observer will readily comprehend the result by examining any disturbed surface of water, without further description. It will s\iffice for our purpose if the first example has given the reader a clear conception of what is meant by adding waves together/''

Hence although the surface of the water at any instant of time can assume only one single form, while each of two different systems of waves simultaneously attempts to impress its own shape upon it, we are able to suppose in the above

Footnote: ⁎ Tho velocities and displacements of the addition of waves as is spoken of in the text,
particles of water are also to be added accord- is not perfectly correct, unless the heights of
ing to the law of the so-called parallelogram the waves are infinitely small in comparison
of forces. Strictly speaking, such a simple with their lengths.
