page: 28

+ sense that the two systems coexist and are superimposed, by considering the actual elevations and depressions of the surface to be suitably separated into two parts, each of which belongs to one of the systems alone.

In the same sense, then, there is also a superimposition of different systems of sound in the air. By each train of waves of sound, the density of the air and the velocity and position of the particles of air, are temporarily altered. There are places in the wave of sound comparable with the crests of the waves of water, in which the quantity of the air is increased, and the air, not having free space to escape, is condensed; and other places in the mass of air, comparable to the troughs of the waves of water, having a diminished quantity of air, and hence diminished density. It is true that two different degrees of density, produced by two different systems of waves, cannot coexist in the same place at the same time; nevertheless the condensations and rarefactions of the air can be (algebraically)

¶ added, exactly as the elevations and depressions of the surface of the water in the former case. Where two condensations are added we obtain increased condensation, where two rarefactions are added we have increased rarefaction; while a concurrence of condensation and rarefaction mutually, in whole or in part, destroy or neutralise each other.

The displacements of the particles of air are compounded in a similar manner. If the displacements of two different systems of waves are not in the same direction, they are compounded diagonally; for example, if one system would drive a particle of air upwards, and another to the right, its real path will be obliquely upwards towards the right. For our present purpose there is no occasion to enter more particularly into such compositions of motion in different directions. We are only interested in the effect of the mass of air upon the ear, and for this we are only concerned with the motion of the air in the passages of the ear. Now the passages of our ear are so narrow in comparison with the length of the waves of

¶ sound, that we need only consider such motions of the air as are parallel to the axis of the passages, and hence have only to distinguish displacements of the particles of air outwards and inwards, that is towards the outer air and towards the interior of the ear. For the magnitude of these displacements as well as for their velocities with which the particles of air move outwards and inwards, the same (algebraical) addition holds good as for the crests and troughs of waves of water.

Hence, vjhen several sonorous bodies in the surroxmding atmosphere, simnltaneously excite different systems of waves of sound, the changes of density of the air, and the disj)lacements and velocities of the ^)a^*^?'c^6's of the air ivithin the passages of the ear, are each equal to the [algebraical) sum of the corresponding changes of density, disjolacements, and- velocities, inhich each system of waves would have sejmrately produced, if it had acted independently; * and in this sense we can say that all the separate vibrations which separate waves of sound would

¶ have produced, coexist undisturbed at the same time within the passages of our ear. After having thus in answer to the first question explained in what sense it is possible for several different systems of waves to coexist on the same surface of water or within the same mass of air, we proceed to determine the means possessed by our organs of sense, for analysing this composite whole into its original constituents.

I have already observed that an eye which surveys an extensive and disturbed surface of water, easily distinguishes the separate systems of waves from each other and follows their motions. The eye has a great advantage over the ear in being able to survey a large extent of surface at the same moment. Hence the eye readily sees whether the individual waves of water are rectilinear or curved, and whether they have the same centre of curvature, and in what direction they

Footnote: ⁎ The same is true for the whole mass of according to the law of the parallelogram of external air, if only the addition of the dis- forces, placements in different dii'ections is made
