page: 31

+ taking sections consisting of two periods of B, we divide B into larger sections, each of which is of the same horizontal length, and hence corres])onds to the same duration of time, as the sections of A.

If, then, both simple tones are heard at once, and the times of the points e and dj, € and 8, e, and S, coincide, the heights of the portions of the section of curve e e have to be [algebraically] added to heights of the section of curve <i„8, and similarly for the sections e c, and 8 S,. The result of this addition is shown in the curve C. The dotted line is a duplicate of the section d^S in the curve A. Its object is to make the composition of the two sections immediately evident to the eye. It is easily seen that the curve C in every place rises as much above or sinks as nnich below the curve A, as the curve B respectively rises above or sinks beneath the horizontal line. The heights of the curve C are consequently, in accordance with the rule for compounding vibrations, equal to the [algebraical] sum ¶ of the corresponding heights of A and B. Thus the perpendicular Ci in C is the sum of the perpendiculars a, and bi in A and B; the lower part of this perpendicular Ci, from the straight line up to the dotted curve, is equal to the perpendicular ai, and the upper part, from the dotted to the continuous curve, is equal to the perpendicular bj. On the other hand, the height of the perpendicular Cj is equal to the height a^ diminished by the depth of the fall bo. And in the same way all other points in the curve C are found.*

It is evident that the motion represented by the curve C is also periodic, and that its periods have the same duration as those of A. Thus the addition of the section d„S of A and e e of B, must give the same result as the addition of the perfectly equal and similar sections 8 8, and e e„ and, if we supposed both curves to be continued, the same would be the case for all the sections into which they would be divided. It is also evident that equal sections of both curves could not continually coincide in this way after completing the addition, unless the ciu'ves thus ¶ added could be also separated into exactly equal and similar sections of the same length, as is the case in fig. 11, whei-e two periods of B last as long or have the same horizontal length as one of A. Now the horizontal lengths of our figure represent time, and if we pass from the curves to the real motions, it results that the motion of air caused by the composition of the two simple tones, A and B, is also periodic, just because one of these simple tones makes exactly twice as many vibrations as the other in the same time.

It is easily seen by this example that the peculiar form of the two curves A and B has nothing to do with the fact that their sum C is also a periodic curve. Whatever be the form of A and B, provided that each can be separated into equal and similar sections which have the same horizontal lengths as the equal and similar sections of the other — no matter whether these sections correspond to one or two, or three periods of the individual curves — then any one section of the curve A compounded with any one section of the curve B, will always give a section ¶ of the curve C, which will have the same length, and will be precisely equal and similar to any other section of the curve C obtained by compounding any other section of A with any other section of B.

When such a section embraces several periods of the corresponding curve (as in fig. 11, the sections e e and e e, each consist of two periods of the simple tone B), then the pitch of this second tone B, is that of an upper partial tone of a prime (as the simple tone A in fig. 11), whose period has the length of that principal section, in accordance with the rule above cited.

In order to give a slight conception of the multiplicity of forms producible by comparatively simple compositions, I may remark that the compound curve would

Footnote: ⁎ [Readers not used to geometrical con- spending perpendiculars in A and B in proper
structions are strongly recommended to trace directions, and joining the extremities of the
the two curves A and B, and to construct the lengths thus found by a curved line. In this
curve C from them, by drawing a number of way only can a clear conceiDtion of the cona-
perpendiculars to a straight line, and then position of vibrations be rendcnnl sufficiently
setting oS. upon them the lengths of the corre- familiar for subsequent use. — Translatvr.'^
