page: 34

+ vibrational curves A and B bear to eacb other, or displacing the curve B by other distances to the right or left, than those ah-eadj selected in the figures. By these simplest possible examples of such compositions, the reader will be able to form some idea of the enormous variety of forms which would result from using more than two simple forms of vibration, each form representing an upper partial tone of the same prime, and hence, on addition, always producing fresh periodic curves. We should be able to make the heights of each single simple vibrational curve greater or smailer at pleasure, and displace each one separately by any amount in respect to the prime, — or, in physical language, we should be able to alter their amplitudes and the difterence of their phases; and each such alteration of amplitude and difference of phase in each one of the simple vibrations would produce a fresli change in the resulting composite vibrational form. [See App. XX. sect. M. No. 2.1

The multiplicity of vibrational forms which can be thus produced by the com¶ position of simple pendular vibrations is not merely extraordinarily great: it is so great that it cannot be greater. The French mathematician Fourier has proved the correctness of a mathematical law, which in reference to our present subject may be thus enunciated: Any given regular periodic form of vibration can always be produced by the addition of simple vibrations, having 2^itch numbers which are once, twice, thrice, four times, dx., as great as the pitch nwnbers of the given motion.

The amplit%ides of the elementary simple vibrations to which the height of our wave-curves corresponds, and the difference of phase, that is, the relative amount of horizontal displacement of the wave-curves, can always be found in every given case, as Fourier has shown, by peculiar methods of calculation (which, however, do not admit of any popular explanation), so that any given regularly periodic motion can always be exhibited in one single way, and in no other way whatever, as the sum of a certain number of j^endidar vibrations. ¶ Since, according to the results already obtained, any regularly periodic motion corresponds to some musical tone, and any simple pendular vibration to a simple musical tone, these propositions of Fourier ma\ be thus expressed in acoustical terms:

Any vibrational motion of the air in the entrance to the ear, corresjwnding to a musical tone, may be cdtvays, and for each case only in one single way, exhibited as the sum of a number of simjde vibrational motions, corresponding to the partials of this musical tone.

Since, according to these propositions, any form of vibration, no matter what shape it maj^ take, can be expressed as the sum of simple vibrations, its analysis into such a sum is quite independent of the power of the eye to perceive, by looking at its representative curve, whether it contains simple vibrations or not, and if it does, what they are. I am obliged to lay stress upon this point, because I have by no means unfrequently found even physicists start on the false hypothesis, that the ¶ vibrational form must exhibit little waves corresponding to the several audible upper partial tones. A mere inspection of the figs. II and 12 (p. 30b and p. 32b) will suffice to show that although the composition can be easily traced in the parts where the curve of the prime tone is dotted in, this is quite impossible in those parts of the curves C and D in each figure, where no such assistance has been provided. Or, if we suppose that an observer who had rendered himself thoroughly familiar with the curves of simple vibrations imagined that he could trace the composition in these easy cases, he would certainly utterly fail on attempting to discover by his eye alone the composition of such curves as are shown in figs. 8 and 9 (p. 21c). In these will be found straight lines and acute angles. Perha]js it will be asked how it is possible by compounding such smooth and uniformly rounded curves as those of our simple vibrational forms A and B in figs. 1 1 and 12, to generate at one time straight lines, and at another acute angles. The answer is, that an infinite number of simple vibrations are required to generate curves with such discontinuities as are there shown. But when a great many
