page: 37

+ greater and greater, \iiitil by their increase the motion imparted on every osciUation of the bell to the walls of the belfry, and the external air would become so great as exactly to be covered by the power exerted by the boy at each swing.

The success of this process depends, therefore, essentially on the boy's applying his force only at those moments when it will increase the motion of the bell. That is, he must employ his strength periodically, and the ])criodic time must be equal to that of the bell's swing, or he will not be successful. He would just as easily bring the swinging bell to rest, if he clung to the rope only during its ascent, and thus let his weight be raised by the bell.

A similar experiment which can be tried at any instant is the following. Construct a pendulum by hanging a heavy body (such as a ring) to the lower end of a thread, holding the upper end in the hand. On setting the ring into gentle pendular vibration, it will be found that this motion can be gradually and considerably ¶ increased by watching the moment when the pendulum has reached its greatest departure from the vertical, and then giving the hand a very small motion in the opposite direction. Thus, when the pendulum is furthest to the right, move the hand very slightly to the left; and when the pendulum is furthest to the left, move the hand to the right. The pendulum may be also set in motion from a state of rest by giving the h^md similar very slight motions having the same periodic time as the pendulum's own swings. The displacements of the hand may be so small under these circumstances, that they can scarcely be perceived with the closest attention, a circumstance to which is due the superstitious application of this little apparatus as a divining rod. If namely the observer, without thinking of his hand, follows the swings of the pendulum with his eye, the hand readily follows the eye, and involuntarily moves a little backwards or forwards, precisely in the same time as the pendulum, after this has accidentally begun to move. These involuntary motions of the hand are usnally overlooked, at least when the observer ¶ is not accustomed to exact observations on such unobtrusive influences. By this nieans any existing vibration of the pendulum is increased and kept up, and any accidental motion of the ring is readily converted into pendular vibrations, which seem to arise spontaneously without any co-operation of the observer, and are hence attributed to the influence of hidden metals, running streams, and so on.

If on the other hand the motion of the hand is intentionally made in the contrary direction, the pendiilum soon comes to rest.

The explanation of the process is very simple. When the iipper end of the thread is fastened to an immovable support, the pendulum, once struck, continues to swhig for a long time, and the extent of its swings diminishes very slowly. We can suppose the extent of the swings to be measured by the angle which the thread makes with the vertical on its greatest deflection from it. If the attached body at the point of greatest deflection lies to the right, and we move the hand to the left, we manifestly increase the angle between the string and the vertical, and con- 1 sequently also augment the extent of the swing. By moving the upper end of the string in the opposite direction we should decrease the extent of the swmg.

In this case there is no necessity for moving the hand in the same periodic time as the pendulum swings. We miglit move the hand backwards and forwards only at every third or fifth or other swing of the pendulum, and we should still produce large swings. Thus, when the pendulum is to the right, move the hand to the left, and keep it still, till the pendulum has swung to the left, then again to the right, and then once more to the left, and then return the hand to its first position, afterwards wait till the pendidum has swung to the right, then to the left, and again to the right, and then recommence the first motion of the hand. In this way three complete vibrations, or double excursions of the pendulum, will correspond to one left and right motion of the hand. In the same way one left and right motion of the hand may be made to correspond with seven or more swings of the pendulum. The meaning of this i)rocess is always that the motion of the
