page: 38

+ liand must in each case be made at such a time and in such a direction as to be opposed to the deflection of the penduhun and consequently to inci'ease it.

By a sHght alteration of the process we can easily make two, four, si.x, etc., swings of the pendulum correspond to one left and right motion of the hand; for a sudden motion of the hand at the instant of the pendulum's passage through the vertical has no influence on the size of the swings. Hence when the pendulum lies to the right move the hand to the left, and so increase its velocity, let it swing to the left, watch for the moment of its passing the vertical line, and at that instant return the hand to its original position, allow it to reach the right, and then again the left and once more the right extremity of its arc, and then recommence the first motion of the hand.

We are able then to communicate violent motion to the pendulum by very small periodical vibrations of the hand, having their periodic time exactly as great, ¶ else two, three, four, &c., times as great as that of the peudular oscillation. We have here considered that the motion of the hand is backwards. This is not necessary. It may take place continuously in any other way we please. When it moves continuously there Avill be generally portions of time during which it will increase the pendulum's motion, and others perhaps in which it will diminish the same. In order to create strong vibrations in the pendulum, then, it will be necessary that the increments of motion should l)e permanently predominant, and should not be neutralised by the sum of the decrements.

Now if a determinate periodic motion were assigned to the hand, and we wished to discover wliether it would produce considerable vibrations in the pendulum, we could not alwaj's predict the result without calculation. Theoretical mechanics would, however, prescribe the following })i-ocess to be pursued: Analyse the lieriocUc motion of the hand into a sum of simple pendular vihrations of the Aa?ifZ— exactly in the same way as was laid down in the last chapter for the periodic motions of ¶ the particles of air, — then, if the periodk time of one of these vibrations is eqwil to the periodic time of the 2'Ctiduliim's oi"n oscillations, the j/enduliim roill be set into violent motion, but not otherwise. We might compound small pendular motions of the hand out of viljrations of other periodic times, as much as we liked, but we should fail to produce any lasting strong swings of the pendulum. Hence the analysis of the motion of the hand into pendular swings has a real meaning in nature, producing determinate mechanical effects, and for the present purpose no other analysis of the motion of the hand into any other partial motions can be substituted for it.

In the above examples the pendulum could lie set into sympathetic vibration, when the hand moved periodically at the same rate as the pendulum; in this case the longest partial vibration of the hand, corresponding to the prime tone of a resonant vibration, was, so to sjjeak, in unison with the pendulum. When three swings of the pendulum went to one backwards and forwards motion of the hand, ¶ it was the third partial swing of the hand, answering as it were to the Twelfth of its prime tone, which set the pendulum in motion. And so on.

The same process that we have thus become acquainted with for swings of long periodic time, holds precisely for swings of so short a period as sonorous vibrations. Any elastic body which is so fastened as to admit of continuing its vibrations for some length of time when once set in motion, can also be made to vibrate symp.itheticall}', when it receives periodic agitations of comparatively small amounts, having a periodic time corresponding to that of its own tone.

Gently touch one of the keys of a pianoforte without striking the string, so as to raise the damper only, and then sing a note of the corresponding pitch forcibly directing the voice against the strings of the instrument. On ceasing to sing, the note will be echoed back from the piano. It is easy to discover that this echo is caused by the string which is in unison with the note, for directly the hand is removed from the key, and the damper is allowed to fall, the echo ceases. The sympathetic vibration of the sti-ing is still better shown by putting little paper
