page: 39

+ riders iipon it, which are jerked oft" as soon as the string vibrates. The more exactly the singer hits the pitch of the string, the more strongly it vibrates. A very little deviation from the exact pitch fails in exciting sympathetic vibration.

In this experiment the sounding board of the instrument is first struck by the vibrations of the air excited by the human voice. The sounding board is well known to consist of a broad flexible wooden plate, which, owing to its extensive siirface, is better adapted to convey the agitation of the strings to the air, and of the air to the strings, than the small surface over which string and air arc themselves directly in contact. The sounding board first commiuiicates the agitations which it receives from the air excited by the singer, to the points where the string is fastened. The magnitude of an}- single such agitation is of course infinitesimally small. A very large number of such effects must necessarily be aggregated, before any sensible motion of the string can be caused. And such a con¶ tinuous addition of eff"ects really takes place, if, as in the preceding experiments with the bell and the pendulum, the periodic time of the small agitations which are communicated to the extremities of the string by the air, through the intervention of the sounding board, exactl}- corresponds to the periodic time of the string's own vibrations. When this is the case, a long series of such vibrations will really set the string into motion which is very violent in comparison with the exciting cause.

In place of the human voice we might of course use any other musical instrument. Provided only that it can produce the tone of the pianoforte string accurately and sustain it powerfully, it will bring the latter into sympathetic vibration. In place of a pianoforte, again, we can employ any other stringed instrument having a sounding board, as a violin, guitar, harp, etc., and also stretched membranes, bells, elastic tongues or plates, ifec, provided only that the latter are so fastened as to admit of their giving a tone of sensible duration when once made ¶ to sound.

Wlien the pitch of the original sounding body is not exactly that of the sym|)athising body, or that which is meant to vibrate in sympathy with it, the latter will nevertheless often make sensible sympathetic vibrations, which will diminish in amplitude as the difference of pitch increases. But in this respect difterent sounding bodies show great difterences, according to the length of time for which they continue to soiuid after having been set in action before comnnuiicating their whole motion to the air.

Bodies of small mass, which readily communicate their motion to the air, and quickly cease to sound, as, for example, stretched membranes, or violin strings, are readily set in sympathetic vibration, because the motion of the air is conversely readily transferred to them, and they are also sensibly moved by sufficiently strong agitations of the air, even when the latter have not precisely the same periodic time as the natural tone of the sympathising bodies. The limits of pitch capable of exciting sympathetic vibration are consequently a little wider in this case. By ¶ the comparatively greater influence of the motion of the air upon light elastic bodies of this kind which offer but little resistance, their natural periodic time can be slightly altered, and adapted to that of the exciting tone. Massive elastic bodies, on the other hand, which are not readily movable, and are slow in communicating their sonorous vibrations to the air, such as bells and ])lates, and continue to sound for a long time, are also more difficult to move by the air. A much longer addition of effects is required for this purpose, and consequently it is also necessary to hit the pitch of their own tone with much greater nicety, in order to make them vibrate sympathetically. Still it is well known that bell-shaped glasses can be put into violent motion by singing their proper tone into them; indeed it is i-elated that singers with very powerful and pure voices, have sometimes been able to crack them by the agitation thus caused. The principal difficulty in this experiment is in hitting the pitch with sufficient precision, and retaining the tone at that exact pitch for a sufficient length of time.

Tuning-forks are the most difficult bodies to set in sympathetic \ibration. To
