page: 41

+ uionic upper i)artial tones of a musical tone already mentioned. They are for tl>e most part inharmonic in relation to the prime tone.

In many cases the vibrations and their mode of distribution over the vibrating bodies can be rendered visible by strewing a little fine sand over the latter. Take, for ■example, a menibrane (as a bladder or piece of thin india-rubber) stretched over a circular ring. In fig. 14 are shown the various forms which a membrane can jissume when it vibrates. The diameters and circles on the surface of the membrane mark those points which remain at rest during the vibration, and are known <is nodal linen. By these the surface is divided into a number of compartments which bend altei-nately up and down, in such a way that while those marked ( + ) rise, those marked (-) fall. Over the figures a, b, c, are shown the forms of a .section of the membrane during vibration. Only those forms of motion are drawn which correspond with the deepest and most easily producible tones of the meml)rane. The number of circles and diameters can be increased at pleasure by 51 taking a sufficiently thin membrane, and stretching it with sufiicient regularity, and in this case the tones would continually sharpen in pitch. By strewing sand on the membrane the figures are easily rendered visible, for as soon as it begins to vibrate the particles of sand'collect on the nodal lines.

In the same way it is possible to render visible the nodal lines and forms of vibration of oval and square membranes, and of differently-shaped plane elastic" plates, bars, and so on. These form a series of very interesting phenomena discovered by Chladni, but to pursue them would lead us too far from our proper .subject. It will suflice to give a few details respecting the simplest case, that of a circular memlirane.

In the time required by the membrane to execute 100 vibrations of the form a, fig. 14 (p. 40c), the number of vibrations executed by the other forms is as follows: — ¶

Footnote: Form of \'ibration
a without uodal lines .
b with one circle ....
c with two circles
d with one diameter
e with one diameter and one circle

Footnote: f with two diameters .
Pitch Number
Cents *
Notes nearly
100
0

(.

Footnote: 229-6
1439
rf'-f-
859-9
2217
h'h +
159
805
«[?
292
1858

'j\r

Footnote: 214
1317

4+

The prime tone has been here arbitrarily assumed as c, in order to note the intervals of the higher tones. Those simple tones produced by the membrane which are slightly higher than those of the note written, are marked ( -1-); those lower, by (-). In this case there is no commensurable ratio between the prime t(me and the other tones, that is, none expressible in whole numbers.

Strew a very thin membrane of this kind with sand, and somid its prime tone ¶ strongly in its neighbourhood; the sand will be driven by the vibrations towards the edge, where it collects. On producing another of the tones of the membrane, the sand collects in the corresponding nodal lines, and we are thus easily able to determine to which of its tones the membrane has responded. A singer wdio knows how to hit the tones of the membrane correctly, can thus easily make the

Footnote: spoken of in the text (as in this table), they must be considered as additions by the translator. In the present case, they give the intervals exactly, and not roughly as in the column of notes. Thus, 1439 cents is sharper than 14 Semitones above c, that is, sharper than d' by 39 hundredths of a Semitone, or about ^ of a Semitone, and 1858 is flatter than 19 Semitones above c, that is flatter than g' by 42 hundredths of a Semitone, or nearly i a Semitone. — Translator.']

Footnote: ⁎ [Cents are hundredths of iiu equal Semitone, and are exceedingly valuable as measures of any, especially unusual, musical intervals. They are fully exf)lained, and the method of calculating them from the Interval Ratios is given in App. XX. sect. C. Here it need only be said that the number of hundreds of cents is the number of equal, that is, pianoforte Semitones in the interval, and these may be counted on the keys of any piano, while the units and tens show the number of hundredths of a Semitone in excess. Wherever cents are
