page: 42

+ sand {irranged itself at pleasure in one order or the other, by singing the corresponding tones powerfully at a distance. But in general the simpler figures of the deeper tones are more easily generated than the complicated figures of the upper tones. It is easiest of all to set the membrane in general motion by sounding its prime tone, and hence such memln-anes have been much nsed in aconstics to prove the existence of some determinate tone in some determinate spot of the siuTounding air. It is most suitable for this pui-j)ose to connect the membrane with an inclosed mass of air. A, fig. 15, is a glass bottle, Fig. is.

having an open month a, and in place of its bottom b, a stretched membrane, consisting of Avet pig's bladder, allowed to dry after it has been stretched and fastened. At c is attached a ¶ single fibre of a silk cocoon, bearing a drop of sealing-wax, and hanging down like a pendulum against the membrane.

As soon as the membrane vibrates, the little pendulum is violently agitated. Such a pendulum is very convenient as long as we have no reason to apprehend any confusion of the prime tone of the membrane with any other of its proper tones. There is no scattering of sand, and the apparatus is therefore always in order. But to decide with certainty what tones are really agitating the membrane, we must after all place the bottle with its mouth downwards and strew sand on the membrane. However, when the bottle is of the right size, and the membrane uniformly stretched and fastened, it is only the prime tone of the membrane (slightly altered by that of the sympathetically vibrating mass of air in the bottle) which is easily excited. This prime tone can be made deeper by increasing the size of the membrane, or the volume of the bottle, or by diminishing the tension of the membrane ¶ or size of the orifice of the bottle.

A stretched membrane of this kind, whether it is or is not attached to tie bottom of a bottle, will not only be set in vibration by nuisical tones of the same pitch as its own proper tone, but also by such musical tones as contain the proper tone of the membrane among its upper partial tones. Generally, given a number of interlacing waves, to discover whether the membrane will vibrate sympathetically, we must suppose the motion of the air at the given place to be mathematically analysed into a sum of pendular vibrations. If there is one such vibration among them, of which the periodic time is the same as that of any one of the proper tones of the membrane, the corresponding vibrational form of the membrane will be superinduced. But if there are none such, or none sutfieiently powerful, the membrane will remain at rest.

In this case, then, we also find that the analysis of the motion of the air into pendular vibrations, and the existence of certain vibrations of this kind, are deci¶ sive for the sympathetic vibration of the membrane, and for this purpose no other similar analysis of the motion of the air can be substituted for its analysis into pendular vibrations. The pendular vibrations into wdiich the composite motion of the air can be analysed, here show themselves capable of producing mechanical eflfects in external nature, independently of the ear, and independently of mathematical theory. Hence the statement is confirmed, that the theoretical view which first led mathematicians to this method of analysing compound vibrations, is founded in the nature of the thing itself.

As an example take the following descri})tiou of a single experiment: — A bottle of the shape shown in fig. 15 above Avas covered with a thin vulcanised india-rubber membrane, of which the vibrating surface was -49 millimetres (1-93 inches)" in diameter, the bottle being UO millimetres (5-51 inches) high, and

Footnote: ⁎ [As 10 inches are exactly 25J: millimetres the calculation of one set of measures from and 100 metres, that is, 100,000 millimetres are the other. Roughly we may assume 25 mm. 3937 inches, it is easy to form little tables for to be 1 inch. But wlieuever dimensions are
