page: 44

Hence any one, even if he has no ear for music or is quite unpractised in detecting musical somids, is put in a condition to pick the required simple tone, even if comparatively faint, from out of a great number of others. The proper tone of the resonator may even be sometimes heard cropping up in the whistling of the wind, the rattling of carnage Avheels, the splashing of water. For these purposes such resonators are incomparably more sensitive than tuned membranes. When the simple tone to be observed is faint in comparison with those Avhich accompany it, it is of advantage to alternately apply and withdraw the resonator. We thus easily feel whether the proper tone of the resonator begins to sound when the instrument is applied, whereas a unifoi-m continuous tone is not so readily perceived.

A properly tuned series of such resonators is therefore an important instrument for experiments in which individiial faint tones have to be distinctly heard, although accompanied by others which are strong, as in observations on the combinational

¶ and Tipper partial tones, and a series of other phenomena to be hereafter described relating to chords. By their means such researches can be carried out even by ears quite untrained in musical observation, whereas it had been previously impossible to conduct them except by trained musical ears, and much strained attention properly assisted. These tones were consequently accessible to the observation of only a very few individuals; and indeed a large number of physicists and even musicians had never succeeded in distinguishing them. And again even the trained ear is now able, with the assistance of resonators, to carry the analysis of a mass of miisical tones much further than before. Without their help, indeed, 1 shou.ld scarcely have succeeded in making the observations hereafter described, with so much precision and certainty, as I have been enabled to attain at present.*

It must be carefully noted that the ear does not hear the required tone with augmented force, unless that tone attains a considerable intensity within the mass

¶ of air enclosed in the resonator. Now the mathematical theory of the motion of the air shows that, so long as the amplitude of the vibrations is sufficiently small, the enclosed air will execute pendular oscillations of the same periodic time as those in the external air, and none other, and that only those pendular oscillations whose periodic time corresponds with that of the proper tone of the resonator, have any considerable strength; the intensity of the rest diminishing as the difTerence of their pitch from that of the proper tone increases. All this is independent of the connection of the ear and resonator, except in so far as its tympanic membrane forms one of the inclosing walls of the mass of air. Theoretically this apparatus does not differ from the bottle with an elastic membrane, in fig. 15 (p. 42a), but its sensitiveness is amazingly increased by using the drumskin of the ear for the closing membrane of the bottle, and thus bringing it in direct connection with the auditory nerves themselves. Hence we cannot obtain a powerful tone in the resonator except when an analysis of the motion of the external air into

¶ pendular vibrations, would show that one of them has the same periodic time as the proper tone of the resonator. Here again no other analysis but that into pendular vibrations woidd give a correct result.

It is easy, for an observer to convince himself of the above-named properties of resonators. Apply one to the ear, and let a piece of harmonised miisic, in which the proper tone of the resonator frequently occurs, be executed by any instruments. As often as this tone is struck, the ear to which the instrument is held, will hear it violently contrast with all the other tones of the chord.

This proper tone will also often be heard, but more weakly, when deeper musical tones occur, and on investigation we find that in such cases tones have been struck which include the proper tone of the resonator among their upper partial tones. Such deeper musical tones are called the harmonic nnder tones of the resonator. They are musical tones whose periodic time is exactly 2, 3, 4, 5, and so on, times as great as that of the resonator. Thus if the proper tone of

Footnote: ⁎ See Appendix II. for the measures and different foi'ins of these Resonators.
