page: 45

+ the resonator is c", it will be heard when a nmsical instruuieut sounds r', ./", c, A\y, F, D, C, and so on.* In this case the resonator is made to sound in sympathy with one of the harmonic xipper partial tones of the compound nmsical tone which is vibrating in the external air. It must, however, be noted that by no means all the harmonic upper partial tones occur in the compound tones of every instrument, and that they have very difterent degrees of intensity in different instruments. In the musical tones of violins, pianofortes, and harmoniums, the first five or six are generally very distinctly present. A more detailed account of the iipper partial tones of strings will be given in the next chapter. On the harmonium the unevenly numbered partial tones (1, 3, 5, &c.) are generally stronger than the evenly numbered ones (2, 4, 6, &c.). In the same way, the upper partial tones are clearly heard by means of the resonators in the singing tones of the luunan voice, but differ in strength for the different vowels, as will be shown hereafter. 11

Among the bodies capable of strong sympathetic vibration must be reckoned stretched strings which are connected with a sounding board, as on the pianoforte.

The principal mark of distinction between strings and the other bodies which vibrate sympathetically, is that different vibrating forms of strings give simple tones corresponding to the htwmonic upper partial tones of the prime tone, whereas the secondary simple tones of membranes, bells, rods, &c., are wdiarmonic with the prime tone, and the masses of air in resonators have generally only very high upper partial tones, also chiefly «?iharmonic with the prime tone, and not capalde of being much reinforced by the resonator.

The vibrations of strings may be studied either on elastic chords loosely stretched, and not sonorous, but swinging so slowly that their motion may be followed with the hand and eye, or else on sonorous strings, as those of the piano¶ forte, guitar, monochord, or violin. Strings of the first kind are best made of thin spirals of brass wire, six to ten feet in length. They should be gently stretched, and both ends should be fastened. A string of this construction is capable of making very large excursions with great regularity, which are easily seen by a large audience. The swings are excited by moving the string regularly backwards and forwards by the finger near to one of its extremities.

A string may be first made to vibrate as in fig. 17, a (p. 466), so that its appearance when displaced from its position of rest is always that of a simple half wave. The string in this case gives a single simple tone, the deepest it can produce, and no other harmonic secondary tones are audible.

But the string may also during its motion assume the forms fig. 17, b, c, d. In this case the form of the string is that of two, three, or four half waves of a simple wave-curve. In the vibrational form b the string produces only the upper Octave of its prime tone, in the form c the Twelfth, and in the form d the second Octave. The dotted lines show the position of the string at the end of half its 11 periodic time. In b the point ft remains at rest, in c two points yi and y. remain at rest, in d three points Sj, 8.,, &,. These points are called nodes. In a swinging spiral wire the nodes are readily seen, and for a resonant string they are shown by little paper riders, which are jerked off from the vibrating parts and remain sitting on the nodes. When, then, the string is divided by a node into two swinging sections, it produces a simple tone having a pitch number double that of the prime

Footnote: ⁎ [The (.•" occurs as the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, the 7th being rather flat. The partials are 5th, Gth, 7th, 8th partials of these notes, in fact:—
c' c"

f f <-■"

c c' r c"

Footnote: A\y fAJj c\) a'\) c"
F f c' f a' c"
I) d a d' ft a. c"
a c f c e' /' h'V, c".-- Translator.^
