page: 49

+ to be established. The experimental proof there given for the ear, can also be carried out in precisely the same way for membranes and masses of air which vibrate sympathetically, and the identity of the laws in l)oth cases will result from those iiwestiffations.*

CHAPTER IV.

Footnote: ON THE ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL TONES BY THE EAR.

It was frequently mentioned in the preceding chapter that musical tones could be resolved by the ear alone unassisted by any peculiar apparatus, into a series of ¶ partial tones corresponding to the simple pendular vibrations in a mass of air, that is, into the same constituents as those into which the motion of the air is resolved b}^ the sympathetic vibration of elastic bodies. We proceed to show the correctness of this assertion.

Any one who endeavours for the first time to distinguish the upper partial tones of a musical tone, generally finds considerable difficulty in merely hearing them.

The analysis of our sensations when it cannot be attached to corresponding differences in external objects, meets with peculiar difficulties, the nature and significance of which will have to be considered hereafter. The attention of the observer has generally to be drawn to the phenomenon he has to observe, by peculiar aids properly selected, until he knows precisely what to look for; after he has once succeeded, he will be able to throw aside such crutches. Similar difficulties meet us in the observation of the upper partials of a musical tone. I shall ¶ first give a description of such processes as will most easily put an untrained observer into a position to recognise upper partial tones, and I will remark in passing that a musically trained ear will not necessarily hear tipper partial tones with greater ease and certainty than an untrained ear. Success depends rather upon a peculiar power of mental abstraction or a peculiar mastery over attention, than upon musical training. But a musically trained observer has an essential advantage over one not so trained in his power of figuring to himself how the simple tones sought for, ought to sound, whereas the untrained observer has continually to hear these tones sounded by other means in order to keep their effect fresh in his mind.

First we must note, that the unevenly numbered partials, as the Fifths, Thirds, Sevenths, &c. of the prime tones, are usually easier to hear than the even ones, which are Octaves either of the prime tone or of some of the upper partials which lie near it, just as in a chord we more readily distinguish whether it contains ¶ Fifths and Thirds than whether it has Octaves. The second, fourth, and eighth partials are higher Octaves of the prime, the sixth partial an Octave above the third partial, that is, the Twelfth of the prime; and some practice is required for distinguishing these. Among the uneven partials which are more easily distinguished, the first place must be assigned, from its usual loudness, to the third partial, the Twelfth of the prime, or the Fifth of its first higher Octave. Then follows the fifth partial as the major Third of the prime, and, generally verj faint, the seventh partial as the minor Seventh + of the second higher Octave of the prime, as will be seen by their following expression in musical notation, for the compound tone c.

Footnote: ⁎ Optical means for rendering visible weak f [Or more correctly Awiv-miuor Seventh;
sympathetic motions of sonorous masses of as the real minor Seventh, formed by taking
air, are described in App. II. These means two Fifths down and then two Octaves up, is
are valuable for demonstrating the facts to sharper by 27 cents, or in the ratio of 63 : 64.
hearers unaccustomed to the observing and — Translator. '\ distinguishing musical tones.
