page: 51

+ partials separately, up to the sixteenth. Those which He still higher are too near to each other in pitch for the ear to separate them readily.

In such experiments I recommend the following process. Touch the node of the string on the pianoforte or monochord with a camel's-hair pencil, strike the note, and immediately remove the pencil from the string. If the ])encil has been pressed tightly on the strisig, we either continue to hear the required partial as an harmonic, or else in addition hear the prime tone gently sounding with it. On repeating the excitement of the string, and continuing to press more and more lightly with the camel's-hair pencil, and at last removing the pencil entirely, the prime tone of the string will be heard more and more distinctly with the harmonic till we have finally the full natural miisical tone of the string. By this means we obtain a series of gradual transitional stages between the isolated partial and the compound tone, in which the first is readily retained by the ear. By applying ¶ this last process I have generally succeeded in making perfectly untrained ears recognise the existence of upper partial tones.

It is at first more difticult to hear the upper partials on most wind instruments and in the human voice, than on stringed instruments, harmoniums, and the more penetrating stops of an organ, because it is then not so easy first to produce the upper partial softly in the same quality of tone. But still a little practice sufliices to lead the ear to the required partial tone, by previously touching it on the piano. The partial tones of the human voice are comparativel}' most difficult to distinguish for reasons which will be given svibsequently. Nevertheless they were distinguished even by Rameau* without the assistance of any apparatus. The process is as follows: —

Get a powerful bass voice to sing e]^ to the vowel 0, in sore [more like m',> in sail' than o in so], gently touch b'\) on the piano, which is the Twelfth, or third partial tone of the note e\f, and let its sound die away while you ai-e listening ¶ to it attentively. The note l>'\f on the piano will appear really not to die away, but to keep on sounding, even when the string is damped by removing the finger from the digital, because the ear unconsciously passes from the tone of the piano to the partial tone of the same pitch produced by the singer, and takes the latter for a continuation of the former. But when the finger is removed from the key, and the damper has fallen, it is of course impossible that the tone of the string should have continued sounding. To make the experiment for g" the fifth partial, or major Third of the second Octave above e\), the voice should sing to the vowel A in father.

The resonators described in the last chapter furnish an excellent means for this purpose, and can be used for the tones of any musical instrument. On applying to the ear the resonator corresponding to any given upper partial of the compound c, such as g', this g' is rendered much more powerful when c is sounded. Now hearing and distinguishing g' in this case by no means proves that the ear ¶ alone and without this apparatus would hear g' as part of the compound c. But the increase of the loudness of g' caused by the resonator may be used to direct the attention of the ear to the tone it is required to distinguish. On gradually removing the resonator from the ear, the force of g' will decrease. But the attention once directed to it by this means, remains more readily fixed upon it, and the observer continues to hear this tone in the natural and unchanged compound tone of the given note, even with his unassisted ear. The sole office of the resonators in this case is to direct the attention of the ear to the required tone.

By frequently instituting similar experiments for perceiving the upjier partial tones, the observer comes to discover them more and more easily, till he is finally able to dispense with any aids. But a certain amount of undisturbed concentration is always necessary for analysing musical tones by the ear alone, and hence the use of resonators is quite indispensable for an accurate comparison of different * Nmivemt SysUme de Musique thioriquc. Paris: 1726. Preface.
