page: 53

+ twelfth, i\:c., of the partial tones were present, giving corresponding harmonics, the string will be reduced to absolute silence by this contact of the finger.

Press down one of the digitals of a piano, in order to free a string from its damper. Pluck the string at its middle point, and immediately touch it there. The string will be completely silenced, showing that plucking it in its middle excited none of the CA^enly numbered partials of its compound tone. Pluck it at }^ or 'f. its length, and immediately touch it in the same place; the string will be silent, ])roving the absence of the third partial tone. Pluck the string anywhere else than in the points named, and the second partial will be heard when the middle is touched, the third when the string is touched at i or ^ of its length.

The agreement of this kind of proof with the results from sympathetic resonance, is well adapted for the experimental establishment of the proposition based in the last chapter solely upon the results of mathematical theory, namely, that sympathetic vibration occurs or not, according as the corresponding simple^ vibrations are or are not contained in the compound motion. In the last described method of analysing the tone of a string, we are quite independent of the theory of sympathetic vibration, and the simple vibrations of strings are exactl}" characterised and recognisable by their nodes. If the compound tones admitted of being analvsed hj sympathetic resonance according to any other vibrational forms except those of simple vibration, this agreement could not exist.

If, after having thus experimentally proved the correctness of Thomas Young's law, we try to analyse the tones of strings by the unassisted ear, we shall continue to find complete agreement.* If we pluck or strike a string in one of its nodes, all those upper partial tones of the compound tone of the string to which the node belongs, disappear for the ear also, bat they are heard if the string is plucked at any other place. Thus, if the string r be plucked at ^ its length, the partial tone f/' cannot be heard, but if the string be plucked at only a little distance from this ¶ point the partial tone (/' is distinctly audible. Hence the ear analyses the sovmd of a string into precisely the same constituents as are found by sympathetic resonance, that is, into simple tones, according to Ohm's definition of this conception. These experiments are also well adapted to show that it is no mere play of imagination when we hear upper partial tones, as some people believe on hearing them for the first time, for those tones are not heard when they do not exist.

The following modification of this process is also very well adapted to make the upper partial tones of strings audible. First, strike alternately in rhythmical sequence, the third and fourth partial tone of the string alone, by damping it in the corresponding nodes, and request the listener to observe the simple melody thus produced. Then strike the luidamped string alternately and in the same rhythmical sequence, in these nodes, and thus reproduce the same melody in the upper partials, which the listener will then easily recognise. Of course, in order to hear the third partial, we must strike the string in the node of the fourth, and conversely.

¶ The compound tone of a plucked string is also a remarkably striking example of the power of the ear to analyse into a long series of partial tones, a motion which the eye and the imagination are able to conceive in a much simpler manner. A string, which is pulled aside by a sharp point, or the finger nail, assumes the form, fig. 18, A (p. 54a), before it is released. It then passes through the series of forms, fig. 18, B, C, D, E, F, till it reaches G, which is the inversion of A, and then returns, through the same, to A again. Hence it alternates between the forms A and G. All these forms, as is clear, are composed of three straight lines, and on expressing the velocity of the individual points of the strings by vibrational curves, these would have the same form. Now the string scarcely imparts any })erceptible portion of its own motion directly to the air. Scarcely any audible tone results when both ends of a string are fastened to immovable supports, as metal bridges, which are again fastened to the walls of a room. The sound of

Footnote: ⁎ See Brandt in PoggendorfE's Annalcn der Fhijsik, vol. cxii. p. 324, where this fact is proved.

,2_

V

<^i'
