page: none

+ the string reaches the air through that one of its extremities which rests upon a bridge standing on an elastic sounding board. Hence the sound of the .string essentially depends on the motion of this extremity, through the pressure which it exerts on the sounding board. The magnitude of this pressure, as it alters periodically with the time, is shown in fig. 19, where the height of the line h h corresponds to the amount of pressure exerted on the bridge by that extremity of the string when the string is at rest. Along h h suppose lengths to be set off corresponding to consecutive intervals of time, the vertical

¶ heights of the broken line above or below h h represent the corresponding augmentations or diminutions of pressure at those times. The pressure of the string on the sounding board consequently alternates, as the figure shows, between a higher and a lower value. For some time the greater pressure remains unaltered; then the lower suddenly ensues, and likewise remains for a time unaltered. The letters a to g in fig. 19 correspond to the times at which the string assumes the forms A to G in fig. 18. It is this alteration between a greater and a smaller pressure which produces the sound in the air. We cannot but feel astonished that a motion produced by means so simple and so easy to comprehend,

¶ should be analysed by the ear into such a complicated sum of simple tones. For the eye and the understanding the action of the string on the sounding board can be figured with extreme simplicity. What has the simple broken line of fig. 19 to do with wave-curves, which, in the course of one of their periods, show

h-|--l-

Footnote: de fgfpd
e ha
1)

3, 4, 5, up to 16, and more, crests and troughs? This is one of the most striking examples of the different ways in which eye and ear comprehend a periodic motion.

There is no sonorous body whose motions imder varied conditions can be so ¶ calculated theoretically and contrasted with observation as a string. The following are examples in which theory can be compared with analysis by ear: —

¶ I have discovered a means of exciting simple pendular vibrations in the air. tuning-fork when struck gives no harmonic upper partial tones, or, at most, traces of them when it is brought into such excessively strong vibration that it no longer exactly follows the law of the pendulum.* On the other hand, tuning forks have some very high inharmonic secondary tones, which produce that peculiar shaq)

Footnote: ⁎ [On all ordinary tuning-forks between a pitch numbers. But the prime can always be
and d" in pitch, I have been able to hear the second partial or Octave of the prime. In some low forks this Octave is so powerful that on pressing the liaudle of the fork against the table, the prime quite disappears and the Octave only is heard, and this has often proved a source of embarrassment in tuning the forks, or in counting beats to determine
heard when the fork is held to the ear or over a properly tuned resonance jar, as described in this paragraph. I tune such jars by pouring water in or out until the resonance is strongest, and then I register the height of the water and pitch of the fork for future use on a slip of paper gummed to the side of the jar. I have found that it is not at all necessary to
