page: 57

+ musical instruinent, as a violin, tninipot, organ, or by a singing voice, it must bo called in exact language a tone of the instrument in ([uestion. This is also the ordinary language, but it did not then imply that the tone migiit be mnipound. When the tone is, as usual, a compound tone, it will be distinguished by this term, or the abridgment, a compound; while tone is a general term which includes both simple and compound tones.* The prime tone is generally louder than any of the upper partial tones, and hence it alone generally determines the ^>«'fcy^ of the compound. The tone produced by any sonorous body reduces to a migle simple tone in very few cases indeed, as the tone of tuning-forks imparted to the air by resonance chambers in the manner already described. The tones of wide-stopped organ pipes when gently blown are almost free from upper partials, and are accompanied only by a rush of wind.

It is well known that this union of several simple tones into one compound ¶ tone, which is naturally effected in the tones produced by most musical instruments, is artiricially imitated on the organ by peculiar mechanical contrivances. The tones of organ pipes are comparatively poor in upper partials. When it is desirable to use a stop of incisive penetrating quality of tone and great power, the wide pipes {principal re;/ister and weitgedacJd f) are not sufficient; their tone is too soft, too defective in upper partials; and the narrow-pipes {geigen-register and qidntaten %) are also unsuitable, because, although more incisive, their tone is weak. For such occasions, then, as in accompanying congregational singing, recourse is had to the compound stops.^ In these stops every key is connected with a larger or smaller series of pipes, which it opens simultaneously, and which give the prime tone and a certain number of the lower upper partials of the compound tone of the note in question. It is very usual to connect the upper Octave with the prime tone, and after that the Twelfth. The more complex compounds (cor/t^^i; i) give the first six partial tones, that is, in addition to the two Octaves of the prime tone and its ¶ Twelfth, the higher major Third, and the Octave of the Twelfth. This is as much of the series of upper partials as belongs to the tones of a major chord. But to prevent these compound stops from being insupportably noisy, it is necessary to reinforce the deeper tones of each note by other rows of pipes, for in all natural tones which are suited for musical purposes the higher partials decrease in force as they rise in pitch. This has to be regarded in their imitation by compound stops. These compound stops were a monster in the path of the old musical theory, which was acquainted only with the prime tones of compounds; but the practice of organ-builders and organists necessitated their retention, and when they are suitably arranged and properly applied, they form a very effective musical apparatus.

Footnote: ⁎ [Here, again, as on pp. 23, 24, I have, in toned diapason, eight feet.' Hopkins, Organ,
the translation, been necessarily obliged to p. 445. ' A manual stop of eight feet, produ-
deviate slightly from the original. K/.aiuj, as cing a pungent tone very lilce that of the
here defined, embraces Ton as a particular Gamba, except that the pipes, being of larger
case. I use tunc for the general term, and scale, speak quicker and produce a fuller tone.
wmpoiuul tone and simple tone for the two Examples of the stop exist at Doncaster, If
particular cases. Thus, as ijresently mentioned the Temple Church, and in the Exchange
in the text, the tone produced by a tuning-fork Organ at Northampton.' Ibid. p. 138. For
held over a proper resonance chamber we know, quintaten, see supra, p. S3d, note. — Translator.^ on analysis, to be simple, but before analysis it § [As described in Hopkins, Organ, p. 142,
is to us only a (musical) tone like any other, these are the scsquialtera ' of five, four, three,
and hence in this case the Author's Klamj or two ranks of open metal pipes, tuned
becomes the Author's Ton. I believe that the in Thirds, Fifths, and Octaves to the Diapa-
language used in my translation is best adapted son
'. The mixture, consisting of five to two
for the constant accurate distinction between ranks of open metal pipes smaller than the
compound and simple tones by English readers, last, is in England the second, in Germany the
as I leave nothing which runs counter to old first, compound stop (p. 143). The Furniture of
habits, and by the use of the words simple and five to two sets of small open pipes, is variable,
compound, constantly recall attention to this (1) The Cornet, vwnnted, has five ranks of very
newly discovered and extremely important rela- large and loudly voiced pipes, (2) the echo is
tion. — Transltdor.] similar, but light and delicate, and is enclosed
t [Pr//*rv>(/— double open diapason. Gross- in a box. In German organs the cornet is also
gedackt—dou.h\e stopped diapason. Hopkins, a pedal reed stop of four and two feet ((6/d). —
Organ, p. 444-5. — Translator.] Translator.]
t [' Oeigcn Principal — violin or crisp-
