page: 58

The nature of the case at the same time fully justifies their use. The musician is bound to regard the tones of all musical instruments as compomided in the same way as the compound stops of organs, and the important part this method of composition plays in the construction of musical scales and chords will be made evident in subsequent chapters.

We have thus been led to an appreciation of upper partial tones, which diflers considerably from that previously entertained by musicians, and even physicists, and must therefore be prei)ared to meet the opposition which will be raised. The upper partial tones were indeed known, but almost only in such compound tones as those of strings, where there was a favourable opportunity for observing them; but they appear in previous physical and musical works as an isolated accidental phenomenon of small intensity, a kind of curiosity, which was certainly occasionally adduced, in order to give some support to the opinion that nature had pre¶ figured the construction of our major chord, but which on the whole remained almost entirely disregarded. In opposition to this we have to assert, and we shall prove the assertion in the next chapter, that upper partial tones are, with a few exceptions already named, a general constituent of all musical tones, and that a certain stock of upper partials is an essential condition for a good musical quality of tone. Finally, these upper partials have been erroneously considered as weak, because they are difficult to observe, while, in point of fact, for some of the best musical qualities of tone, the loudness of the first upper partials is not far inferior to that of the prime tone itself.

There is no difficulty in verifying this last fact by experiments on the tones of strings. Strike the string of a piano or monochord, and immediately touch one of its nodes for an instant with the finger; the constituent partial tones having this node will remain with unaltered loudness, and the rest will disappear. We might also touch the node in the same way at the instant of striking, and thus obtain the ¶ corresponding constituent partial tones from;, the first, in place of the complete compound tone of the note. In both ways we can readily convince ourselves that the first upper partials, as the Octave and Twelfth, are by no means weak and difficult to hear, but have a very appreciable strength. In some cases we are able to assign numerical values for the intensity of the upper partial tones, as will be shown in the next chapter. For tones not produced on strings this a posteriori proof is not so easy to conduct, because we are not able to make the upper partials speak separately. But even then by means of the resonator we can apjjreciate the intensity of these upper partials by producing the corresponding note on the same or some other instrument until its loudness, when heard through the resonator, agrees with that of the former.

The difficulty we experience in hearing upper partial tones is no reason for considering them to be weak; for this difficulty does not depend on their intensity, but upon entirely diffi^rent circumstances, which could not be properly estimated ¶ until the advances recently made in the physiology of the senses. On this difficulty of observing the upper partial tones have been founded the objections which A. Seebeck* has advanced against Ohm's law of the decomposition of a musical tone; and perhaps many of my readers who are unacquainted with the physiology of the other senses, particularly with that of the eye, might be inclined to adopt Seebeck's opinions. I am therefore obliged to enter into some details concerning this difference of opinion, and the peculiarities of the perceptions of our senses, on which the solution of the difficulty depends.

Seebeck, although extremely accomplished in acoustical experiments and observations, was not always able to recognise upper partial tones, where Ohm's law required them to exist. But we are also bound to add that he did not apply the methods already indicated for directing the attention of his ear to the upper partials in question. In other cases when he did hear the theoretical upper * In PoggendorfE's Annaloi der Physik, vol. Ix. p. 449, vol. Ixiii. pp. 353 and 368.— Ohm, ibid. vol. lix. p. 513, and vol. Ixii. p. 1.
