page: 60

All these helps fail in the resolution of musical tones into their constituent partials. When a compound tone commences to sound, all its partial tones commence with the same comparative strength; when it swells, all of them generally swell uniformly; when it ceases, all cease simultaneously. Hence no opportunity is generally given for hearing them separately and independently. In precisely the same manner as the naturally connected partial tones form a single source of sound, the partial tones in a compound stop on the organ fuse into one, as all are struck with the same digital, and all move in the same melodic progression as their prime tone.

Moreover, the tones of most instruments are usually accompanied by characteristic irregular noises, as the scratching and rubbing of the violin bow, the rush of wind in flutes and organ pipes, the grating of reeds, &c. These noises, with wdiich we are already familiar as characterising the instruments, materially ¶ facilitate our power of distinguishing them in a composite mass of sounds. The partial tones in a compound have, of course, no such characteristic marks.

Hence we have no reason to be surprised that the resolution of a compound tone into its partials is not quite so easy for the ear to accomplish, as the resolution of composite masses of the musical sounds of many instruments into their proximate constituents, and that even a trained musical ear requires the application of a considerable amount of attention when it undertakes the former problem.

It is easy to see that the auxiliary circumstances already named do not always sufhce for a correct separation of musical tones. In uniformly sustained musical tones, where one might be considered as an upper partial of another, onr judgment might readily make default. This is really the case. G. S. Ohm proposed a very instructive experiment to show this, using the tones of a violin. But it is more suitable for such an experiment to use simple tones, as those of a stopped organ pipe. The best instrument, however, is a glass bottle of the form ¶ shown in fig. 20, which is easily procured and prepared for the experiment. A little rod c supports a guttapercha tube a in a proper position. The end of the tube, which is directed towards the bottle, is softened in warm water and pressed flat, forming a narrow chink, through which air can be made to rush over the mouth of the bottle. When the tube is fastened by an india-rubber pipe to the nozzle of a bellows, and wind is driven over the bottle, it produces a hollow obscure sound, like the vowel 00 in too, which is freer from upper partial tones than even the tone of a stopped pipe, and is only accompanied by a slight ¶ noise of wind. I find that it is easier to keep the pitch unaltered in this instrument wliile the pressure of the wind is slightly changed, than in stopped pipes. We deepen the tone by fr partially shading the orifice of the bottle with t_^ a little wooden plate; and we sharpen it by pouring in oil or melted wax. We are thus able tcj make any required little alterations in pitch. I tuned a large bottle to b'^ and a smaller one to b'b and united them with the same bellows, so that when used both began to speak at the same instant. When thus united they gave a musical tone of the pitch of the deeper />[?, but having the quality of tone of the vowel oa in toad, instead of oo in too. When, then, I compressed first one of the india-rubber tubes and then the other, so as to produce the tones alternately, separately, and in connection, I was at last able to hear them separately when sounded together, but I could not continue to hear them separately for long, for the upper tone gradually fused with
