page: none

Seebeck and Ohm are agreed that the upper partials of a musical tone are perceived synthetically. This is acknowledged by Seebeck when he admits that their action on the ear changes the force or quality of the sound examined. The dispute turns upon whether in all cases they can be perceived analytically in their individual existence; that is, whether the ear when unaided by resonators or other physical auxiliaries, which themselves alter the mass of musical somid heard by the observer, can by mere direction and intensity of attention distinguish wlicther, and if so in what force, the Octave, the Twelfth, etc., of the prime exists in the given musical sound.

In the first place I will adduce a series of examples which show that the difficulty felt iu analysing musical tones exists also for other senses. Let us begin with the comparatively simple perceptions of the sense of taste. The ingredients of our dishes and the spices with which we flavour them, are not so ¶ complicated that they could not be readily learned by any one. And yet there are very few people who have not themselves practically studied cookery, that are able readily and correctly to discover, by the taste alone, the ingredients of the dishes placed before them. How much practice, and perhaps also peculiar talent, belongs to wine tasting for the piu-pose of discovering adulterations is known in all winegrowing countries. Similarly for smell; indeed the sensations of taste and smell may unite to form a single whole. Using our tongues constantly, we are scarcely aware that the peculiar character of many articles of food and drink, as vinegar or wine, depends also upon the sensation of smell, their vapours entering the back part of the nose through the gullet. It is not till we meet with persons in whom the sense of smell is deficient that we learn how essential a part it plays iu tasting. Such persons are constantly in fault when judging of food, as indeed any one can learn from his own experience, when he suffers from a heavy cold in the head without having a loaded tongue.

¶ When our hand glides unawares along a cold and smooth piece of metal are apt to imagine that we have wetted our hand. This shows that the sensation of wetness to the touch is compounded out of that of unresisting gliding and cold, which in one case results from the good heat-conducting properties of metal, and in the other from the cold of evaporation and the great specific heat of water. We can easily recognise both sensations in wetness, when we think over the matter, but it is the above-mentioned illusion which teaches us that the peculiar feeling of wetness is entirely resolvable into these two sensations.

The discovery of the stereoscope has taught us that the power of seeing the depths of a field of view, that is, the different distances at which objects and their parts lie from the eye of the spectator, essentially depends on the simultaneous synthetical perceptions of two somewhat different perspective images of the same objects by the two eyes of the observer. If the difference of the tAvo images is sufficiently great it is not difficult to perceive them analytically as ¶ separate. For example, if we look intently at a distant object and hold one of our fingers slightly in front of our nose we see two images of our finger against the background, one of which vanishes when we close the right eye, the other belonging to the left. But when the differences of distance are relatively small, and hence the differences of the two perspective images on the retina are so also, great practice and certainty in the observation of double images is necessary to keep them asiuider, yet the synthetical perception of their differences still exists, and makes itself felt in the apparent relief of the surface viewed. In this case also, as well as for upper partial tones, the ease and exactness of the analytical perception is far behind that of the synthetical perception.

In the conception which we form of the direction in which the objects viewed seem to lie, a considerable part must be played by those sensations, mainly muscular, which enable us to recognise the position of our body, of the head with regard to the body, and of the eye with regard to the head. If one of these is altered, for example, if the sensation of the proper position of the eye is changed by pressing
