page: 65

+ composition of two or more musical sounds or noises on the most extended scale and the power of analysing even extremely involved compounds of musical tones, into the separate parts produced hy individual instruments, can readily be acquired by any one who directs his attention to the subject. But the ultimate simple elements of the sensation of tone, simple tones themselves, are rarely heard alone. Even those instruments by which they can be prodiiced, as tuning-forks before resonance chambers, when strongly excited, give rise to weak harmonic upper partials, jjartly within and partly without the ear, as Ave shall see in Chapters V. and VII. Hence in this case also, the opportunities are very scanty for impressing on our memory an exact and sure image of these simple elementary tones. But if the constituents to be added are only indefinitely and vaguely known, the analysis of the sum into those parts must be correspondingly^ uncertain. If we do not know with certainty how much of the musical tone under consideration is to ¶ be attributed to its prime, we cannot but be luicertain as to what belongs to the partials. Consequently we must begin by making the individual elements which have to be distinguished, individually audible, so as to obtain an entirely fresh recollection of the corresponding sensation, and the whole business requires undisturbed and concentrated attention. We are even without the ease that can be obtained by frequent repetitions of the experiment, such as we possess in the analysis of musical chords into their individual tones. In that case we hear the individual tones sufficiently often by tliemselves, whereas we rarely hear simple tones and may almost be said never to hear the building up of a compound from its simple tones.

The results of the preceding discussion may be summed up as follows: — ■

(1) The upper partial tones corresponding to the simple vibrations of a compound motion of the air, are perceived synthetically, even when they are not always perceived analytically.

¶ (2) But they can be made objects of analytical perception withoxit any other help than a proper direction of attention.

(3) Even in the case of their not being separately perceived, because they fuse into the whole mass of musical sound, their existence in our sensation is established by an alteration in the quality of tone, the impression of their higher pitch being characteristically marked by increased brightness and acuteness of quality.

In the next chapter we shall give details of the relations of the upper partials to the quality of compound tones.

CHAPTER V.

Footnote: ON THE DIFFERENCES IN THE QUALITY OF MUSICAL TONES.

Towards the close of Chapter I (p. 21d), we found that differences in the quality ¶ of musical tones must depend on the form of the vibration of the air. The reasons for this assertion were only negative. We have seen that force depended on amplitude, and pitch on rapidity of vibration: nothing else was left to distinguish quality but vibrational form. We then proceeded to show that the existence and force of the upper partial tones which accompanied the prime depend also on the vibrational form, and hence we could not but conclude that musical tones of the same quality would always exhibit the same combination of partials, seeing that the peciiliar vibrational form which excites in the ear the sensation of a certain quality of tone, must always evoke the sensation of its corresponding upper partials. The question then arises, can, and if so, to what extent can the difterences of musical quality be reduced to the combination of difterent partial tones with different intensities in different musical tones? At the conclusion of last chapter (p. QOd), we saw that even artificially combined simple tones were capable of fusing into a musical tone of a quality distinctly different from that of either of its constituents, and that consequently the existence of a new upper partial really altered

Footnote: F
