page: 66

+ the quality of a tone. By this means we gained a clue to the hitherto enigmatical nature of quality of tone, and to the cause of its varieties.

There has been a general inclination to credit quality with all possible peculiarities of musical tones that were not evidently due to force and pitch. This was correct to the extent that quality of tone was merely a negative conception. But very slight consideration will suffice to show that many of these peculiarities of musical tones depend upon the way in which they begin and end. The methods of attacking and releasing tones are sometimes so characteristic that for the human voice they have been noted by a series of different letters. To these belong the explosive consonants B, D, G, and P, T, K. The effects of these letters are produced by opening the closed, or closing the open passage through the mouth. For B and P the closure is made by the lips, for D and T by the tongue and upper teeth,* for G and K by the back of the tongue and soft palate. The series of the mediae

¶ B, D, G is distinguished from that of the tenues P, T, K, by the glottis being sufficiently narrowed, when the closure of the former is released, to produce voice, or at least the rustle of whisper, whereas for the latter or tenues the glottis is wide open,t and cannot sound. The mediae are therefore accompanied by voice, which is capable of counnencing at the beginning of a syllable an instant before the opening of the mouth, and of lasting at the end of a syllable a moment after the closure of the mouth, because some air can be still driven into the closed cavity of the mouth and the vibration of the vocal chords in the larynx can be still maintained. On account of the narrowing of the glottis the influx of air is more moderate, and the noise of the wind less sharp for the mediae than the tenues, which, being spoken with open glottis, allow of a great deal of wind being forced at once from the chest.;]: At the same time the resonance of the cavity of the mouth, which, as we shall more clearly understand further on, exercises a great influence on the vowels, varies its pitch, corresponding to the rapid alterations in the magnitude of its volume

¶ and orifice, and this brings about a corresponding rapid variation in the quality of the speech sound.

As with consonants, the difterences in the quality of tone of struck strings, also partly depends on the rapidity with which the tone dies away. When the strings have little mass (such as those of gut), and are fastened to a very mobile sounding board (as for a violin, guitar, or zither), or when the parts on which they rest or which they touch are but slightly elastic (as when the violin strings, for example, are pressed on the finger board by the soft point of the finger), their vibrations rapidly disappear after striking, and the tone is dry, short, and without ring, as in the pizzicato of a violin. But if the strings are of metal wire, and hence of greater weight and tension, and if they are attached to strong heavy bridges w^hich cannot be much shaken, they give out their vibrations slowly to the

Footnote: ⁎ [This is true for German, and most Con- examples, it seemed better in the present case,
tinental languages, and for some dialectal where the author was speaking especially of
U English, especially in Cumberland, Westmore- the phenomena of speech to which he was
land, Yorkshire, Lancashire, the Peak of Derby- personally accustomed, to leave the text un-
shire, and Ireland, but even then only in con- altered and draw attention to English pecu-
nection with the trilled R. Throughout Eng- liarities in footnotes. — Translator.']
land generally, the tip of the tongue is quite \ [Observe again that this description of
free from the teeth, except for TH in thin and the rush of wind accompanying P, T, K,
then, and for T and D it only touches the hard although true for German habits of speech, is
palate, seldom advancing so far as the root of not true for the usual English habits, which
the gums. — Translator.'] require the windrush between the opening of
t [This again is true for German, but not the mouth and sounding of the vowel to be
for English, French, or Italian, and not even entirely suppressed. The English result is a
for the adjacent Slavonic languages. In these gliding vowel sound preceding the true vowel on
languages the glottis is quite closed for both commencing a syllable, and following the vowel
the mediae and the tenues in ordinary speech, on ending one. The difference between English
but the voice begins for the mediae before P and German Pis precisely the same (as I have
releasing the closure of the lips or tongue and verified by actual observation i a.^ ihat between
palate, and for the tenues at the moncnt of the simple Sanscrit tenuis P, and the postaspi-
releasc. Although in giving vowel sounds, &c., rated Sanscrit Ph, as now actually pronounced
I have generally contented myself with trans- by cultivated Bengalese. See raj Early English
lating the same into English symbols and Pronunciation, p. 1136, col. 1. — TroMslaior.']
