page: 67

+ air and the sounding board; their vibrations continue longer, their tone is more durable and fuller, as in the pianoforte, but is comparatively less powerful and penetrating than that of gut strings, which give up their tone more readily when struck with the same force. Hence the pizzicato of bowed instruments when well executed is much more piercing than the tone of a pianoforte. Pianofortes with their strong and heavy supports for the strings have, consequently, for the same thickness of string, a less penetrating but a much more lasting tone than those instruments of which the suppoi'ts for the strings are lighter.

It is very characteristic of brass instruments, as trumpets and trombones, that their tones commence abruptly and sluggishly. The various tones in these instruments are produced by exciting different upper partials through different styles of blowing, which serve to throw the column of air into vibrating portions of different numbers and lengths similar to those on a string. It always requires ¶ a certain amount of effort to excite the new condition of vibration in place of the old, but when once established it is maintained with less exertion. On the other hand, the transition from one tone to another is easy for wooden wind instruments, as the flute, oboe, and clarinet, where the length of the column of air is readily changed by application of the fingers to the side holes and keys, and where the style of blowing has not to be materially altered.

These examples will suffice to show how certain characteristic peculiarities in the tones of several instruments depend on the mode in which they begin and end. When we speak in what follows of musical quality of tone, we shall disregard these peculiarities of beginning and ending, and confine our attention to the peculiarities of the musical tone which continues uniformly.

But even when a musical tone continues with uniform or variable intensity, it is mixed up, in the general methods of excitement, with certain noises, which express greater or less irregularities in the motion of the air. In wind instruments ¶ where the tones are maintained by a stream of air, we generally hear more or less whizzing and hissing of the air which breaks against the sharp edges of the mouthpiece. In strings, rods, or plates excited by a violin bow, we usually hear a good deal of noise from the rubbing. The hairs of the bow are naturally full of many minute irregularities, the resinous coating is not spread over it with absolute evenness, and there are also little inequalities in the motion of the arm which holds the bow and in the amount of pressure, all of which influence the motion of the string, and make the tone of a bad instrument or an unskilful performer rough, scraping, and variable. We shall not be able to explain the nature of the motions of the air and sensations of the ear which correspond to these noises till we have investigated the conception of heats. Those who listen to music make themselves deaf to these noises by purposely withdrawing attention from them, but a slight amount of attention generally makes them very evident for all tones produced by blowing or rubbing. It is well known that most consonants in human ¶ speech are characterised by the maintenance of similar noises, as F, V; S, Z; TH in thin and in then; the Scotch and German guttural CH, and Dutch 0. For some the tone is made still more irregular by trilling parts of the mouth, as for R and L. In the case of R the stream of air is periodically entirely interrupted by trilling the uvula* or the tip of the tongue; and we thus obtain an intermitting sound to which these interruptions give a ijeculiar jarring character. In the case of L the soft side edges of the tongue are moved by the stream of air, and, withoiit completely interrupting the tone, produce inequalities in its strength.

Even the vowels themselves are not free from such noises, although they are kept more in the background by the musical character of the tones of the voice. Donders first drew attention to these noises, which are partly identical with those which are produced when the corresponding vowels are indicated in low voiceless

Footnote: ⁎ [In the northern parts of Germany and of There are also many other trills, into which, France, and in Northumberland, but not other- as into other phonetic details, it is not neceswise in England, except as an organic defect. sary to enter. — Translator.']
F 2
