page: 68

+ speecli. They are strongest for ee in see, the French u in vu (which is nearly the same as the Norfolk and Devon oo in too), and for oo in too. For these vowels they can be made audible even when speaking aloud.*^ By simply increasing their force the vowel ee in see becomes the consonant y in yon, and the vowel oo in too the consonant w in wan.-\ For a in art, a in at, e in met, there, and o in more, the noises appear to me to be produced in the glottis alone when speaking gently, and to be absorbed into the voice when speaking aloud.:}: It is remarkable that in speaking, the vowels a in art, a in at, and e in met, there, are produced with less musical tone than in singing. It seems as if a feeling of greater compression in the larynx caused the tuneful tone of the voice to give way to one of a more jarring character which admits of more evident articulation. The greater intensity thus given to the noises, appeal's in this case to facilitate the characterisation of the peculiar vowel quality. In singing, on the contrary, we try to favour the musical

¶ part of its quality and hence often render the articulation somewhat obscui-e.§

Such accompanying noises and little inequalities in the motion of the air, furnish much that is characteristic in the tones of musical instruments, and in the vocal tones of speech which correspond to the different positions of the mouth; but besides these there are numerous peculiarities of quality belonging to the musical tone proper, that is, to the perfectly regular portion of the motion of the air. The importance of these can be better appreciated by listening to musical instruments or human voices, from such a distance that the comparatively weaker noises are no longer audible. Notwithstanding the absence of these noises, it is generally possible to discriminate the different musical instruments, although it must be acknowledged that under such circumstances the tone of a French horn may be occasionally mistaken for that of the singing voice, or a violoncello may be confused with an harmonium. For the human voice, consonants first disappear at a distance, because they are characterised by noises, but M, N, and the vowels

¶ can be distinguished at a greater distance. The formation of M and N in so far resembles that of vowels, that no noise of wind is generated in any part of the cavity of the mouth, which is perfectly closed, and the sound of the voice escapes through the nose. The mouth merely forms a resonance chamber which alters the quality of tone. It is interesting in calm weather to listen to the voices of men who are descending from high hills to the plain. Words can no longer be recognised, or at most only such as are composed of M, N, and vowels, as Mamma, Ko, Noon. But the vowels contained in the spoken words are easily distinguished. Wanting the thread which connects them into words and sentences, they form a strange series of alternations of quality and singular inflections of tone.

In the present chapter we shall at first disregard all irregular portions of the motion of the air, and the mode in which sounds commence or terminate, directing our attention solely to the musical part of the tone, properly so called, which corresponds to a uniformly sustained and regularly periodic motion of the air,

¶ and we shall endeavour to discover the relations between the quality of the sound

Footnote: ⁎ [At the Comedie Fran(,'aise I have heard the important phonetic observations in the
M. Got pronounce the word oui and Mme. text. — Translator.]
Provost-Ponsin pronounce the last syllable of § [These observations must not be cou-
haehis entirely without voice tones, and yet sidered as exhausting the subject of the dif-
make them audible throughout the theatre. — ference between the singing and the speak-
Translator.] ing voice, which requires a peculiar study
t [That this is not the whole of the pheno- here merely indicated. See my Pronunciatimi
menon is shown by the words ye, v^oo. The fur Singers (Curwen) and S-jxcch in Soncj
whole subject is discussed at length in my (Novello). The difference between English and
Early English Prommciation, pp. 1092-1094, German habits of speaking and singing must
and 1149-1151 — Translator.] also be borne in mind, and allowed for by
% [By ' speaking gently ' [leise) seems to the reader. The English vowels given in the
be meant either speaking absolutely without text are not the perfect equivalents of Prof,
voice, that is with an open glottis, or in a Helmholtz's German sounds. The noises
whisper, with the glottis nearly closed. For which accompany the vowels are not nearly
voice the glottis is quite closed, and this is so marked in English as in German, but they
indicated by ' speaking aloud ' {hcim lantcn differ very much locally, even in England. —
Sprechen). It would lead too far to discuss Translator.]
