page: 70

+ perfectly indistinguishable, whether the simple tone is conducted to the external air in the preceding methods by a tuning-fork and a resonance tube of any given material, glass, metal, or pasteboard, or by a string, provided only that we guard against any chattering in the apparatus.

Simple tones accompanied only by the noise of rushing wind can also be produced, as already mentioned, by blowing over the mouth of bottles with necks (p. 60c). If we disregard the friction of the air, the proper musical cpiality of such tones is really the same as that produced by tuning-forks.

2. Musical I'ones with Inharmonic Up'per Partlah.

Nearest to musical tones without any upper partials are those with secondary tones which are inharmonic to the prime, and such tones, therefore, in strictness, ¶ not be reckoned as musical tones at all. They are exceptionally used in artistic music, but only when it is contrived that the prime tone should be so much more powerful than the secondary tones, that the existence of the latter may be ignored. Hence they are placed here next to the simple tones, because musically they are available only for the more or less good simple tones which they represent. The first of these are tuning-forks themselves, when they are struck and applied to a sounding board, or brought very near the ear. The [inharmonic] upper partials of tuning-forks lie very high. In those which I have examined, the first made from 5-8 to 6-6 as many vibrations in the same time as the prime tone, and hence lay between its third diminished Fifth and major Sixth. The pitch numbers of these high upper partial tones were to one another as the squares of the odd numbers. In the time that the first upper partial would execute 3x3 = 9 vibrations, the next would execute 5x5 = 25, and the next 7 x 7 = 49, and so on. Their pitch, therefore, increases with extraoi'dinary rapidity, and they are usually all

¶ with the prime, though some of them may exceptionally become harmonic. If we call the prime tone of the fork c, the next succeeding tones are nearly a"\), cV, c'it.* These high secondary tones produce a bright inharmonic clink, which is easily heard at a considerable distance when the fork is first struck, whereas when it is brought close to the ear, the prime tone alone is heard. The ear readily separates the prime from the upper tones and has no inclination to fuse them. The high simple tones usually die off rapidly, while the prime tone remains audible for a long time. It should be remarked, however, that the nuitual relations of the proper tones of tuning-forks differ somewhat according to the form of the fork, and hence the above indications must be looked upon as merely approximate. In theoretical determinations of the upper partial tones, each prong of the fork may be regarded as a rod fixed at one end.

The same relations hold for straight elastic rods, which, as already mentioned, when struck, give rather high inharmonic upper partial tones. When such a rod

¶ is firmly supported at the two nodal lines of its prime tone, the continuance of that tone is favo\ired in preference to the other higher tones, and hence the latter disturb the effect very slightly, more especially as they rapidly die away after the rod has been struck. Such rods, however, are not suitable for real artistic music,

Footnote: ⁎ [On calculating the number of cents (as hence it is called d'^' in the text. The interval
in App. XX. sect. C), we find that the first to the next tone is 25 : 49 or 1165 cents.
tone mentioned, which vibrates from 5-8 to Adding this to the former numbers the uiterval
6-6 as fast as the prime, makes an interval with the prime must be between 5977 and
with it of from .3043 to 3267 ct., so that if C201 cents, or between?/^' + 77 and (f ' - 3, for
the prime is called c, the note lies between which in the text c"Jf is selected. The inde-
g"\y + 43, and a" - 33, where <i"r, and a" are terminacy arises from the difftculty of finding
the third diminished Fifth and major Sixth of the pitch of the first inharmonic upper partial,
the prime c mentioned in the text. This Prof. The intervals between that and the next upper
Helmholtz calls a"% or 3200 cents. Then the partials are 9 : 25 or 1769 ct., 9 : 49 or 2934
interval between this partial and the next is ct., 9 : 81 or 3699 ct., and so on. The word
9 : 25 or 1769 ct. , and hence the interval ' inharmonic ' has been inserted m the text,
with the prime is between 4812 and 5036 as tuning-forks have also generally harmonic
cents, or lies between c"' + 12 and d"' + 36, and upper partials. See p. 54(7, noie.^Trunslatoi:']
