page: 72

Footnote: Number of Nodal Circles
Number of Diameters
0
1
2 3 j 4
5
0
1 2

f'h

^'b

Footnote: C 1 d'

y" 1

Footnote: [

c" j

1

'f-o"^

This shoAvs that many proper tones of nearly the same pitch are produced by a plate of this kind. When a plate is struck, those proper tones which have no node at the point struck, will all sound together. To obtain a particular determinate tone it is of advantage to support the plate in points which lie in the nodal lines of that tone; because those proper tones which have no node in those points will then die off more rapidly. For example, if a circular plate is supported at

¶ 3 points in the nodal circle of fig. 21, C (p. 71c), and is struck exactly in its middle, the simple tone called (A in the table, which belongs to that form, will be heard, and all those other proper tones which have diameters as some of their nodal lines* will be very weak, for example, c, d', c", g", b'\) in the table. In the same way the tone g"^ with two nodal circles, dies off immediately, because the points of support fall on one of its ventral segments, and the first proper tone which can sound loudly at the same time is that corresponding to three nodal circles, one of its nodal lines being near to that of No. 2. But this is 3 Octaves and more than a whole Tone higher than the proper tone of No. 2, and on account of this great interval does not disturb the latter. Hence a disc thus struck gives a tolerably good musical tone, whereas plates in general j)roduce sounds composed of many inharmonic proper tones of nearly the same pitch, giving an empty tin-kettle sort of quality, which cannot be used in music. But even when the disc is ])roperly supported the tone dies away rapidly, at least in the case of glass plates, because

¶ contact at many points, even when nodal, sensibly impedes the freedom of vibration.

The sound of hells is also accompanied by inharmonic secondary tones, which, however, do not lie so close to one another as those of flat plates. The vibrations which usually arise have 4, 6, 8, 10, ifec, nodal lines extending from the vertex of the bell to its margin, at equal intervals from each other. The corresponding proper tones for glass bells which have approximativcly the same thickness throughout, are nearly as the squares of the numbers 2, 3, 4, 5, so that if we call the lowest tone <\ wo have for the

Footnote: Number of nodal Hues .
. 1 4
1
G
8
10
12
Tones
Cenfe
• 1 ^' 0
d' + 1404
c" ' 2400
3173
d"' + 3804

The tones, however, vary with the greater or less thickness of the wail of the ¶ towards the margin, and it appears to be an essential point in the ait of casting bells, to make the deeper proper tones mutually harmonic by giving the bell a certain empirical form. According to the observations of the organist Gleitz.t the bell cast for the cathedral at Erfurt in 1477 has the following proper tones: E, e, g^, h, f-', r/'jj, //, c"|. The [former] bell of St. Paul's, London, gave a and c'lf. Hemony of Ziitphen, a master in the seventeenth century, required a good bell to have three Octaves, two Fifths, one major and one minor Third. The deepest tone is not the strongest. The body of the bell when struck gives a deeper tone than the 'sound bow,' but the latter gives the loudest tone. Probably other vibrational forms of bells are also possible in which nodal circles are formed

Footnote: ⁎ Provided that the supported points do not happen to belong to a system of diameters making equal angles with each other.
t ' Historical Notes on the Great Bell and the other Bells in Erfurt Cathedral
'
{Geschichtliche-s iibcr die grosse Glockc und die ilbrigen Glocken des Domes zu Erfurt). Erfurt, 1867.— See also Schafh;iutl in the Kunst und Gewerbcblatt fur das Konigreich Bay cm, 1868, liv. 325 to 350 ; 385 to 427.
