page: 75

+ in eacli case the iuteiisity of the prime tone exceeds that of any upper partial. If the string is struck with a sharp-edged metallic hammer which rebounds instantly, only the one single point struck is directly set in motion. Immediately after the blow the remainder of the string is at rest. It does not move until a wave of deflection rises, and runs backwards and forwards over the string. This limitation of the original motion to a single point produces the most abrupt discontinuities, and a corresponding long series of upper partial tones, having intensities,* in most cases equalling or even surpassing that of the prime. When the hammer is soft and elastic, the motion has time to spread before the hammer rebounds. When thus struck the point of the string in contact with such a hammer is not set in motion with a jerk, but increases gradually and continuously in velocity during the contact. The discontinuity of the motion is consequently much less, diminishing as the softness of the hammer increases, and the force of the higher upper partial ¶ tones is correspondingly decreased.

We can easily convince ourselves of the correctness of these statements by opening the lid of any pianoforte, and, keeping one of the digitals down with a weight, so as to free the string from the damper, plucking the string at pleasure with a finger or a point, and striking it with a metallic edge or the pianoforte hammer itself. The qualities of tone thus obtained will be entirely diflferent. When the string is struck or plucked with hard metal, the tone is piercing and tingling, and a little attention enables us to hear a midtitude of very high partial tones. These disappear, and the tone of the string becomes less bright, but softer, and more harmonious, when we pluck the string with the soft finger or strike it with the soft hammer of the instrument. We also readily recognise the different loudness of the prime tone. When we strike with metal, the prime tone is scarcely heard and the quality of tone is correspondingly j'oor. The peculiar quality of tone commonly termed poverty, as opposed to richness, arises from the upper ¶ partials l)eing comparatively too strong for the prime tone. The prime tone is heard best when the string is plucked with a soft finger, which produces a rich and yet harmonious quality of tone. The prime tone is not so strong, at least in the middle and deeper octaves of the instniment, when the strings are struck with the pianoforte hammer, as when they are plucked with the finger.

This is the reason why it has been found advantageous to cover pianoforte hammers with thick layers of felt, rendered elastic by much compression. The outer layers are the softest and most yielding, the lower are firmer. The surface of the hammer comes in contact with the string without any audible impact; the lower layers give the elasticity which throws the hammer back from the string. If you remove a pianoforte hammer and strike it strongly on a wooden table or against a wall, it rebounds from them like an india-rubber ball. The heavier the hammer and the thicker the layers of felt— as in the hammers for the lower octaves— the longer must it be before it rebounds from the string. The hammers for the upper ¶ octaves are lighter and have thinner layers of felt. Clearly the makers of these instruments have here been led by practice to discover certain relations of the elasticity (3f the hammer to the best tones of the string. The make of the hammer has an immense influence on the quality of tone. Theory shows that those upper partial tones are especially favoured whose periodic time is nearly etpial to twice

Footnote: ⁎ When iidensitij is here meutioned, it is as the pitch number. Messrs. Preece and
always measured objectively, by the vis viva Stroh, Proc. IL S., vol. xxviii. p. 366, think
ov mechanical equivalent of work ot the corre- that ' loudness does not depend upon ampUtude
sponding motion. [Mr. Bosanquet {Acadcmij, of vibration only, l)ut upon the quantity of air
Dec. 4, 1875, p. 580, col. 1) points out that put in vibration; and, therefore, there exists
p. lOrf, note, and Chap. IX., paragraph 3, show an absolute physical magnitude in acoustics
this measure to be inadmissible, and adds: analogous to that of quantity of electricity or
' if we admit that in similar organ pipes quantity of heat, and which may be called
similar proportions of the wind supplied are quantity of sound,' and they illustrate this by
employed in the production of tone, the me- the effect of differently sized discs in then-
chanical energy of notes of given intensity automatic phonograph there described. See
varies inversely as the vibration number,' i.e. also App. XX. sect. M. No. 2.—Traiis/afo,:\
