page: 76

+ the time during which the hammer lies on the string, and that, on the other hand, those disappear whose periodic time is 6, 10, 14, etc., times as great.*

It will generally be advantageous, especially for the deeper tones, to eliminate from the series of upper partials, those which lie too close to each other to give a good compound tone, that is, from about the seventh or eighth onwards. Those with higher ordinal numbers are generally relatively weak of themselves. On examining a new grand pianoforte by Messrs. Steinway of New York, which was remarkable for the evenness of its quality of tone, I find that the damping resulting from the duration of the stroke falls, in the deeper notes, on the ninth or tenth partials, whereas in the higher notes, the fourth and fifth partials were scarcely to be got out with the hammei-, although they were distinctly audible when the string was plucked by the nail.+ On the other hand upon an older and much used grand piano, which originally showed the principal damping in the neighbourhood of the

¶ seventh to the fifth partial for middle and low notes, the ninth to the thirteenth partials are now strongly developed. This is probably due to a hardening of the hammers, and certainly can only be prejudicial to the quality of tone. Observations on these relations can be easily made in the method recommended on p. 52/v, c. Put the point of the finger gently on one of the nodes of the tone of which you wish to discover the strength, and then strike the string by means of the digital. By moving the finger till the required tone comes out most purely and sounds the longest, the exact position of the node can be easily found. The nodes which lie near the striking point of the hammer, are of course chiefly covei-ed by the damper, but the corresponding partials are, for a reason to be given presently, relatively weak. Moreover the fifth partial speaks well when the string is touched at twofifths of its length from the end, and the seventh at two-sevenths of that length. These positions are of course quite free of the damper. Generally we find all the partials which arise from the method of striking used, when we keep on striking

¶ while the finger is gradually moved over the length of the string. Touching the shorter end of the string between the striking point and the further bridge will thus bring out the higher partials from the ninth to the sixteenth, which are unisically undesirable.

The method of calculating the strength of the individual upper partials, when the diu-ation of the stroke of the hammer is given, will be found further on.

Secondly as to the />Zaw struck. In the last chapter, when verifying Ohm's law for the analysis of musical tones by the ear, we remarked that whether strings are plucked or struck, those upper partials disappear which have a node at the point excited. Conversely; those partials are comparatively strongest which have a maximum displacement at that point. Generally, when the same method of striking is sviccessively applied to different points of a string, the individual upper partials increase or decrease with the intensity of motion, at the point of excitement, for the coi-responding simple vibrations of the string. The composition of ¶ the musical tone of a string can be consequently greatly varied by merely changing the point of excitement.

Thus if a string be struck in its middle, the second partial tone disappears,

Footnote: ⁎ [The following paragraph on p. 123 of several times. I got out the 7th and 9th
the 1st English edition has heen omitted, harmonic of c, but on account of difficul-
and the passage from ' It will generally be ties due to the over-stringing and over-barring
advantageous,' p. 76(f, to ' found further on,' of the instrument and other circumstances
p. 76c, has been inserted, both in accordance I did not pursue the investigation. Mr. A. J.
with the 4th German edition.—Translator.] Hipkins informs me that on another occasion
t [As Prof. Helmholtz does not mention he got out of the c' string, struck at i the
thestrikingdistanceof the hammer, I obtained length, the Gth, 7th, 8th, and 9th har-
permission from Messrs. Steinway & Sons, at monies, as in the experiments mentioned in
their London house, to examine the c, c' and the next footnote, ' the Gth and 7th beautifully
c" strings of one of their grand pianos, and strong, the 8tli and 9th weaker but clear and
found the striking distance to be VV. tV. ^.nd unmistakable.' He struck with the hammer
-jY of the length of the string respectively. always. Observe the 9th harmonic of a strmg
I did not measure the other strings, but I struck with a pianoforte hammer at its node,
observed that the striking distances varied or }, its length. — Transhi for.']
