page: 78

+ interest to the investigation of the composition of nnisicul tones for this point of excitement. An essential advantage in the choice of this position seems to be that the seventh and ninth partial tones disappear or at least become very weak. These are the first in the series of partial tones which do not belong to the major chord of the prime tone. Up to the sixth partial we have only Octaves, Fifths, and major Thirds of the prime tone; the seventh is nearly a minor Seventh, the ninth a major Second of the prime. Hence these will not fit into the major chord. Experiments on pianofortes show that when the string is struck by the hammer and touched at its nodes, it is easy to bring out the six first partial tones (at least on the strings of the middle and lower octaves), but that it is either not possible to bring out the seventh, eighth, and ninth at all, or that we obtain at best very weak and imperfect resvilts. The difficulty here is not occasioned by the incapacity of the string to form such short vibrating sections, for if instead of striking

¶ the digital we pluck the string nearer to its end, and damp the corresponding nodes, the seventh, eighth, ninth, nay even the tenth and eleventh partial may be clearly and brightly produced. It is only in the upper octaves that the strings are too short and stiff to form the high upper partial tones. For these, several instrument-makers place the striking point nearer to the extremity, and thus obtain a brighter and more penetrating tone. The upper partials of these strings, which their stiffness renders it difficidt to bring out, are thus favoured as against the prime tone. A similarly brighter tone, but at the same time a thinner and poorer one, can be obtained from the lower strings by placing a bridge nearer the striking point, so that the hammer falls at a point less than i of the effective length of the string from its extremity.

While on the one hand the tone can be rendered more tinkling, shrill, and acute, by striking the string with hard bodies, on the other hand it can be rendered duller, that is, the prime tone may be made to outweigh the upper partials, by

¶ striking it with a soft and heavy hammer, as, for example, a little iron hammer covered with a thick sheet of india-rubber. The strings of the lower octaves then produce a much fuller but duller tone. To compare the different qualities of tone thus produced by using hammers of different constructions, care must be taken always to strike the string at the same distance from the end as it is struck by the proper hammer of the instrument, as otherwise the results would be mixed up with the changes of quality depending on altering the striking point. These circumstances are of course well known to the instrument-makers, because they have

Footnote: the hammer abolishes the node of the striking diately after production, they last much longer
place, and with it the partial belonging to it and are much brighter.
throughout the string. I do not find, however, ' I do not think the treble strings are from
that the hammer striking at the jth elimi- shortness and stiffness incapable of forming
nates the 8th partial. It is as audible, when high proper tones. If it were so the notes
touched as an harmonic, as the 9th and higher would be of a very different quality of tone to
partials. It is easy, on a long string of say that which they are found to have. Owing to
51 from 25 to 45 inches, to obtain the series of the very acute pitch of these tones our ears
upper partials up to the fifteenth. On a cannot follow them, but their existence is
string of 45 inches I have obtained as far as proved by the fact that instrument-makers
the 23rd harmonic, the diameter of the wire often bring their treble striking place very
being 1-17 mm. or -07 inches, and the tension near the wrestplank-bridge in order to secure
being 71 kilogrammes or 156-6 lbs. The a brilliant tone effect, or ring, by the pre-
partials diminish in intensity with the re- ponderance of these harmonics,
duction of the vibrating length; the 2nd is '
The clavichord differs entirely from
stronger than the 3rd, and the 3rd than the hammer and plectrum keyboard instruments
4th, &c. Up to the 7tli a good harmonic note in the note being started from the end, the
can always be brought out. After the 8th, as tangent (brass pin) which stops the string
Helmholtz says, the higher partials are all being also the means of exciting the sound,
comparatively weak and become gradually But the thin brass wires readily break up into
fainter. To strengthen them we may use a segments of short recurrence, the bass wires,
narrower harder hammer. To hear them which are most indistinct, being helped in the
with an ordinary hammer it is necessary to latest instruments by lighter octave strings,
excite them by a firm blow of the hand upon which serve to make the fundamental tones
the finger-key and to continue to hold it down. apparent.' See also the last note, p. 76d', and
They sing out quite clearly and last a very App. XX. sect. N. — Translator.] sensible time. On removing the stop imme-
