page: 80

+ tone is much more distinct in the tones of pianoforte strings when phicked by the finger, than when struck by the hammer.

Although, as is shown by the mechanism of the upper octaves on pianofortes, it is possible to produce a compound tone in which the prime is predominant, makers have preferred arranging the luethod of striking the lower strings in such a way as to preserve the five or six first partials distinctly, and to give the second and third greater intensity than the prime.

Thirdly, as regards the thickness and material of the strings. Very rigid strings will not form any very high upper partials, because they carmot readily assume inflections in opposite directions within very short sections. This is easily observed by stretching two strings of different thicknesses on a monochord and endeavouring to produce their high upper partial tones. We always succeed much better with the thinner than with the thicker string. To produce very high upper ¶ partial tones, it is preferable to use strings of extremely fine wire, such as gold lace makers employ, and when they are excited in a suitable manner, as for example by plucking or striking with a metal point, these high iipper partials may be heard in the compound itself. The numerous high upper partials which lie close to each other in the scale, give that peculiar high inharmonious noise which we are accustomed to call ' tinkling '. From the eighth partial tone upwards these simple tones are less than a whole Tone apart, and from the fifteenth upwards less than a Semitone. They consequently form a series of dissonant tones. On a string of the finest iron wire, such as is used in the manufacture of artificial flowers, 700 centimetres (22'97 feet) long, I was able to isolate the eighteenth partial tone. The peculiarity of the tones of the zither depends on the presence of these tinkling upper partials, but the series does not extend so far as that just mentioned, because the strings are shorter.

Strings of gut are much lighter than metal strings of the same compactness, ¶ and hence produce higher partial tones. The difference of their musical quality depends partly on this circumstance and partly on the inferior elasticity of the gut, which damps their partials, especially their higher partials, much more rapidly. The tone of plucked cat-gut strings {guitar, harp) is consequently much less tinkling than that of metal strings.

4. Miisical Tones of Bowed Instruments.

No complete mechanical theory can yet be given for the motion of strings excited by the violin-bow, because the mode in which the bow affects the motion of the string is unknown. But by applying a peculiar method of observation, proposed in its essential features by the French physicist Lissajous, I have found it possible to observe the vibrational form of individual points in a violin string, and from this observed form, which is comparatively very simple, to calculate the ¶ whole motion of the string and the intensity of the vipj)er partial tones.

Look through a hand magnifying glass consisting of a strong convex lens, at any small bright object, as a grain of starch reflecting a flame, and appearing as a fine point of light. Move the lens about while the point of light remains at rest, and the point itself will appear to move. In the apparatus I have employed, which is shown in fig. 22 opposite, this lens is fastened to the end of one prong of the tuning-fork 0, and marked L. It is in fact a combination of two achromatic lenses, like those used for the object-glasses of microscopes. These two lenses may be used alone as a doublet, or be combined with others. When more magnifying power is required, we can introduce behind the metal plate A A, which carries the fork, the tube and eye-piece of a microscope, of which the doublet then forms the object-glass. This instrument may he called a vibration microscojie. AVhen it is so arranged that a fixed luminous point may be clearly seen through it, and the fork is set in vibration, the doublet L moves periodically up and down in pendular vibration. The observer, however, appears to see the luminous point
