page: 82

+ much from one expressible by small whole numbers, the motion of the curve is too rapid for the eye to follow it, and all becomes confusion.

If the vibration microscope has to be used for observing the motion of a violin string, the luminous point must be attached to that string. This is done by first blackening the reqiiired spot on the string with ink, and when it is dry, rubbing it over with wax, and powdering this with starch so that a few grains remain sticking. The violin is then fixed with its strings in a vertical direction opposite the microscope, so that the luminous reflection from one of the grains of starch can be clearly seen. The bow is drawn across the strings in a direction parallel to the prongs of the fork. Every point in the string then moves horizontally, and on setting the fork in motion at the same time, the observer sees the peculiar vibrational curves already mentioned. For the purposes of observation I used the a string, which I tuned a little higher, as //[?, so that it was exactly two Octaves ¶ higher than the tuning-fork of the microscope, which sounded B\}.

In fig. 23 are shown the resulting vibrational curves as seen in the vibration microscope. The straight horizontal lines in the figures, a to a, b to It, c to c

show the apparent path of the observed luminous point, before it had itself been set in vibration; the curves and zigzags in the same figures, show the a^^parent path of the luminous point when it also was made to move. By their side, in A, B, C, the same vibrational forms are exhibited according to the methods used in Chapters I. and II., the lengths of the horizontal line being directly proportional to the corresponding lengths of time, whereas in figures a to a, b to b, c to c, the horizontal lengths are proportional to the excursions of the vibrating microscope. A, and a to a, show the vibrational curves for a tuning-fork, that is for a simple pendular vibration; B and b to b those of the middle of a violin string in unison with the fork of the vibration microscope; C and c, c, those for a string which was tuned an Octave higher. We may imagine the figures a to a, b to b, and c to c, to be formed from the figures A, B, C, by supposing the surface on which these are drawn to be wrapped round a transparent cylinder whose circumference is of the same length as the horizontal line. The curve di-awn upon the surface of the cylinder must then be observed from such a point, that the horizontal line which when wrapped round the cylinder forms a circle, appears perspectively as a single straight line. The vibrational curve A will then appear in the forms a to a, B in the forms b to b, C in the forms c to c. When the pitch of the two vibrating bodies is not in an exact harmonic ratio, this imaginary cylinder on which the vibrational curves are drawn, appears to revolve so that the forms a to a, &c., are assumed in succession.

It is now easy to rediscover the forms A, B, C, from the forms a to a, b to b,
