page: 84

+ third partial a ninth, that of the fourth a sixteenth, and so on. This is the same scale of intensity as for the partial tones of a string plncked in its middle, with this exception, that in the latter case the evenly numbered partials all disappear, whei'eas they are all present when the how is iised. The upper partials in the compound tone of a violin are heard easily and wall be found to be strong in sound if they have been first produced as so-called harmonics on the string, by bowing lightly while gently touching a node of the required partial tone. The strings of a violin will allow the harmonics to be produced as high as the sixth partial tone with ease, and with some difficulty even up to the tenth. The lower tones speak best when the string is bowed at from one-tenth to one-twelfth the length of the vibrating portion of the string from its extremity. P'or the higher harmonics where the sections are smaller, the strings must be bowed at about one-fourth or one-sixth of their vibi'ating length from the end.*

¶ The prime in the compound tones of bowed instruments is comparatively more powerful than in those produced on a pianoforte or guitar by striking or plucking the strings near to their extremities; the first upper partials are comparatively weaker; but the higher upper partials from the sixth to about the tenth are much more distinct, and give these tones their cutting character.

The fundamental form of the vibrations of a violin string just described, is, when the string speaks well, tolerably independent of the place of bowing, at least in all essential features. It does not in any respect alter, like the vibrational form of struck or plucked strings, according to the position of the point excited. Yet there are certain obser- Fk;. 25.

vable differences of the vibrational figure which depend upon the bowingpoint. Little crumples are

¶ usually perceived on the lines of the vibrational figure, as in fig. 25, which increase in breadth and height the further the bow is removed from the extremity of the string. When we bow at a node of one of the higher upper partials which is near the bridge, these crumples are simply reduced by the absence of that part of the normal motion of the string which depends on the partial tones having a node at that place. When the observation on the vibrational form is made at one of the other nodes belonging to the deepest tone which is eliminated, none of these crumples are seen. Thus if the string is bowed at 4th, or ~ths, or |ths, or iths, &c., of its length from the bridge, the vibrational figure is simple, as in fig. 24 (p. 83/y). But if we observe between two nodes, the crumples appear as in fig. 25. Variations in the quality of tone partly depend upon this condition. When the violin bow is brought too near the

¶ finger board, the end of which is ith the length of the string from the bridge, the 5th or 6th partial tone, which is generally distinctly audible, will be absent. The tone is thus rendered duller. The usual place of bowing is at about y\jth of the length of the string; for p^no passages it is somewhat further from the bridge and for forte somewhat nearer to it. If the bow is brought near the bridge, and at the same time but lightly pressed, another alteration of quality occurs, which is readily seen on the vibrational figure. A mixture is formed of

Footnote: ⁎ [The position of the finger for producing near the nut, out of 165 mm. the actual
the harmonic is often sHghtly different from half length of the strings. These differences
that theoretically assigned. Dr. Huggins, must therefore be due to some imperfec-
F.R.S., kindly tried for me the position of tions of the strings themselves. Dr. Huggins
the Octave harmonic on the four strings of finds that there is a space of a quarter of
his Stradivari, a mark with Chinese white an inch at any point of which the Octave
being made under his finger on the finger harmonic may be brought out, but the quality
board. Result, 1st and 4th string exact, of tone is best at the points named above. —
2nd string 3 mm., and 3rd string 5 mm. too Trmislator.]
