page: 85

+ the prime tone and first liarmonic of the string. By liglit and rapid howing, namely at about oVth of the length of the string from the bridge, wc sometimes obtain the upper Octave of the prime tone by itself, a node being formed in the middle of the string. On bowing more firmly the prime tone innnediately sounds. Intermediately the higher Octave may mix with it in any proportion. This is immediately recognised in the vibrational figure. Fig. 26 gives the corresponding series of forms. It is seen how a fresh crest appears on the longer side of the front of a wave, jutting out at first slightly, then more strongly, till at length the crests of the new waves are as high as those of the old, and then the vibrational number has doubled, and the pitch has passed into the Octave above. The quality of the lowest tone of the string is rendered softer and brighter, but less fidl and powerful when the intermixture commences. It is interesting to observe the vi1)rational figure while little changes are made in the style of bowing, and note ¶ how the resulting slight changes of quality are immedi.itely rendered evident by verv distinct changes in the vibrational figure itself.

The vibrational forms just described may be maintained in a unifonnly steady and unchanged condition by carefully uniform bowing. The instrument has then an uninterrupted and pure musical quality of tone. Any scratching of the bow is immediately shown by sudden jumps, or discontinuous displacements and changes in the vibrational figure. If the scratching continues, the eye has no longer time to perceive a regular figure. The scratching noises of a violin bow must therefore be regarded as irregular interruptions of the normal vibrations of the string, making them to recommence from a new starting jioint. Sudden jumps in the

vibrational figure betray every little stumble of the bow which the ear alone would scarcely observe. Inferior bowed instrvmients seem to be distinguished from good ones by the freciuency of such greater or smaller irregularities of vibration. On the string of my monochord, which was only used for the occasion as a bowed instrument, great neatness of bowing was required to preserve a steady vibrational figure lasting long enough for the eye to apprehend it; and the tone was rough in (piality, accompanied by much scratching. With a very good modern violin made by Bausch it was easier to maintain the steadiness of the vibrational figure for some time; but I succeeded much better with an old Italian violin of Guadanini, ¶ which was the first one on which I could keep the vibrational figure steady enough to count the crumples. This great uniformity of vibration is evidently the reason of the purer tone of these old instruments, since every little irregularity is immediately felt by the ear as a roughness or scratchiness in the quality of tone.

An appropriate structure of the instrument, and wood of the most perfect elasticity procurable, are probably the important conditions for regular vibrations of the string, and when these are present, the bow can be easily made to work uniformly. This allows of a pure flow of tone, undisfigured by any roughness. On the other hand, when the vibrations are so tuiiform the string can be more vigorously attacked with the bow. Good instruments consequently allow of a much more powerful motion of the string, and the whole intensity of their tone can be communicated to the air without diminution, whereas the friction caused by any imperfection in the elasticity of the wood destroys part of the motion. Much of the advantages of old violins may, however, also depend upon their age, and especially their long use, both of which cannot but act favoiu-ably on the elasticity of
