page: 86

+ the wood. But the art of bowing is evidently the most important condition of all. How delicately this must he cultivated to obtain certainty in producing a very perfect quality of tone and its difFei-ent varieties, cannot be more cleaidy demonstrated than by the observation of vibrational figiires. It is also well known that great players can bring out full tones from even indifferent instruments.

The preceding observations and conclusions refer to the vibrations of the strings of the instrument and the intensity of their upper partial tones, solely in so far as they are contained in the compound vibrational movement of the string. But partial tones of different pitches are not equally well communicated to the air, and hence do not strike the ear of the listener with precisely the same degrees of intensity as those they possess on the string itself. They are communicated to the air by means of the sonorous body of the instrument. As we have had already occasion to remark, vibrating strings do not directly communicate any

¶ portion of their motion to the air. The vibrating strings of the violin, in the first place, agitate the bridge over which they are stretched. This stands on two feet over the most mobile part of the 'belly' between the two '/ holes'. One foot of the bridge rests upon a comparatively firm support, namely the ' soundpost,' which is a solid rod inserted between the two plates, back and belly, of the instrument. It is only the other leg which agitates the elastic wooden plates, and through them the included mass of air.*

An inclosed mass of air, like that of the violin, viola, and violoncello, bounded by elastic plates, has certain proper tones which may be evoked by l)lowing across the openings, or '/ holes '. The violin thus treated gives c' according to Savart, wdio examined instruments made by Stradivari (Stradiuarius).t Zamminer found the same tone constant on even imperfect instruments. For the violoncello Savart found on blowing over the holes F, and Zamminer 0.% According to Zamminer the soimd-box of the viola (tenor) is tuned to be a Tone

¶ deeper than that of the violin. § On placing the ear against the back of a violin and playing a scale on the pianoforte, some tones will be found to penetrate the ear with more force than others, owing to the resonance of the instrument. On a

Footnote: ⁎ [This account is not quite sufficient. agitation ti-ansmitted by the rod." In short,
Neither leg of the bridge rests exactly on the touch rod acts as a sound-post to the
the sound-post, because it is found that this finger. The place of least vibration of the
position materially injures the quality of tone. belly is exactly over the sound-post and of the
The sound-post is a little in the rear of the back at the point under the sound-post. On
\eo of the bridge on the v" string side. The removing the sound-post, or covermg its ends
pcTsition of the sound-post with regard to the with a sheet of india-rul)ber, which did not
bridge has to be adjusted for each individual diminish the support, the tone was poor and
instrument. Dr. William Muggins, F.R.S., in thin. But an external wooden clamp connect-
his paper ' On the Function of the Sound-post, ing belly and back in the places where the
and on the Proportional Thickness of the sound-post touches them, restored the tone.—
Strings of the Violin,' read Mav 24, 188.3, Translator.]
ProceecUnqs of thr Koi/al Society, vol. xxxv. t [Zamminer, Die Musik, 1855, vol. i.
t| pp. 241-248, "has experimentally investigated p. 37, says c' of 256 \ih.— Translator.']
the whole action of the sound-post, and finds + [Zamminer, ihid. p. 41, and adds that
that its main function is to convey vibrations judging from the violm the resonance should
from the belly to the back of the violin, in he F%.— Translator.]
addition to those conveyed by the sides. The § [The passage referred to has not been
(apparently ornamental) cuttings in the bridge found. But Zammmer says, p. 40, 'The
of the viohn, sift the two sets of vibrations, length of the box of a violin is 13 Par. inches,
set up by the bowed string at right angles to and of the viola 14 inches 5 lines. Exactly
each other and ' allow those only or mainly to in inverse ratio stand the pitch numbers
pass to the feet which would be efficient in 470 (a misprint for 270 most probably) and
setting the body of the instrument into vibra- 241, which were found by blowing over the
tion'. As the peculiar shape of the instru- wind-holes of the two instruments.' Now the
ment rendered strewing of sand unavailable, ratio 13 : 14t% gives 182 cents, and the ratio
Dr. Huggins investigated the vibrations by 241 : 270 gives 197 cents, which are very
means of a ' touch rod,' consisting of ' a small nearly, though not ' exactly ' the same. This,
round stick of straight grained deal a few however, makes the resonance of the violm
inches long; the forefinger is placed on one 270 vib. and not 256 vib., and agrees with the
end and the other end is put Ughtly in contact next note. I got a good resonance with a fork
with the vibrating surface. The 'finger soon of 268 vib. from Dr. Muggins's violoncello by
becomes very sensitive to small differences of Nicholas about a.d. Vl<d±^Translator.]
