page: none

+ furnished with somewhat projecting sharp eilges, l)y ilirectiiig a tliiii Hat stream of air across the opening and against its edges.*

The motion of air that takes place in the inside of organ i)ipes, corresponds to a system of plane waves which are reflected backwards and forwards between the two ends of the pipe. At the stopj^ed end of a cylindrical pipe the reflexion of every wave that strikes it is very perfect, so that the reflected wave has the same intensity as it had before reflexion. In any train of waves moving in a given direction, the velocity of the oscillating molecules in the condensed portion of the wave takes place in the same direction as that of the propagation of the waves, and in the rareHed portion in the opposite direction. But at the stopped end of a pipe its cover does not allow of any forward motion of the n\oleculcs of air in the direction of the length of the |)ipe Hence the incident and reflected wave at this place combine so as to excite opposite velocities of oscillation of the molecxiles of ¶ air, and consequently by their superposition the velocity of the molecules of air at the cover is destroyed. Hence it follows that the phases of pressure in both will agree, because opposite motions of oscillation and opposite propagation, result in accordant pressure.

Hence at the stopped end tliere is no motion, but great alteration of pressure. The reflexion of the wave takes place in such a manner that the phase of conden sation remains unaltered, but the direction of the motion of oscillation is reversed.

The contrary takes place at the open end of pipes, in which is also included the <ipening of their mouths. At an open end where the air of the pipe connnunicates freely with the great outer mass of air, no sensible condensation can take place. In the explanation usually given .of the motion of air in pipes, it is assumed that both condensation and rarefaction vanish at the open ends of pipes, which is aijproximately but not exactly correct. If there were exactly no alteratit)n of density at that place, there would be complete reflexion of every incident wave ¶ at the open ends, so that an equally large reflected wave would be generated with an opposite state of density, but the direction of oscillation of the molecules of air in both waves would agree. The superposition of such an incident and such a

Footnote: ture of the air. The following are adapted from 2f to 3.^ inches, the pitch number
from the rules given by 51. Cavaille-Coll, the increases bj' about 1 in 300, but as pressure
celebrated French organ-builder, in Comjites varies from 3^ to 4 inches, the pitch number
Rciidus, 1860, p. 176, supposing the tempera- increases by about 1 in 440, the whole increase
ture to be 59' F. or 15" C, and the pressure of of pressure from 23 to 4 inches increases the
the wind to be about 3^ inches, or 8 centi- pitch number by 1 in 180. metres (meaning that it will support a column For temperature, I found by numerous
of water of that height in the wind gauge). observations at very different temperatures
The pitch niunbers, for donhle vibrations, are that the following practical rale is sufficient
found by dividing 20,080 when the dimensions for reducing tbe pitch number observed at one
ai-e given in inches, and 510,000 when in temperature to that due to another. It is not
millimetres by the following numbers: (1) for quite accurate, for the air Ijlown from the
ei/lindrical open pipes, 3 times the length bellows is often lower than the external tem-
added to 5 times the diameter; (2) for cfjliiidyi- perature. Let F be the pitch number observed ^
ad stopped pipes, G times the length added to at a given temperature, and d the difference of
10 times the diameter; (3) for square open temperature in degrees Fahr. Then the pitch
pipes, 3 times the length added to 6 times the number is P x (1 + 00104 d) according as the
depth (clear internal distance from mouth to temperature is higher or lower. Tbe practical
back; (4) for squnre stopped pipes, 6 times the operation is as follows: supposing P = 528, and
length added to 12 times the depth. d = 14 increase of temperature. To 528 add
This rule is always sufficiently accurate for 4 in 100, or 21-]2, giving 549-12. Divide by
cutting organ pipes to their approximate 1000 to 2 places of decimals, giving -55.
length, and piercing them to bring out the:Multiply by J = 14, giving 7-70. Adding this to
(Jctave harmonic, and has long been used for 528, we get 535-7 for the pitch number at the
these purposes in M. Cavaille-CoU's factory. new temperature.— 7'y-r^^«^f/o/•.] The rule is not so safe for the square wooden * [Here the passage from ' These edges,'
as for the cylindrical metal pipes. The pitch p. 140, to '
resembling a violin,' p. 141 of the
of a pipe of known dimensions ought to be 1st Enghsh edition, has been omitted, and the
tirst ascertained by other means. Then this passage from 'The motion of air,' p. 89rt,
pitch number multiplied by the divisors in (3) to ' their corners are rounded oi?,' p. 93?^, has
and (4) should be used in place of the 20,080 been inserted in accordance with the 4th
or 510,000 of the rule, for all similar pipes. German edition.— Tran slat m:^
As to strength of wind, as pressure varies
