page: 91

These therefore have the same phases, and cancel their etiect ou the return of the wave with an opposite phase. Hence the tones of strongest resonance in sto[)ped jjipes correspond with the series of unevenly numbered partials of its fundamental tone. Supposing its pitch number is n, then 3/?, is the Twelfth of u, that is the Fifth of -In the higher Octave, and 5/; is the major Third of \n the next liigher Octave, and In the [sub] minor Seventh of the same Octave, and so on.

Now although the phenomena follow these rules in the principal points, certain deviations from them occur because there is not precisely no change of pressiu-e at the open ends of pipes. From these ends the motion of sound communicates itself to the uninclosed air beyond, and the waves which spread out from the open ends of the tubes have relatively very little alteration of pressure, but are not entirely without some. Hence a part of every wave which is incident on the open end of the pipe is not reflected, but runs out into the open air, while the remainder or greater portion of the wave is reflected, and returns into the tube. The re-H flexion is the more complete, the smaller are the dimensions of the opening of the tube in comparison with the wave-length of the tone in question.

Theory* also, agreeing with experiment, shows that the phases of the reflected part of the wave are the same as they would be if the reflexion did not take place at the surface of the opening itself but at another and somewhat ditterent plane. Hence what may be called the reduced length of the pipe, or that answering to the pitch, is somewhat different from the real length, and the difference between the two depends on the form of the mouth, and not on the pitch of the notes produced unless they are so high and hence their wave-lengths so short, that the dimensions of the opening cannot be neglected in respect to them.

For cylindrical pipes of circular section, with ends cut at right angles to the length, the distance of the plane of reflexion from the end of the pipe is theoretically determined to be at a distance of 0-785-t the radius of the circle.! For a ¶ wooden pipe of square section, of which the sides were 36 mm. (1-4 inch) internal measure, I found the distance of the plane of reflexion 14 mm. (-55 inch).^

Now since on account of the imperfect reflexion of waves at the open ends of organ pipes (and respectively at their mouths) a part of the motion of the air must escape into the free air at every vibration, any oscillatory motion of its mass of air must be speedily exhausted, if there are no forces to replace the lost motion. Li fact, on ceasing to blow an organ pipe scarcely any after sound is observable. Nevertheless the wave is frequently enough reflected forward and backward for its pitch to become perceptible on tapping against the pipe.

The means usually adopted for keeping them continually sounding, is hloirlag. In order to understand the action of this jirocess, we must remember that when

Footnote: " See my paper ui Crellcn Jdunud for tion of the plug. [The sameness of the pitch
Mathematics, vol. Ivii. is determined by seeiug that each makes the
t Mr. Bosanquc't {Proc. Mas. Assn. 1877-8, same number of beats with the same fork.]
p.65) is reported as saying: 'Lord Rayleigh and The nodal surface lay 137 mm. (5-39 inch)
himself had gone fully into the matter, and had from the end of the pipe, while a quarter of II
come to the conclusion that this correction was a wave-length was 151 mm. (5-94 inch). At the
much less than Helmlioltz supposed. Lord Ray- mouth end of the pipe, on the other hand,
leigh adopted the figure -6 of the radius, whilst 83 mm. (3-27 inch) were wanting to complete
he himself adopted -55. ' See papers by Lord the theoretical length of the pipe. [The addi-
Rayleigh and Mr. Bosanquet in Philosophical tional piece l)eing half the length of the wave,
Mayazine. i\Ir. Blaikley by a new process the pitch of the pipe before and after the
finds -576, which lies between the other two, addition of this piece remains the same, by
see his paper in Phil. Mag. Mav 1879, p. 342. which propeity the length of the additional
+ The pipe was of wood, made by ]\Iarlove, piece is found. The length of the pipe from
the additional length being 302 mm". (11-9 in.), the bottom of the mouth to the open end was
corresponding exactly with half the length of 205 mm. =8-07 inch; the node, as determmed,
wave of the pipe. The position of the nodal was 137 mm. = 5-39 inch from the open end,
plane in the inside of the pipe was determined and G8 mm. =2-68 inch from the bottom of the
by inserting a wooden plug of the same diameter mouth. These lengths had to be increased by
as of the internal opening of the pipe at its 14 mm. = -55 in. and 83 mm. = 3-27 in. respec-
open end, until the pitch of the pipe, whicli tively, to make up each to the quarter length
had now become a closed one, was exactly the of the wave 151 mm. = 5-95 inch. — Translator.^ same as that of the open pipe before the inser-
