page: none

+ that secondly the higher upper partials, whose wave-lengtlis only slightly exceed the diameter of the pipe, are as a general rule imperfectly developed.

The kind of motion of the air here described is exactly the same as that shown in Hg. 23 (p. 82/>), B and C, fig. 24 (p. 836), A and B, for the vibrating points of a violin string. Organ-builders have long since remarked the similarity of the (piality (jf tone, for the narrower cylindrical-pipe stops when strongly blown, as shown by the names: Geigenprindpal , Viola di Gamha, Violonvello, Violon-fHisit*

That these conclusions from the mechanics of blowing correspond with the facts in nature, is shown by the experiments of Messrs. Toepler tt Boltzmann,t who rendered the form of the oscillation of pressure in the interior of the pipe optically observable by the interference of light passed through a node of the vibrating mass of air. When the force of the wind was small they found almost a simple vibration (the smaller the oscillation of the aii'-blade at the lip, the more completely the dis¶ continuities disappear). But when the force of the wind was greater they found a very rapid alternation between two different values of pressure, each of which )'emained almost unaltered for a fraction of a vibration.

Messrs. Mach and J. Hervert's J experiments with gas flames placed before the end of an open pipe to make the vibrations visible, show that the form of motion just described really occurs at the ends of the pipes. The forms of vibration which they deduced from the analysis of the forms of the flames correspond with those of a violin string, except that, for the reason given above, their corners are rounded off. By using resonators I find that on narrow pipes of this kind the partial tones may be clearly heard up to the sixth.

For wide open pipes, on the other hand, the adjacent proper tones of the tube are all somewhat sharper than the corresponding iiarmonic tones of the prime, and hence these tones will be much less reinforced by the resonance of the tube. Wide pipes, having larger masses of vibrating air and admitting of being much more strongly blown without jumping up into an harmonic, are used for the great body^ of sound on the organ, and are hence called p^'in^ipalstimmen.i. For the above reasons they produce the prime tone alone strongly and fully, with a much weaker retinue of secondary tones. For wooden 'principal' pipes, I find the prime tone and its Octave or first upper partial very distinct; the Twelfth or second upper partial is but weak, and the higher upper partials no longer distinctly perceptible. For metal pipes the fourth partial was also still perceptible. The quality of tone in these pipes is fuller and softer than that of the geigenjyrincipal* When flute or flue stops of the organ, and the German flute are blown softly, the upper partials lose strength at a greater rate than the prime tone, and hence the musical quality becomes weak and soft.

Another variety is observed on the pipes which are conically narrowed at their

Footnote: ⁎ [GeiyeiipriHcipal— violin or crisp-toned sively conical with a bell top. From Hopkins
diapason, 8 feet, — violin principal, 4 feet. See on the 0?-gan, pp. 137, 445, &c. — Translator.] supra, p. 91rf, note. Violoncello — 'crisp-toned -f Poggendor&'s A7inal., vol. cxli. pp. 321-
open stop, of small scale, the Octave to the 352. ^
violone, 8 feet'. Violon-hass —thin fails in:f Poggendorff's ^-i?n!r?/., vol. cxlvii. pp. 590-
Hopkins, but it is probably his 'violone^ 604.
double bass, a unison open wood stop, of much § [Literally ' principal voices or parts ' ;
smaller scale than the Diapason, and formed may probably be best translated ' principal
of pipes that are a little wider at the top than work ' or ' diapason-work,' including ' all the
at the bottom, and furnished with ears and open cylindrical stops of Open Diapason
beard at the mouth; the tone of the Violone measure, or which have their scale deduced
is crisp and resonant, like that of the orches- from that of the Open Diapason; such stops
tral Double Bass; and its speech being a little are the chief, most important or "■ princijiul,'"
slow, it has the Stopped Bass always drawn as they are also most numerous in an organ.
with it, 16 feet'. Gamha or viol da gamba — The Unison and Double Open Diapasons,
' l)ass viol, unison stop, of smaller scale, and Principal, Fifteenth and Octave Fifteenth;
thinner but more pungent tone than the violin the Fifth, Twelfth, and Larigot; the Tenth
diapason, 8 feet, . . . one of the most highly and Tierce; and the Mixture Stops, when of
esteemed and most frequently disposed stops full or proportional scale, belong to the Dia-
in Continental organs; the German gamba is pason-work.' From Hopkins on the Organ,
usually composed of cylindrical pipes '. In p. 131. — Translator J] England tiU very recently it was made exclu-
