page: 94

+ upper end, in the mUcwnnl, f/emshom, und spitzfllite stops.* Their upper opening has generally half the diameter of the lower section; for the same length the mlicional pipe has the narrowest, and the sjnt^ote the widest section. These pipes have, I find, the property of rendering some higher partial tones, from the Fifth to the Seventh, comparatively stronger than the lower. The tiuality of tone is consequently poor but peculiarly bright.

The narrower stopped cylindrical pnpes have proper tones correspondmg to the unevenly numljered partials of the prime, that is, the third partial or Twelfth, the fifth partial or higher major Third, and so on. For the wider stopped pipes, as for the wide open pipes, the next adjacent proper tones of the mass of air are distinctly higher than the corresponding upper partials of the prime, and consequently these upper partials are very slightly, if at all, reinforced. Hence wide stopped pipes, especially when gently blown, give the prime tone almost alone, and they were

¶ therefore j)reviously adduced as examples of simple tones (p. 60c). Narrow stopped pipes, on the other hand, let the Twelfth be very distinctly heard at the same time with the prime time; and have hence been called quintaten {<juintam tenentes).f When these pipes are strongly blown they also give the fifth partial, or higher major Third, very distinctly. Another variety of quality is produced by the rohrfl'ute.X Here a tube, open at both ends, is inserted in the cover of a stopped pipe, and in the examples I examined, its length was that of an open pipe giving the fifth partial tone of the prime tone of the stopped pipe. T'he fifth partial tone is thus proportionably stronger than the rather weak third partial on these pipes, and the quality of tone becomes peculiarly bright. Compared with open pipes the quality of tone in stopped pipes, where the evenly numbered partial tones are absent, is somewhat hollow; the wider stopped i)ipes have a dull quality of tone, especially when deep, and are soft and powerless. But their softness offers a very effective contrast to the more cutting qualities of the narrower open pipes and the

¶ noisy corni)oiind stops, of which I have already spoken (p. 576), and which, as is well known, form a compound tone by uniting many pipes corresponding to a prime and its upper partial tones.

Wooden pipes do not produce such a cutting windrush as metal pipes. Wooden sides also do not resist the agitation of the waves of sound so well as metal ones, and hence the vibrations of higher pitch seem to be destroyed by friction. For these reasons wood gives a softer, but duller, less penetrating quality of tone than metal. It is characteristic of all pipes of this kind that they speak readily, and hence admit of great rapidity in musical divisions and figures, but, as a little increase of force in blowing distinctly alters the pitch, their loudness of tone can scarcely be changed. Hence on the ovgan forte and ^r/a«o have to be produced by stops, which regulate the introduction of pipes with various qualities of tone, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, now the loud and cutting, now the weak and soft. The means of expression on this instrument are therefore somewhat limited, but, on the other

¶ hand, it clearly owes part of its magnificent properties to its power of sustaining tones with unaltered force, undisturbed by subjective excitement.

Footnote: ⁎ \Saliclonnl—' reedy Double Dulciana, 16 conical bodies, 8 feet '. ' This stop is found of
feet and 8 feet, octave salicional, 4 feet '. The 8, 4, and 2 feet length in German organs. In
Dulciana is described as 'belonging to the Flute- England it has hitherto been made chiefly as a
work the pipes much smaller in scale than 4-feet stop; i.e. of principal pitch. The pipes
those of the open diapason . . . tone peculiarly of the Spitz-flute are slightly conical, being
soft and gentle ' (Hopkins, p. 113). Gemshorn, about J narrower at top than at the mouth,
literally ' chamois horn ' ; in Hopkins, ' Goat- and the tone is therefore rather softer than
horn, a unison open metal stop, more conical that of the cylindrical stop, but of very pleas-
than' the Spitz-Flote, 8 feet '. ' A member of ing quality ' {ibid. p. l-^0).^Translator.'] the Flute-work and met with of 8, 4, or 2 feet t [See supra, p. 33(7, note.— Translator.']
len<^th in Continental organs. The pipes of this \ [Itoh rflote- ' Double Stopped Diapason of
stop are only i the diameter at the top that they metal pipes with chimneys, 16 feet, Keed-flute,
are at the mouth; and the tone is consequently Metal Stopped Diapason, with reeds, tubes or
liaht but very clear and travelling ' {ibid. chimneys, 8 feet. Stopped ]\Ietal Flute, with
priio). Spitzflotc—' S^ire or taper flute, a reeds, tubes or chimneys, 4 feet' (Hopkins,
unison open metal stop formed of pipes with pp. 444, U5).— Tra)tslator.]
