page: 90

'J'lie mode in ill tig. 29, A ai dinal section into which the wind tonijue 1 is fastened

which tongues are fastened id B below p ]) is the

A bears a air chamber is driven; the 1 the groove r,

in the reed stops of ¶ sonant cnj) above

Footnote: A F[fi. 20.

organs B is a

is sliown longitu-

which fits into the block s; d is the tuning wire, which presses against the tongue, and being pushed down shortens it and hence sharpens its pitch, and, conversely, flattens the pitch when pulled up. Slight variations of pitch are thus easily produced.*

2. The tongues of clarinets, oboes, and ¶ bassoons, are constructed in a somewhat similar manner and are cut out of elastic reed plates. The clarinet has a single wide tongue which is fastened before the corresponding opening of the mouthpiece like the metal tongues previous^ described, and would strike the frame if its excursions were long enough. But its

Footnote: obtained from some of the principal English organ- builders, which I here insert from p. 711 of the first edition of this translation: — Mr. Willis tells nie that he never uses free reeds, that no power can be got from them, and that he looks upon them as ' artificial toys '. Messrs. J. W. Walker & Sons say that they
^ have also never used free reeds for the forty or more years that they have been in business, and consider that free reeds have been superseded by striking reeds. Mr. Thomas Hill informs me that free reeds had been tried by his father, by M. Cavaille-Coll of Paris, and others, in every imaginable way, for the last thirty or forty years, and were abandoned as ' utterly worthless '. But he mentions that Schiilze (of Paulenzelle, Schwartzburg) told him that he never saw a striking reed till he came over to England in 1851, and that Walcker (of Ludwigsburg, Wuertemberg) had Jittle experience of theni, as Mr. Hill learnt from him aljout twenty years ago. j\Ir. Hill adds, however, that both these builders speedily abandoned the free reed, after seeing the English practice of voicing striking reeds. This is corroborated by Mr. Hermann Smith's
^ statement (1875) that Schulze, in 1862, built the great organ at Doncaster with 94 stops, of which only the Trombone and its Octave had free reeds (see Hopkins on the Organ, p. 530, for an account of this organ); and that two years ago he built an organ of 64 stops and 4,052 pipes for Sheffield, with not one free reed; also that Walcker built the great organ for Ulm cathedral, with 6,500 pipes and 100 stops, of which .34 had reeds, and out of them only 2 had free reeds; and that more recently he built as large a one for pjoston ]\Iusic Hall, without more free reeds; and again that CavailM-CoU quite recently built an organ for Mr. Hopwood of Kensington of 2,252 pipes and 40 stops, of which only one — the Musette — had free reeds. He also says that Lewis, and probably most of the London organ-builders not previously mentioned, have never used the free reed. The harshness of the
striking reed is obviated in the English method of voicing, according to Mr. H. Smith, by so curving and manipulating the metal tongue, that instead of coming with a discontinuous ' flap ' from the fixed extremity down on to the slit of the tube, it ' rolls itself ' down, and hence gradually covers the aperture. The art of curving the tongue so as to produce this effect is very difficult to acquire; it is entirely empirical, and depends upon the keen eye and fine touch of the ' artist,' who notes lines and curves imperceptible to the uninitiated observer, and foresees their influence on the production of quality of tone. Consequently, when an organ-builder has the misfortune to lose his ' reed-voicer,' he has always great difficulty in replacing him. — Translator.']
" [It should be observed that fig. 29, A, sliows a /rcc reed, and fig. 29, B, a strikivg reed; and that the tuning wire is right in fig. 29, B, because it presses the reed against the edges of its groove and hence shortens it, but it is wrong in fig. 29, A, for the reed being free would strike against the wire and rattle. For free reeds a clip is used which grasps the reed on both sides and thus limits its vibrating length.
Fig. 28, p. 9bh, shows the vibrator of an harmonium , not of an organ pipe. The figures are the same as in all the German editions. — Translator.]
