page: 100

The trumpet is restricted to these natural tones. But by introducing the hand into the bell of the French horn and thus partly closing it, and by lengthening the tube of the trombone,* it was possible in some degree to siipj)ly the missing tones and improve the faulty ones. In later times trumpets and horns have been frequently supplied with keys t to supply the missing tones, but at some expense of power in the tone and the brilliancy in its quality. The vibrations of the air in these instruments are unusually powerful, and require the I'esistance of firm, smooth, unbroken tubes to preserve their strength. In the use of brass instruments, the different form and tension of the lips of the player act only to determine which of the proper tones of the tube shall speak; the pitch of the individual tones is almost J entirely independent of the tension of the lips.

On the other hand, in the /Ki\//n.r the tension of the vocal chords, which here form the membranous tongues, is itself variable, and determines the pitch of

¶ tone. The air chambers connected with the lai'vnx are not adapted for materially altering the tone of the vocal chords. Their walls are so yielding that they cannot allow the formation of vibrations of the air within them sufficiently powerful to force the vocal chords to oscillate with a period which is diftcrent from that required by their own elasticity. The cavity of the mouth is also far too short, and generally too widely open for its mass of air to have material influence on the pitch.

In addition to the tension of the vocal chords (which can be increased not only by separating the points of their insertion in the cartilages of the larynx, but also by voluntarily stretching the muscular fibres within them), their thickness seems also to be variable. Much soft Avatery inelastic tissue lies luiderneath the elastic fibrils proper and the nuiscular fibres of the vocal chords, and in the breast voice this probably acts to weight them and retard their vibrations. The head voice is probably produced by drawing aside the mucous coat below the chords,

¶ thus rendering the edge of the chords sharper, and the weiglit of the vibrating part less, wdiile the elasticity is unaltered, j

Footnote: Hence the Fourth a"f^ was 53 cents (33 : 32) trombone can be altered at will, and cliosen
too sharp, and the Sixth c" was 43 cents to make its harmonics produce a just scale.
(40 : 39) too flat, and they were consequently Some trumpets also are made with a short
unusable without modification by the hand. slide worked by two fingers one way, and
Themiuor Seventh (^'[j was too flat by 27 cents returning to its position by a spring. Such
(64 : G3), but unless played in (intended) instruments are sometimes used by first-rate
unison against the just form, it produces a players, such as Harper, the late celebrated
better effect. 'In trumpets, strictly so called,' trumpeter, and his son. But, as Mr. Blaikley
says Mr. Blaikley, ' a great portion of the length informed me, an extremely small percentage
is cylindrical and the bell curves out hyper- of the trumpets sold have slides. At present
bolically, the two lowest partials are not the piston brass instruments have nearly driven
required as a rule and are not strictly in all slides, except the trombone, out of the field,
tune, so the series of partials may be taken — Translatnr.']
as about -75, 1-90, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, &c., all the f [The keys are nearly obsolete, and have
upper notes being brought into tune by modi- been replaced by pistons which open valves,
ITficationsin theformof the bellinagoodinstru- and thus temporarily increase the length of
ment.' The length of the French horn varies the tube, so as to make the note blown 1, 2,
with the ' crook ' which determines its pitch. or 3 Semitones flatter. These can also be
The following contains the length in English used in combination, but are then not so true,
inches for each crook, as given by Mr. Blaiklev: This is tantamount to an imperfect slide
B\) (alto) 108, ^h 1141, ^j^ 121J, G 128f,> action. Instruments of this kind are now
1441, ^|5 i53_ E\y 162, Z»i3 171J, C 192f, B\f much used in all military bands, and are
(basso) 216J, hence the length varies from made of very different sizes and pitches. —
9 ft. to 18 ft. f inch. By a curious error in Translator.']
all the German editions, Zamminer is said to I [But by no means ' quite '. It is possible
make the length of the E\y Waldhorn 27 feet, to blow out of tune, and to a small extent
or the length of the wave of the loiccd note, temper the harmonics. — Translator.'] in place of his 13"4 feet. Zamminer, however, § [On the suljject of the registers of the
says that the instrument is named from the human voice and its production generally, see
Octave ahuve the lowest note, and that hence Lennox Browne and Emit Behnke, Voice, ^ong,
the wave-length of this Octave is the length of and Speech (Sampson Low, London, 1883,
the horn. — Translator.] pp. 322). This work contains not merely

Footnote: ⁎ [A large portion of the trombone is com- accui'ate drawings of the larynx in the different
posed of a double narrow cylindrical tube on registers, but 4 laryngoscopic photographs
which another slides, so that the length of the from Mr. Behnke's own larynx. A reijist''r
