page: none

We now proceed to investigate the '/ua/if// <>/ tn)i,- prudueed on reed |)ii)es, which is our proper subject. The sound in these pipes is excited by intermittent pulses of air, which at each swing break through the opening that is closed by the tongue of the reed. A freely vibrating tongue has far too small a surface to communicate any appreciable qiiantity of sonorous motion to the surrounding air; and it is as little able to excite the air inclosed in pipes. The sound seems to be re;dly produced by pulses of air, as in the siren, where the metal plate that opens and closes the oriiice does not vibrate at all. By the alternate opening and closing of a passage, a continuous influx of air is changed into a periodic motion, capable of affecting the air. Like any other periodic motion of the air, the one thus produced can also be resolved into a seines of simple vibrations. We have already remarked that the number of terms in such a series will increase with the discontinuity of the motion to be thus resolved (p. ?>\d). Now the motion of the air which ¶ passes through a siren, or past a vibrating tongue, is discontinuous in a very high degree, since the individual pulses of air must be generally separated by complete pauses during the closures of the opening. Free tongues without a resonance tube, in which all the individual simple tones of the vibration which they excite in the air are given oft" freely to the surrounding atmosphere, have consequently always a very sharp, cutting, jarring quality of tone, and we can really hear with either armed or unarmed ears a long series of strong and clear partial tones up to the l(3th or 20th, and there are evidently still higher partials present, although it is difficult or impossible to distinguish them from each other, because they do not lie so nuich as a Semitone apart.* This whirring of dissonant partial tones makes the musical quality of free tongues very disagreeable. t A tone thus produced also shows that it is really due to puffs of air. I have examined the vibrating tongue of a reed pipe, like that in fig. 28 (p. 95/y), when in action with the vibration microscope of. Lissajous, in order to determine the vibrational form of ¶ the tongue, and I found that the tongue performed perfectly regular simple vibrations. Hence it would communicate to the air merely a simple tone and not a compound tone, if the sound were directly produced by its own vibrations.

The intensity of the upper partial tones of a free tongtie, unconnected with a resonance tube, and their relation to the prime, are greatly dependent on the

Footnote: is defined as ' a series of tones produced by the same mechanism ' (p. 163). The names of the registers adopted are those introduced by the late John Curwen of the Tonic Sol-fa movement. They depend on the appearance of the glottis and vocal chords, and are as follows: 1. Lower thick, 2. Upper thick (both ' chest voice ■), 3. Lower thin ('high chest' voice in men), 4. Upper thin ('falsetto' in women), .5. Small (' head voice ' in women). The extent of the registers are stated to be (p. 171)
1. lower tliick. 2. upper thick. 3. lower thin. /Men Eioa, //to/', ,'/' to ,•"
(Women c toe', (/'to/, /to
e"
1. lower thick. -L upper thick, o. lower tliiu.
Women only.
«/" to/", g" to/' 4. upper thin. 5. small.
The mechanism is as follows (pp. 163-171): —
1. Lower thick. The hindmost points of the pyramids (arytenoid cartilages) close together, an elliptical slit between the vocal ligaments (or chords), which vibrate through their whole length, breadth, and thickness fully, loosely, and visibly. The lid (epiglottis) is low.
2. Upper thick. "The elliptical chink disappears and becomes linear. The lid (epiglottis) rises; the vocal ligaments are stretched.
3. Lower thin. The lid (epiglottis) is more raised, so as to show the cushion below it, the whole larynx and the insertions of the vocal
ligaments in the shield (thyroid) cartilage. The vocal ligaments are quite still, and their vibrations are confined to the thin inner edges. The vocal ligaments are made thinurr and transparent, as shown by illumination from lielow. Male voices cease here.
between the vocal ligaments. When this is used by men it gives the falsetto arising from the upper thin being carried below its true place. This slit is gradually reduced in size as the contralto and soprano voices ascend. U,
4. Upper thin. An elliptical slit again forms
contracts for at least two-thirds of its length, the vocal ligaments being pressed together so tightly that scarcely any trace of a slit remains, and no vibrations are visible. The front part opens as an oval chink, and the edges of this vibrate so markedly that the outline is blurred. The drawings of the two lost registers (pp. 168169) were made from laryugoscopic examination of a lady.
5. Small. The back part of the glottis
itself for full explanations, and the reader should especially consult Mr. Behnke's admirable little work The Mechanism of the H^iman rokc (Curwen, 3rd ed., 1881, pp. 125).— Trauslatur.]
Keference should be made to the book
exhibit this effect very well. — Translofor.]

Footnote: ⁎ [See footnote t p. b(kl' . — Translator.] ■\- [The cheap little mouth harmonicons
