page: none

We have hitherto discussed cases of resonance, generated in such air chambers as were capable of reinforcing the prime tone principally, but also a certain number of the harmonic upper partial tones of the compound tone produced. The case, however, may also occur in which the lowest tone of the resonance chamber applied does not con-espond with the prime, but only with some one of the upper partials of the compound tone itself, and in these cases we find, in accordance with the principles hitherto developed, that the corresponding upper partial tone is really more reinforced than the pi'ime or other partials by the resonance of the chamber, and consequently predominates extremely over all the other partials in the series. The quality of tone thus produced has consequently a peculiar character, and more or less resembles one of the vowels of the human voice. For the ¶ vowels of speech are in reality tones produced by membi'anous tongues (the vocal chords), with a resonance chamber (the mouth) capable of altering in length, width, and pitch of resonance, and hence capable also of reinforcing at difterent times difl'erent partials of the compound tone to which it is aiiplied.*

In order to understand the composition of vowel tones, we must in the first place bear in mind that the source of their sound lies in the vocal chords, and that when the voice is heard, these chords act as membranous tongues, and like all tongues produce a series of decidedly discontinuous and sharply separated pulses of air, which, on being represented as a sum of simple vibrations, must consist of a very large number of them, and hence be received by the ear as a very long series of partials belonging to a compoiuid musical tone. With the assistant of resonators it is possible to recognise very high partials, up to the sixteenth, when one of the brighter vowels is sung by a powerful bass voice at a low pitch, and, in the case of a strained forte in the upper notes of any human voice, we can ¶ hear, more clearly than on any other musical instnunent, those high upi)er partials that belong to the middle of the four-times accented Octave (the highest on modern pianofortes, see note, p. IScZ), and these high tones have a peculiar relation to the ear, to be subsequently considered. The loudness of such upper partials, especially those of highest pitch, differs considerably in different individuals. For cutting bright voices it is greater than for soft and dull ones. The quality of tone in cutting screaming voices may perhaps be referred to a want of suflicient smoothness or straightness in the edges of the vocal chords, to enable them to close in a straight narrow slit without striking one another. This circumstance would give the larynx more the character of striking tongues, and the latter have a much more cutting quality than the free tongues of the normal vocal chords. Hoarseness in voices may arise from the glottis not entirely closing during the vibrations of the vocal chords. At any rate, when alterations of this kind are made in artificial membranous tongues, similar results ensue. For a strong and ¶ yet soft quality of voice it is necessary that the vocal chords should, even when most strongly vibrating, join rectilinearly at the moment of approach with perfect tightness, effectually closing the glottis for the moment, but without overlapping

Footnote: out scientifically. ' The general principles,' edited with additional letters by W. S. Broadwrites Islv. Blaikley, ' are not difficult of com- wood, and published by Rudall, Carte, & Co., prehension; the difficulty is to determine quan- makers of bis flutes. See also Victor Mabillon, titatively tbe values in each particular case.' Etude sur Ic doUjti dc la FlMe Boehm, 1882, The paper by SchafhJiutl (writing under the and a paper by M. Aristide Cavaillo-Coll, in name of Pellisov), 'Tbeorie gedeckter cylin- i: Echo Mmicaliov 11 Ja.u.lQm.--Translator. drischer und coni.scher Pfeifen uud der Quer- * The theory of vowel tones was first enunfiuten,' Scbweiger, Journ. Ixviii. 183.3, is dis- elated by Wheatstone in a criticism, unfortnfigured by misprints so that the formulae are nately little known, on Willis's experunents. unintelligible, and the theory is also extremely The latter are described in the Traiisadionsbazardous. But they are the only papers I of the Cambridge Philosophkal Socicti/, vol. have found, and are referred to by Theobald iii. p. 281, and Poggendorff's Annalcn der Boehm, Ueber den Fldtcnl>an, Mainz, 1847. Phi/sik; vol. xxiv. p. 397. Wheatstone's rcAn English version of this, by himself, made port upon them is contained in the London for Mr. Rudall in 1847, has recently been aiul H'estniinsler Eevieio tov Octohev 1831.
