page: 104

+ or striking against each other. If they do not close perfectly, the stream of air will not be completely interrnptecl, and the tone cannot be powerful. If they overlap, the tone must be cutting, as before remarked, as those arising from .striking tongues. On examining the vocal chords in action by means of a laryngoscope, it is marvellous to observe the accuracy with which they close even when making vibrations occupying nearly the entire breadth of the chords them(selves.*

There is also a certain difterence in the way of putting on the voice in speaking and in singing, which gives the speaking voice a much more cutting quality of tone, especially in the open vowels, and occasions a sensation of much greater pi'essure in the larynx. I suspect that in speaking the vocal chords act as striking tongues, t

When the mucous membrane of the larynx is affected with catarrh, the ¶ laryngoscope sometimes shows little flakes of nnicus in the glottis. When these are too gi'eat they disturb the motion of the vibrating chords and make them irregular, causing the tone to become unequal, jarring, or hoarse. It is, however, remarkable what comparatively large flakes of mucus may lie in the glottis without jn-oducing a very striking deterioration in the quality of tone.

It has already been mentioned that it is generally more difficult for the unassisted ear to recognise the upper partials in the human voice, than in the tones of musical instruments. Resonators are more necessary for this examination than for the analysis of any other kind of musictil tone. The upper partials of the human voice have nevertheless been heard at times by attentive observers. Rameau had heard them at the beginning of last century. And at a later period Seller of Leipzig relates that while listening to the chant of the watchman during a sleepless night, he occasionall}- heard at first, when the watchman was at a distance, the Twelfth of the melody, and afterwards the prime tone. The reason of this difficulty ¶ is most probably that we have all our lives remarked and observed the tones of the human voice more than any other, and always with the sole object of grasping it as a whole and obtaining a clear knowledge and percej^tion of its manifold changes of quality.

We may certainly assume that in the tones of the human larynx, as in all other reed instruments, the upper partial tones would decrease in force as they increase in pitch, if they could be observed without the resonance of the cavity of the mouth. In reality they satisfy this assumption tolerably v/ell, for those vowels which are spoken with a wide funnel-shaped cavity of the mouth, as A [n in art], or A [a in hat lengthened, which is nearly the same as a in have]. But this relation is materially altered by the resonance which takes place in the cavity of the mouth. The more this cavity is narrowed, either by the lips or the tongue, the more distinctly marked is its resonance for tones of determinate pitch, and the more therefore does this resonance reinforce those partials in the compoiind tone produced by ¶ the vocal chords, which approach the favoured pitch, and the more, on the contrary, will the others be damped. Hence on investigating the compound tones of the human voice by means of resonators, we find pretty imiforinly that the first six to eight partials are clearly perceptible, but with very different degrees of force according to the different forms of the cavity of the mouth, sometimes screaming loudly into the eai', at others scarcely audible.

Under these circumstances the investigation of the resonance of the cavity of the mouth is of great importance. The easiest and surest method of finding the tones to which the air in the oral cavity is tuned for the different shapes it assumes

Footnote: ⁎ [Probably these observations were made t
iThe Ciermaii liabit of begimiing open
on the ' upper thick ' register, because the vowels with the ' check ' or Arabic hamza,
chords are then more visible. It is evident which is very marked, and instantly cliarac-
that these theories do not apply to the lower terises his nationality, is probal)ly what is
thick, upper thin, and small registers, and here alluded to, as occasioning a sensation of
scarcely to the lower thin, as described above, much greater pressure. This does not apply
footnote, p. lOlc. — Translator.] in the least to English speakers. — Translator.]
