page: 105

+ ill the production of vowels, is that which is used for glass bottles uiul other spaces tilled with air. That is, tuning-forks of different pitches have to be struck and held before the opening of the air chamber — in the present case the open mouth — and the louder the proper tone of the fork is heard, the nearer does it correspond with one of the proper tones of the included mass of air."''" Since the shape of the oral cavity can be altered at pleasure, it can always be made to suit the tone of any given tuning-fork, and we thus easily discover what shape the month must assume for its included mass of air to be tuned to a determinate pitch.

Having a series of tuning-forks at command, I was thus able to obtain the following results: —

The pitch of strongest resonance of the oral cavity de[)eiids solely upon the vowel for pronouncing which the mouth has been arranged, and alters considerably Um- even slight alterations in the vowel rpiality, such, for example, as occur in the ¶ different dialects of the same language. On the other hand, the proper tones of the cavity of the mouth are nearly independent of age and sex. I have in general found the same resonances in men, women, and children. The want of space in the oral cavity of women and children can be easily replaced by a great closure of its op'Cning, which will make the resonance as deep as in the larger oral cavities of men.f

The vowels can be arranged in three series, according to the position of the parts of the mouth, which nuiy be written thus, in accordance with Du 13oislleymond the elder j" : —

I

The vowel A [a in father, or Scotch a in ijian] forms the common origin of ¶ all three series. With this vowel corresponds a funnel-shaped resonance cavity,

Footnote: ⁎ [See note * p. 876, on determining violin resonance. One difficulty in the case of the mouth is that there is a constant tendency to vary the shape of the oral cavity. Another, as shown at the end of the note cited, is that the same irregular cavity, such as that of the mouth, often more or less reinforces a large number of different tones. As it was important for my phonetic researches, I have made many attempts to determine my own vowel resonances, but have hitherto failed in all my attempts. — Translator.]
t [Easily tried by more or less covering the top of a tumbler with the hand, till it resounds to any fork from c' to d" or higher. — Translator.]
t Norddcutschc Zeitschrift, edited by de la Motte Fouque, 1812. Kculmus oder allgcmcine Alphahetik, von F. H. du Bois-Reymond, Berlin, 1862, p. 152. [This is the arrangement usually adopted. But in 1867 Mr. IMelville Bell, an orthoepical teacher of many years' standing, who had been led professionally to pay great attention to the shapes of the mouth necessary to produce certain sounds, in his Visible Speech; the Science <>f Unicersal Alphahetics (London: Simpkin, JNIarshall & Co., 4to. , pp. X. 126, with sixteen lithographic tables), proposed a more elaborate method of classifying vowels by the shape of the mouth. He commenced with 9 positions of the tongue, consisting of .3 in which the middle, or as he terms it, ' front ' of the tongue was raised, highest for ca in seat, not so high for a in sate, and lowest for a in sat; 3 others in which the back, instead of the middle, of the tongue
was raised, highest for oo in snood, lower for o in node, and lowest for aw in imawed (none of which three are determined by the position of the tongue alone), and 3 intermediate positions, where the whole tongue is raised almost evenly at three different elevations. These 9 lingual positions might be accompanied with the ordinary or with increased distension of the pharynx, giving 9 primary and 9 ' wide " vowels. And each of the 18 vowels, thus produced, could be ' rounded,' that is, modified by shading the mouth in various degrees with the lips. He thus obtains 36 distinct vowel cavities, among which almost all those used for vowel qualities in different nations may be placed. Subsequent research has shown how to extend this arrangement materially. See *\ my Eccrly English Pronunciation, part iv., 1874, p. 1279. Also see generally my Pronunciation for Siiiijers (Curwen, 1877, pp. 246) and Speech in Son;/ (Novello, 1878, pp. 140). German vowels differ materially in quality from the English, and consequently complete agreement between Prof. Helmholtz's observations and those of any Englishman, who repeats his experiments, must not be expected. I have consequently thought it better in this place to leave his German notation untranslated, and merely subjoin in parentheses the nearest English sounds. For the table in the text we may assume A to = a in father, or else Scotch a hi man (different sounds), E to = c in there, I to = u in sure; and 0 to = eii in French «c(« or else in peuple (different sounds), and U to = n in French pu.— Translator.]
to = i in nuwhinc, 0 to = o in more, U
