page: 108

F<3r the third series of vowels from A throug'li 0 [French oi in jif-v, ny the deeper e« in ^-'fH/vZe], towards U [French u in jm, which is rather deeper than the German sound], we have the same internal positions of the mouth as in the histnamed series of vowels. For U the mouth is placed in nearly the same position as for a vowel lying between E and I, and for 0 as for an E which inclines towards A. In addition to the constriction between the tongue and palate as in the second series, we have also a constriction of the lij^s, which are made into a sort of tube, forming a front prolongation of that made by the tongue and palate. The air chamber of the mouth, therefore, in this case also resembles a bottle with a neck, but the neck is longer than for the second series of vowels. For I the neck was 6 centimetres (2-36 inches) long, for LI, measured from the front edge of the ujjper teeth to the commencement of the soft palate, it is S centimetres {Z-\o inches). The pitch of the higher proper tone corresponding to the resonance of the neck

¶ be, therefore, about a Fourth deeper than for I. If both ends were free, a pipe of this length would give //", according to the usual calciilation. In reality it resounded for a fork lying between //'" and c?'"!?, a divergence similar to that found for I, and also probably attributable to the back end of the tube debouching into a wider but not quite open space. The resonance of the back space has to be observed in the same way as for the I series. For O it is/', the same as for E, and for U it is /, the same as for I.

The fact that the cavity of the mouth for different vowels is tuned to different pitches was first discovered by Bonders,* not with the help of tuning-forks, but by the whistling noise produced in the mouth by Avhispering. The cavity of the mouth thiis reinforces by its resonance the corresponding tones of the windrush, which are produced partly in the contracted glottis.f and partly in the forward contracted passages of the mouth. In this way it is not usual to obtain a complete musical tone; this only happens, without sensible change of the vowel, for U and

¶ U, Avhen a real whistle is produced. This, however, would be a fault in speaking. We have rather only such a degree of reinforcement of the noise of the air as occiu's in an organ pipe, which does not speak well, either from a badly-constructed lip or an insufficient pressure of wind. A noise of this kind, although not In-ought up to being a complete musical tone, has nevertheless a tolerably determinate pitch, which can be estimated by a practised ear. But, as in all cases where tones of very different qualities have to be compared, it is easy to make a mistake in the Octave. However, after some of the important pitches have been detemiined by

Footnote: the required positions and then tapping agaiiij^t Cbr. Hellwag, De Fonai(tione Loquelai- Diss.,
a finger placed just in front of the upper teeth, Tubingae, 1710. — Florcke, Keue Berliner
for the higher resonance, and placed against Monatssclirift, Sept. 1803, Feb. 1804. — Olivier
the neck, just above the larynx, for the lower. Ortho-ejm-ijraphischcs Elementar-lVcrk, 1804,
He obligingly performed the experiment several part iii. p. 21.
times privately before me, and the successive + In whispering, the vocal chords are kept alterations and differences in their direction close, but the air passes through a small €T were striking. The tone was dull and like triangular opening at tbe back part of the a wood harmonica. Considerable dexterity glottis between tbe arytenoid cartilages. [Acseemed necessary to produce the effect, and I cording to Czermak {Sitzunijsheriddr, Wiener could not succeed in doing so. He carried out Akad., Matb.-Naturw. CI. April 29, 1858, the experiment much further than is suggested p. 576) the vocal chords as seen through the in tbe text, embracing tbe whole nine positions lar3-ngos€ope are not quite close for whisper, of tbe tongue in bis father's vowel scheme, but are nicked in the middle. Merkel {Die and obtaining a double resonance in each case. Funktionm da menschlichcn Schhnul- unci This fact is stated, and the various vowel Kehlkopfcs. . . . nach eiyenen 2)haryy)f/o- wnd theories appreciated in j\Ir. Graham Bell's larynrjoakopischen Untersuchunge/h Leipzig, paper on ' Vowel Theories ' read before the 1862, p. 77) distinguishes two kinds of wbisperAmericau National Academy of Arts and ing Sciences, April 15, 1879, and printed in the tbe chords is from ^ to f of a line wide, proAmcrican Journal of Otology, vol. i. July ducing no resonant vibrations,and that between 1879. — Translatm:] the arytenoids is somewhat wider: (2) tbe '* Archiv far die Holldndischen Bcitrdge gentle, in which tbe vowel is commenced as in fiir Natur-und Hcilkundc von Bonders und loud speaking, with closed glottis, and, after it Berlin, vol i. p. 157. Older incomplete obser- has begun, tbe back part of the glottis is vations of the same circumstance in Samuel opened, while the chords remain close and Revher's Mathcsis Mosnicu. Kiel. 1619. — motionless. — Translator.}
: (1) the loud, in wbichtbeopening between
