page: none

For U it is also by no means easy to find the pitch of the resonance by a fork, i\s the snialhiess of the opening makes the resonance weak. Another phenomenon has guided me in this case. If I sing the scale from c upwards, uttering the vowel U for each note, and taking care to keep the quality of the vowel correct, and not allowing it to pass into 0,* I feel the agitation of the air in the mouth, and even on the drums of both ears^ where it excites a tickling sensation, most powerfully when the voice reaches /. As soon as ,/' is passed the quality changes, the strong agitation of the air in the mouth and the tickling in the ears cease. For the note / the phenomenon in this case is the same as if a spherical resonance chamber were placed before a tongue of nearly the same pitch as its proper tone. In this case also we have a powerful agitation of the air within the sphere and a sudden alteration of quality of tone, on passing from a deeper pitch of the mass of air through that of the tongue to a higher. The resonance of the mouth for U is thus ¶ fixed at ./' with more certainty than by means of tuning-forks. But we often meet with a U of higher resonance, more resembling 0, which I will represent by the French Ou. Its proper tone may rise as high as f.\ The resonance of the cavity of the mouth for different vowels may then be expressed in the notes as follows:

/

b'b n

d""

f

Footnote: 0-

Ou

E

0 U

The mode in which the resonance of the cavity of the mouth acts upon the quality of the voice, is then precisely the sanio as that which we discovered to exist for artificially constructed reed pipes. All those partial tones are reinforced which coincide with a proper tone of the cavity of the mouth, or have a pitch sufficiently near to that of such a tone, while the other partial tones will be more or less damped. The damping of those partial tones which are not strengthened is the more striking the narrower the opening of the mouth, either between the lips as for U, or between the tongue and palate as for I and U.

These differences in the partial tones of the different vowel sounds can be easily and clearly recognised by means of resonators, at least within the once and twice accented Octaves [:264 to 1056 vib.]. For example, apply a b'\f resonator to the ear, and get a bass voice, that can preserve pitch well and form its vowels with purity, to sing the series of vowels to one of the harmonic under tones of h'\), such as b\f, e\), B\f, G\), E\). It will be found that for a pure, full-toned 0 the y\) of ¶ resonator will bray violently into the ear. The same upper partial tone is still very powerful for a clear A and a tone intermediate between A and O, but is weaker for A, E, O, and weakest of all for U and I. It will also be found that the resonance of 0 is materially weakened if it is taken too dull, approaching U,

Footnote: ⁎ [That is, according to the previous directions, to keep the tongue altogether depressed, in the position for av: in gnaw, which is not natural for an Englishman, so that for English 00 in too we may expect the result to be materially different. — Translator.']
t Prof. Helmholtz may mean the Swedish 0, see note* p. 106rf. The following words immediately preceding the notes, which occur in the 3rd German edition, appear to have been accidentally omitted in the 4th. They are, however, retained as they seem necessary. — Translator. ]
the vowel at the head of each column, and when the writer distinguishes different forms I add them immediately before the resonance note. Thus we liave Helmholtz's Ou between U and O; Merkel's O'^ between 0 and A, his obscure A\ E' and clear A', E' ; Trautmann's O' = Italian open 0, and (as he says) English a in all (which is, however, slightly different), 0' ordinary o in Berliner oltnc, E' Berlin Schnee, E' French pere (the same as A?) , O' Berlin schon, French pen, ()' French Icur. Of course this is far from exhausting the list of vowels in actual use. — Translator.]
