page: none

+ or too open, becoming A ^. But if the ll'\) resonator be used, whicli is an Octave liigher, it is the vowel A that excites the strongest sympathetic resonance; while 0, Avhich was so powerful with the h'\} resonator, now produces only a slight effect.

For the high upper partials of A, E, I, no resonators can be made which are capable of sensibly reinforcing them. We are, then, driven principally to observations made with the unassisted ear. It has cost me much trouble to determine these strengthened jjartial tones in the vowels, and I was not acquainted with them when my previous accounts were published.* They are best observed in high notes of' women's voices, or the falsetto of men's voices. The upper partials of high notes in that j)art of the scale are not so nearly of the same pitch as those of deeper notes, iind hence they are more readily distinguished. On //[j, for example, women's voices could easily bring out all the vowels, with a full quality of tone, but at higher pitches the choice is more limited. When h'\) is^sung, then, the Twelfth/'" ¶ is heard for the broad A, the double Octave h"'\) for E, the high Third d"" for I, all clearly, the last even piercingly. [See table on p. 124, note.] f

Further, I should observe, that the table of notes given on the preceding page, relates only to those kinds of vowels which appear to me to have the most characteristic quality of tone, but that in addition to these, all intermediate stages are possible, passing insensibly from one to the other, and are actually used partly in dialects, partly by particular individuals, partly in peculiar pitches while singing, or to give a more decided character while whispering.

It is easy to recognise, and indeed is sufficiently well known, that the vowels with a single resonance from U through 0 to clear A can be altered in continuous succession. But I wish further to remark, since doubts have been thrown on the deep resonance I have assigned to U, that when I apply to my ear a resonator tuned to/', and, singing upon/ori?[? as the fundamental tone, try to find the vowel resembling U which has the strongest resonance, it does not answer to a ¶ dull L", but to a U on the wav to Qi.X

Then again transitions gje possible between the vowels of the A — 0 — U series and those of the A — () — U series, as well as between the last named and those of the A — E — I series. I can begin on the position for U, and gradually transform the cavity of the mouth, already narrowed, into the tube-like forms for O and li , in which case the high resonance becomes more distinct and at the same time higher, the narrower the tube is made. If we make this transition while applying a resonator between />'[> and h"\f to the ear, we hear the loudness of the tone increase at a certain stage of the transition, and then diminish again. The higher the resonator, the nearer must the vowel approach to 0 or U. With a proper ]josition of the mouth the reinforced tone may be brought up to a whistle. Also in a gentle whisper, where the rustle of the air in the larynx is kept very weak, so that with vowels having a naiTOw opening of the mouth it can be scarcely heard, a strong fricative noise in the opening of the mouth is often required to make the ¶ vowel audible. That is to say, we then make the vowels more like their related consonants, English W and German J [English Y].

Generally speaking the vowels § with double resonance admit of numerous modifications, because any high pitch of one of the resonances may combine with any low pitch of the other. This is best studied by applying a resonator to the ear and trying to find the corresponding vowel degi-ees in the thi'ee series which reinforce its tone, and then endeavouring to pass from one of these to the other in such a way that the resonator should have a reinforced tone throughout.

Footnote: ⁎ Gelehrtc Anzeigcn der Bayerischen Aka- J [An U sound verging towards O is gene-
demie der Wissenschaften, June 18, 1859. rally conceived to be duller not brighter, by
t [The passage ' In these experiments ' English writers, but here U is taken as the
to ' too deep to be sensible,' p. 166-7 of the dullest vowel. This remark is made merely
1st English edition, is here cancelled, and to prevent confusion with English readers. —
p. 111b, ' Further, I should observe,' to p. 116a, Translator.^
'high tones of A, E, I,' inserted in its place § [Misprinted Consonanten in the German,
from the 4th German edition. — Translator.] — Translator.]
