page: 113

+ vibratory niotiou once excited in the air tilling the cavity of the mouth is very rapidly extinguished, as any one may easily observe by filliping liis cheek with a finger when the mouth is put into different vowel positions. We thus very easily distinguish the pitch of the resonance for the various transitional degrees from O towards V in one direction and towards A in the other. But the tone dies away rapidly. The various resonances of the cavity of the mouth can also be made audible by rapping the teeth. Just for this reason a tone, which oscillates approximately in agreement with the few vibrations of such a brief resonance tone, will be reinforced by sympathetic vibration to an extent not much less than another tone which exactly coincides with the first; and the range of tones which can thus be sensibly reinforced by a given position of the mouth, is rather considerable.^' This is confirmed by experiment. When I apply a b'\f resonator to the right, and ail /" resonator to the left ear and sing the vowel 0 on B\j, I find a reinforce¶ ment not only of the 4th partial h'\f which answers to the proper tone of the cavity of the mouth, but also, very perceptibly, though considerably less, of /'. the 6th partial, also. If I then change 0 into an A, until /" finds its strongest resonance, the reinforcement of b'\^ does not entirely disappear although it becomes much less.

The position of the mouth from 0 to 0^ appears to be that which is most favourable for the length of its proper tone and the pi-oduction of a resonance limited to a very naiTow range of pitch. At least, as I have before remarked, for this position the reinforcement of a suitable tuning-fork is most powerful, and tapping the cheek or the lips gives the most distinct tone. If then for 0 the reinforcement by resonance extends to the interval of a Fifth, the intervals will be still greater for the other vowels. With this agree experiments. Apply any resonator to the ear, take a suitable under tone, sing the different vowels to tliis under tone, and let one vowel melt into another. The greatest reinforcements by resonance take place on that vowel or those vowels, for which one of the characteristic tones in 51 the diagram p. 100/y coincides with the proper tone of the resonator. But more or less considerable reinforcement is also observed for such vowels as have their characteristic tones at moderate differences of pitch from the proper tone of the resonator, and the reinforcement will be less the greater these differences of pitch.

By this means it becomes possible in general to distinguish the vowels from each other even when the note to which they are sung is not precisely one of the harmonic under tones of the vowels. From the second partial tone onwards, the intervals are narrow enough for one or two of the partials to be distinctly reinforced by the resonance of the mouth. It is only when the proper tone of the cavity of the mouth falls midw ay between the prime tone of the note sung by the voice and its higher Octave, or is more than a Fifth deeper than that prime tone, that the characteristic resonance will be weak.

Now in speaking, both sexes choose one of the deepest positions of their voice. ¶ Men generally choose the upper half of the great (or eight-foot) Octave; and women the upper half of the small (or four-foot) Octave, t With the exception of U, which admits of fluctuations in its proper tone of nearly an Octave, all these pitches of the speaking voice have the corresponding proper tones of the cavity of the mouth situated within sufficiently narrow intervals from the upper partials of the speaking tone to create sensible resonance of one or more of these partials, and thus characterise the vowel. | To this must be added that the speaking voice, probably through great pressure of the vocal ligaments upon one another, converting

Footnote: ⁎ On this subject see Appendix X., and of certain of its partials with exact pitches
the corresponding investigation in the text in but in their coming near enough to those
Pai't I. Chap. VI. therein referred to. pitches to receive reinforcement, and that the
+ [That is both use their ' lower thick ' character of a vowel quality of tone, like that
register, as described in the note p. 101c?, but of all qualities of tone, depends not on the
are an Octave apart. — Translator.] absolute pitch, but on the relative force of the
+ [Observe here that the quality of the upper partials. As Prof. Helmholtz's theory
vowel tone is not made to consist in the identity has often been grievously misunderstood, I
I
