page: 116

English obscure A in uJea]), and hence select somewhat deeper tones in place of the high tones of A, E, I.

A peculiar circumstance must also be mentioned which distinguishes the human voice from all other instruments and has a peculiar relation to the human ear. Above the higher reinforced partial tones of I, in the neighbourhood of e"" uptoy"[26-iO to 3168 vib.] the notes of a pianoforte have a peculiar cutting effect, and we might be easil} led to believe that the hammers were too hard, or that their mechanism somewhat differed from that of the adjacent notes. But the phenomenon is the same on all pianofortes, and if a very small glass tube or sphere is applied to the ear, the cutting effect ceases, and these notes become as soft and weak as the rest, but another and deeper series of notes now becomes stronger and more cutting. Hence it follows that the human ear by its own resonance favours the tones between e"" and c/"", or, in other words, that it is tuned to one of these pitches.*

¶ These notes produce a feeling of pain in sensitive ears. Hence the upper partial tones which have nearly this pitch, if any such exist, are extremely prominent and affect the ear powerfully. This is generally the case for the human voice when it is strained, and will help to give it a screaming effect. In powerful male voices singing forte, these partial tones sound like a clear tinkling of little bells, accompanying the voice, and are most audible in choruses, when the singers shout a little. Every individual male voice at such pitches produces dissonant upper partials. When basses sing their high /, the 7th partial tone f is d"", the 8th e"" , the 9th /""J, and the 10th f"j^. Now, if e"" and /""| are loud, and J"" and /"jf, though weaker, are audible, there is of course a sharp dissonance. If many voices are sounding together, producing these upper partials with small differences of pitch, the result is a very peculiar kind of tinkling, which is readily recognised a second time when attention has been once drawn to it. I have not noticed any difference of effect for different vowels in this case, but the tinkling ceases as soon

¶ as the voices are taken ^jmwio; although the tone produced by a chorus will of course still have considerable power. This kind of tinkling is peculiar to human voices; orchestral instruments do not produce it iu the same way either so sensibly or so powerfully. I have never heard it from any other musical instrument so clearly as from human voices.

The same upper partials are heard also in soprano voices when they sing forte; in harsh, uncertain voices they are tremulous, and hence show some resemblance to the tinkling heard in the notes of male voices. But I have heard them brought out with exact purity, and continue to sovind on perfectly and (luietly, in some steady and harmonious female voices, and also in some excellent tenor voices. In the melodic progression of a voice part, I then hear these high upper partials of the four-times accented Octave, falling and rising at different times within the compass of a minor Third, according as different upper partials of the notes sung enter the region for which our ear is so sensitive. It is certainly remarkable that

¶ it should be precisely the human voice which is so rich in those upper partials for which the human ear is so sensitive. Madame E. Seller, however, remarks that dogs are also very sensitive for the high e"" of the violin.

This reinforcement of the upper partial tones belonging to the middle of the four-times accented Octave, has, however, nothing to do with the characterisation of vowels. I have mentioned it here, merely because these high tones are readily remarked in investigations into the vowel qualities of tone, and the observer must not be misled to consider them as peculiar characteristics of individual vowels. They are simply a characteristic of strained voices.

The humming tone heard when singing with closed mouth, lies nearest to U.

Footnote: ⁎ I have lately found that my right ear is merely applying a short paper tube to the enmost sensitive for /"", and my left for c"". trance of my ear, this chirp is rendered extraWhen I drive air into the passage leading to the ordinarily weak. ^ ^ tympanum, the resonance descends to 0'"% and f [The first six partial tones are e , c , ^^ , g"'i. The chirp of the cricket corresponds e'", g"%, b'", the seventh is 27 cents flatter precisely to the higher resonance, and on than d"". — Translator.~\
