page: 117

This hum is used in uttering the consonants M, N and N*-'. The size of the exit of the air (the nostrils) is in this case much smaller in comparison with the resonant chamber (the internal nasal cavity) than the opening of the lips for U in comparison with the corresponding resonant chamber in the mouth. Hence, in humming, the peculiarities of the U tone are much enhanced. Thus although upper partials are present, even iip to a considerably high pitch, yet they decrease in strength as they rise in pitch much faster than for U. The upper Octave is tolerably strong in humming, but all the higher partial tones are weak. Humming in the N-position differs a little from that in the M-position, by having its upper partials less damped than for M. But it is only at the instant when the cavity of the mouth is opened or closed that a clear difference exists between these consonants. We cannot enter into the details of the com]wsition of the sound of the other consonants, because they produce noises which have no constant pitch, and ¶ are not musical tones, to which we have here to confine our attention.

The theory of vowel sounds here explained may be confirmed by experiments with artificial reed pipes, to which proper resonant chambers are attached. This was first done by Willis, who attached reed pipes to cylindrical chambers of variable length, and produced different tones by increasing the length of the resonant tube. The shortest tubes gave him I, and then E, A, 0, up to U, until the tube exceeded the length of a quarter of a wave. On further increasing the length the vowels returned in converse order. His determination of the pitch of the resonant pipes agrees well with mine for the deeper vowels. The pitch found by Willis for the higher vowels was relatively too high, because in this case the length of the wave was smaller than the diameter of the tubes, and consequently the usual calculation of pitch from the length of the tubes alone was no longer applicable. The vowels E and I were also far from accurately resembling those of the voice, because the second resonance was absent, and hence, as Willis himself states, they could ¶ not be w^ell distinguished.*

Footnote: Pitch
Pitch,
Length of Tube
\ owel
In the Word
Willis
Helmholtz
in Inches
0
No
c"

,.,

Footnote: [ 4-7
Ao
Nought

c"b

c"b

Footnote: 1 3-8
Paw

</"

</'

Footnote: 3-05
A
Part
d"'\,

d"'b

Footnote: 2-2
Pad

/'"

Footnote: 1-8
E
Pay
d""
h"'\}
! 1-0
Pet
c'""
c""
0-6
I
See

</""

Footnote: 0-38 (?)

The vowels are obtained much more clearly and distinctly with properly tuned resonators, than with cylindrical resonance chambers. On applying to a reed pipe ¶ which gave f>\), a glass resonator tuned to b\), I obtained the vowel U; changing the resonator to one tuned for fy\), I obtained 0; the i"b resonator gave a rather close A, and the d'" resonator a clear A. Hence by tuning the applied chambers in the same way we obtain the same vowels quite independently of the form of the chamber and nature of its walls. I also succeeded in |)roducing various grades of

Footnote: ⁎ [Probably the first treatise on phonology in which Willis's experiments were given at length, and the above table cited, with Wheatstone's article from the London and Westmbistcr Reviev\ which was kindly brought under my notice by Sir Charles Wheatstone himself, was my Alphabet of Nature, London, 1845. The table includes U exemplified by but, hoot, with an indefinite length of pipe. The word pad is misprinted paa. in all the German editions of Helmholtz (even the 4tb, which appeared after the correction in my translation), and as he
therefore could not separate its A from that in ptdi, he gives no pitch. It is really the nearest English representative of the German. The sounds in noiujlit, pan-, which Sir John Herschel, when citing Willis (Art. ' Sound,' in Encijc. MeiropoL, par. 375), could not distinguish, were probably meant for the broad Italian open O, or English o in 'more, and the English aw in maio respectively. The length of the pipe in inches is here added from WiUis's paper. I have heard Willis's experiments repeated by Whentatone.— Translator.]
