page: 119

+ lower partial tones, up to about the sixth partial, are nn)rL' liarinouious and musical. Compared with simple tones they are rich and splendid, wliilc they are at the same time perfectly sweet and soft if the higher \ipper partials are absent. To these belong the musical tones j)roduced by the pianoforte, open organ pipes, the softer piano tones of the human voice and of the French horn. The lastnamed tones form the transition to musical tones with high upper partials; while the tones of flutes, and of pipes on the flue-stops of organs with a low pressure of wind, ap})roach to simple tones.

3. If only the unevenly numbered partials are present (as in narrow stopped organ pi])es, pianoforte strings struck in their middle points, and clarinets), the quality of tone is hoUow, and, when a large number of such upper partials are present, naml. When the prime tone predominates the quality of tone is rich; but when the prime tone is not sufficiently superior in strength to the upper ¶ partials, the quality of tone is j^oor. Thus the quality of tone in the wider open organ pipes is richer than that in the naiTower: strings struck with pianoforte hammers give tones of a richer quality than when struck by a stick or plucked by the finger; the tones of reed pipes with suitable resonance chamliers have a richer (juality than those without resonance chambers.

4. When partial tones higher than the sixth or seventh are very distinct, the quality of tone is cutting and r<mfjh. The reason for this will be seen hei-eafter to lie in the dissonances which they form with one another. The degree of harshness may be very different. When their force is inconsiderable the higher upper [)artials do not essentially detract from the nuisical applicability of the compound tones; on the contrary, they ai-e useful in giving character and expression to the music. The most important musical tones of this description are those of bowx>d instruments and of most reed pipes, oboe (hautbois), bassoon (fagotto), harmonium, and the human voice. The rough, braying tones of brass instruments are extremely ¶ penetrating, and hence are better adapted to give the impression of great power than similar tones of a softer iiuality. They are conseciuently little suitable for artistic music when used alone, but produce great effect in an orchestra. Why high dissonant upper partials should make a musical tone more penetrating will appear hereafter.

CHAPTER VI.

Footnote: ox THE APPREHENSION OF QUALITIES OF TONE.

Up to this point we have not endeavoured to analyse given musical tones further than to determine the differences in the number and loudness of their partial tones. ¶ Before we can determine the function of the ear in apprehending qualities of tone, we must inquire whether a determinate relative strength of the upper partials suffices to give us the impression of a determinate musical quality of tone or whether there are not also other perceptible differences in quality which are independent of such a relation. Since we deal only with musical tones, that is, with such as are produced by exactly periodic motions of the air, and exclude all irregular motions of the air which appear as noises, we can give this question a more definite form. If we suppose the motion of the air corresponding to the given musical tone to be resolved into a sum of pendular vibrations of air, such individual pendular vibrations will not only differ from each other in force or amplitude for different forms of the compound motion, but also in their relative position, or, according to physical terminology, in their difference of phase. For example, if we superimpose the two pendular vibrational curves A and B, fig. 31 (p. 120(t), first with the point e of B on the point do of A, and next with the point e of B on the point d^ of A, we obtain the two entirely distinct vibrational curves
