page: 120

C and D. By further displacement of the initial point e so as to place it on dj or dg we obtain other forms, which are the inversions of the forms C and D, as has been already shown (supra, p. 32a). If, then, musical quality of tone depends solely on the relative force of the partial tones, all the various motions C, D, <fec., must

Footnote: Fig. 31.

make the same impression on the ear. But if the relative position of the two ¶ waves, that is the difference of phase, produces any effect, they must make different impressions on the ear.

Now to determine this point it was necessary to compound various musical tones out of simple tones artificially, and to see whether an alteration of quality ensued when force was constant but phase varied. Simple tones of great purity, which can have both their force and phase exactly regulated, are best obtained from tuning-forks having the lowest proper tone reinforced, as has been already described (p. 54(/ ), by a resonance chamber, and communicated to the air. To set the tuning-forks in very uniform motion, they were placed between the limbs of a little electro-magnet, as shown in fig. 32, opposite. Each tuning-fork was screwed into a separate board d d, which rested upon pieces of india-rubber tubing e e that were cemented below it, to prevent the vibrations of the fork from being directly communicated to the table and hence becoming audible. The limbs b b of the electro-magnet are surrounded with wire, and its pole f is directed to the fork. ¶ There are two clamp screws g on the boai'd d d which are in conductive connection with the coils of the electro-magnet, and serve to introduce other wires which conduct the electric current. To set the forks in strong vibration the strength of these streams must alternate periodically. These are generated by a separate apparatus to be presently described (fig. 33, p. 122^, c).

When forks thus arranged are set in vibration, veiy little indeed of their tone is heard, because they have so little means of communicating their vibrations to the surrounding air or adjacent solids. To make the tone strongly audible, the resonance chamber i, which has been previously tuned to the pitch of the fork, must be brought near it. This resonance chamber is fastened to another board k, which slides in a proper groove made in the board d d, and thus allows its opening to be brought very near to the fork. In the figure the resonance chamber is shown at a distance from the fork in order to exhibit the separate parts distinctly; when in use, it is brought as close as possible to the fork. The mouth of the resonance chamber can be closed by a lid 1 attached to a lever ra. By pulling the string n
