page: 124

In precisely the same way as the vowels of the human voice, it is possible to imitate the quality of tone produced by organ pipes of different stops, if they have not secondary tones which are too high, but of course the whizzing noise, formed by breaking the stream of air at the lip, is wanting in these imitations. The tuning-forks are necessarily limited to the imitation of the purely musical part of the tone. The piercing high upper partials, required for imitating reed instruments, were absent, but the nasality of the clarinet was given by using a series of unevenly numbered partials, and the softer tones of the horn by the full chorus of all the forks.

But though it was not possible to imitate every kind of quality of tone by the present apparatus, it sufficed to decide the important question as to the effect of altered difference of phase upon quality of tone. As I particularly observed at the beginning of this chapter, this question is of fundamental importance for the ¶ theory of auditory sensation. The reader who is unused to physical investigations must excuse some apparently difiicidt and dry details in the explanation of the experiments necessary for its decision.

The simple means of altering the phases of the secondary tones consists in bringing the resonance chambers somewhat out of tune by narrowing their apertures, which weakens the resonance, and at the same time alters the phase. If the resonance chamber is tuned so that the simple tone which excites its strongest resonance coincides with the simple tone of the corresponding fork, then, as the mathematical theory shows,* the greatest velocity of the air at the mouth of the chamber in an outward direction, coincides with the greatest velocity of the ends of the fork in an inward direction. On the other hand, if the chamber is tuned to be slightly deeper than the fork, the greatest velocity of the air slightly ])recedes, and if it is tuned slightly higher, that greatest velocity slightly lags behind the greatest velocity of the fork. The more the tuning is altered, the ¶ will be the difference of phase, till at last it reaches the duration of a quarter of a vibration. The magnitude of the difference of phase agrees during this change precisely with the strength of the resonance, so that to a certain degree we are able to measure the former by the latter. If we represent the strength of the sound in the resonance chamber when in unison with the fork by 10, and divide the periodic time of a vibration, like the circumference of a circle, into 360

Footnote: added the partial is not mentioned in the text. ones, but the whole For the second series of experiments the forks tials of b\f. of cori'csponding pitches are kept under the old
now numbered as par-
11 %

First ) Forks )■

Footnote: 1
2
3 ' 4
5_
6
7

«"b

Footnote: 8
10
12
14
16

%

Footnote: U 0
A
E

/

Footnote: ■'»/ p p p
PP P P PP PP
PP
P 1 / P I P P \ f f P

/ P

ff P

ff P

ff P

Footnote: Second ( Forks r
1
•2
3
4
5
6
7
8

1

>

Footnote: U 0
A E

if

Footnote: mf

J'

Footnote: mf mf
P

mf f

/ P

f

ff

ff ff

ff

ff

Footnote: See Appendix XX. sect. !M. No. 2, for Messrs. Preece and Stroh's new method of vowel synthesis. — Tr(mshitor.~\
See the first part of Appendix IX.
