page: 126

+ cases, without any alteration of pliase, by removing the corresponding chambers to the proper distance from its forks without shading its mouth.

In this manner every possible difference of phase in the tones of two chambers can be produced. The same process can of course be applied to any required number of forks. I have thus experimented upon numerous combinations of tone with varied differences of phase, and I have never experienced the slightest difference in the quality of tone. So far as the quality of tone was concerned, I found that it was entirely indiffei-ent whether I weakened the separate partial tones by shading the moutlis of their resonance chambers, or by moA'ing the chamber itself to a sufficient distance from the fork. Hence the answer to the proposed question is: the qxiality of the musical j^ortion of a compound tone depends solely on the number aiul relative strength of its partial simple tones, and in no respect on their differences of 2'>hase*

The preceding proof that quality of tone is independent of difference of phase, is the easiest to carry out experimentally, but its force lies solely in the theoretical proposition that phases alter contemporaneously with strength of tone when the mouths of the resonance chambers are shaded, and this proposition is the result of mathematical theory alone. We cannot make vibrations of air directly visible. But by a slight change in the experiment it may be so conducted as to make the alteration of phase immediately visible. It is only necessary to put the tuning-forks themselves out of tune with their resonance chambers, by attaching little lumps of wax to the prongs. The same law holds for the phases of a tuning-fork kept in vibration by an electric current, as for the resonance chambers themselves. The phase gradually alters by a quarter period, while the strength of the tone of the fork is reduced from a maximum to nothing at all, by putting it out of time. The phase of the motion of the air retains the same relation to the phase of the vibration of the fork, because the pitch, which is determined by the number of interruptions of the electrical current in a second, is not altered by the alteration of the fork. The change of phase in the fork can be observed directly by means of Lissajou's vibration microscope, already described and shown in fig. 22 (p. 80(i). Place the prongs of the fork and the microscope of this instrument horizontally, and the fork to be examined vertically; powder the upper end of one of its prongs with a little starch, direct the microscope to one of the grains of starch, and excite both forks by means of the electrical currents of the interrupting fork (fig. 33, p. \'22h). The fork of Lissajou's instrument is in unison with the interrupting fork. The grain of starch vibrates horizontally, the object-glass of the microscope vertically, and thus, by the composition of these two motions, curves are generated, just as in the observations on violin strings previously described.

When the observed fork is in unison with the interrupting fork, the curve becomes an oblique straight line (fig. 34, 1), if both forks pass through their

Footnote: Fig. 34.

position of rest at the same moment. As the phase alters, the straight line })aases thi-ough a long oblique ellipse (2, 3), till on the difference of phase becoming a quarter of a period, it develops into a circle (4); and then as the difference of phase increases, it passes through oblique ellipses (5, 6) in another direction, till it reaches another straight line (7), on the difference becoming half a period.

If the second fork is the upper Octave of the inten'upting fork, the curves

Footnote: ⁎ [The experiments of Koenig with the modification. Moreover Koenig contends that wave-siren, explained in App. XX. sect. L. the 'apparent exception' of p. 127c, is an art. 6, show that this law requires a slight ' actual ' one {ibid.). — Trmislator,]
