page: 128

Appunn in Ilanau, giving the first sixteen pai-tial tones of B\}. All these pipes stand on a common windchest, which also contains the valves by which they can be opened or shut. Two larger valves cut off the passage from the windchest to the bellows. While these valves are closed, the pipe valves are arranged for the required combination of tones, and then one of the main valves of the windchest is opened, allowing all the pipes to sound at once. The character of the vowel is better produced in this way by short jerks of sound, than by a long continued sovuid. It is best to produce the prime tone and the predominant upper partial tones of the required vowels on both the open and stopped pipes at once, and to open only the weak stopped pipes for the next adjacent tones, so that the strongtone may not be too isolated.

The imitation of the vowels by this means is not very perfect, because, among other reasons, it is impossible to graduate the strength of tone on the different pipes

¶ 80 delicately as on the tuning-forks, and the higher tones especially are too screaming. But the vowel sounds thus composed are perfectly recognisable.

We proceed now to consider the part played by the ear in the apprehension of quality of tone. The assumption formerly made respecting the function of the ear, was that it was capable of distinguishing both the pitch number of a musical tone (which gives the pitch), and also the form of the vibrations (on which the difference of quality depends). This last assertion was based simply on the exclusion of all other possible assumptions. As it could be proved that sameness of pitch always required equal pitch numbers, and as loudness visibly depended upon the amplitude of the vibrations, the quality of tone must necessarily depend on something which was neither the number nor the amplitude of the vibrations. There was nothing left us but form. We can now make this view more definite. The experiments just described show that waves of very different forms (as fig. 31, C, D, p. 120a, and fig. 12, C, D, p. 22/^), may have the same quality of tone, and

¶ indeed, for every case, except the simple tone, thei-e is an infinite number of forms of wave of this kind, because any alteration of the difference of phase alters the form of wave without changing the quality of tone. The only decisive character of a quality of tone, is that the motion of the air which strikes the ear when resolved into a sum of pendulum vibrations gives the same degree of strength to the same simple vibration.

Hence the ear does not distinguish the different forms of waves in themselves, as the eye distinguishes the different vibrational curves. The ear must be said rather to decompose every wave form into simpler elements according to a definite law. It then receives a sensation from each of these simpler elements as from an harmonious tone. By trained attention the ear is able to become conscious of each of these simpler tones separately. And what the ear distinguishes as different qualities of tone are only different combinations of these simpler sensations.

The comparison between ear and eye is here very instructive. When the

¶ vibrational motion is rendered visible, as in the vibration microscope, the eye is capable of distinguishing every possible different form of vibration one from another, even such as the ear cannot distinguish. But the eye is not capable of ' directly resolving the vibrations hito simple vibrations, as the ear is. Hence the eye, assisted by the above-named instrument, really distinguishes the form of vibration, as such, and in so doing distinguishes every different form of vibration. The ear, on the other hand, does not distinguish every different form of vibration, but only such as when resolved into pendular vibrations, give different constituents. But on the other hand, by its capability of distinguishing and feeling these very constituents, it is again superior to the eye, which is quite incapable of so doing.

This analysis of compound into simple pendular vibrations is an astonishing property of the ear. The reader must bear in mind that when we apply the term ' compound ' to the vibrations produced by a single musical instrument, the ' composition ' has no existence except for our auditory perceptions, or for mathematical theory. In reality, the motion of the particles of the air is not at all compound,
