page: 129

+ it is quite simple, flowing from a single source. When we turn to external nature for an analogue of such an analysis of periodical motions into simple motions, we find none but the phenomena of sympathetic vibration. In reality if we suppose the dampers of a pianoforte to be raised, and allow any musical tone to impinge powerfully on its sounding board, we bring a set of strings into sympathetic vibration, namely all those strings, and only those, which correspond with the simple tones contained in the given musical tone. Here, then, we have, by a purely mechanical process, a resolution of air waves precisely similar to that performed by the ear. The air wave, quite simple in itself, brings a certain number of strings into sympathetic vibration, and the sympathetic vibration of these strings depends on the same law as the sensation of harmonic upper partial tones in the ear.*

There is necessarily a certain difference between the two kinds of apparatus, because the pianoforte strings readily vibrate with their upper partials in sympathy, ¶ and hence separate into several vibrating sections. We will disregard this peculiarity in making our comparison. It would besides be easy to make an instrument in which the strings would not vibrate sensibly or powerfully for any but their prime tones, by simply loading the strings slightly in the middle. This would make their higher proper tones inharmonic to their primes.

Now suppose we were able to connect every string of a piano with a nervous fibre in such a manner that this fibre would be excited and experience a sensation every time the string vibrated. Then every musical tone which impinged on the instrument would excite, as we know to be really the case in the eai-, a series of sensations exactly corresponding to the pendular vibrations into which the original motion of the air had to be resolved. By this means, then, the existence of each partial tone would be exactly so perceived, as it really is perceived by the ear. The sensations of simple tones of different pitch would under the supposed conditions fall to the lot of different nervous fibres, and hence be produced quite ¶ separately, and independently of each other.

Now, as a matter of fact, later microscopic discoveries respecting the internal construction of the ear, lead to the hypothesis, that arrangements exist in the ear

similar to those which we ^^^" ^^'' have imagined. The end of

every fibre of the auditory nerve is connected with small elastic parts, which we cannot but assume to be set in sympathetic vibration by the waves of sound.

The construction of the ear may be briefly described as follows: — The fine ends ¶ of the fibres of the auditory nerves are expanded on a delicate membrane in a cavity filled with fluid. Owing to its involved form this cavity is known as the lahyrinth of the ear. To conduct the vibrations of the air with sufficient force into the fluid of the labyrinth is the office of a second portion of the ear, the tympdnunn or drum and the parts within it. Fig. 36 above is a

Footnote: ⁎ [Eaise the dampers of a piano, and utter the vowel A («A) sharply and loudly, directing it well on to the sound l)oard, pause a second and the vowel will be echoed from the strings. Redamp, raise the dampers and cry U (00) as before, and that will also be echoed. Re-damp, raise the dampers and cry I (cc), and that again will be echoed. The other vowels may be tried in the same way. The echo, though
imperfect, is always true enough to surprise a hearer to whom it is new, even if the pitch of the vowel is taken at hazard. It will be improved if the vowels are sung loudly to notes of the piano. The experiment is so easy to make and so fundainental in character, that it should be witnessed by e%'ery student. — Tramlator.^
