page: 130

+ diagrammatic section, of the size of life, showing the cavities belonging to the auditory apparatus. A is the labyrinth, B B the cavity of the tynvpdmim or drum, D the funnel-shaped entrance into the meatus or external auditory passage, narrowest in the middle and expanding slightly towards its upper extremity. This meatus, in the ear or passage, is a tube formed partly of cartilage or gristle and partly of bone, and it is separated from the tympanum or drum, by a thin circular membrane, the memhrana tympdnl or drumshin* c c, which is rather laxly stretched in a bony ring. The drum (tympanum) B lies between the outer passage (meatus) and the labyrinth. The drum is separated from the labyrinth by bony walls, pierced with two holes, closed by membranes. These are the so-called windows {fenes'trae) of the labyrinth. The upper one o, called the oval window {fenestra uvdlis), is connected with one of the ossicles or little bones of the ear called the stirrup. The lower or round window r {fenestra rotunda) has no

¶ connection with these ossicles.

The drum of the ear is consequently completely shut off from the external passage and from the labyrinth. But it has free access to the upper part of the pharynx or throat, through the so-called Eustachian t tube E, ^vhich in Germany is tenned a trumpet, because of the trumpet-like expansion of its pharyngeal extremity and the narrowness of its opening into the drum. The end which opens into the drum is formed of bone, but the expanded pharyngeal end is formed of thin flexible cartilage or gristle, split along its upper side. The edges of the split are closed by a sinewy membrane. By closing the nose and mouth, and either condensing the air in the mouth by pressure, or rarefying it by suction, air can be respectively driven into or drawn out of the drum through this tube. At the entrance of air into the drum, or its departure from it, we feel a sudden jerk in the ear, and hear a dull crack. Air passes from the pharynx to the drum, or from the drum to the pharynx only at the moment of making the motion of swallowing.

¶ When the air has entered the drum it remains there, even after nose and mouth are opened again, until we make another motion fig. 37.

of swallowing. Then the air leaves the drum, as we perceive by a second cracking in the ear, and the cessation of the feeling of tension in the drumskin which had remained up till that time. These experiments shew that the tube is not usually open, but is opened only diu-ing swallowing, and this is explained by the fact that the muscles which raise the velum j^c^''^^ o^ soft palate, and are set in action on swallowing, arise partly from the cartilaginous extremity of the tube. Hence the drum is generally quite closed, and filled with air, which has a pressure equal to

¶ of the external air, because it has from time to time, that is whenever we swallow means of equalising itself with the same by free communication. For a strong pressure of the air, the tube opens even without the action of swallowing, and its power of resistance seems to be very different in different individuals.

In two places, this air in the drum is likewise separated from the fluid of the labj-rinth merely by a thin stretched membrane, which closes the two ivindows of the

Footnote: the Ossicles of the ear in mutual connection seen from the front, and taken from the right side of the head, which has been turned a little to the right round a vertical axis. M hammer or malleus. J anvil or incvs. S stirrup or stapes. Mcp head, Mc neck, Ml long process or processus (jrd'ciiis. Mm handle or manubrima of the hammer. — Jc body, Jb short process, Jl long process, Jpl orbicular process or os orbicXddrc or proces'sus lentictitarls, of the an\-il.— Sep head or ccpifuiutn of the stirrup.

Footnote: ⁎ [In conunon parlance the dnanskin of the ear, or tijmpnnic membrane, is spoken of as the drum itself. Anatomists as well as drummers distinguish the membranous cover (drumskin) which is struck, from the hollow cavity (drum) which contains the resonant air.
The quantities of the Latin words are marked, as I have heard musicians give them incorrectly. — Translator. ]
t [Generally pronounced yoo-stai'-kl-an, but sometimes yoo-stdi'-shl-an. — Translator.]
