page: 131

+ labyrinth, already mentioned, namely, the ond window (o, tiii'. .'K!, p. 129c) and the ronnd window (r). Hotli of these membranes an' in contact on their onter side with the air of the drum, and on their inner side with the water of the labyrinth. The membrane of the ronnd window is free, b\xt that of the oval windowis connected with the drumskin of the ear by a sei'ies of three little bones or auditory ossicles, jointed together. Fig. 37 shews the three ossicles in their natural connection, enlarged four diameters, 'rhey are the ImnDiier (mal'lcus) M, the unv'd (in'cus) J, and the stirrup (stapes*) 8. The hammer is attached to the drumskin, and the stirrup to the membrane of the oval window.

The hammer shewn separately in fig. 38, has a thick, rounded npi)er extremity,

the head cp, and a thinner lower extremity, the iKUKlIf m. Betweeii these two is

A Fig. 38. B a contraction e, the iii'ck. At the

back of the head is tlic surface of the Joi)it, by means of which it fits on to1[ the anvil. Below the neck, where the handle begins, project two processes, the long 1, also called joj'ocessns Folidnus and py. gracilis, and the short b, also called ^:>n hre'vis. The long process has the proportionate length shewn in the figure, in children only; in adults it appears to l>e absorl)ed down to a little stump. It is directed forwards, and is covered by the bands which fasten the hammer in front. The short process b, on the other hand, is directed towards the drumskin, and presses its upper part a little forwards. From the point of this process b to ¶ the point of the handle m the hammer is attached to the upper portion of the

Footnote: Right haimiifr, A fniin the fniiit, li from beliiiul. cp, liead, " c neck, b siidit, 1 long process, ni handle. Siirface of the joint.
Left temporal bone of a newly-born child, with the audi- Ri^ht dnnnskin\viththehaninier,seenfiii>n the
tory ossicles in nitii. Sta, spina tynipSnica anterior. inside. Theinnerlayerof thefoldofnuicons
Stp, spina tympanica posterior. Mcp, head of the menibiune belonging t<i the haniiner (see
hammer. Mb short. Ml long process of hammer. ,T below) is removed Stji. spiii.-i tym))rinica
anvil.- .S stirrup. p„.st. .Mrp, head of the luiiimi.-r. ' Ml, long
process of hammer, ma.liuairifii turn mallei ant. 1 ehm-diitympani. ■! Kuslachiaii tube. * Tendon of the M. tensor tynipaiii, c\it through close to its insertion.

drumskin, in such a manner that the point of the handle draws the drumskin considerably towards the inner part of the ear.

Fig. 39 above shews the hammer in its natural position as seen from without, after the drumskin has been removed, and fig. 40 shews the hammer lying against the drumskin as seen from within. The hammer is fastened along

Footnote: ⁎ [Stapes is u.sually called stai'peez. It is a contraction for statq)^ not a classical word, and is usually received as classical. — Translator.']
foot-rest, also not
