page: 136

From the vestibule proceeds forwards and iinderwards, a spiral canal, the snailshell or cochlea, at the entrance to which lies the round window Fc (fenestra cochleae), which is turned towards the cavity of the drum. Upwards and backwards, on the other hand, proceed three semicircular canals from the vestibule, the ho7-izontal, front vertical and hack vertical semicircular canals, each of which debouches with both its mouths in the vestibule, and each of which has at one end a bottle-shaped enlargement, or ampulla (ha, vaa, vpa). The aquaeductus vestibrdi shown in the figure, Av, appears (from Dr. Fr, E. Weber's investigations) to form a communication between the water of the labyrinth, and the spaces for lymph within the cranium. The rough places Tsf and* are casts of canals which introduce nerves.

The whole of this cavity of the labyrinth is filled with fluid, and surrounded by the extremely hard close mass of the petrous bone, so that there are only two ¶ yielding spots on its walls, the two windows, the oval Fv, and the round Fc. Into the first, as already described, is fastened the foot of the stirrup, by a narrow membranous margin. The second is closed by a membrane. When the stirrup is driven against the oval window, the whole mass of fluid in the labyrinth is necessarily driven against the round window, as the only spot where its walls can give way. If, as Politzer did, we put a finely drawn glass tube as a manometer into the round window, without in other respects injuring the labyrinth, the water in this tube will be driven upwards as soon as a strong pressure of air acts on the

Ik '■■■

Footnote: Re vaa
vpa
It In
A, left labyiinth from without. 15, liul cochleae or voui: 1 window. Fv, fen sphaerlcus. li liorizoutal st'iniiircu semicircular t-iuuil. \\ni, aiiiimllu of the liack vertical seinii semicircular canals. .\v, cast of the afiuaeductus vest'ihul little canals which debouch on the pyramis vestlbuli.
yrinth from withii vestibnli, or oval nal. ha, ampulla
l
C, left labyrinth from above. Fc, fenestra .vindow. Re, recessus elliptlcus. Rs, recessus if the same, vaa, ampulla of the front vertical ular canal, vc, common limb of the two vertical Tsf, tractus spiralis foramlnosus. "Cast of the

outside of the drumskin and causes the foot of the stirrup to be driven into the oval window.

The terminations of the auditory nerve are spread over fine membranous ¶ formations, which lie partly floating and partly expanded in the hollow of the bony labyrinth, and taken together compose the metnlranous labyrinth. This last has on the whole the same shape as the bony labyrinth. But its canals and cavities are smaller, and its interior is divided into two separate sections; first the titrlcillus with the semicircular canals, and second the saccidus with the niembranotis cochlea. Both the utriculus and the sacculus lie in the vestibule of the bony labyrinth: the utriculus opposite to the recessus elliptlcus (Re, fig. 43 above), the sacculus opposite to the recessus sphaerhtis (Rs). These are floating bags filled with water, and only touch the wall of the labyrinth at the point where the nerves enter them.

The form of the utriculus with its membranous semicircular canals is shewn in fig. 44. The ampullae project much more in the membranous than in the bony semicircular canals. According to the recent investigations of Riidinger, the membranous semicircular canals do not float in the bony ones, but are fastened to the convex side of the latter. In each ampulla there is a pad-like prominence directed
