page: none

Footnote: Utriculus and nieinbiunous semicircular canals (left side) seen from without, va front, vp back vertical, h horizontal semicircular canal.

¶ into which tibrilos of the auditory nerve enter; and on tlic utricuhis

¶ is a phxce whicli is flatter and thickened. The peculiar manner in which

Footnote: the nerves terminate in this place will be de.scriV)ed Fig. 44. ^

¶ liereafter. Whether these, and the whole apparatus

of the semicircular canals, assist in the sensation of hearing, has latterlv been rendered very douV)tful. [See p. 1516.]

In the inside of the utriculus is found the auditory sand, consisting of little crystals of lime connected by means of a nuicous mass with each other and witli the thickened places where the nerves are so abundant. In the hollow of the bony vestibide, near the utriculus, and fastened to it, but not communicating with it, lies ¶ the sacculus, also provided with a similar thickened spot full of nerves. A narrow canal connects it with the canal of the membranous cochlea. As to the cavity of the cochlea, we see by fig. 43 opposite, that it is ¶ similar to the shell of a garden snail; but the canal of the cochlea is ¶ into two almost completely separated galleries, by a transverse partition, ¶ bony and partly membranous. These galleries communicate only at the ¶ of the cochlea through a small opening, the hHlcotrema, bounded by the ¶ or hook-shaped termination of its central axis or tnodi'olus. Of the two ¶ into which the cavity of the bony cochlea is divided, one communicates ¶ with the vestibule and is hence called the vestibide gallery (sciila vestiball). ¶ other gallery is cut off from the vestibule by the membranous partition, but ¶ at its base, where it begins, is the round window, and the yielding membrane, ¶ closes this, allows the fluid in the gallery to exchange vibrations with the ¶ in the drum. Hence this is called the drum galleri/ (scala tymp;ail). ^

¶ it must be observed that the membranous partition of the cochlea is ¶ a single membrane, but a membranous canal (ductus cochlearis). Its inner ¶ ^g margin is turned tovvards the central axis or

modiolus, and attached to the rudimentary bony partition (lamina spiralis). A part of the opposite external surface is attached to the inner surface of the bony gallery. Fig. 45 shews the bony parts of a cochlea which has been laid open, and fig. 46 (p. 138«), a transverse section of the canal (which is imperfect on the left hand at bottom). In both figures Ls denotes the bony part of the partition, and in fig. 46 V and b are the two unattached parts ¶ of the membranous canal. The transverse section of this canal is, as the figure shews, nearly triangular, so that an angle of the triangle near Lis is attached to the edge of the bony partition. The conmiencement of the ductus cochlearis at the base of the cochlea, communicates, as already stated, by means of a narrow membranous canal with the sacculus in the vestil)ule. Of the two unattached strips of its membranous walls, the one facing the vestibule gallery is a soft mem¶ incapable of ottering nnich YCiAai-AWce^Reissner's membrane (membrana vesti¶ V, fig. 46, p. 138a); but the other, the membrana basilclris (b), is a firm, ¶ stretched, elastic membrane, striped radially, corresponding to its radial ¶ It splits easily in the direction of these fibres, shewing that it is but loosely

Footnote: Fee
Bony cochlea (right side) opened in fiont. modiolus. I.s, lainliia siiiialis. II, lifn Fee, fenestra cochleae. ^St'ctionof tliejiai of the cochlea. 1 iL'i)iiev extremity of the
