page: 138

Footnote: fransverse section of a spire of a cochlea whichhas been, softened in hydrochloric acid. Ls, lamina spiralis. Lis,, limbus laminae spiralis. Sv, scala ve.stlbftll. St, scala tymp5nl. Dc, ductus cochlearis. Lsp, Itgamentum spirale. v, membrana vestibularis, h, membrana Mstlaris. e, outer wall of the ductus cochlearis._ * its fillet. The dotted lines shew sections of the membrana tectoria and the auditory roils.

comit'cted in a direction tninsverse to them. The terminations of the nerves of ¶ the cochlea and their appendages, are attached to the membrana basilaris, as shewn by the dotted lines in fig. 46.

When the drnmskin is driven inwards by increased pressure of air in the auditory ¶ passage, it also forces the auditory ossicles inwards, as already explained, and as consequence the foot of the stiiTup penetrates deeper into the oval window. The fiuid of the labyrinth, being surrounded in all other places by firm bony walls, has only one means of escape, — the round window with its 3'ielding membrane. To reach it, the fluid of the labyrinth must either pass ¶ the helicotrema, the narrow opening at the vertex of the cochlea, flowing over from the vestibule gallery into the drum gallery, or, as it would pr(jl>al)ly not have sufficient time to do this in the case of sonorous vibrations, press the membranous partition of the cochlea against the drum gallery. The converse action must take place when the air in the auditory passage is rarefied.

Hence the sonorous vibrations of the air in the outer auditory passage are finally transferred to the membranes of the labyrinth, more especially those of the cochlea, and to the expansions of the nerves upon them. ¶ The terminal expansions of these nerves, as I have already mentioned, are connected with very small elastic appendages, which appear adapted to excite the

nerves by their vibrations.

The nerves of the vestibule terminate in the thickened places of the bags of

the membranoxis labyrinth, already mentioned p,o 47

(p. 137rt), where the tissue has a greater and

almost cartilaginous consistency. One of these

places, provided with nerves, projects like a fillet

into the inner part of the ampulla of each semicircular canal, and another lies on each of the little

bags in the vestibule. The nerve fibres here enter

between the soft cylindrical cells of the fine cuticle

(("•pithrlTum) which covers the internal surface of

the fillets. Projecting from the internal surface ¶ this epithelium in the ampullae, Max Schultze

discovered a number of very peculiar, stiff, elastic

hairs, shewn in fig. 47. They are much longer

than the vibratory hairs of the ciliated epithe'lium

(their length is ttV of a Paris line [or -00355

English inch] in the ray fish), brittle, and running

to a very fine point. It is clear that fine stiff

hairs of this kind are extremely well adapted for

moving sympathetically with the motion of the

fluid, and hence for producing mechanical irritation in the nei've fibres which lie in the soft

epithelium between their roots.

According to Max Schultze, the corresponding

thickened fillets in the vcstibides, where the nerves terminate, have a similar soft

epithelium, and have short hairs which are easily destroyed. Close to these
