page: 141

+ the upper jointed ends of the fibres of the first series. Tlte fibres of the first series arise from the inner margin of the membrane, which can be rehitively little ao-itated, bnt the fibres of the second series are attached nearly in the middle of the membrane, and this is precisely the place where its vibrations will have the greatest excursions. When the pressure of the fluid in the drum gallery of the labyrinth is increased by driving the foot of the stirrup against the oval window, the membrane at the base of the arches will sink downwards, the fibres of the second series be more tightly sti-etched, and perhaps the corresponding places of the fibres of the fii-st series be bent a little downwards. It does not, however, seem probable that the fibres of the first series themselves move to any great extent, for their lateral connections are strong enough to make them hang together in masses like a membrane, when they have been released from their attachment in anatomical preparations. On reviewing the whole arrangement, there can be no doubt that ¶ Corti's oryau is an apparatus adapted for receiving the vibrations of the membranu

basilaris, and for vibrating of itself, but our present knowledge is not sufficient toll determine with accuracy the manner in which these vibrations take place. For this purpose we require to estimate the stability of the several parts and the degree of tension and flexibility, with more precision than can be deduced from such observations as have hitherto been made on isolated parts, as they casually group themselves under the microscope.

Now Corti's fibres are wound round and covered over with a multitude of very delicate, frail formations, fibres and cells of various kinds, partly the finest terminational runners of nerve fibres with appended nerve cells, partly fibres of ligamentous tissue, which appear to serve as a support for fixing and suspending the nerve formations.

The connection of these parts is best shewn in fig. 49 opposite. They are grouped like a pad of soft cells on each side of and within Corti's arches. The most important of them appear to be the cells c and d, which arc furnished with
