page: 142

+ hairs, precisely resembling the ciliated colls in the ampullae and utricidus. They appear to be directly connected by fine varicose nerve fibres, and constitute the most constant part of the cochlean formations; for with birds and reptiles, where the structure of the cochlea is much simpler, and even Corti's arches are absent, these little ciliated cells are always to be found, and their hairs are so placed as to strike against Corti's membrane during the vibration of the membrana basilaris. The cells at a and a', fig. 49 (p. 140), which appear in an enlarged condition at b and n in fig. 51 (p. 141), seem to have the character of an epithelium. In fig. 51 there will also be observed bundles and nets of fibres, which may be partly merely supporting fibres of a ligamentous nature, and may partly, to judge by their appearance as strings of beads, possess the character of bundles of the finest fibriles of nerves. But these parts are all so frail and delicate that there is still much doubt as to their connection and office.

¶ The essential result of our description of the ear may consequently be said to consist in having found the terminations of the auditory nerves everywhere connected with a peculiar auxiliary apparatus, partly elastic, partly firm, which may be put in sympathetic vibration under the influence of external vibration, and will then probably agitate and excite the mass of nerves. Now it was shewn in Chap. III., that the process of sympathetic vibration was observed to difter according as the bodies put into sympathetic vibration were such as when once put in motion continued to sound for a long time, or soon lost their motion, p. 39c. Bodies which, like tuning forks when once struck, go on sounding for a long time, are susceptible of sympathetic vibration in a high degree notwithstanding the difficulty of putting their mass in motion, because they admit of a long accumulation of impulses in themselves minute, produced in them by each separate vibration of the exciting tone. But precisely for this reason there must be the exactest agreement between the pitches of the proper tone of the fork and of the exciting tone, because other-

¶ wise subsequent impulses given by the motion of the air could not constantly recur in the same phase of vibration, and thus be suitable for increasing the subsequent effect of the preceding impulses. On the other hand if we take bodies for which the tone rapidly dies away, such as stretched membranes or thin light strings, we find that they are not only susceptible of sympathetic vibration, when vibrating air is allowed to act on them, but that this sympathetic vibration is not so limited to a particular pitch, as in the other case, and they can therefore be easily set in motion by tones of different kinds. For if an elastic body on being once struck and allowed to sound freely, loses nearly the whole of its motion after ten vibrations, it will not be of much importance that any fresh impulses received after the expiration of this time, should agree exactly with the former, although it would be of great importance in the case of a sonorous body for which the motion generated by the first impulse would remain nearly unchanged up to the time that the second impulse was applied. In the latter case the second impulse could not increase the

¶ amount of motion, unless it came upon a phase of the vibration which had precisely the same direction of motion as itself.

The connection between these two relations can be calculated independently of the nature of the body put into sympathetic vibration,* and as the results are iruportant to enable us to form a judgment on the state of things going on in the ear, a short table is annexed. Suppose that a body which vibrates sympathetically has been set into its state of maximum vibration by means of an exact unison, and that the exciting tone is then altered till the sympathetic vibration is reduced to j^o of its former amount. The amount of the required difference of pitch is given in the first column in terms of an equally tempered Tone [which is i of an (Octave]. Now let the same sonorous body be struck, and let its sound be allowed to die away gradually. The number of vibrations which it has made by the time that its intensity is reduced to ^\ of its original amount is noted, and given in the second column.

Footnote: ⁎ The mode of calculation is explained in Appendix X.
