page: none

Footnote: Difference of Pitch, i:i terms of an equally tempered Tone, iKHes-
sary to reduce the intensity of sympathetic vibration to ^'^ of th it
produced by perfect unisonance
Number of vibrations after wliicli the intensity of tone in a sonorous body whose sound is allowed to die out, reduces to ^'^ of its original amount

1. One eighth of a Tone

2. One quarter of a Tone

3. One Semitone ........

i. Three quarters of a Tone

5. A whole Tone

6. A Tone and a quarter .......

7. A tempered minor Third or a Tone and a half

8. A Tone and three quarters

9. A tempered major Third or two whole Tones .

38-00 19-00 9-50 6-33 4-75 3-80 3-17 2-71 2-37

Now, although we are not able exactly to discover how long the ear and its ¶ individual parts, when set in motion, will continue to sound, yet well-known •experiments allow us to form some sort of judgment as to the position which the parts of the ear must occupy in the scale exhibited in this table. Thus, there ■cannot possibly be any parts of the ear which continue to sound so long as a tuning-fork, for that would be patent to the commonest observation. But even if there were any parts in the ear answering to the first degree of our table, that is requiring 38 vibrations to be reduced to ^\j of their force, — we should recognise this in the deeper tones, because 38 vibrations last i of a second for A, i for a, yW for a, ifec, and such a long endurance of sensible sound would render rapid musical passages impossible in the unaccented and once-accented Octaves. Such 41 state of things would disturb musical effect as much as the sti'ong resonance of ■a vaulted room, or as raising the dampers on a piano. When making a shake, we ■can readily strike 8 or 10 notes in a second, so that each tone separately is struck from 4 to 5 times. If, then, the sound of the first tone had not died off in our ear ¶ before the end of the second sound, at least to such an extent as not to be sensible when the latter was sounding, the tones of the shake, instead of being individually distinct, would merge into a continuous mixture of both. Now shakes of this kind, with 10 tones to a second, can be clearly and sharply executed throughout almost the whole scale, although it must be owned that from A downwards, in the gi'eat and contra Octaves they sound bad and rough, and their tones begin to mix. Yet it can be easily shewn that this is not due to the mechanism of the instrument. Thus if we execute a shake on the harmonium, the keys of the lower notes are just as acc\u-ately constructed and just as easy to move as those of the higher ones. Each sepai-ate tone is completely cut off with perfect certainty at the iiioment the valve falls on the air passage, and each speaks at the moment the valve is raised, because during so brief an interruption the tongues remain in a state of vibration. Similarly for the violoncello. At the instant when the finger which makes the shake falls on the string, the latter must commence a vibration oi a ¶ different periodic time, due to its length; and the instant that the finger is removed, the vibration belonging to the deeper tone must return. And yet the skake in the bass is as imperfect on the violoncello as on any other instrument. Runs and shakes can be relatively best executed on a ])ianoforte because, at the moment of striking, the new tone sounds with great but rapidly decreasing intensity. Hence, in addition to the inharmonic noise produced by the simultaneous continuance of the two tones, we also hear a distinct prominence given to each separate tone. Now, since the difficulty of shaking in the bass is the same for all instruments, and for individual instruments is demonstrably independent of the manner in which the tones are produced, we are forced to conclude that the difficulty lies in the ear itself. We have, then, a plain indication that the vibrating parts of the ear are not damped with sufficient force and rapidity to allow of vsuccessfully effecting such a rapid alternation of tones.

Nay more, this fact further proves that there must he (liferent piu-ts of th'- >'<ir which are set in vibration by tones of different piti-lc and which receive the sensatioa
