page: 146

Hence it follows, as Henle has also proved, that the greatest increase of breadth falls on the outer zone of the basilar membrane, beyond the line of the attachment of the outer rods. This increases from 0-023 mm. [= -000905 in.] to 0-41 mm. [= -016142 inch] or neai'ly twentyfold.

In accordance with these measures, the two rows of Corti's rods are almost parallel and upright near to the round window, but they are bent much more strongly towards one another near the vertex of the cochlea.

It has been already mentioned that the membrana basilaris of the cochlea breaks easily in the radial direction, but that its radial fibres have considerable tenacity. This seems to me to furnish a very important mechanical relation, namely, that this membrane in its natural connection admits of being tightly stretched in the transverse direction from the modiolus to the outer wall of the cochlea, but can have only little tension in the direction of its length, because it ¶ could not resist a strong pull in this direction.

Now the mathematical theory of the vibration of a membrane with different tensions in different directions shews that it behaves very differently from a membrane which has the same tension in all directions.* On the latter, vibrations produced in one part, spread uniformly in all directions, and hence if the tension were uniform it would be impossible to set one part of the basilar membrane in vibration, without producing nearly as strong vibrations (disregarding individual nodal lines) in all other parts of the membrane.

But if the tension in direction of its length is infinitesimally small in comparison with the tension in direction of the breadth, then the radial fibres of the basilar membrane may be approximatively regarded as forming a system of stretched strings, and the membranous connection as only serving to give a fulcrum to the pressure of the fluid against these strings. In that case the laws of their motion would be the same as if every individual string moved independently ¶ of all the others, and obeyed, by itself, the influence of the periodically alternating pressure of the fluid of the labyrinth contained in the vestibule gallery. Consequently any exciting tone would set that part of the membi-ane into sympathetic vibration, for which the proper tone of one of its radial fibres that are stretched and loaded with the various appendages already described, corresponds most nearly with the exciting tone; and thence the vibrations will extend with rapidly diminishing strength on to the adjacent parts of the membrane. Fig. 52, on p. 144(/, might be taken to represent, on an exaggerated scale of height, a longitudinal section of that part of the basilar membrane in which the proper tone of the radial fibres of the membrane are nearest to the exciting tone.

The strongly vibrating parts of the membrane would, as has been explained in respect to all bodies which vibrate sympathetically, be more or less limited, according to the degree of damping power in the adjacent parts, by friction against the fluid in the labyrinth and in the soft gelatinous parts of the nerve fillet. ¶ Under these circumstances the parts of the membrane in unison with higher tones must be looked for near the round window, and those with the deeper, near the vertex of the cochlea, as Hensen also concluded from his measurements. That such short strings should be capable of corresponding with such deep tones, must be explained by their being loaded in the basilar membrane with all kinds of solid formations; the fluid of both galleries in the cochlea must also be considered as weighting the membrane, because it cannot move without a kind of wave motion in that fluid.

The observations of Hasse shew that Corti's arches do not exist in the cochlea of birds and amphibia, although the other essential parts of the cochlea, as the basilar membrane, the ciliated cells in connection with the terminations of the nerves, and Corti's membrane, which stands opposite the ends of these ciliae, are all present. Hence it becomes very probable that Corti's arches play only a secondary part in the function of the cochlea. Perhaps we might look for the effect * See Appendix XI.
