page: 117

+ of Corti's arches in their power, as relatively firm objects, of trausuiittinu' the vibrations of the basilar membrane to small limited regions of the iii)per part of the relatively thick nervons fillet, better than it conld be done by the immediate communication of the vibrations of the basilar membrane tlu'ough the soft mass of this fillet. Close to the outside of the upper end of the ai'ch, connected with it by the stiflFer fibriles of the membrana reticularis, are the ciliated cells of the nervous fillet (see c in fig. 49, p. 140). In birds, on the other hand, the ciliated cells form a thin stratum upon the basilar naembrane, and this stratum can readily receive limited vibrations from the membrane, without communicating them too far sideways.

According to this view Corti's arches, in the last resort, will be the means of transmitting the vibrations received from the basilar membrane to the terminal appenaages of the conducting nerve. In this sense the reader is requested here¶ after to understand references to the vibrations, proper tone, and intonation Corti's arches; the intonation meant is that which they receive through their connection with the corresponding part of the basilar membrane.

According to Waldeyer there are about 4500 outer arch fibres in the human cochlea. If we deduct 300 for the simple tones which lie beyond musical limits, and cannot have their pitch perfectly apprehended, there remain 4200 for the seven octaves of musical instiiiments, that is, 600 for every Octave, 50 for every Semitone (that is, 1 for every 2 cents); certainly quite enough to explain the power of distinguishing small pai-ts of a Semitone.* According to Prof. W. Preyer's investigations,+ practised musicians can distinguish with certainty a diflference of pitch arising from half a vibration in a second, in the doubly accented Octave. This would give 1000 distinguishable degrees of pitch in the Octave, from 500 to 1000 vibrations in the second. Towards the limits of the scale the power to distinguish differences diminishes. The 4200 Corti's arches appear then, in this respect, to be enough to apprehend distinctions of thisH amount of delicacy. But even if it should be found that many more than 4200 degrees of pitch could be distinguished in the Octave, it would not prejudice our assumption. For if a simple tone is struck having a pitch between those of two adjacent Corti's arches, it would set them both in sympathetic vibration, and that arch would vibrate the more strongly which was nearest in pitch to the proper tone. The smallness of the interval between the pitches of two fibres still distinguishable, will therefore finally depend upon the delicacy with Avhich the different forces of the vibrations excited can be compared. And we have thus also an explanation of the fact that as the pitch of an external tone rises continuously, our sensations also alter continuonsly and not by jumps, as must be the case if only one of Corti's arches were set in sympathetic motion at once.

To draw further conclusions from our hypothesis, when a simple tone is presented to the ear, those Corti's arches which are nearly or exactly in unison with ¶ it will be strongly excited, and the rest only slightly or not at all. Hence every simple tone of determinate pitch will be felt only by certain nerve fibres, and

Footnote: ⁎ [A few lines of the 1st English edition at vib. a difference of or interval of
have here been cancelled, and replaced by 500 -300 vib. 1-0 cents )?/'as per-
others from the 4th German edition,— rrrms- 1000 -500 „ -9 „ jceived.
^f'tor.] but on the other hand
\ \_Ueher die Grenzen der Tomvahrneh- at vib. a difference of or interval of
mimg (On the limits of the perception of 60 -200 vib. 6 cents \ was
tone), June 1876. Eearranged in English by HO -091 ,, 1-4 „ | not
the Translator in the Proceedings of the 250 -150 ,, 1-0 „ [" per-
Miisical Association for 1876-7, pp. 1-32, 400 -200 ,, -9 „ ) ceived,
under the title of ' On the Sensitiveness of the the intervals perceived, or not perceived, being
Ear to Pitch and Change of Pitch in Music' the same, but the pitches different. And gene-
On p. 11 of this arrangement it is stated that, rally throughout the scale a difference of i
including Delezenne's results, vib. is not heard, but
at vib. a difference of or interval of from Gj^ to j/j^ f vib.^
120 -418 vib. 6 cents ) i««s per- and from «' to c" I „ Ws heard.
440 -364 „ 1-4 ,, jceived. and
from c to c" ^ „ J
— Traiislator.] L 2
