page: 148

+ simple tones of difterent pitch will excite different fibres. When a compound musical tone or chord is presented to the ear, all those elastic bodies will be excited, which have a proper pitch corresponding to the various individual simple tones contained in the whole mass of tones, and hence by properly directing attention, all the individual sensations of the individual simple tones can be perceived. The chord must be resolved into its individual compound tones, and the compound tone into its individual harmonic partial tones.

This also explains how it is that the ear resolves a motion of the air into pendular vibrations and no other. Any particle of air can of course execute only one motion at one time. That we considered such a motion mathematically as a sum of pendular vibrations, w^as in the first instance merely an arbitrary assumption to facilitate theory, and had no meaning in nature. The first meaning in nature that we found for this resolution came from considering sympathetic ¶ vibration, when we discovered that a motion which was not pendular, could produce sympathetic vibrations in bodies of those difterent pitches, which corresponded to the harn)onic upper partial tones. And now^ our hypothesis has also reduced the phenomenon of hearing to that of sympathetic vibration, and thus furnished a reason why an originally simple periodic vibration of the air produces a sum of different sensations, and hence also appears as compound to our perceptions.

The sensation of difterent pitch would consequently be a sensation in different nerve fibres. The sensation of a quality of tone would depend upon the power of a given compound tone to set in vibration not only those of Corti's arches which correspond to its prime tone, but also a series of other arches, and hence to excite sensation in several different groups of nerve fibres.

Physiologically it should be observed that the present assumption reduces sensations which differ qualitatively according to pitch and quality of tone, to a ¶ difference in the nerve fibres which are excited. This is a ste^J similar to that taken in a wider field by Johannes Miiller in his theory of the specific energies of sense. He has shewn that the difference in the sensations due to various senses, does not depend upon the actions which excite them, but upon the various nervous arrangements which receive them. We can convince ourselves experimentally that in whatever manner the optic nerve and its expansion, the retina of the eye, may be excited, b}' light, by twitching, by pressm-e, or by electricit}', the result is never anything but a sensation of light, and that the tactual nerves, on the contrary, never give us sensations of light or of hearing or of taste. The same solar rays which are felt as light by the eye, are felt by the nerves of the hand as heat; the same agitations which are felt by the hand as twitterii:igs, are tone to the ear.

Just as the ear apprehends vibrations of different periodic time as tones of different pitch, so does the eye perceive luminiferous vibrations of different periodic time as difterent coloiu's, the quickest giving violet and blue, the mean green and ¶ yellow, the slowest red. The laws of the mixture of colours led Thomas Young to the hypothesis that there were three kinds of nerve fibres in the eye, with different powers of sensation, for feeling red, for feeling green, and for feeling violet. In reality this assumption gives a very simple and perfectl}' consistent explanation of all the optical phenomena depending on colour. And by this means the qiialitative differences of the sensations of sight are reduced to differences in the nerves which receive the sensations. For the sensations of each individual fibre of the optic nerve there remains only the quantitative differences of greater or less irritation.

The same result is obtained for hearing by the hypothesis to wdiich our investigation of quality of tone has led us. The qualitative difference of pitch and quality of tone is reduced to a difference in the fibres of the nerves receiving the sensation, and for each individual fibre of the nerve there remains only the quantitative differences in the amount of excitement.

The processes of irritation within the nerves of the muscles, by which their contraction is determined, have hitherto been more accessible to physiological
