page: 140

+ investigation than those which take place in the nerves of sense. In tliose oi the muscle, indeed, we find only (inantitative difterences of more or less excitement, and no qualitative differences at all. In them we are able to establish, that during excitement the electrically active particles of the nerves undergo determinate changes, and that these changes ensue in exactly the same way whatever be the excitement which causes them. But precisely the same changes also take place in an excited nerve of sense, although their consequence in this case is a sensation, while in the other it was a motion; and hence we see that the mechanism of the process of irritation in the nerves of sense must be in every respect similar to that in the nerves of motion. The two hypotheses just explained really red\ice the processes in the nerves of man's two principal senses, notwithstanding their apparently involved qualitative differences of sensations, to the same simple scheme with which we are familiar in the nerves of motion. Nerves have been ¶ often and not unsuitably compared to telegraph wires. Such a wire conducts one kind of electric current and no other; it may be stronger, it may be weaker, it may move in either direction; it has no other qualitative differences. Nevertheless, according to the different kinds of apparatus with which we provide its terminations, we can send telegraphic despatches, ring bells, explode mines, decompose water, move magnets, magnetise iron, develop light, and so on. So with the nerves. The condition of excitement which can be produced in them, and is conducted by them, is, so far as it can be recognised in isolated fibres of a nerve, everywhere the same, but when it is brought to various parts of the brain, or the body, it produces motion, secretions of glands, increase and decrease of the quantity of blood, of redness and of warmth of individual organs, and also sensations of light, of hearing, and so forth. Supposing that every qualitatively different action is produced in an organ of a different kind, to which also separate fibres of nerve must proceed, then the actual process of irritation in individual ¶ nerves may always be precisely the same, just as the electrical current in the telegraph wires remains one and the same notwithstanding the various kinds of effects which it produces at its extremities. On the other hand, if we assume that the same fibre of a nerve is capable of conducting difterent kinds of sensation, we should have to assume that it admits of various kinds of processes of irritation, and this we have been hitherto unable to establish.

In this respect then the view here proposed, like Young's hypothesis for the difference of colours, has a still wider signification for the physiology" of the nerves in general.

Since the first publication of this book, the theory of auditory sensation here explained, has received an interesting confirmation from the observations and experiments made by V. Hensen* on the auditory apparatus of the Crustaceae. These animals have liags of auditory stones (otoliths), partly closed, partly opening outwards, in which these stones float freely in a watery fluid and are ¶ supported by hairs of a peculiar formation, attached to the stones at one end, and, partly, arranged in a series proceeding in order of magnitude, from larger and thicker to shorter and thinner. In many crustaceans also we find precisely similar hairs on the open surface of the body, and these must be considered as auditory hairs. The proof that these external hairs are also intended for hearing, depends first on the similarity of their construction with that of the hairs in the bags of otoliths; and secondly on Hensen's discovery that the sensation of hearing remained in the Mysis (opossiim shrimp) when the bags of otoliths had been extirpated, and the external auditory hairs of the antennae were left.

Hensen conducted the sound of a keyed Inigle through an apparatus formed on the model of the drumskin and auditory ossicles of the ear into the water of a little box in which a specimen of Mysis was fastened in such a way as to allow the external auditory hairs of the tail to be observed. It was then seen that certain tones of the horn set certain hairs into strong vibration, and other tones

Footnote: ⁎ Stiulicn i'lhcr das Gehoron/aii da Decco- and Kolliker's Zcitschrift fiir irlssensch/'/tlichc poden, Leipzig, 1863. Reprinted from Siebold Zoolotjic, vol. xiii.
