page: none

+ impression would acquire a certain, though an ill-defined, pitch, in general the intensity of the sensation seems, for an equal amount of vis viva in the motion, to increase as the pitch ascends. So that the impression of the highest strongly excited fibre preponderates.

A determinate pitch, to a more remarkable extent, may also naturally result, if the pressure itself which acts on the stirruj) of the drum alternates several times between positive and negative. And thus all transitional degrees between noises without any determinate pitch, and compound tones with a determinate pitch may be produced. This actually takes place, and herein lies the proof, on which HenS. Exner * has properly laid weight, that such noises must be perceived by those })arts of the ear which act in distinguishing pitch.

In former editions of this work I had expressed a conjecture that the auditory ciliae of the ampullae, which seemed to be but little adapted for resonance, and those of the little bags opposite the otoliths, might be especially active in the 11 perception of noises.

As regards the ciliae in the ampullae, the investigations of Goltz have made it extremely probable that they, as well as the semicircular canals, serve for a totally difterent kind of sensation, namely for the perception of the turning of the head. Revolution about an axis perpendicular to the plane of one of the semicircular canals cannot be immediately transferred to the ring of water which lies in the canal, and on account of its inertia lags behind, while the relative shifting of the water along the wall of the canal might be felt by the ciliae of the nerves of the ampullae. On the other hand, if the turning continues, the ring of water itself will be gradually set in revolution by its friction against the wall of the canal, and will continue to move, even when the turning of the head suddenly ceases. This causes the illusive sensation of a revolution in the contrary direction, in the well-known form of giddiness. Injuries to the semicircular canals without injuries ¶ to the brain produce the most remarkable disturbances of equilibrium in the lower animals. Electrical discharges through the ear and cold water squirted into the ear of a person with a perforated drumskin, produce the most violent giddiness. Under these circumstances these parts of the ear can no longer with any probability be considered as belonging to the sense of hearing. Moreover impulses of the stirrup against the water of the labyrinth adjoining the oval window are in reality ill adapted for prodiicing streams through the semicircular canals.

On the other hand the experiments of Koenig with short sounding rods, and those of Preyer with Appunn's tuning-forks, have established the fact that very high tones with from 4000 to 40,000 vibrations in a second can be heard, but that for these the sensation of interval is extremely deficient. Even intervals of a Fifth or an Octave in the highest positions are only doubtfully recognised and are often wrongly appreciated by practised musicians. Even the major Third c' — e' [4096 : 5120 vibrations] was at one time heard as a Second, at another as a Fourth or a ¶ Fifth; and at still greater heights even Octaves and Fifths were confused.

If we maintain the hypothesis, that every nervous fibre hears in its own peculiar jiitch, we should have to conclude that the vibrating parts of the ear which convey these sensations of the highest tones to the ear, are much less sharply defined in their capabilities of resonance, than those for deeper tones. This means that they lose any motion excited in them comparatively soon, and are also comparatively more easily Ttrought into the state of motion necessary for sensation. This last assumption must be made, because for parts which are so strongly damped, the possibility of adding together many separate impulses is very limited, and the construction of the auditory ciliae in the little liags of the otoliths seems to me more suited for this purpose than that of the shortest fibres of the basilar membrane. If this hypothesis is confirmed we should have to regard the auditory ciliae as the bearers of squeaking, hissing, chirping, crackling sensations of sound, and to consider their reaction as diftering only in degree from that of the cochlear fibres, f

Footnote: ⁎ Ffluecjer, Archir. fur Fhysiolof/ic, vol. t [See App. XX. sect. L. art. 5.— Trans-.
xiii. ' Iiifor.]
