page: 153

+ sounded together, loudly and continuously. The pitch of a combinational tone is generally different from that of either of the generating tones, or of their harmonic upper partials. In experiments, the combinational are readily distinguished from the upper partial tones, by not being heard when only one generating tone is sounded, and by appearing simultaneously with the second tone. Combinational tones are of two kinds. The first class, discovered by Sorge and Tartini, I have termed differential tones, because their pitch number is the difference of the pitch numbers of the generating tones. The second class of siimmationnl tones, having their pitch number equal to the sum of the pitch numbers of the generating tones, were discovered by myself.

On investigating the combinational tones of two compound unisical tones, we find that both the primary and the upper partial tones may give rise to both differential and summational tones. In such cases the number of combinational ¶ tones is very great. P"-t it must be observed that generally the differential are stronger than the summational tones, and that the stronger generating simple tones also produce the stronger combinational tones. The combinational tones, ::i k.u, increase in a much greater ratio than the generating tones, and diminish also more rapidly. Now since in musical compound tones the prime generally predominates over the partials, the differential tones of the two primes are generally heard more loudly than all the rest, and were consequently first discovered. They are most easily heard when the two generating tones are less than an octave apart, because in that case the differential is deeper than either of the two generating tones. To hear it at first, choose two tones which can be held with great force for some time, and form a justly intoned harmonic interval. First sound the low tone and then the high one. On properly directing attention, a weaker low tone will be heard at the moment that the higher note is struck; this is the required combinational tone.* For pai'ticular instruments, as the harmonium, the com¶ binational tones can be made more audible by properly tuned resonators. In this case the tones are generated in the air contained within the instrument. But in other cases, where chey are generated solely within the ear, the resonators are of little or no use.

Footnote: A commoner English name is rjrave harmonics, The differential tones are well heard on the which is inapplicable, as they are not neces- English concertina, for the same reason as on sarily graver than both of the generating tones. the harmonium. High notes forming SemiProf. Tyndall calls them rcsidtant tones. I tones tell well. It is convenient to choose prefer retaining the Latin expression, first in- close dissonant intervals for first examples in troduced, as Prof. Preyer informs us {Akusti- order to dissipate the old notion that the sdie UntcrsurlnuKicn, ^. 11), hy Q.\5. A. (d. 1836 in Dessau) in Gilbert's Annulen der fundamental bass' of the 'cliord'. It is very Physih 1805, vol. xxi. p. 265, but only for the easy when playing two high generating notes, tones here distinguished as differential, and as ij'" and ,</"';|f or the last and a'", to hear at afterwards used by Scheibler and Prof. Helm- the same time the rattle of the beats (see next holtz. I shall, however, use 'combinational chapter) and the deep combinational tones tones ■ to express all the additional tones which about FJ^ and (?,|j, much resembling a thrashare heard when two notes are sounded at the ing machine two 'or three fields off. The beats ^ same time.— Translator. ^ and the differentials have the same frequency * [I have found that combinational tones (note p. lid). See infra, App. XX. sect. L. art. can be made quite audible to a hundred people 5, /. The experiment can also be made with at once, by means of two flageolet fifes or //" c whistles, blown as strongly as possible. I all three notes h"\), b", c'" are held down tochooseveiyclose dissonant intervals because the gether, the ear can perceive the two sets of great depth of the low tone is much more strik- beats of the upper notes as sharp high rattles, ing, being very far below anything that can be and the beats of the two combinational tones, touched by the instrument itself. Thus </'" about the pitch of C, which have altogether a being sounded loudly on one fife by an assis- different character and frequency. On the taut, I give /'""£, when a deep note is instantly Harmonical, notes //' c'" should beat 66, notes heard which, if the interval were pure, would b"\f b" should beat 39-6, and notes 'b"\} ¥"\f be (/, and is sufficiently near to (j to be recog- should beat 26-4 in a second, and these should nised as extremely deep. As a second experi- be the pitches of their combinational notes; ment, the r/"" being held as before, I give first the two first should therefore beat 26-4 times /""ti and then c"" in succession. If the inter- in a second, and the two last 13-2 times in a vals were pure the combinational tones would second. But the tone 26-4 is so difficult to jump from q to c", and in reality, the jump is hear that the beats are not distinct. — Trmuvery nearly the same and quite appreciable. lator.]
yieth. 'grave harmonic' is necessarily the ' true " and h'"^ h" on any harmonium. And if
