page: 154

The following table gives the first difterential tones of the usual harmonic ¶ : —

Ratio of the vibrational numbers

Difference of

The combinational tone is deeper than i

the same

a Unison

an Octave

a Twelfth

Two Octaves

Two Octaves and a major Third

2

a Fifth

3

a major Sixth

¶ Octave ¶ Fifth

¶ . ¶ Major Third ¶ Minor Third ¶ Major Sixtli

¶ Sixth

1 : 2

2: 3

3 : 4

4 : 5

5 : 6 3 : 5 5 : 8

¶ in ordinary musical notation, the generating tones being written as minims and ¶ the difterential tones as crotchets —

Octave. Fifth. Fourth.

:\Iajor Third.

Minor Third.

Major Sixth.

Minor Sixth.

e^

1^1

5:

When the ear has learned to hear the combinational tones of pure intervals ¶ sustained tones, it will be able to hear them from inharmonic intervals and in ¶ rapidly fading notes of a pianoforte. The combinational tones from inhar¶ monic intervals are more difficult to hear, because these intervals beat more or less ¶ as we shall have to explain hereafter. The combinational tones arising ¶ such as fade rapidly, for example those of the pianoforte, are not strong ¶ to be heard except at the first instant, and die oft" sooner than the gene¶ tones. Combinational tones are also in general easier to hear from the simple ¶ of tuning-forks and stopped organ pipes than from compound tones where a ¶ of other secondary tones are also present. These compound tones, as has ¶ already said, also generate a number of difterential tones by their harmonic ¶ partials, and these easily distract attention from the difterential tones of the ¶ Combinational tones of this kind, arising from the upper partials, are ¶ heard from the violin and harmonium.

Example. — Take the major Third c'e', ratio of pitch numbers 4 : 5. First difference 1, that ¶ C. The first harmonic upper partial of c' is c", relative pitch number 8. Ratio of this and ¶ 5 : 8, difference 3, that is g. The first upper partial of r' is c", relative pitch number 10 ; ¶ ratio for this and c', 4 : 10, difference 6, that is;/. Then again c" e" have ratio 8 : 10, difference ¶ that is '■. Hence, taking only the first upper partials we have the series of combinational ¶ 1, 3, 6, 2 or C, ij, r/', c. Of these the tone 3, or g, is often easily perceived.

These multiple combinational tones cannot in general be distinctly heard, except ¶ the generating compound tones contain audible harmonic upper partials. ¶ we cannot assert that the combinational tones are absent, where such partials ¶ absent; but in that case they are so weak that the ear does not readily recognise ¶ beside the loud generating tones and first difterential. In the first place ¶ leads us to conclude that they do exist in a weak state, and in the next ¶ the beats of impiu-e intervals, to be discussed presently, also establish their ¶ In this case we may, as Hallstroem suggests,* consider the multiple ¶ tones to arise thus: the first difterential tone, or cambinational tone ¶ the first order, by combination with the generating tones themselves, produce ¶ difterential tones, or comhinational tones of the second order; these again

* Poggendorff's Annakn, vol. xxiv. p. 438.
