page: 156

¶ decent ease under peculiarly favourable circumstances on the harmonium and ¶ siren. Scarcely any but the first summational tone can be perceived, ¶ a vibrational number equal to the sum of those of the generators. Of course ¶ tones may also arise from the harmonic upper partials. Since their ¶ number is always equal to the sum of the other two, they are always ¶ in pitch than either of the two generators. The following notes will shew ¶ nature for the simple intervals: —

a:

^^=:

-j — r^*~7T~

fc. — ^-

— r

Octave.

Fifth.

m

2 + 4 2 + 3

= 6. =5.

In relation to music I

Fourth.

3 + 4

= 7.

will here

:^:

Major Sixth. 3 + 5

Major Third.

4 + 5 = 9.

Minor Third. 5 + 6 = 11.

Minor

Sixth.* 5 + 8 = 13.

remark at once that many cf these summational tones form extremely inharmonic intervals with the generators. Were they not generally so weak on most instruments, they would give rise to intolerable dissonances. In reality, the major and minor Third, and the minor Sixth, sound very badly indeed on the polyphonic siren, where all combinational tones are remarkably loud, whereas the Octave, Fifth, and major Sixth are very beautifid. Even the Fourth on this siren has only the effect of a tolerably harmonious chord of the minor Seventh. ¶ It was formerly believed that the combinational tones were purely subjective, and were produced in the ear itself.t Differential tones alone were known, and these were connected with the beats which usually result from the simultaneous sounding of two tones of nearly the same pitch, a phenomenon to be considered in the following chapters. It was believed that when these beats occurred with sufficient rapidity, the individual increments of loudness might produce the sensation of a new tone, just as numerous ordinary impulses of the air would, and that the frequency of such a tone would be equal to the frequency of the beats. But this supposition, in the first place, does not explain the origin of summational tones, being confined to the differentials; secondly, it may be proved that under certain conditions the combinational tones exist objectively, independently of the ear which would have had to gather the beats into a new tone; and thirdly, this supjjosition cannot be reconciled with the law confirmed by all other experiments, that the only tones which the ear hears, correspond to pendular vibrations, of the ¶

And in reality a diiferent cause for the origin of combinational tones can be established, which has already been mentioned in general terms (p. 1 52c). Whenever the vibrations of the air or of other elastic bodies which are set in motion at the same time by two generating simple tones, are so powerful that they can no longer be considered infinitely small, mathematical theory shows that vibrations of the air must arise which have the same frequency as the combinational tones. §

Particular instruments give very powerful combinational tones. The condition

Footnote: objections, and for other objections, see App. XX. sect. L. art. 5, b, c. — Trans/ator.]

Footnote: § [The tones supposed to arise from beats, and' the differential tones thus generated, are essentially distinct, having sometimes the same but frequently different pitch numbers. See App. XX. sect. L. art. 3, d. — Translatm-.A

Footnote: ⁎ [The notation of the last 5 bars has been altered to agree with the diagram of harmonics of Con p. 12c. -Translator.']
+ [The result of Mr. Bosanquet's and Prof. Preyer's quite recent experiments is to shew that they are so. See App. XX. sect. L. art. 4, b, c. — Translafm:]

Footnote: J [For Prof. Preyer's remarks on these
