page: 158

+ of the combinational tones by resonators is small and du))ions. Here, then, there does not exist in the air any clearly sensible pendular vibration corresponding to the combinational tone, and we must conclude that such tones, which are often powerfully audible, are really produced in the ear itself. But analogously to the former cases we are justified in assuming in this case also that the external vibrating parts of the ear, the drumskin and auditory ossicles, are really set in a sufficiently powerful combined vibration to generate combinational tones, so that the vibrations which correspond to combinational tones may really exist objectively in the parts of the ear without existing objectively in the external air. A slight reinforcement of the combinational tone in this case by the corresponding resonator may, therefore, arise from the drumskin of the ear communicating to the air in the resonator those particular vibrations which con-espond to the combinational tone.*

Now it so happens that in the construction of the external parts of the ear for ¶ conducting sound, there are certain conditions which are peculiarly favourable for the generation of combinational tones. First we have the unsymmetrical form of the drumskin itself. Its radial fibres, which are externally convex, undergo a much greater alteration of tension when they make an oscillation of moderate amplitude towards the inside, than when the oscillation takes place towards the outside. For this purpose it is only necessary that the amj)litude of the oscillation shovild not be too small a fraction of the minute depth of the arc made by these radial fibres. Under these circumstances deviations from the simple superposition of vibrations arise for very tnuch smaller amplitudes than is the case when the vibrating body is symmetrically constructed on both sides. f

But a more important circumstance, as it seems to me, when the tones are powerful, is the loose formation of the joint between the hammer and anvil (p. 1336). If the handle of the hammer is driven inwards by the drumskin, the anvil and stirrup must follow the motion unconditionally. But that is not the case for the ¶ subseqiient outward motion of the handle of the hammer, dnring which the teeth of the two ossicles need not catch each other. In this case the ossicles may dick. Now I seem to hear this clicking in my own ear whenever a very strong and deep tone is brought to bear upon it, even when, for example, it is produced by a tuningfork held between the fingers, in which there is certainly nothing that can make any click at all.

This peculiar feeling of mechanical tingling in the ear had long ago struck me when two clear and powerful soprano voices executed passages in Thirds, in which 3ase the combinational tone comes out very distinctly. If the phases of the two tones are so related that after every fourth oscillation of the deeper and every fifth of the higher tone, there ensues a considerable outward displacement of the drumskin, sufficient to cause a momentary loosening in the joint between the hammer and anvil, a series of blows will be generated between the two bones, which would be absent if the connection were firm and the oscillation regular, and these blows ¶ taken together would exactly generate the first differential tone of the interval of a major Third. Similarly for other intervals.

It must also be remarked that the same peculiarities in the construction of a sonorous body which makes it suitable for allowing combinational tones to be heard when it is excited by two waves of different pitch, must also cause a single simple tone to excite in it vibrations corresponding to its harmonic upper partials; the effect being the same as if this tone then formed svmmiational tones with itself.

This result ensues because a simple periodical force, corresponding to pendular vibrations, cannot excite similar pendular vibrations in the elastic body on which it acts, unless the elastic forces called into action by the displacements of the ex-

Footnote: ⁎ [See latter half of Appendix XVI. — are proportional to the first power of the am-
Translator.'] plitude, whereas for symmetrical ones they
t See my paper on combinational tones are proportional to only the second power of
already cited, and Appendix XII. For unsym- this magnitude, which is very small in both
metrical vibrating bodies the disturbances cases.
