page: 166

+ vibrations with alternately large and small excursions, according as the tone of the two forks is at its maximum or minimum.

The same effect can be obtained from the sympathetic vibration of a stretched membrane. Fig, 58 is the copy of a drawing made by a vibrating membrane of

Footnote: Fio. 58.

this sort, used in the phonautograph of Messrs. Scott it Koenig, of Paris. The membrane of this instrument, which resembles the drumskin of the ear, carries a small stiff style, which draws the vibrations of the membrane upon a rotating cylinder. In the ])resent case the membrane was set in motion by two organ jjipes, that beat.

¶ The undulating line, of which only a pai't is here given, shews that times of strong vibration have alternated with times of almost entire rest. In this case, then, the beats are also sympathetically executed by the membrane. Similar drawings again have been made by Dr. Politzer, who attached the Avriting style to the auditory bone (the columella) of a duck, and then produced a beating tone by means of two organ pipes. This experiment shewed that even the auditory bones follow the beats of two tones.*

Generally this must always be the case when the pitches of the two tones struck differ so little from each other and from that of the proper tone of the sympathetic body, that the latter can be put into sensible vibration by both tones at once. Sympathetic bodies which do not damp readily, such as tuning-forks, consequently require two exciting tones Avhich diifer extraordinarily little in pitch, in order to shew visible beats, and the beats must therefore be very slow. For bodies readily damped, as membranes, strings, &c., the difference of the exciting

¶ tones ma}- be greater, and consequently the beats may succeed each other more rapidly.

This holds also for the elastic terminal formations of the auditory nerve fibres. Just as we have seen that there may be visible beats of the auditor}^ ossicles, Corti's arches may also be made to beat by two tones sufficiently near in pitch to set the same Corti's arches in sympathetic vibration at the same time. If then, as we have previously supposed, the intensity of auditory sensation in the nerve fibres involved increases and decreases with the intensity of the elastic vibrations, the strength of the sensation must also increase and diminish in the same degree as the vibrations of the corresponding elastic appendages of the nerves. In this case also the motion of Corti's arches must still be considered as compounded of the motions which the two tones would have produced if they had acted separately. According as these motions are directed in the same or in opposite directions they will reinforce or enfeeble each other by (algebraical) addition. It is not till these motions

¶ excite sensation in the nerves that any deviation occurs from the law that each of the two tones and each of the two sensations of tones subsist side b\- side without disturbance.

We now come to a part of the investigation which is very important for the theory of musical consonance, and has also unfortunately been little regarded by acousticians. The question is: what becomes of the beats when they grow faster and faster 1 and to what extent may their number increase without the ear being unable to perceive them? Most acousticians were probably inclined to agree with the hypothesis of Thomas Young, that when the beats became very (piick they gradually passed over into a combinational tone (the first differential). Young imagined that the pulses of tone which ensue during beats, might have the same

Footnote: ⁎ The beats of two tones are also clearly tones. Even without using the rotating mirror
shewn by the vibrating flame described at the for observing the flames, we can easily recog-
end of Appendix II. The flame must be con- nise the alterations in the shape of the flame
nected with a resonator having a pitch sufii- which takes place isochronously with the
ciently near to those of the two generating audible beats.
