page: 167

+ effect on the ear as elementary pulses of air (in the siren, for exaaiple), and that just as 30 puffs in a second through a siren would produce the sensation of a deep tone, so would 30 beats in a second resulting from any two higher tones produce the same sensation of a deep tone. Certainly this view is well supported by the fact that the vibrational number of the first and strongest combinational tone is actually the number of beats produced by the two tones in a second. It is, however, of much importance to remember that there are other combinational tones (my summational tones), which will not agree with this hypothesis in any respect,'* but on the other hand are readily deduced from the theory of combinational tones which I have proposed (in Appendix XII.). It is moreover an objection to Young's theor}^, that in many cases the combinational tones exist externally to the ear, and are able to set properly tuned membranes or resonators into sympathetic vibration,t because this could not possibly be the case, if the combinational tones were ¶ nothing but the series of beats with undisturbed superposition of the two waves. For the mechanical theory of sympathetic vibration shews that a motion of the air compounded of two simple vibrations of different periodic times, is capable of putting such bodies only into sympathetic vibration as have a proper tone corresponding to one of the two given tones, provided no conditions intervene by which the simple superposition of two wave systems might be disturbed; and the nature of such a disturbance was investigated in the last chapter.:): Hence we may consider combinational tones as an accessory phenomenon, by which, however, the course of the two primary wave systems and of their beats is not essentially interrupted.

Against the old opinion we may also adduce the testimony of our senses, which teaches us that a much greater number of beats than 30 ii^ a second can be distinctly heard. To obtain this result we must pass gradually from the slower to the more rapid beats, taking care that the tones chosen for beating are not too far ¶ apart from each other in the scale, because audible beats are not produced unless the tones are so near to each other in the scale that they can both make the same elastic appendages of the nerves vibrate sympathetically. § The number of beats, however, can be increased without increasing the interval between the tones, if both tones are taken in the higher octaves.

The observations are best begun by producing two simple tones of the same pitch, say from the once-accented octave by means of tuning-forks or stopped organ pipes, and slowly altering the pitch of one. This is effected by sticking more and more wax on one of the forks; or more and more covering the mouth of one of the pipes. Stopped organ pipes are also generally provided with a movable plug or lid at the stopped end, in order to time them; by pulling this out we flatten, by pushing it in we sharpen the tone.**

When a slight difference in pitch has been thus produced, the beats are heard at first as long drawn out fluctuations alternately swelling and vanishing. Slow ¶ beats of this kind are by no means disagreeable to the ear. In executing music containing long sustained chords, they may even produce a solemn effect, or else give a more lively, tremulous or agitating expression. Hence we find in modern

Footnote: ⁎ [Prof. Preyer shews, App. XX. sect. L. stration of the following facts, is made with
art. 4, d, that summational tones, as suggested two ' pitch pipes,' each consisting of an exten-
by Appunn, may be considered as differential sible stopped pipe, which has the compass of
tonesof the second order, if such are admitted. the once-accented octave and is blown as a
— Translator.'] whistle, the two being connected by a bent tube
t [After the experiments of Prof. Preyer with a single mouthpiece. By carefully adjust-
and INIr. Bosanquet, App. XX. sect. L. art. 4, ing the lengths of the pipes, I was first able to
this must be considered as due to some error produce complete destruction of the tone by
of observation. — Translator.'] interference, the sound returning inunediately
X [See Bosanquet's theory of ' transforma- wlien the mouth of one whistle was stopped by
tion' in App. XX. sect. L. art. 5, «.— '/'m/;*- the finger. Then on gradually lengthening one
lator.] of the pipes the beats began to be heard slowly,

Footnote: § [ Koenig knows no such limitation. See and increased in rapidity. The tone being
App. XX. sect. L. art. 3. — Translator.] nearly simple the beats are well heard. —

Footnote: ⁎ * [A cheap apparatus, useful for demon- Translator.]
