page: 168

+ organs and harmoniums, a stop with two pipes or tongues, adjusted to beat. This imitates the trembling of the human voice and of violins which, appropriately introduced in isolated passages, may certainly be very expressive and effective, but applied continuously, as is unfortunately too common, is a detestable malpractice.

The ear easily follows slow beats of not more than 4 to 6 in a second. The hearer has time to apprehend all their separate phases, and become conscious of each separately, he can even count them without difficulty.* But when the interval between the two tones increases to about a Semitone, the number of beats becomes 20 or 30 in a second, and the ear is conse([uently unable to follow them sufficiently well for counting. If, however, we begin with hearing slow beats, and then increase their rapidity more and more, we cannot fail to recognise that the sensational impression on the ear preserves precisely the same character, appearing as a series of separate pulses of sound, even when their frequency is so great that we have

¶ no longer time to fix each beat, as it passes, distinctly in our consciousness and count it.f

But while the hearer in this case is quite capable of distinguishing that his ear now hears 30 beats of the same kind as the 4 or 6 in a second which he heard before, the effect of the collective impression of such a rapid beat is qiute different. In the first place the mass of tone becomes confused, which 1 principally refer to the psychological impressions. We actually hear a series of pulses of tone, and are able to recognise it as such, although no longer capable of following each singly or separating one from the other. But besides this psychological consideration, the sensible impression is also unpleasant. Such rapidly beating tones are jarring and rough. The distinctive property of jarring, is the intermittent character of the sound. We think of the letter R as a chai'acteristic example of a jarring tone. It is well known to be produced by interposing the uvula, or else the thin tip of the tongue, in the way of the stream of air passing out of the mouth,

¶ in such a manner as only to allow the air to force its way through in sepai'ate pulses, the consequence being that the voice at one time soiuids freely, and at another is cut off.X

Intermittent tones were also produced on the double siren just described by using a little reed pipe instead of the wind-conduit of the upper box, and driving the air through this reed pipe. The tone of this pipe can be heard externally only when the revohition of the disc brings its holes before the holes of the box and opens an exit for the air. Hence, if we let the disc revolve while air is driven through the pipe, we obtain an intermittent tone, which sounds exactly like beats arising from two tones sounded at once, although the intermittence is produced by purely mechanical means. Such effects may also be produced in another way on the same siren. Remove the loAver windbox and retain only its pierced cover, over which the disc revolves. At the under part apply one extremity of an indiarubber tube against one of the holes in the cover, the other end being conducted

¶ by a proper ear-piece to the observer's ear. The revolving disc alternately opens and closes the hole to which the india-rubber tube has been applied. Hold a tuning-fork in action or some other suitable musical instrument above and near

Footnote: ⁎ [See App. XX. sect. B. No. 7, for direc- Octave, but become rapidly too fast to be
tions for observing beats. — Travslator.] followed. As, however, these are not simple
t [The Harmonical is very convenient for tones, the beats are not perfectly clear. —
this purpose. On the (l\y key is a f/j one Translator.']
comma lower than d. These dd^ beat about \ [Phonautographic figures of the effect 9, 18, 36, 73 times in 10 seconds in the of r, resemble those of fig. 58, p. 166rt. Six different Octaves, the last barely countable. varieties of these figures are given on p. 19 of Also e^\) and Cj beat 38, 66, 132,364 in 10 Donder's seconds in the different Octaves. The two first logy of Speech Sounds, and especially of those of these sets of beats can be counted, the two in the Dutch Language ' [Dc Pliysiologie der last cannot be counted, but will be distinctly Spraakkhnikci), in hct hijzonder ran die der perceived as separate pulses. Similarly the nederlandsche taal. Utrecht 1870, pp. 24), — beats between all consecutive notes (except F Translator.'] and G, B and C) can be counted in the lowest
importantlittle tract on 'The Physio-
