page: 170

+ itself blunts the sensibility of the nerve, and thus eftectually protects this organ against too long and too violent excitement.

It is quite different when we allow intermittent light to act on the eye, such as flashes of light Avitli intermediate pauses. During these pauses the sensibility is again somewhat re-established, and the new irritation consequently acts much more intensely than if it had lasted with the same uniform strength. Every one knows how unpleasant and annoying is any flickering light, even if it is relatively very weak, coming, for example, from a little flickering taper or rushlight.

The same thing holds for the nerves of touch. Scraping with the nail is far more annojdng to the skin than constant pressure on the same place with the same pressure of the nail. The unpleasantness of scratching, rubbing, tickling, depends upon the intermittent excitement which they produce in the nerves of touch. ¶ A jarring intermittent tone is for the nerves of hearing what a flickering light is to the nerves of sight, and scratching to the nerves of touch. A much more intense and unpleasant excitement of the organs is thus prodiiced than would be occasioned by a continuous uniform tone. This is even shewn when we hear very weak intermittent tones. If a tuning-fork is struck and held at such a distance from the ear that its sound cannot be heard, it becomes immediately audible if the handle of the fork be revolved by the fingers. The revolution brings it alternately into positions where it can and cannot transmit sound to the ear [p. 161/y], and this alternation of strength is immediately perceptible by the ear. For the same reason one of the most-delicate means of hearing a very weak, simple tone consists in sounding another of nearly the same strength, which makes from 2 to 4 beats in a second with the first. In this case the strength of the tone varies from nothing to 4 times the sti'ength of the single simple tone, and this increase of strength combines with the alternation to make it audible. ¶ Just as this alternation of strength will serve to strengthen the impression of the very weakest musical tones upon the ear, we must conclude that it must also serve to make the impression of stronger tones much xuore penetrating and violent, than they would be if their loudness wei-e continuous.

We have hitherto confined our attention to cases where the number of beats did not exceed 20 or 30 in a second. We saw that the beats in the middle pai't of the scale are still quite audible and form a series of separate pulses of tone. But this does not furnish a limit to their nximber in a second.

The interval V c" gave us 33 beats in a second, and the eflfect of sounding the two notes together was very jarring. The interval of a whole tone h'\) c" gives nearly twice as many beats, but these are no longer so cutting as the former. The rule assigns 88 beats in a second to the minor Third a c", but in reality this interval scarcely shews any of the roughness produced by beats from tones at closer intervals. We might then be led to conjecture that the increasing number of beats weakened ¶ their impression and made them inaudible. This conjecture would find an analogy in the impossibility of separating a series of rapidly succeeding impressions of light on the eye, when their number in a second is too lai-ge. Think of a glowing stick swung round in a circle. If it executes 10 or 15 revolutions in a second, the eye believes it sees a continuous circle of fire. Similarly for colour-tops, with which most of my readers are probably familiar. If the top be spun at the rate of more than 10 revolutions in a second, the colours upon it mix and form a perfectly unchanging impression of a mixed colour. It is only for very intense light that the alternations of the various fields of colour have to take place more quickly, 20 to 30 times in a second. Hence the phenomena are ipiite analogous for ear and eye. When the alternation between irritation and rest is too fast, the alternation ceases to be felt, and sensation becomes continuous and lasting.

However, we may convince ourselves that in the case of the ear, an increase of the number of beats in a second is not the only cause of the disappearance of the
