page: 172

+ the whole Tones . . e J [major, 297-26-1] and d' e [minor 330-297]

the minor Third . • ^ i) [198-165]

the major Third . . c e [165-132]

the Fourtli . . . G c [132-99] the Fifth . . . C G [99-66] and yet we find that these intervals are more and more free from rouglmess.*

The roughness arising from sounding two tones together depends, then, in a compound manner on the magnitude of the interval and the number of beats produced in a second. On seeking for the reason of this dependence, we observe that, as before remarked, beats in the air can exist only when two tones are produced sufficiently near in the scale to set the same elastic appendages of the auditory nerve in sympathetic vibration at the same time. When the two tones produced ¶ are too far apart, the vibrations excited by both of them at once in Corti's organs are too weak to admit of their beats being sensibly felt, supposing of course that no upper partial or combinational tones intervene. According to the assumptions made in the last chapter respecting the degree of damping possessed by Corti's organs (p. 144c), it would result, for example, that for the interval of a whole Tone c cZ, such of Corti's fibres as have the proper tone fTi, would be excited by each of the tones with y\j of its own intensity; and these fibres will therefore fluctuate between the intensities of vibration 0 and -~^. But if we strike the simple tones e and cfi, it follows from the table there given that Corti's fibres which correspond to the middle between c and (A will alternate between the intensities 0 and \^. Conversely the same intensity of beats would for a minor Third amount to only 0*194, and for a major Third to only 0*108, and hence would be scarcely perceptible beside the two pi-imary tones of the intensity 1.

Fig. 59, which we used on p. 144f/ to express the ^"^- ■''^•

¶ intensity of the sympathetic vibration of Corti's ti

fibres for an increasing interval of tone, may here serve to shew the intensity of the beats which two tones excite in the ear when forming different intervals in the scale. But the parts on the base line must now be considered to repre- ^ ,_.^-^'\\

sent fifths of a whole Tone, and not as before of lo so 5 lo

a Semitone. In the present case the distance of

the two tones from each other is doubly as great as that between either of them and the intermediate Corti's fibres.

Had the damping of Corti's organs been equally great at all parts of the scale, and had the number of beats no influence on the roughness of the sensation, equal intervals in all parts of the scale woidd have given equal roughness to the combined tones. But as this is not the case, as the same intervals diminish in roughness. ¶ as we ascend in the scale, and increase in roughness as we descend, we must either assume that the damping power of Corti's organs of higher pitch is less than that of those of lower pitch, or else that the discrimination of the more rapid beats meets with certain hindrances in the nature of the sensation itself.

At present I see no way of deciding between these two suppositions; but the former is possibh- the more improbable, because, at least with our artificial musical ¶ instruments, the higher the pitch of a vibrating body, the more difficulty is perienced in isolating it sufficiently to prevent it from commiuiicating its vibrations to its environment. Very short, high-pitched strings, little metal tongues or plates, &c., yield high tones which die off with great rapidity, whereas it is easy to generate deep tones with correspondingly greater bodies which shall retain their tone for a considerable time. On the other hand the second supposition is favoured ¶ by the analogy of another nervous apparatus, the eye. As has been already

Footnote: ⁎ [All these intervals can be tried on the the student should listen to the beats of the Harmonical, but as the tones are compoimd, primes only. — Translator.']
