page: 173

+ marked, a series of impressions of light, following each other rapidly and re'^ularlv excite a uniform and continuous sensation of light in the eve. ^V^hen the separate luminous in-itations follow one another very quickly, the impression produced by each one lasts unweakened in the nerves till the next supervenes, and thus the pauses can no longer be distinguished in sensation. In the eye, the number of .separate irritations cannot exceed 24: in a second without being completely fused into a single sensation. In this respect the eye is far surpassed by the ear, which can distinguish as many as 132 intermissions in a second and probably even that is not the extreme limit. Much higher tones of sutiicient strength would probably allow us to hear still more.* It lies in the nature of the thing, that different kind's of apparatus of sensation should shew different degrees of mobility in this respect, since the result does not depend simply on the mobility of the molecules of the nerves, but also depends upon the mobility of the auxiliary apparatus through which the excitement is induced or expressed. Muscles are much less mobile thanH the eye; ten electrical discharges in a second directed through them generally suffice to bring the voluntary muscles into a permanent state of contraction. For the muscles of the involuntary system, of the bowels, the vessels, &c., the pauses between the irritations may be as much as one, or even several seconds long, without any intermission in the continuity of contraction.

The ear is greatly superior in this respect to any other nervous apparatus. It is eminently the organ for small intervals of time, and has been long used as such by astronomers. It is well known that when two pendulums are ticking near one another, the ear can distinguish whether the ticks are or are not coincident, within one hundredth of a second. The eye would certainly fail to determine whether two flashes of light coincided within ^/^ second; and probably within a much larger fraction of a second.!

But although the ear shews its superiority over other organs of the body in ¶ this respect, we cannot hesitate to assume that, like every other nervous apparatus, the rapidity of its power of apprehension is limited, and we may even assume that we have approached very near the limit when we can but faintly distinguish 132 Iteats in a second.

Footnote: ⁎ [In the two high notes g"" f'jjf of the appear beliind a bar, and an electrical current
flageolet fifes (p. 153(Z, note), which if justly causes another point to make a hole between
intoned should give 198 beats in a second, I the seconds holes on the chronograph. By
could hear none, though the tones were very applying a scale, the time of transit is thus
powerful, and the scream was very cutting measured off. A mean, of course, is taken as
indeed.— In the case of b" c'", which on the before. On my asking Mr. Stone (now Astrono-
Harmonical are tuned to make 1056 and 990, mer at Oxford, then chief assistant at Green-
the rattle of the 66 beats, or thereabouts, is wich Observatory) as to the relative degree of
quite distinct, and the differential tone is very accuracy of the two methods, he told me that
powerful at the same time.— 2Va?i.s/rtfi!or.] he considered the first gave results to one-
t [The following is an interesting compari- tenth, and the second to one-twentieth of a
son between eye and ear, and eye and hand. second. It must be remembered that the first
The usual method of observing transits is by method also required a mental estimation
counting the pendulum ticks of an astronomi- which had to be performed in less than a
cal clock, and by observing the distances of second, and the result borne in mind, and that %
the apparent positions of a star before and after this was avoided by the second plan. On the
passing each bar of the transit instrument at other hand in the latter the sensation had to
the moments of ticking, to estimate the moment be conveyed from the eye to the brain, which
at which it had passed each bar. This is done issued its orders to the hand, and the hand
for five bars and a mean is taken. But a few had to obey them. Hence there was an endea- ■
years ago a chronograph was introduced at vour at performing simultaneously, several
Greenwich Observatory, consisting of a uni- acts which could only be successive. Anyone
formly revolving cylinder in which a point will find upon trial that an attempt to merely
pricks a hole every second. Electrical com- make a mark at the moment of hearing an
munication being established with a knob on expected sound, as, for example, the repeated
the transit instrument, the observer presses tick of a common half seconds clock, is liable
the knob at the moment he sees a star dis- to great error. — Translator.]
