page: 178

+ tiimous and musical, yet for aerial vibrations of a ditterent form, for example when compound tones are used, discontinuous pulses of sound are still heard even within this octave. For example, blow the disc of the siren with gradually increasing speed. At first only pulses of air are heard; but after reaching 36 vibrations in a second, weak tones sound with them, which, however, are at first upper partials. As the velocity increases the sensation of the tones becomes continually stronger, but it is a long time before we cease to perceive the discontinuous pulses of air, although these tend more and more to coalesce. It is not till we reach 110 or 117^ vibrations in a second {A or B\) of the great octave) that the tone is tolerably continuous. It is just the same on the harmonium, where, in the cor anglais stop, c with 132 vibrations in a second still jars a little, and in the bassoon stop we observe the same jarring even in c with 264 vibrations in a second. Generally the same observation can be made on all cutting, snarling, or braying tones, which, as has ¶ been already mentioned, are always provided with a very great number of distinct iipper partial tones.

The cause of this phenomenon must be looked for in the beats produced by the high upper pai-tials of such compound tones, which are too nearly of the same pitch. If the 15th and 16th partials of a compound tone are still audible, they form the interval of a Semitone, and naturally produce the cutting beats of this dissonance. That it is really the beats of these tones which cause the roughness of the whole compound tone, can be easily felt by using a proper resonator. If (?, is struck, having 49^ vibrations in a second, the 15th partial is f"^, the 16th </", and the 17th yit [nearly], &c. Now when I apply the resonator g", which reinforces g" most, and /"tt, g"^ somewhat less, the roughness of the tone becomes extremely more prominent, and exactly resembles the piercing jar produced when f"^ and g" are themselves sounded. This experiment succeeds on the pianoforte, as well as on both stops of the harmonium. It also distinctly succeeds for higher pitches, ¶ far as the resonators reach. I possess a resonator for g'" , and although it only slightly reinfm-ces the tone, the roughness of G, with 99 vilirations in a second, was distinctly increased when the resonator was applied.*

Even the 8th and 9th partials of a compound tone, which are a whole Tone apart, cannot but produce l)eats, although they are not so cutting as those from the higher upper partials. But the reinforcement by resonators does not now succeed sowell, because the deeper resonators at least are not capable of simultaneously reinforcing the tones which differ from each other by a whole Tone. For the higher resonators, where the reinforcement is slighter, the interval between the tones capable of being reinforced is greater, and thus by means of the resonators g" and (/" I succeeded in increasing the roughness of the tones G to g (having 99 and 198 vibrations in a second respectively), which is due to the 7th, 8th and 9th partial tones (./"", //", a", and ./"", g'", a'" respectively). On comparing the tone of G as heard in the resonators with the tone of the dissonances /' g" ¶ and g" a" as struck directly, the ear felt their close resemblance, the rapidity of intermittence being nearly the same.

Hence there can no longer be any doubt that motions of the air corresponding to deep musical tones compounded of numerous partials, are capable of exciting at one and the same time a continuous sensation of deep tones and a discontinuous sensation of high tones, and become rough or jarring through the latter.f Herein lies the explanation of the fact already observed in examining qualities of tone, that compound tones with many high upper partials are cutting, jarring, or braying; and also of the fact that they are more penetrating and cannot readily pass unobserved, for an intermittent impression excites our nervous apparatus much more powerfully than a continuous one, and continually forces itself afresh on our

Footnote: '' [The student should now perform the ex- punn's Reed pipes of 32 and G4 vib. in the South
periments on the Harmonical indicated on Kensington IMuseum. Their musical character
p. 22rf, note.— Trrnisfritor.] is quite destroyed by the loud thumpuig of the
t [This is particularly noticeable on Ap- upper ]}a.vtisi\s.— Translator.]
