page: 179

+ perception.* On the other hand simple tones, or compound tones which liave only a few of the lower upper partials, lying at wide intervals apart, must produce perfectly continuous sensations in the ear, and make a soft and gentle impression, without much energy, even when they are in reality relatively strong.

We have not yet been able to determine the upper limit of the number of intermittences perceptible in a second for high notes, and have only drawn attention to their becoming more difficult to perceive, and making a slighter impression, as they became more numerous. Hence even when the form of vibration, that is the quality of tone, remains the same, while the pitch is increased, the quality of tone will generally appear to diminish in roughness. The part of the scale adjacent to

/ it, for which the ear is peculiarly sensitive, as I have already remarked (p. 116a),

must be particularly important, as dissonant upper partials which lie in this neighbourhood cannot but be especially prominent. Now /""jj: is the 8th partial ot fj^ ¶ with 366 1 vibrations in a second, a tone belonging to the upper tones of a man's and the lower tones of a woman's voice, and it is the 16th partial of the unaccented ./"it, which lies in the middle of the usual compass of men's voices.f I have already mentioned that when human voices are strained these high notes are often heard sounding with them. Wlien this takes place in the deeper tones of men's voices, it must produce cutting dissonances, and iu fact, as I have already observed, when a powerful bass voice is trumpeting out its notes in full strength, the high upper partial tones in the four-times-accented octave are heard, in quivering tinkles (p. 116c). Hence jarring and braying are much more usual and more powerful in bass than in higher voices. For compomid tones above /'it, the dissonances of the higher upper partials in the four-times-accented octave, are not so strong as those of a whole Tone, and as they occur at so great a height they can scarcely be distinct enough to be clearly sensible.

In this way we can explain why high voices have in general a pleasanter tone, ¶ and why all singers, male and female, consequently strive to touch high notes. Moreover in the upper parts of the scale slight errors of intonation produce many more beats than in the lower, so that the musical feeling for pitch, correctness, and beauty of intervals is much surer for high than low notes.

According to the observations of Prof. W. Preyer the difference in the qualities of tone of tuning-forks and reeds entirely disappears when they reach a height of c" 4224, doubtless for the reason he assigns, namely that the upper partials of the reeds fall iu the seventh and eighth accented octave, which are scarcely audible.

CHAPTER X.

Footnote: BEATS OF THE UPPER PARTIAL TONES.

H

The beats hitherto considered, were produced by two simple tones, without any intervention of upper partial or combinational tones. Such beats could only arise when the two given tones made a comparatively small interval with each other. As soon as the interval increased even to a minor Third the beats became indistinct. Now it is well known that beats can also arise from two tones which make a much greater interval with each other, and we shall see hereafter that these beats play a principal part in settling the consonant intervals of our musical scales, and they

Footnote: ⁎ [In Prof. Tyudairs paper ' On the Atmo- throwing the horns slightly out of unison; but
sphere as a Vehicle of Sound,' read before though the beats rendered the sound charac-
the Royal Society, Feb. 12, 1874, in trying the teristic, they did not seem to augment the
distance at which intense sounds could be range
'. — Trand<ttur.'\
heard at sea, he says [I'hilosophkal Tmnsuc- t [On the compass of voices see App. XX.
tions for 1874, vol. clxiv. p. 189), ' The influence sect. N. No. 1. — Translator.] of "beats" was tried on June 3 [1873] by
