page: 180

+ must consequently be closely examined. The beats heard when the two generathig tones are more than a minor Third apart in the scale, arise from upper partial and combinational tones.* When the compound tones have distinctly audible upper partials, the beats resulting from them are generally clearer and stronger than those due to the combinational tones, and it is much more easy to determine their source. Hence we begin the investigation of the beats oceumng in wider intervals with those which arise from the presence of upper partial tones. It must not be forgotten, however, that beats of combinational tones are much more general than these, as they occur with all kinds of musical tones, both simple and compound, whereas of course those due to upper partial tones are only found when such partials are themselves distinct. But since all tones which are iiseful for musical purposes are, with rare exceptions, richly endowed with powerful upper partial tones, the beats due to these upper partials are relatively of much greater practical importance ¶ those due to the weak combinational tones.

When two compound tones are sounded at the same time, it is readily seen, from what precedes, that beats may arise whenever any two upper partial tones lie sufficiently near to each other, or when the prime of one tone approaches to an upper partial of the other. The number of beats is of course, as before, the difference of the vibrational numbers of the two partial tones to which the beats are due. When this difference is small, and the beats are therefore slow, they are relatively most distinct to hear and to count and to investigate, precisely as for beats of prime tones. They are also more distinct when the particular partial tones which generate them are loudest. Now, for the tones most used in music, partials with a low ordinal number are loudest, because the intensity of partial tones usually diminishes as their ordinal number increases.

Let us begin, then, with examples like the following, on an organ in its principal or violin stops,+ or upon an harmonium:

¶ 1 2 3 -4 i 5 I I

__,>. -

'^ 1 —

■&- -&' ■&-

The minims in these examples denote the prime tones of the notes struck, and the crotchets the con-esponding iipper partial tones. If the octave C c in the first example is tuned accurately, no beats will be heard. But if the upper note is changed into B as in the second example, or fl\} as in the third, we obtain the same beats as we should from the two tones B c, or c d\}, where the interval is a Semitone. The number of beats (16^ in a second) is the same in each case, but their intensity is naturally less in the former case, because they are somewhat smothered by the strong deep tone C, and also because c, the second partial of C, has generally less force than its prime. J ¶ In examples 4 and 5 beats will be heard on keyed instruments tuned according to the usual system of temperament. If the tempered intonation is exact there will be one beat in a second, § because the note a" on the instrument does not exactly

Footnote: ⁎ [But as upper partial and combinational we can slightly flatten the upper note, by just
tones are both simple, it is always simple tones pressing it down enough to speak, when the
which beat together, and the "laws of Chap. beats will arise. Or by using the d and d^ we
VIII. therefore govern all beats. With a little can produce mistuned Octaves as D d^ or D^ d.
practice the bell-like sound of the beating par- And f 3r the Fifth in No. 4 and 5, we can use
tials may be distinguished amid the confused d' a" or d' a', or take this mistuned Fifth lower,
beating of harsh reed tones. It only remains as d a or d a, the true Fifth being d^ n, which
to determine when and how these extra beating may be contrasted with it. — Translutor.]
tones arise.— rrw/isZff to;'.] § [Suppose fZ' has 297, then equally tempered
+ [See p. 93, notes * and §. On English a ought to have 445 vibs. The third partial of
organs the open diapason and keraulophon or d' has therefore 3 x 297 = 891 vib., and the
gamba might be Vi'&eA.—TransMor.'] Octave of a has 2 x 445 = 890 vib., and these
\ [On the Harmonical, instead of varying two tones beat 891 - 890 = once in a second.—
the Octave in C c by a Semitone up or down, Translator.']
