page: 181

+ agree with the note a", which is the thiril partial tone of the note d' . On the other hand the note a" on the instrnment exactly coincides with a", the second partial tone of the note a in the fifth example, so that on instrnments exactly timed in any temperament the two examples 4 and 5 shonld give the same number of beats.

Since the first upper partial tone makes exactly twice as man}' vil)i*ations in a second as its prime, the c on the instrument in Ex. 1, is identical with the first upper pai-tial of the prime tone C, provided c makes twice as many vibrations in a second as C. The two notes C, c, cannot be struck together withoiit producing beats, unless this exact relation is maintained. The least deviation from this exact relation is betrayed by beats. In the fourth example the beats will not cease till we tune a" on the instrument so as to coincide with the third partial tone of the note d, and this can only happen when the pitch number of a" is precisely three times that of d'. In the fifth example we have to make the pitch niuiiber of a half as great as ¶ that of a", which is three times that of d' ; that is the pitch numbers of (/' and a uuist be exactly as 2 : 3, or beats will ensue. Any deviation from this ratio will be detected at once by beats.

Now we have already shewn thr.t the pitch nmnbcrs of two tones which form an Octave are in the ratio 1 : 2, and those of two which form a Fifth in that of 2 : 3. These ratios were discovered long ago by merely following the judgment of the ear respecting the most pleasant concord of two tones. The circumstances just stated furnish the reason why these intervals when tuned according to these simple ratios of numbers, and in no other case, will produce an undisturbed concord, whereas very small deviations from this mathematical intonation \v ill betray themselves by that restless fluctuation of tone known as beats. The d' and a of the last example, if d' tuned as a perfect Fifth below a [that is as d^ on the Harmonical], make 2931 and 440 vibrations in a second respectively, and their common upper partial a" makes 3 x 293i = 2 x 440 = 880 vibrations in a second. In the tempered intonation ¶ (/' makes almost exactly 293| vibrations in a second, and hence its second upper partial (or third partial) tone makes 881 vib. in the same time, and this extremely small difference is betrayed to the ear by one beat in a second. That imperfect Octaves and Fifths will produce beats, was a fact long known to organ builders, who made use of it practically to obtain the required just or tempered'intonation with greater ease and certainty. Indeed, there is no more sensitive means of proving the correctness of intervals.

Two musical tones, therefore, which stand in the relation of a perfect Octave, a perfect Twelfth, or a perfect Fifth, go on sounding uniformly without disturbance, and are thus distinguished from the next adjacent intervals, imperfect Octaves and Fifths, for which a part of the tone breaks up into distinct pulses, and consequently the two tones do not continue to sound without interruption. For this reason the perfect Octave, Twelfth, and Fifth will be called consonant intervals in contradistinction to the next adjacent intervals, which are termed dissonant. Although these names ¶ were given long ago, long before anything was known about upper partial tones and their beats, they give a very correct notion of the essential character of the phenomenon which consists in the imdisturbed or disturbed coexistence of sounds.

Since the phenomena just described form the essential basis for the construction of normal musical intervals, it is advisable to establish them experimentally in every possible form.

We have stated that the beats heard are the beats of those partial tones of both compounds which nearly coincide. Now it is not always very easy on hearing a Fifth or an Octave which is slightly out of tune, to recognise clearly with the unassisted ear which part of the whole sound is beating. On listening we are apt to feel that the whole sound is altei-nately reinforced and weakened. Yet an ear accustomed to distinguish upper partial tones, after directing its attention on the common upper partials concerned, will easily hear the strong beats of these particular tones, and recognise the continued and undisturbed sound of the primes. Strike the note d', attend to its upper partial a", and then strike a tempered Fifth
