page: 185

Hence the number of beats which arise from putting one of the generating tones out of tune to the amoinit of one vibration in a second, is always given by the two numbers which detine the interval. The smaller number gives the number of beats which arise from increasing the pitch number of the upper tone by 1. The larger number gives the number of beats which arise from increasing the pitcli number of the lower tone b\' 1. Hence if we take the major Sixth c a, having the ratio 3 : 5, and sharpen a so as to make one additional vibration in a second, we shall have 3 beats in a second; but if we sharpen c so as to make one more vibration in a second, we obtain 5 beats in a second, and so on.

Our calculation and the rule based on it shew that if the amount by which one of the tones is put out of tune remains constant, the number of the beats increases according as the interval is expressed in larger numbers. Hence for Sixths and Thirds the pitch luimbers of the tones must be much more nearly in the normal ratio, if we wish to avoid slow beats, than for Octaves and Unisons. On the other fl hand a slight imperfection in the tuning of Thirds brings us much sooner to the limit where the beats become too i-ajjid to be distinctly separable. If we change the Unison c" c", by flattening one of the tones, into the Semitone //' c", on sounding the notes together there results a clear dissonance with 33 beats, the number which, as before observed, seems to give the maximum of harshness. But to obtain 33 beats from hfth/' c", it is only necessary to alter c" by a quarter of a Tone. If it is changed by a Semitone, so that/' c" becomes/' //, there result 66 beats, and their clearness is already much injured. To obtain 33 beats the c" must not be changed in the Fifth c" </" by more than one-sixth of a Tone, in the Fourtli c" f" by more than one-eighth, in the major Third c" e" and major Sixth c" a" by more than one-tenth, and in the minor Third c" e"\) by more than onetwelfth. Conversely, if in each of these intervals the pitch number of c" be altered by 33, so that c" becomes 6' or d"\), we obtain the following numbers of ¶ beats: —

Footnote: The interval of thu
becomes
or
and gives beats
Octave . . . . c" c'" Fifth .... c" ;/" Fourth .... c" "/'" Major Tliird . . . c"'c" Minor Third . . . c" e"^
b' c'" ^' II" h' f" b''c" h' c"\y
d"\) c'"
d"\> y" d"\> I" d"\,'ed"b c"\)
66 99 132 165
198

Now since 99 beats in a second produce very weak effects even under favourable circumstances for simjjle tones, and 132 beats in a second seem to lie at the limit (jf audibility, we must not be surprised if such numbers of beats, produced by the weaker upper partials, and smothered by the more powerful prime tones, no longer produce any sensible effect, and in fact vanish so far as the ear is concerned. Now ¶ this relation is of great importance in the practice of music, for in the table it will be seen that the mistuned Fifth gives the interval // //", which is much used as an imperfect consonance under the name of ininor Sixtli. In the same way we find the major Third d"\)f" as a mistuned Fourth, and the Fourth h'e' as a mistuned major Third, and so on. That, at least in this part of the scale, the major Third does not produce the beats of a mistuned Fourth, or the Fourth those of a mistuned major Third, is explained by the great number of beats. In point of fact these intervals in this part of the scale give a perfectly uninterrupted sound, without a trace of beats or harshness, when they are tuned perfectly.

This brings us to the investigation of those circumstances which afiect the perfection of the consonance for the different intervals. A consonance has been characterised by the coincidence of two of the upper partial tones of the compounds forming the chord. When this is the case the two compound tones cannot generate any slow beats. But it is possible that some other two upper partial tones of these two compounds may be so nearly of the same pitch that they can generate
