page: 188

+ cases in which the prime tone of the higher note coincides with one of the partial tones of the lower note, although as the interval between the two notes increases the difference between consonance and dissonance tends towards obliteration.

The cases hitherto considered, where the prime of one compound tone coincides with one of the partials of the other, may be termed absolute consonances. The second compound tone introduces no new element, but merely reinforces a part of the other.

Unison and Octave disturb the next adjacent intervals considerably, in the sense assigned to this expression on p. 186(7, so that the minor Second C D\), and the major Seventh C B, which differ from the Unison and Octave by a Semitone respectively, are the harshest dissonances in our scale. Even the major Second C B, and the minor Seventh C B\f, which are a whole Tone a]iart from the disturbing intervals, must be reckoned as dissonances, although, owing to the greater ¶ interval of the dissonant partial tones, they are much milder than the others. In the higher regions of the scale their roughness is materially lessened by the increased rapidity of the beats. Since the dissonance of the minor Seventh is due to the second partial tone, which in most musical qualities of tone is nmch v/eaker than the prime, it is still milder than that of the major Second, and hence lies on the very boundary between dissonance and consonance.

To find additional good consonances we must consequently go to the middle of the Octave, and the first we meet is the Fifth. Immediately next to it within the interval of a Semitone there are only the intervals 5 : 7 and 5 : 8 in our table, and these cannot much disturb it, because in all the better kinds of musical tones tie 7th and 8th partials are either very weak or entirely absent. The next intervals with stronger upper partials are the Fourth 3 : 4 and the major Sixth 3 : 5. But here the interval is a whole Tone, and if the tones 1 and 2 of the interval of the Octave could produce very little disturbing effect in the minor Seventh, the dis¶ turbance by the tones 2 and 3, or by the vicinity of the Fifth to the Fourth and major Sixth must be insignificant, and the reaction of these two intervals with the tones 3 and 4 or 3 and 5 on the Fifth must be entirely neglected. Hence the Fifth remains a perfect consonance, in which there is no sensible disturbance of closely adjacent upper partial tones. It is only in harsh qualities of tone (harmonium, double-bass, violoncello, reed organ pipes) with high upper partial tones, and deep primes, when the number of beats is small, that we remark that the Fifth is somewhat rougher than the Octave.* Hence the Fifth has been acknowledged as a consonance from the earliest times and by all musicians. On the other hand the intervals next adjacent to the Fifth are those which produce the harshest dissonances after those next adjacent to the Octave. Of the dissonant intervals next

Footnote: ⁎ [The above discussion may be rendered numbers of the two prime tones which form
easier by the following considerations, which the Fifth to be 2 and 3, and find those of their
the student should illustrate or hear illus- upper partials thus, assuming (J G to be the
^ trated on the Harmouical. Take the pitch two notes.
Nos. of the Partials .. Partials of lower note . . 2 4 G 8 10 12 14 16
12345678
Lower note . . . . C c il c c' 7 h% '^' " Fifili or 2 : 3, upper note G ij cV y h'
Partials of upper note . . 3 6 9 12 ' 15
Nos. of the Partials ..
1234 5
We see that the principal beating tones The next beating partial tones are 8 and 9, or
are 14 and 15, or b'\y b', the 7th partial of the c' d', the 4th partial of the lower and 3rd of
lower and 5th of the upper; and 15 and 16, the upper note, and these being a whole Tone
or h' c", the 5th of the upper and 8th of the apart, the beats are not of importance even
lower note, and that these beats are unimpor- when strong, and with weak upper partials
tant because the 7th and 8th partials are are insignificant. Similarly for the beats of
generally weak; but if they are strong these 9 and 10, or d' c', the 3rd partial of the upper
beats being those of a Semitone and of nearly and 5th of the lower note. On referring to the
a Semitone, are very harsh. On the Har- text it will be seen that the same intervals
m.onical it will be found that the 12th 0 ;/ is are there compared and in the same order as
faultless, but the 5th C G is decidedly harsh. here. — Transldtor.']
