page: 192

+ that number in every case. The intonation is supposed to be that of the scale of C major- with just intervals, but h\f represents the subminor Seventh of c (4 : 7).*

4,: 7, 5^:8, 5, : 6^ 4, : 5, 3, : 5^ 83:4, 2, : 83

The prime tones of the notes in this example are all partials of C^, which

makes 33 vibrations in a second, and hence their own pitch numbers and those

¶ their upper partials arc multiples of 38; consequently the difference of these

pitch numbers, which gives the number of beats, must always be 33, 66, or some

higher multiple of 33.

In the low positions here assigned the beats arising from the dissonant upper partials are as effective as their intensity will allow, and in this case the Sixths, Thirds, and even the Fourth are considerably rough. But the major Sixth and major Third shew their superiority over the minor Third and minor Sixth, by descending lower down in the scale, and yet sounding somewhat milder than the others. It is also a well-known practical rule among musicians to avoid these close intervals in low |iositions, when soft chords are required, though there was no justification for this rule in any previous theory of chords.

My theory of hearing by means of the sympathetic vibration of elastic appendages to the nerves, would allow of calculating the intensity of the beats of the different intervals, when the intensity of the upper partials in the corre¶ quality of tone belonging to the instrument used, is known, and the intervals are so chosen that the number of beats in a second is the same. But such a calculation would be very different for different qualities of tone, and holds only for such a particular case as may be assumed.

For intervals constructed on the same lower note a new factor comes into play, namely, the number of beats which occur in a second; and the influence of this factor on the roughness of the sensation cannot be calculated directly by any fixed law. But to obtain a general graphical representation of the complicated relations which co-operate to produce the effect, I have made such a calculation, knowing that diagrams teach more at a glance than the most complicated descriptions, and have hence constructed figs. 60, A and B (p. 193). In order to construct them I have been forced to assiuiie a somewhat arbitrary law for the dependence of roiighness upon the number of beats. I chose for this purpose the simplest mathematical formula which would shew that the roughness vanishes when there ¶ are no beats, increases to a maximum for 83 beats, and then diminishes as the number of beats increases. Next I have selected the quality of tone on the violin in order to calculate the intensity and roughness of the beats due to the upper partials taken two and two together, and from the final results I have constructed figs. 60, A and B, opposite. The base lines c'c", c"c"' denote those parts of the musical scale which lie between the notes thus named, but the pitch is taken to increase continuously [as when the finger slides down the violin string], and not by separate steps [as when the finger stops oft' definite lengths of the violin string]. It is further assumed that the notes or compound tones belonging to any individual part of the scale, are sounded together with the note c, which forms the constant lower note of all the intervals. Fig. 60 A, therefore, shews the roughness of all intervals which are less than an Octave, and fig. 60 B of those which are greater

Footnote: ⁎ [The ordinal numbers of the partials the primes is 4 : 5, and that the beating parwhich beat 33 times iu a second, are here sub- tials are the 4th of 4, and the 3rd of 5, having scribed. Thus 44 : 63 means that the ratio of the ratio 16 : 15. — Translator.'^
