page: 194

Thirteenth or c'a"\), fare still worse, on account of the increased disturbance of the adjacent intervals. The conclusions here drawn from calculation are easily confirmed by experiments on justly intoned instruments.* That they are also attended to "in the practice of musical composition, notwithstanding the theoretical assumption that the nature of a chord is not changed by altering the pitch of any one of its constituents by whole octaves, we shall see further on, when considering chords and their inversions.

It has already been mentioned that peculiarities of individual qualities of tone may have considerable effect in altering the order of the relative harmoniousness of the intervals. The quality of tone in the musical instruments now in use has been of course selected and altered with a view to its employment in harmonic combinations. The preceding investigation of the qualities of tone in our principal musical instruments has shewn that in what are considered good qualities of tone ¶ the Octave and Twelfth of the prime, that is the 2nd and 3rd partial, are powerful, the 4th and iith partial have only moderate strength, and the higher partials rapidly diminish in force. Assuming such a quality of tone, ■ the results of this chapter may be summed up as follows.

When two musical tones are sounded at the same time, their united sound is generally disturbed by the beats of the upper partials, so that a greater or less part of the whole mass of sovuid is broken up into pulses of tone, and the joint effect is rough. This relation is called Dissonance.

But there are certain determinate ratios between pitch numbers, for which this rule suffers an exception, and either no beats at all are formed, or at least only sucH as have so little intensity that they produce no unpleasant disturbance of the united sound. These exceptional cases are called Consonances.

1. The most perfect consonances are those that have been here called absolute, in which the prime tone of one of the combined notes coincides with some partial

¶ tone of the other. To this group belong the Octave, Twelfth, and double Octave.

2. Next.follow the Fifth and the Fourth, which may be called ^:ier/>c^ consonances, because they may be used in all parts of the scale Avithout any important distvirbance of harmoniousness. The Fourth is the less perfect consonance and approaches those of the next group. It owes its superiority in musical practice simply to its being the defect of a Fifth from an Octave, a circumstance to which we shall return in a later chapter.

3. The next group consists of the major Sixth and the major Third, which may be called medial consonances. The old writers on harmony considered them as imperfect consonances. In lower parts of the scale the disturbance of the harmoniousness is very sensible, but in the higher positions it disappears, because the beats are too rapid to be sensible. But each, in good musical qualities of tone, is independently characterised, by the fact that any little defect in its intonation produces sensible beats of the upper partials, and consequently each interval is

¶ sharply separated from all adjacent intervals.

4. The imperfect consonances, consisting of the minor Third and minor Sixth, are not in general independently characterised, because in good musical qualities of tone the partials on which their definition depends are often not found for the minor Third, and are generally absent for the minor Sixth, so that small imperfections in the intonation of these intervals do not necessarily produce beats. f

Footnote: fig. 60 A, it will be seen that c'"^ belongs to the c'e"\f - and c'c'\) - , the student should take the
little depression to the right of the fraction | same intervals a Fourth lower, as / b'\f and
between e"\} - and e". The slight depression r/" 6|j. AU the other notes are on the instru-
for a"\} is just under the fraction i/- to the left ment in all the octaves. — Translator.] of a". The depression for e'|j - is just to the f [It must be recollected that in the minor
left of that for e'\}.— Translator.'] Sixth the 2nd and 3rd partials form the Semi-

Footnote: ⁎ [The student is strongly recommended tone 15 : 16, and the 3rd and 5tli form the
to verify all these consonances on the Har- Semitone 24 : 25 (see note p. 191c), and that
monical, where b\f - , that is '^b\y, is placed on the resulting beats, which in good qualities of
the g'^ digital. The Harmonical does not con- tone are never absent, will always be more
tain e'(f - , that is 'e^, and hence, in place of powerful than those which arise from small
