page: 196

Fourth c'f and major Sixth c'a become worse as the Eleventh cf" and major Thirteenth c'a'. The minor Third c'e> and minor Sixth c'a\), however, become still worse as the minor Tenth c'e"\) and minor Thirteenth c'a"[,, so that the latter intervals are far less harmonious than the subminor Tenth 3 : 7, c'e"\)-[ov g' h'\f\ and subminor Fourteenth 2 : 7, c'6"|j-.

The order of the consonances here proposed is based xipon a consideration of the harmoniousness of each individual interval independently of any connection with other intervals, and consequently without any regard to key, scale, and modulation. Almost all writers on musical theory have proposed similar orders for the consonances, agreeing in their general features with each other and with that here deduced from the theory of beats. Thus all put the Unison and Octave first, as the most perfect of all consonances; and next in order comes the Fifth, after which the Fourth is placed by those who do not include the modulational

¶ of the Fourth, but restrict their observation to the independent harmoniousness of the interval. There is great diversity, on the other hand, in the arrangement of the Sixths and Thirds. The Greeks and Romans did not acknowledge these intervals to be consonances at all, perhaps because in the unaccented Octave, within which their music, arranged for men's voices, usually lay, these intervals really sound badly, and perhaps because their ear was too sensitive to endure the trifling increase of roughness generated by compound tones when sounded together in Thirds and Sixths. In the present century, the Archbishop Chrysanthus of Dyrrhachium declares that modern Greeks have no pleasure in polyphonic music, and consequently he disdains to enter upon it in his book on music, and refers those who are curious to know its rules, to the writings of the West.* Arabs are of the same opinion according to the accounts of all travellers. This rule remained in force even during the first half of the middle ages, when the first attempts were made at harmonies for two voices. It was not till towards

¶ the end of the twelfth century that Franco of Cologne included the Thirds among the consonances. He distinguishes: —

1. Perfect Consonances: Unison and Octave.

2. Medial Consonances: Fifth and Fourth.

3. Imperfect Comonanx^es: Major and minor Thirds.

4. Imperfect Dissonances: Major and minor Sixth.

5. Perfect Dissonances: Minor Second, augmented Fourth, major and minor Seventh.f

It was not till the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries that musicians began to include the Sixths among the consonances. Philipp de Vitry and Jean de Muris X mention as perfect consonances the Unison, Octave, and Fifth; as imperfect, the Thirds and Sixths. The Fourth has been cut out. The first author opposes the major Third and major Sixth, as more perfect, to the minor Third and minor Sixth. The same order is found in the Dodecachordon of Glareanus, 1557, j who ¶ merely added the intervals increased by an Octave. The reason why the Fourth was not admitted as either a perfect or an imperfect consonant, must be looked for in the rules for the progression of parts. Perfect consonances Avere not allowed to follow each other between the same parts, still less dissonances; but imperfect consonances, as the Thirds and Sixths, were permitted to do so. But on the other hand the perfect consonances, Octaves, and Fifths were admitted in chords on which the music paused, as in the closing chord. Here, however, the Fourth of the bass could not occur because it does not occur in the triad of the tonic. Again a succession of Fourths for two voices was not admitted, as the Fourth and Fifth were too closely related for such a purpose. Hence so far as the progression of

Footnote: ⁎ &eaipTjTiKhv /xeya t'^s MovcriKris Trapa Xpvcr- 1852, p. 49. dv9ov. TfpyedTTj, 1832, cited by Coussemaker, J Coussemaker, ibid. p. 66 and p. 68.
Histoire de Vhannonic, p. 5. § [This is the date of the abstract by
t Gerbert, Scriptores ccdesiastici de Mu- Woneggar of Lithuania, the date of the original
sica Sacra. Saint-Blaise, 1784, vol. iii. p. 11. work is 1547, ten years e&rliej:.— Translator.'] — Coussemaker, Histoire de I'harmonie, Paris,
