page: 200

+ the tone 200, and this tone 99 makes two beats in a second with the tone 101. These beats then serve to distinguish the imperfect from the justly intoned Fifth even in the case of two simple tones. The number of these beats is also exactly as many as if they were beats due to the upper partial tones.* But to observe these beats the two primary tones must be loud, and the ear must not be distracted by any extraneous noise. Under favoiu'able circumstances, however, they are not difficult to hear.t

For an imperfect Fourth, having, say, the vibrational numbers 300 and -401, the first differential tone is 101; this with the tone 300 produces the differential tone 199 of the second order, and this again with the tone 401 the differential tone 202 of the third order, and this makes 3 beats with the differential tone 199 of the second order, that is, precisely as many beats as would have been generated by the upper partial tones 1200 and 1203, if they had existed. These beats of the Fourth ¶ very weak even when the primary tones are powerful. Perfect quiet and great attention are necessary for observing them.:}: And after all there may be a doubt whether by strong excitement of the primary tones, weak partials may not have arisen, as we already considered on p. 159/v, c.§

The beats of an imperfect major Third are scarcely recognisable, even under the most favourable conditions. If we take as the vibrational numbers of the primary tones 400 and 501, we have: —

501 - 400 = 101, the differential tone of the first order 400-101 = 299, „ „ „ second,,

501-299 = 202, „ „ „ third „

400-202 - 198, „ „ „ fourth „

The tones 202 and 198 produce 4 beats. Scheibler succeeded in counting beats of the imperfect major Third.** I have niA'self believed that I heai'd them ¶ under favourable circumstances. But in any case they are so difficult to perceive that they are not of any importance in distinguishing consonance from dissonance.

Hence it follows that two simple tones making various intervals adjacent to the major Third and sounded together will produce a xmiform uninterrupted mass of sound, without any break in their harmoniousness, provided that they do not approach a Second too closely on the one hand or a Fourth on the other. My own experiments with stopped organ pipes justify me in asserting that however much this conclusion is opposed to nnisical dogmas, it is borne out by the fact, provided that really simple tones are used for the purpose. ft It is the same with intei'vals near to the major Sixth; these also shew no difterence as long as they i-emain sufficiently far from the Fifth and Octave. Hence although it is not difficult to tune perfect major and minor Thirds on the harmonium or reed pipes or on the violin, by sounding the two tones together and trying to get rid of the beats, it is perfectly impossible to do so on stopped organ pipes or tuning-forks without the aid of other intervals. It will appear hereafter that the use of more than two tones will allow these intervals to be perfectly tuned even for simple tones.

Intermediate between the compound tones possessing many powerful upper partials, such as those of reed pipes and violins, and the entirely simple tones of tuning-forks and stopped organ pipes, lie those compound tones in which only the

Footnote: ⁎ [But, as before, the pitch is very diffe- much lower in pitch and so iuliarmonic to the
rent. — Translator.'] others that there is no danger of confusing
t [Scheibler, ihid. p. 21. I myself sue- them. — Translator.'] ceeded in hearing and counting them. — Trans- ** [Scheibler, ihid. p. 25, says only ' as beats
latov.] of this kind are too indistinct," he uses another

Footnote: J [Scheibler says, p. 24, they are heard as method for tuning the major Third. See
well as for the Fifth. I have not found it so. note*, p. 20M. He also calculates the inter-
— Translator.] mediate tones differently. But neither he nor

Footnote: § [Supposing the pitch numbers of the any one seems to have tried to verify their
mistuued Fourth are 300 and 401, then the existence, which is doubtful. — Translator.] beating upper partials would be 1200 and ft [Or at any rate tones without the 4th
1203, a very high pitch; but the beating partial, which those of stopped organ pipes
differentials are 202 and 199, which are so do not possess. — Translator.]
