page: 204

Herein we find the reason why tones with harmonic upper partials play such a leading part in the sensation of the ear. They are the only sounds which, even when very intense, can produce sensations that continue in undisturbed repose, without beats, corresponding to the purely periodic motion of the air, which is the objective foundation of these tones. I have already stated as a result of the summary which I gave of the composition of musical tones in Chapter V., No. 2, p. 119«, that besides tones with harmonic upper partials, the only others used (and that also generally in a very subordinate manner) are either such as have a section of the series of harmonic upper partials (like those of well tuned bells), or such as have secondary tones (as those in bars) so very weak and so far distant from their primes, that their differentials have but little force and at any rate do not produce any distinct beats.

Collecting the results of our investigations upon beats, we find that when two ¶ or more simple tones are sounded at the same time, they cannot go on sounding without mutual disturbance, unless they form with each other certain perfectly definite intervals. Such an undisturbed flow of simultaneous tones is called a consonance. When these intervals do not exist, beats arise, that is, the whole compound tones, or individual partial and combinational tones contained in them or resulting from them, alternately reinforce and enfeeble each other. The tones then do not coexist undisturbed in the ear. They mutually check each other's uniform flow. This process is called dissonance *

Combinational tones are the most general cause of beats. They are the sole cause of beats for simple tones which lie as much as, or more than, a minor Third apart.f For two simple tones they suffice to delimit the Fifth, perhaps the Fourth, but certainly not the Thirds and Sixths. These, however, will be strictly delimited when the major Third is added to the Fifth to form the common major chord, and when the Sixth is united with the Fourth to form the chord of the

¶ Sixth and Fourth, ..

Thirds, however, are strictly delimited, by means of the beats of imperfect intervals, in a chord of two compound tones, each consisting of a prime and the two next partial tones. The beats of such intervals increase in strength and distinctness, with the increase in number and strength of the upper partial tones in the compounds. By this means the difference between dissonance and consonance, and of perfectly from imperfectly tuned intervals, becomes continually more marked and distinct, increasing the certainty with which the hearer distinguishes the correct intervals, and adding much to the powerful and artistic effect of successions of chords. Finally when the high upper partials are relatively too strong (in piercing and braying qualities of tone), each separate tone will by itself generate intermittent sensations of tone, and any combination of two or more compounds of this description produces a sensible increase of this harshness, while at the same ¶ time the large number of partial and combinational tones renders it difficult for the hearer to follow a complicated arrangement of parts in a musical composition.

These relations are of the utmost importance for the use of different instruments in the different kinds of musical composition. The considerations which determine the selection of the proper instrument for an entire composition or for individual phrases in movements written for an orchestra are very multifarious. First in rank stands mobility and power of tone in the different instruments. On this there is no need to dwell. The bowed instruments and pianoforte surpass all others in mobility, and then follow the flutes and oboes. To these are opposed the trumpets and trombones, which commence sluggishly, but surpass all instruments in poAver. Another essential consideration is expressiveness, which in general depends on the power of producing with certainty any degree of rapid alterations in loudness at the pleasure of the player. In this respect also bowed instruments,

Footnote: ⁎ [See Prof. Preyer's addendum to this f [But see App. XX. sect. L. art. 3.— Tj-ffJis-
theory in App. XX. sect. L. art. 7. — Translator. 1 lator.]
