page: 207

+ well on the vowel a in father, because the higher note e'\) has the same upper partial b"\y as the deeper b\f. But if a in father being inclined towards a infill, or a in fat, the upper partials /" and e"\f or else d'" and e"\} might interrupt the consonaiice. This serves to shew, among other things, that the translation of the words of a song from one language into another is not by any means a matter of indiffei-ence for its musical effect.*

Disregarding at present these reinforcements of partials due to the characteristic resonance of each vowel, the musical tones of the human voice are on the whole accompanied by the lower partials in moderate strength, and hence are well adapted for combinations of chords, precisely as the tones of the princijial stops of the organ. Besides this the human voice has a peculiar advantage over the organ and all other musical instruments in the execution of polyphonic music. The words which are sung connect the notes belonging to each part, and form a clue which ¶ readily guides the hearer to discover and pursue the related parts of the whole body of sound. Hence polyphonic music and the whole modern system of harmony were first developed on the human voice. Indeed, nothing can exceed the musical eff"ect of well harmonised part laiusic perfectly executed in just intonation by practised voices. For the complete harmoniousness of such music it is indispensably necessary that the several musical intervals should be justly intoned, and our present singei'sf unfortunately seldom learn to take just intervals, because they are accustomed from the first to sing to the accompaniment of instruments which are tuned in equal temperament, and hence with imperfect consonances. It is only such singers as have a delicate musical feeling of their own who find out the correct result, which is no longer taught them.

Richer in upper partials, and consequently brighter in tone than the human voice and the principal stops on the organ, are the boived instruments, which conseqviently fill such an important place in music. Their extraordinary mobility and ¶ expressiveness give them the first place in instrumental music, and the moderate acuteness of their quality of tone assigns them an intermediate position between the softer flutes and the braying brass instruments. There is a slight diff'erence between the different instruments of this class; the tenor and double-bass have a somewhat acuter and thinner quahty than the violin and violoncello, that is, they have relatively stronger \ipper partials. The audible partials reach to the sixth or eighth, according as the bow is brought nearer the finger-board for piano, or nearer the bridge for forte, and they decrease regularly in force as they ascend in pitch. Hence on bowed instruments the diff"erence between consonance and dissonance is

Footnote: ⁎ [x4.1so, it shews how the musical effect of and tempered intonation in the singing of the
different stanzas in a ballad, though sung to the same choir. It was a choir of about 60 mixed
same written notes, will constantly vary, quite voices, which had gained the prize at the In-
indepeudentlyof difference of expression. This teruational Exhibition at Paris in 1867, and
is often remarkable on the closing cadence of had been kept well together ever since. After
the stanza. As the vowel changes from a in singing some pieces without accompaniment, II
father, to a in mat; c in met, or i in sit, or and hence in the just intonation to which the
again to o in not, u in but, and u in put, the singers had been trained, and with the most
musical result is totally different, though the delightful effect of harmony, they sang a piece
pitch remains unaltered. To shew the effect with a pianoforte accompaniment. Of course
of the different vowels throughout a piece of the pianoforte itself was inaudible among the
music, I asked' a set of about 8 voices to sing, mass of sound produced by sixty voices. But
before about 200 others, the first half of See it had the effect of perverting their intonation,
the conquering hero comes, first to lah, then to and the whole charm of the singing was at
lee, and then to loo. The difference of effect once destroyed. There was nothing left but
was almost ludicrous. Much has to be studied the everyday singing of an ordinary choir,
in the relation of the qualities of vowels to the The disillusion was complete and the effect
effect of the music. In this respect, too, the most unsatisfactory as a conclusion. If the
pitch chosen for the tonic will be found of great same piece of music or succession of chords in
importance. — Translator.'] C major or C minor, without any modulation,
t [This refers to Germaiay, not to the Eng- be played first on the Harmonical and then be
lish Tonic Solfaists, nor to the English ma- contrasted with an ordinary tempered har-
drigal singers. On Dec. 27, 1869, at a meeting monium, the same kind of difference will be
of the Tonic Solfa College I had an unusual felt, but not so strongly. — Translator.] opportunity of contrasting the effect of just
