page: 208

+ clearly and distinctly marked, and the feeling for the justness of the intervals very certain; indeed it is notorious that practised violin and violoncello players have a very delicate ear for distinguishing differences of pitch. On the other hand the piercing character of the tones is so marked, that soft song-like melodies are not well suited for bowed instruments, and are better given to flutes and clarinets in the orchestra. Full chords are also relatively too rough, since those upper partials which form dissonant intervals in every consonance, are sufficiently strong to make the dissonance obtrusive, especially for Thirds and Sixths. Moreover, the imperfect Thirds and Sixths of the tempered musical scale are on bowed instruments very perceptibly different in effect from the justly intoned Thirds and Sixths when the player does not know how to substitute the pure intervals for them, as the ear requires. Hence in compositions for bowed instruments, slow and flowing progressions of chords are introduced by way of exception only, because they are not ¶ sufficiently harmonious; quick movements and figures, and arpeggio chords are preferred, for which these instruments are extremely well adapted, and in which the acute and piercing character of their combined sounds cannot be so distinctly pei'ceived.

The beats have a peculiar character in the case of bowed instruments. Regular, slow, numerable beats seldom occur. This is owing to the minute irregularities in the action of the bow on the string, already described, to which is due the wellknown scraping effect so often heard. Observations on the vibrational figure shew that every little scrape of the bow causes the vibrational curve to jump suddenly backwards or forwards, or in physical terms, causes a sudden alteration in the phase of vibration. Now since it depends solely on the difference of phase whether two tones which are sounded at the same time mutually reinforce or enfeeble each other, every minutest catching or scraping of the bow will also affect the flow of the beats, and when two tones of the same pitch are played, every jump in the phase will ¶ suffice to produce a change in the loudness, just as if iiTCgular beats w^ere occun-ing at unexpected moments. Hence the best instruments and the best players are necessary to produce slow beats or a uniform flow of sustained consonant chords. Probably this is one of the reasons why quartettes for bowed instruments, when executed by players who can play solo pieces pleasantly enough, sometimes sound so intolerably rough and harsh that the eff'ect bears no proper ratio to the slight roughness which each individual player produces on his own instrument.* When I was making observations on vibrational figures, I found it diflicult to avoid the occurrence of one or two jumps in the figure every second. Now in solo-playing the tone of the string is thus interrupted for almost inappreciably minute instants, which the hearer scarcely perceives, but in a quartette when a chord is played for which all the notes have a common upper partial tone, there would be from four to eight sudden and irregular alterations of loudness in this common tone every second, and this could not pass unobserved. Hence for good combined performance, ■T a much greater evenness of tone is required than for solo-playing.f

Footnote: The pianoforte takes the first place among stringed instruments for which the strings are struck. The previous analysis of its quality of tone shews that its deeper octaves are rich, but its higher octaves relatively poor, in upper partial tones. In the lower octaves, the second or third partial tone is often as loud as the prime, nay, the second partial is often louder than the prime. The consequence is that * [To mj'self, one of the principal reasons rally known. If the music notes could be for the painful effect here alluded to, which is pre%'iously marked by duodenals, in the way unfortunately so extremely well known, is the suggested in App. XX. sect. E. art. 26, much fact that the players not having been taught the of this difficulty might be avoided from the nature of just intonation, do not accommodate first. But the marking would requu-e a study the pitches of the notes properly. When not yet commenced by the greater number of quartette plavers are used to one another they musicians. — T/'a/isZrt tor.]
overcome this difficulty. But when thev learn f [On violins combinational tones are
thus it is a mere accommodation of the different strong. I have been told that violinists watch intervals by ear to the playing of (say) the for the Octave differential tone, in tuning thenleader. (See App. XX. sect. G. art. 7.) The real Yiiihs relations of the just tones are in fact not gene-
—Translaior.']
