page: 210

+ tones, but gives a quality of tone to these strings which does not suit the character of the others, and hence certainly detracts from their charm.

In many other instruments, where their construction does not admit of such absolute control over the quality of tone as on the pianoforte, attempts have been made to i^roduce similar varieties of quality in the high notes, by other means. In the bowed instruments this purpose is served by the resonance box, the proper tones of which lie within the deepest Octaves of the scale of the instrument. Since the partial tones of the sounding strings are reinforced in proportion to their jjroximity to the partial tones of the resonance box, this resonance will assist the prime tones of the higher notes, as contrasted with their upper partials, much more than it will do so for the deep notes. On the contrary, the deepest notes of the violin will have not only their prime tones, but also their Octaves and Fifths favoured by the resonance; for the deeper proper tone of the resonance box ¶ bet\veen the prime and 2nd jmrtial, and its higher proper tone between the 2nd and 3rd partials. A similar effect is attained in the compound stops of the organ, by making the series of upper partial tones, which are represented by distinct pipes, less extensive for the higher than for the low-er notes in the stop. Thus each digital opens six pipes for the lower octaves, answering to the first six partial tones of its note; but in the two upper octaves, the digital opens only three or even two pipes, which give the Octave and Twelfth, or mei-ely the Octave, in addition to the prime.

There is also a somewhat similar relation in the human voice, although it varies much for the different vowels. On comparing the higher and lower notes which are sung to the same vowel, it will be found that the resonance of the cavity of the mouth generally reinforces relatively high upper partials of the deep notes of the bass, whereas for the soprano, where the noce sung comes near to the characteristic pitch of the vowel, or even exceeds it, all the upper partials become much ¶ weaker. Hence in general, at least for the open vowels, the audible upper partials of the bass are much more nimierous than those of the soprano.

We have still to consider the artificial reed instruments, that is the ivind instruments of wood and /jrass. Among the foi-mer the clarinet, among the latter the horn are distinguished for the softness of their tones, whereas the bassoon and hautbois in the first class, and the trombone and trumpet in the second represent the most penetrating qualities of tone used in music.

Notwithstanding that the keyed horns used for so-called concerted music have a far less braying quality of tone than trumpets proper, which have no side holes, yet the number and the force of their upper partial tones are far too great for the harmonious effect of the less perfect consonances, and the chords on these instruments are very noisy and harsh, so that the}- are only endurable in the open air. In artistic orchestral music, therefore, trumpets and ti-ombones, which on account of their penetrative power cannot be dispensed with, are seldom employed foi ¶ harmonies, except for a few and if possible perfect consonances.

The clarinet is distinguished from all other orchestral wind instruments by having no evenly numbered partial tones.* To this circumstance must be due many remarkable deviations in the effect of its chords from those of other instruments. When two clarinets are playing together all of the consonant intervals will be delimited by combinational tones alone, except the major Sixth 3 : 5, and the Twelfth 1 : 3. But the diflPerential tones of the first order, which are the strongest among all combinational tones, will always suffice to produce the beats of imperfect consonances. Hence it follows that in general the consonances of two clarinets have but little definition, and must be proportionately agreeable. This is really the case, except for the minor Sixth and minor Seventh, which are too near the major Sixth, and for the Eleventh and minor Thirteenth, which are too near the Twelfth. On the other hand, when a clarinet is played in combination with a violin or oboe, the majority of consonances will have a perceptibly different effect according a& * [But see ]Mr. Blaikley's observations, supra, p. 99b, note. — Translator.]
