page: 216

+ beou able to hear the deeper combinational tones of the second order, written as quavers, when the tones have been played on an harmonium, and the ear was assisted by the proper resonators: * but I have not been able to hear those written with semiquavers. They have been added merely to make the tlieoiy complete. Perhaps they might be occasionally heard from very loud musical tones having powerful upper partials. But they may be certainly neglected in all ordinary cases.

For the minor triads, on the other hand, the combinational tones of the first order, which are easily audible, begin to disturb the harmonious efl'ect. They are not near enough indeed to beat, but they do not belong to the harmony. For the fundamental triad, and that of the Sixth and Third [the two first chords], these combinational tones, written as crotchets, form the major triad A\f C E\), and for the triad of the Sixth and Fourth [the third chord], we find entirely new tones,

¶ A\f, B\f, which have no relations with the original triad. t The combinational tones of the second order, however (written as quavers), are sometimes partly above and generally partly below the prime tones of the triad, but so near to them, that beats must arise; whereas in the corresponding major triads the tones of this order fit perfectly into the original chord. Thus for the fundamental minor triad in the example, c e'\} g , the deeper combinational tones of the second order give the dissonances a\) h\f c', and similarly for the triad of the Sixth and Third, e\f g c". And for the triad of the Sixth and Fourth g c" e"\} we find the dissonances h\) c and //' a'\). This disturbing action of the combinational tones on the harmoniousness of minor triads is certainly too slight to give them the character of dissonances, but they produce a sensible increase of roughness, in comparison with the eftect of major chords, for all cases whei-e just intonation is employed, that is, where the mathematical ratios of the intervals are preserved. In the ordinary tempered intonation of our keyed instruments, the roughness due to the

¶ coml)inational tones is proportional>ly less marked, because of the much greater roiighness due to the imperfection of the consonances. Practically I attribute more importance to the influence of the more powerful deep combinational tones of the first order, which, without increasing the roughness of the chord, introduce tones entirely foi-eign to it, such as those of the A\) and E\) major triads in the case of the C minor triads. The foreign element thus introduced into the minor chord is not sufiiciently distinct to destroy the harmony, but it is enough to give a mysterious, obscure effect to the musical character and meaning of these chords, an effect for which the hearer is unable to account, because the weak combinational tones on which it depends are concealed by other and louder tones, and are audible only to a practised ear.j. Hence minor chords are especially adapted to express mysterious obscurity or harshness. § F. T. Yischer, in his Esth<4ics (vol. iii. § 772), has carefully examined this character of the minor mode, and shewn how it suits many degrees of joyful and painful excitement, and that all shades of

¶ feeling which it expresses agree in being to some extent ' veiled ' and obscure.

Every minor Third and every Sixth when associated with its principal com-

Footnote: ⁎ [See note f on p. 157rf. — Transhdor.'] wore chosen because the first Third in the
t [From the list of harmonics on p. 21bc fundamental position is major in the first case
it will be seen that these tones occur as lower and viinor in the second. In German the
harmonics of the tone whence the minor chords terms are dur and moll, that is, hard and
are derived. — Translator.] soft.] It is well known that the names dur
I [The Author is of course always speaking and mo/l are not connected with the hard or
of chords in just intonation. When tempered, soft character of the pieces of music written
as on the harmonium, even the major chords in these modes, but are historically derived
are accompanied by unrelated combinational from the angular form of jj and the rounded
tones, sufficiently close to beat and sufficiently form of \y, which were the B durum and B
loud for Scheibler to have laid down a rule mol/e of the medieval musical notation. [The
for counting the beats in order to verify the probable origin of the forms t> llj ^' ti is given
correctness of the tempered tuning (see p. from observations on the plates in Gaforius's
203d). But still the different effects of the two Thcorkum Ojnis Harmonicar Diicipliiiae, 14:80,
chords are very marked. — Translator.] the earliest printed book on music, in a foot-

Footnote: § [The English names major and minor note, infra, p. 312rf. — Translator.]
