page: none

+ ciated ugree, however, with the practice of the best coinposerri, of those, 1 lueau, who studied vocal music principally, before the great development of instrumental music necessitated the general introduction of tempered intonation, as any one may easily convince himself by examining those compositions which aimed at producing an impression of perfect harmoniousness. Mozart is certainly the composer who had the surest instinct for the delicacies of his art. Among his vocal compositions the Ave venim corpns is particuhirly celebrated for its wonderfully pure and smooth harmonies. On examining this little piece as one of the most suitable examples for our purpose, we find in its first clause, which has an extremely soft and sweet effect, none but major chords, and chords of the dominant Seventh. All these major chords belong to those which we have noted as being the more perfectly harmonious. Position 2 occurs most frequently, and then 8, 10, 1, and 9 [of p. 223f] , It is not till we come to the final modulation of ¶ this first clause that we meet with two minor chords, and a major chord in an \infavourable position. It is A'ery striking, by way of comparison, to find that the second clause of the same piece, which is more veiled, longing, and nwstical, and laboriously modulates through bolder transitions and harsher dissonances, has many more minor chords, which, as well as the major chords scattered among them, are for the most part brought into unfavom-able positions, until the fimd chord again restores perfect harmony.

Precisely similar observations may be made on those choral pieces of Palestrina, and of his contemporaries and successors, which have a simple harmonic construction without any involved polyphony. In transforming the Roman Chiu-ch music, which was Palestrina's task, the principal weight was laid on harmonious eftect in contrast to the harsh and unintelligible polyphony of the older Netherland * system, and Palestrina and his school have really solved the problem in the most perfect manner. Here also we find an almost uninterrupted flow of consonant chords, with some dominant Sevenths, or dissonant passing notes, charily interspersed. HereU also the consonant chords wholly, or almost wholly, consist of those major and minor chords which we have noted as being in the more perfect positions. Only in the final cadence of a few clauses, on the contrary, in the midst of more powerful and more frequent dissonances, we find a predominance of the unfavourable positions of the major and minor chords. Thus that expression which modern music endeavours to attain b}' various discords and an abundant introduction of dominant Sevenths, was obtained in the school of Palestrina by the much more delicate shading of various inversions and positions of consonant chords. This explains the liarmoniousness of these compositions, which arc nevertheless full of deep and tender expression, and sound like the songs of angels with hearts aff'ected but undarkened by human grief in their heavenly joy. Of course such pieces of music require fine ears both in singer and hearer, to let the delicate gradation of expression receive its due, now that modern music has accustomed us to modes of ¶ expression so much more violent and drastic.

The great majority of major tetrads in Palestrina's Stabat mater are in the ])Ositions 1, 10, 8, 5, 3, 2, 4, 9 ("of p. 223c], and of minor tetrads in the positions 9, 2, 4, 3, 5, 1 [of p. 224a]. For the major chords one might almost think that some theoretical rule led him to avoid the bad intervals of the minor Tenth and the [major or minor] Thirteenth. But this rule would have been entirely useless for minor chords. Since the existence of combinational toiies was not then known, we can only conclude that his fine ear led him to this practice, and that the judgment of that ear exactly agreed with the rules deduced from our theory.

These authorities may serve to lead musicians to allow the correctness of my arrangement of consonant chords in the order of their harmoniousness. But any one can convince himself of their correctness on any justly intoned instrument

Footnote: ⁎ [Inchiding both the modern kingdom of 1532, was born in Hainault in the present the Netherlands or Holland, and the still more Belgium. — Transhitor.] modern kingdom of Belgium. Josquin, 1450-
