page: 228

+ or subuiiuor Seventh 4 : 7 [r to '//'[j on the Harmonica]], and of the suhminor Tenth 3 : 7 [g to '//[>] in many qualities of tone soxuid at least as well as the minor Sixth 5:8 [f' to c"] , and that the subminor Tenth really sounds better than the ordinary minor Tenth 5 : 12 [e to </"]. But we have already noticed a circumstance of great importance for musical practice which gives the minor Sixth an advantage over the intervals formed with the number 7. The inversion of the minor Sixth gives a better interval, the major Third [e c" inverted gives c' (-'], and its importance as a consonance in modern music is especially due to this ver}relation to the major Third; it is essentially necessary, and justified, just because it is the inversion of the major Third. On the other hand the inversion or transposition of an interval formed with the number 7 leads to intervals worse than itself. Hence, as it is necessary, for the purposes of harmony, to have the power of transposing the parts at pleasure, we have a sufficient reason for drawing the ¶ line between the minor Sixth on the one hand, and the intervals characterised by 7 on the other. It is not, however, till we come to construct scales, which we shall have to consider in the next chapter, that we find decisive reasons for making this the boundary. The scales of modern music cannot possibly accept tones determined by the number 7.* But in musical harmony we can only deal with C'lioi'ds formed of notes in the scale. Intervals characterised by 5, as the Thirds and Sixths, occur in the scale, as well as others characterised by 9, as the major ' Second 8 : 9, biit there are none characterised by 7, which should form the transition between them. Here, then, there is a real gap in the series of chords arranged according to the degree of their harmonious effect, and this gap serves to determine the boundary between consonance and dissonance.

The decision does not depend, then, on the nature of the intervals themselves but on the construction of the whole tonal system. This is corroborated by the fact that the boundary between consonant and dissonant intervals has not been ¶ always the same. It has been already mentioned that the Greeks always represented Thirds as dissonant, and although the original Pythagorean Third 64 : 81, determined by a series of Fifths, was not a consonance, 3'et even when the natural major Third 4 : o was afterwards included in the so-called syntono-diatonic mode of Didymus and Ptolemaeus, it was not recognised as a consonance. It has already been mentioned that in the middle ages, first the Thirds and then the Sixths were acknowledged as imperfect consonances, that the Thirds were longomitted from the final chord, and that it v.'as not till later that the major, and quite recently the minor Third was admitted in this position. It is quite a mistake to suppose, with modern musical theorists, that this was merely whimsical and unnatural, or that the older composers allowed themselves to be fettered by blind faith in Greek authority. The last was certainly partly true for writers on musical theory down to the sixteenth century. But we must distinguish carefully between composers and theoreticians. Neither the Greeks, nor the great musical ¶ composers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, were people to be blinded by a theory which their ears could upset. The reason for these deviations is to be looked for rather in the difference between the tonal systems in eaidy and recent times, with which we shall become acquainted in the next part. It will there be seen that our modern s^'stem gained the form under which we know it through the influence of a general use of harmonic chords. It was only in this system that a complete regard was paid to all the requisitions of interwoven harmonies. Owing to its strict consistency, we were not only able to allow many licences in the use of the more imperfect consonances and of dissonances, which older systems had to avoid, but we were often required to insert the Thirds in final chords, as a mode of distinguishing with certainty between the major and minor mode, in cases Avhere this distinction Avas formerly evadeil.

Footnote: ⁎ [Poole's scale / ^ «i '^b'r^ c' d' e\ /', and monic, which is the only acoustical justification Bosanquet's and White's tempered imitation for the greatly harsher dominant Seventh. — of '^b'\f, properly 969 cents, as 974 cents, shew Translator.} the feeling that exists for using the 7th har-
