page: 229

Hut if the boundary between consonance and dissonance has really chano'od with a change of tonal system, it is manifest that the reason for assigning this boundarv does not depend on the intervals and their individual musical eftect, but on the whole construction of the tonal system.

The enigma which, about 2500 years ago, Pythagoras proposed to science, which investigates the reasons of things, 'Why is consonance determined by the ratios of small whole numbers?' has been solved by the discovery that the ear resolves all complex sounds into pendular oscillations, according to the laws of sympathetic vibration, and that it regards as harmonious only such excitements of the nerves as continue without disturbance. The resolution into partial tones, mathematically expressed, is effected by Fourier's law, which shews how any periodically variable magnitude, whatever be its nature, can be expressed by a sum of the simplest periodic magnitudes.* The length of the periods of the simply periodic terms of this sum must be exactly such, that either one or two^] or three or four, and so on, of their periods are equal to the period of the given magnitude. This, reduced to tones, means that the pitch numbers of the partial tones must be exactly once, twice, three times, four times, and so on, respectively, as great as that of the prime tone. These are the whole numbers which determine the ratios of the consonances. For, as we have seen, the condition of consonance is that two of the lower partial tones of the notes combined shall be of exactly the same pitch; when they are not, disturbance arises from beats. Ultimately, then, the reason of the rational numerical relations of Pytliagoras is to be found in the theorem of Fourier, and in one sense this theorem may be considered as the prime source of the theory of harmony. f

The relation of whole numbers to consonance became in ancient times, in the middle ages, and especially among Oriental nations, the foundation of extravagant and fanciful speculation. ' Everything is Number and Harmony,' was the characteristic principle of the Pythagorean doctrine. The same numerical ratios^ which exist between the seven tones of the diatonic scale, were thought to be found again in the distances of the celestial bodies from the central fire. Hence the harmony of the spheres, which was heard by Pythagoras alone among mortal men, as his disciples asserted. The numerical speculations of the Chinese in primitive times reach as far. In the book of Tso-kiu-ming, a friend of Confucius (b.c. 500), the five tones of the old Chinese scale were compared with the five elements of their natural philosophy — water, fire, wood, metal, and earth. The whole numbers; 1, 2, 3 and 4 were described as the source of all perfection. At a later time the 12 Semitones of the Octave were connected with the 12 months in the year, and so on. Similar references of musical tones to the elements, the temperaments, and the constellations are found abundantly scattered among the musical writings of the Arabs. The harmony of the spheres plays a great part throughout the middle ages. According to Athanasius Kircher, not only the macrocosm, but the microcosm is musical. Even Keppler, a man of the deepest scientific spirit, coidd not^ keep himself free from imaginations of this kind. Nay, even in* the most recent times, theorising friends of music may be found who will rather feast on arithmetical mysticism than endeavour to hear upper partial tones.

The celebrated mathematician Leonard Euler | tried, in a more serious ami more scientific manner, to found the relations of consonances to whole numbers upon psychological considerations, and his theory may certainly be regarded as the one which found most favour with scientific investigators during the last century, although it perhaps did not entirely satisfy them. Eider § begins by explaining that we are pleased witli everything in which we can detect a certain amount of

Footnote: ⁎ Namely magnitudes which vary as sines tauce by Prof. Preyer. See infra, App. XX.
and cosines. sect. L. art. 7. — Traiislafor.]
t [The coincidences or non-coincidences of + Tentameti novae thcorwc. Musicac, Petro-
combinational tones, which are independent of poli, 1739. .
Fourier's law, are also considered of impor- § Lor. cit. chap. ii. § 7,
