page: 231

Euler has not confined these speculations to single consonances and chords, but has extended them to their results, to the construction of scales, and to UKxlulations, and brought out many surprising specialities correctly. But without taking into account that Euler's system gives no explanation of the reason why a consonance when slightly out of tune sounds almost as well as one justly tuned, and much better than one greatly out of tune, although the numerical ratio for the former is generally much more complicated, it is very evident that the principal difficulty in Euler's theory is that it says nothing at all of the mode in which the mind contrives to perceive the numerical ratios of two combined tones. We must not forget that a man left to himself is scai'cely aware that a tone depends upon vibrations. Moreover, immediate and conscious perception by the senses has no means of discovering that the numbers of vibrations performed in the same time are different, greater for high than for low tones, and that determinate intervals have deter¶ minate ratios of these numbers. There are certainly many perceptions of the senses in which a person is not precisely able to account for the way in which he has attained to his knowledge, as when from the resonance of a space he judges of its size and form, or when he reads the character of a man in his features. But in such cases a person has generally had a large experience in such relations, which helps him to form a judgment in analogous circumstances, without having the previous circumstances on which his judgment depends clearly present to his mind. But it is quite different with pitch numbers. A man that has never made physical experiments has never in the wdiole course of his life had the slightest opportunity of knowing anything about pitch numbers or their ratios. And almost every one who delights in music remains in this state of ignorance from birth to death.

Hence it would certainly be necessary to shew how the ratios of pitch numbers can be perceived by the senses. It has been my endeavour to do this, and hence the results of my investigation may be said, in one sense, to fill up the gap which Euler's left. But the physiological processes which make the difference sensible^ between consonance and dissonance, or, in Euler's language, orderly and disorderly relations of tone, ultimately bring to light an essential difference between our method of explanation and Euler's. According to the latter, the human mind perceives commensurable ratios of pitch numbers as sitch; according to our method, it perceives onli/ the physical effect of these ratios, namely, the continuous or intermittent sensation of the auditory nerves.* The physicist knows, indeed, that the reason why the sensation of a consonance is continuous is that the ratios of its pitch numbers are commensurable, but when a man who is unacquainted with physics, hears a piece of music, nothing of the sort occurs to him,t nor does the physicist find a chord in any respect more harmonious because he is better acquainted with the cause of its harmoniousness.J It is quite different with the order of rhythm. That exactly two crotchets, or three in a triplet, or four quavers

Footnote: and chords, is here annexed, because its con- because 60 is the least common multiple of f j sequences are very correct, if combinational 4, 5, 6, that is, the least number which all of tones are disregarded. When p is a prime them will divide without a remainder, number, the degree is = p. All other numbers * [With possibly Prof. Preyer's addition, are products of prime numbers. The number see App. XX. sect. L. art. 1.— Translator.] of the degree for a product of two factors a and t [In point of fact, as he always hears temb, for which separately the numbers of degree pared tones, he never hears the exact cornare a and ^ respectively = o + /3 - 1. To find mensurable ratios. Indeed, on account of the the number of the degree of a chord, which can impossibility of tuning with perfect exactness, be expressed hy p: q: r: s, &c., in smallest the exact ratios are probably never heard, whole numbers, Euler finds the least common except from the double siren and wave-siren. — multiple of;;, q, r, s, &c., and the number of Tnoislator.]
its degree is that of the chord. Thus, for + [Does a man breathe more easily and
example: aerate his blood better because he knows the
The number of the degree of 2 is 2, and of 3 is 3, constitution of the atmosphere and its relation
of 4 = 2 X 2, it is 2 + 2 - 1 = 3 ^^ ^^^^ carbonised blood? Does a man feel a
of 12 = 4 X 3^ it is 3 + 3 - 1 = 5 weight greater or less, because he knows the
of 60 = 12 X 5* it is 5 -t- 5 - 1 = 9' \&vfs of gravitation? These are quite similar
That of the major triad 4 : 5 : 6 is that 'of 60, ^^^^^^ons.-Translator.]
