page: 232

+ go to one minim is perceived by any attentive listener without the least instruction. But while the orderly relation (or commensurable ratio) of the vibrations of two combined tones, on the other hand, undoubtedly aftects the ear in a certain way which distinguishes it from any disorderly relation (incommensurable ratio), this difference of consonance and dissonance depends on physical, not psychological grounds.

The considerations advanced by Rameau ^ and d'Alembert i on the one side, and Tartini X on the other, concerning the cause of consonance agree better with our theory. The last founded his theory on the existence of combinational tones, the two first on that of upper partial tones. As we see, they had found the proper points of attack, but the acoustical knowledge of last century did not allow of their drawing sufficient consequences from them. According to d'Alembert, Tartini's book was so darkly and obscurely written that he, as well as other well-

¶ instructed people, were unable to form a judgment upon it. D'Alembert's book, on the other hand, is an extremely clear and masterly performance, such as was to be expected from a sharp and exact thinker, who was at the same time one of the greatest physicists and mathematicians of his time. Rameau and d'Alembert lay down two facts as the foundation of their system. The first is that every resonant body audibly produces at the same time as the prime {generateur) its Twelfth and next higher Third, as upper partials (harnioniques). The second is that the resemblance between any tone and its Octave is generally apparent. The first fact is used to shew that the major chord is the most natural of all chords, and the second to establish the possibility of lowering the Fifth and the Third by one or two Octaves without altering the nature of the chord, and hence to obtain the major triad in all its different inversions and positions. The minor triad is then found by the condition that all three tones should have the same upper partial or harmonic, namely, the Fifth of the chord (in fact C, E\), and G have all the same

¶ iipper partial ff). Hence althoxigh the minor chord is not so perfect and natural as the major, it is nevertheless prescribed /;// natttre.

In the middle of the eighteenth century, when much sutt'ering arose from an artificial social condition, it may have been enough to shew that a thing was natural, in order at the same time to prove that it must also be beautiful and desirable. Of course no one who considers the great perfection and suitability of all organic arrangements in the human body, would, even at the present day, den}that when the existence of such natural relations have been proved as Rameau discovered between the tones of the major triad, they ought to be most carefully considered, at least as starting-points for further research. And Rameau had indeed quite correctly conjectured, as we can now perceive, that this fact was the proper basis of a theory of harmony. But that is by no means everything. For in nature we find not only beauty but ugliness, not only help but hurt. Hence the mere proof that anything is natural does not suffice to justify it esthetically.

¶ Moreover if Rameau had listened to the effects of striking rods, bells, and membranes, or blowing over hollow chambers, he might have heard many a perfectly dissonant chord. And yet such chords cannot but be considered equally nattiral. That all musical instruments exhibit harmonic upper partials depends upon the selection of qualities of tone which man has made to satisfy the requirements of his ear.

Again the resemblance of the Octave to its fundamental tone, which was one of Rameau's initial facts, is a musical phenomenon quite as much in need of explanation as consonance itself.

No one knew better than d'Alembert himself the gaps in this system. Hence

Footnote: ⁎ [Traite dc Vharmonic reduite a dcs prin- 1762. cipes iifdurds, 1121. — Translator. '\ \ \Trattido di Miisicn sccondo la vera
t I^Umcnts dc Musique, suirant les prin- scienza delV armonia. Padova, 1751. — Transapes de M. Itameau, par M. d'Alembert. Lyon, lator.]
