page: 235

+ larly Scales, Modes, and theii* Modulations have undergone multifarious alterations, not merely among uncultivated or savage people, but even in those periods of the world's history and among those nations where the noblest flowers of hum;ui culture have expanded.

Hence it follows, — and the proposition is not even now sutticiently present to the minds of our musical theoreticians and historians — that the system of Scales, Modes, and Harmonic I'issues does not rest solely upon inalterahle natural laws, hut is also, at least partly, the residt of esthetical principles, ivhich have already chanjed, and will still further change, with the progressive develojwient of humanity.

But it does not follow from this that the choice of those elements of musical art was perfectly arbitrary, and that they do not allow of being derived from some more general law. On the contrary the rules of any style of art form a wellconnected system whenever that style has attained a full and perfect development. ¶ These rules of art were certainly never developed into a system by the artists themselves with conscious intention and consistency. They are rather the result of tentative exploration or the play of imagination,- as the artists think out or execute their plans, and by trial gradually discover what kind or manner of performance best pleases them. Yet science can endeavour to discover the motors, whether psychological or technical, which have been at work in this artistic process. Scientific esthetics have to deal with the psychological motor; scientific j^hysics with the technical. When the artist's aim in the style he has adopted, and its principal direction, have once been rightly conceived, it can be more or less correctly determined why he was forced to follow this or that rule, or employ this or that technical means. In musical theory, namely where the peculiar physiological functions of the ear, while not immediately present to conscious self-examination, play an important part, a large and rich field is thrown open for scientific investigation to shew the necessary character of the technical rules for each individual ¶ direction in the development of our art.

It does not rest with natural science to characterise the chief problem worked out by each school of art, and the elementary principle of its style. This must be gathered from the results of historical and esthetical inquiry.

Tlij relation we have to treat may be illustrated by a comparison with architecture, which, like music, has pursued essentially different directions at difFei'ent times. The Greeks, in their stone temples, imitated the original wooden constructions; that was the principle of their architectural style. The whole division and arrangement of their decorations clearly shew that it was their intention to imitate wooden constructions. The verticality of the supporting columns, the general horizontality of the supported beam, forced them to divide all the subordinate parts for the great majority of cases into vertical and horizontal lines. The purposes of ■Grecian worship, which performed its principal functions in the open air, were satisfied by erections, of this kind, in which the internal spaces were necessarily ¶ narrowly limited by the length of the stone or wooden beams which could be employed. The old Italians (Etruscans), on the other hand, discovered the principle •of the arch, composed of wedge-shaped stones. This discovery rendered it possible to cover in much more extensive buildings with arched roofs, than the Greeks could do with their wooden beams. Among these arched buildings the halls of justice (basil'icae) became important, as is well known, for the subsequent development of architecture. The arched roof made the circular arch the chief principle in division and decoration for Roman {Byzantine) art. The columns, pressed by heavy weights, were transformed into pillars, on which, after the style was fully developed, columns merely appeared in diminished forms, half sunk in the mass of the pillar, as simply decorative articulations, and as the downward continuation of the ribs of the arches which radiated towards the ceiling from the upper end of the pillar.

In the arch the wedge-shaped stones press against each other, but as they all uniformly press inwards, each one prevents the other from falling. The most
