page: 239

+ having no acconipan^'ing harmonies. Nevertheless our recitative, when well performed, will give us a better conception of the degi'ee in which the expression of the words can be enhanced b}' musical recitation, than we can obtain from the monotonous repetition of the Roman liturgy, although the latter perhaps is more nearly related in kind to ancient recitation than the former. The settlement of the Roman liturgy by Pope Gregory the (ireat (a.d. 590 to 604) reaches back to a time in which reminiscences of the ancient art, although faded and deformed, might have been in some degree handed down by tradition, especially if, as we arc probably entitled to assume, (Gregory really did little more than finally establish the Roman school of singing which had existed from the time of Pope Sylvester (a.d. 314 to 335).* The majority of these formulae for lessons, collects, &c., evidently imitate the cadence of ordinary speech. They proceed at an equal height; particular, emphatic, or non-Latin words are somewhat altered in pitch; and for the punctuation certain concluding forms arc prescribed, as the following^ for lessons, according to the customs of Miuister.f

Footnote: Sic can - ta com - ma, sic du - o punc - ta: sic ve - ro punc-tum. Thus sing the com - ma, and thus the co - Ion
: and thus the full stop.

:ffz:rpr-=p:

Sic sig - mom in - ter - ro - ga - ti Thus sing the mark of in - ter - ro

These and similar final formulae were varied according to the solemnity of the feast, the subject treated, the rank of the priest that sang and that answered, and^y so on.+ It is easy to see that they strove to imitate the natural cadences of ordinary speech, and to give them solemnity by eliminating their individual irregularities. Of coarse in such fixed formula no regard can be paid to the grammatical sense of the clauses, which suffers much in various ways from the intoning. Similarly we may suppose that the ancient tragic poets prescribed the cadences of speech to their actors, and preserved them by a musical accompaniment. And since ancient tragedy kept much further aloof from immediate external realism than our modern drama, as is shewn by the artificial rhythms, the unusual rolling words, the immovable strange masks, it could admit of a more singing tone for declamation than would, perhaps, please our modern ears. Then we must remember that by emphasising or increasing the loudness of certain words, and by rapidity or slowness of speech, or pantomimic action, much life can be thrown into delivery of this kind, which would certainly be insufferably monotonous if not.thus enlivened.

But in any case homophonic music, even when in olden time it had to ac-^ company extensive poems of the highest character, necessarily played an utterly subordinate part. The musical turns must have entirely depended on the changing sense of the words, and could have had no independent artistic value or connection without them. A peculiar melody for singing hexameters throughout an epic, or iambic trimeters throughout a tragedy, would have been insupportable.| Those

Footnote: ⁎ [These are the dates of his reign. from the Jewish ritual chants. In the oldest
Hullah says the school was founded in a.d. manuscripts of the Old Testament, there are
350. — Translator.'] 25 different signs employed to denote cadences
t Antony, ' Lehrbuch des Gregorianischen and melodic phrases of this kind. The fact
Kirchengesanges ' [Manual of Gregorian that the corresponding signs of the Greek
Church-musk'], Miinster, 1829. According to Church are Egyptian demotic characters, hints
the information collected by Fetis (in his at a still older Egyptian origin for this nota-
Histoire generale de 3Iusiquc, Paris, 1869, tion.
vol. i. chap, vi.), it has become doubtful I [We must remember that the Greek and
whether this system of declamation with pre- Latin so-called accents consisted solely in
scribed cadences, is not rather to be deduced alterations of pitch, and hence to a certain
