page: 242

Footnote: rE Hypato [uTrarrj uppermost string]
Tetrachord of ) F Parhypate .
... [■jroipuTriirri next to uppermost string]
lowest pitch "i G Licbrmos [\ixavos forefinger string]
\^A Mese (tone of middle string) . [/xear] middle string]
IB Paramcse ..
.. [Trapafxear} next to middle string]
C Trite [Tpirr, third string]
D Paranete [vapai'riT-^ next to lowermost string]
E Nete [V/jttj lowermost string]

In modem phraseology the hist desci'iption cited from Aristotle implies that the Parhypate was a kind of descending ' leading note ' to the Hypate. In the leading tone there is perceptible effort, which ceases 0:1 its falling into the fnndamental tone.

If, then, the tone of the middle string answers to the tonic, the Hypate, which

¶ is its Fifth, will answer to the dominant. For our modern feeling it is far more necessary to close with the tonic than to begin with it, and hence we usually take the final tone of a piece to be its tonic without further inquiry. Modern music, howevei', usually introduces the tonic also in the first beat of the opening bar. The whole mass of tone is developed from the tonic and returns into it. Modern musicians cannot obtain complete repose at the end unless the series of tones converges into its connecting centre.

Ancient Greek music seems, then, to have deviated from ours by ending on the dominant instead of the tonic. And this is in full agreement with the intonation of speech. We have seen that the end of an affirmative sentence is likewise formed on the Fifth next below the principal tone.* This peculiarity has also been genemlly preserved in modern recitative, in which the singer usually ends on the dominant; the accompanying instruments then make this tone part of the chord of the dominant Seventh, leading to the tonic chord, and thus make a close

¶ the tonic in accordance with our present musical feeling. Now since Greek music was cultivated by the recitation of epic hexameters and iambic trimeters, we should not be surprised if the above-mentioned peculiarities of chanting were so predominant in the melodies of odes that Aristotle could regard them as the rule. I

From the facts just adduced it follows (and this is what we are chiefly concerned with) that the Greeks, among whom our diatonic scale first arose, were not without a certain esthetic feeling for tonality, but that they had not developed it so decisively as in modern music. Indeed, it does not appear to have even entered into the technical rules for constructing melodies. Hence Aristotle, who treated music esthetically, is the only known writer who mentions it; musical writers proper do not speak of it at all. And unfortunately the indications furnished by Aristotle are so meagre, that doubt enough still exists. For example, he says nothing about the differences of the various musical modes in reference to their

¶ principal tone, so that the most important point of all from which we should wish to regard the construction of the musical scale, is almost entirely obscured.

The reference to a tonic is more distinctly made out in the scales of the old Christian ecclesiastical music. Originally the four so-called authentic scales were distinguished, as they had been laid down by Ambrose of Milan (elected Bishop A.D. 374, died a.d. 398). Not one of these agrees with any one of our scales. The four 2:>lafjal scales afterwards added by Gregory, are no scales at all in our sense of the word. The four authentic scales of Ambrose X are:

Footnote: ⁎ [This would be entirely crossed by the ment of the Homeric Ode to Demeter, which
ancient Greek system of pitch-accents, just as has been published by B. Marcello, shews the
it now is by a similar system in Norwegian, above-mentioned peculiarity very distmctly. where the pitch may rise for both affirmative \ [Mr. Rockstro in his article ' Ambro-
and interrogative sentences. See p. 239rf', sian Chant,' in Grove's Dictionary of Music,
note \. Translator.'] states that this attribution of four authentic
t Among the presumed ancient melodies scales to St. Ambrose has not been proved. —
which have been handed down to us, the frag- Translator. ]
