page: 243

\) D E F G A B c J

■2) E F G A R c d e

3) F G A R c d e f

i) G A B c d e f \i Perhaps, however, the change of B into B\) was allowed from the first, and this would make the first scale agree with our descending scale of D minor, and the third scale would become onr scale of F major. The old rule was that' songs in the first scale should end in i), those in the second in E, those in the third in F, and those in the fourth in G. This marked ont these tones as tonics in our sense of the word. But the rule was not strictly observed. The conclusion might fall on other tones of the scale, the so-called confined tones, and at last the confusion became so great that no one was able to say exactly how the scale was to be recognised, all kinds of insufficient rules were formulated, and at last musicians ¶ clung to the mechanical expedient of fixing upon certain initial and concluding phrases, called tropes, as chai'acterising the scale.

Hence although the rule of tonality had been already remarked in these medieval ecclesiastical scales, the rule was so unsettled and admitted so many exceptions, that the feeling of tonality must have been much less developed than in modern music.

The Indians also hit upon the conception of a tonic, although their music is likewise unisonal. They called the tonic Ansa* Indian melodres as transcribed by English travellers, seem to be very like modern European melodies. f Fe'tis and Coussemaker % have made the same remark respecting the few known remains of old German and Celtic melodies.

Although, therefore, homophonic music was [possibly] not entirely without a reference to some tonic, or predominant tone, such a tone was beyond all dispute much more weakly developed than in modern music, where a few consecutive chords ¶ suffice to establish the scale in which that portion of the piece is written. The cause of this seems to me traceable to the undeveloped condition and subordinate part which characterises homophonic music. Melodies which move up and down in a few tones which are easily comprehended, and are connected, not by some musical contrivance, but by the words of a poem, do not require the consistent application of any contrivance, to combine them. Even in modern recitative tonality is much less firmly established than in other forms of composition. The necessity for a steady connection of masses of tone by purely musical relations, does not dawn distinctly on our feeling, until we have to form into one artistic whole large masses of tone, which have their own independent significance without the cement of poetry.

Footnote: ⁎ Jones, On the Music of the Indians, " By the word vtidi," says the commentator
translated by Dalberg, pp. 36, 37. [Sir W. "
he means the note, which announces and
Jones s tract, with many others, is reprinted ascertains the Raga [tmie], and which may be
m Sourmdro Mohun Tagore's Hindu Music considered as the parent and origin of the
from Various Authors. This is what he says cjraha and iiijdsa." This clearly shews I think fi
of the ans'a, p. 149 of Tagore: ' Since it [says Sir W. Jones], that the ans'a must be
appears from the Narayan [a Sanscrit treatise the tonic; and we shall find that the two
on music], that 36 modes are in general use, other notes are generally its third and fifth
and, the rest very rarely applied to practice, I or the mediant and dominant. In the poem
shall exhibit only the scales of the 6 Ragas entitled Macfha there is a musical simile
[tunes] and 30 Ragmis [female personification which may illustrate and confirm our idea'
of tunes m Hindu music] according to Soma. [I give the translation only.] " From the
r ' i-'^liSr? ^is*'i"guis^ed sounds in each mode greatness, from the transcendent qualities of
[as Sir W.Jones translates?v;^] are called f/w/ja, that hero, eager for conquest, other kings
nj/asa, ans'a, and the writer of the Narayan march in subordination to him, as other notes
defines them m the two following couplets. are suhoTdma,te to the ans'a " '—Translafor] [I give the translation only.] " The note called f [The construction and time are very
c/raha is placed at the beginning, and that different. The scales are extremely variable
named nydsa at the end of a song; that note, The results are very imperfectly represented
which displays the peculiar melody, and to by our present musical notation.— rm?w^«tor 1 which all the others are subordinate, that, X Histoirc de VHarmonie au moyen Aae,
which is always of the greatest use, is like a Paris, 1852, pp. 5-7. sovereign, though a mere ans'a or portion."
