page: 244

Footnote: Polyphonic Music.

The second stage of musical development is the polyphonic music of the middle ages. It is usual to cite as the first invented part-music, the so-called organum or diaphony, as originally described by the Flemish monk Hucbald at the beginning of the tenth century. In this, two voices are said to have proceeded in Fifths or Fourths, with occasional doublings of one or both in Octaves. This would produce intolerable music for modern ears. But according to 0. Paul * the meaning is not that the two voices sang at the same time, but that there was a responsive repetition of a melody in a transposed condition, in which case Hucbald would have been the inventor of a principle which subsequently became so important in the fugue and sonata.

The first luidoubted form of part-music intentionally for several voices, was the

¶ so-called discanfus, which became known at the end of the eleventh century in

France and Flanders. The oldest specimens of this kind of music which have

been preserved are of the following description. Two entirely different melodies

and to all appearance the more different the better — were adapted to one another

by slight changes in rhythm or pitch, until they formed a tolerably consonant whole. At first, indeed, there seems to have been an inclination for coupling a liturgical formula with a rather ' slippery ' song. The first of such examples could scarcely have been intended for more than musical tricks to amuse social meetings. It was a new and amusing discovery that two totally independent melodies might be sung together and yet sound well.

The principle of discant was fertile, and its nature was suitable for development at that period. Polyphonic music proper was its issue. Different voices, each proceeding independently and singing its o^^n melody, had to be united in such a way as to produce either no dissonances, or merely transient ones which ¶ were readily resolved. Consonance was not the object in view, but its opposite, dissonance, was to be avoided. All interest was concentrated on the motion of the voices. To keep the various parts together, time had to be strictly observ^ed, and hence the influence of discant developed a system of musical rhythm, which again contributed to infuse greater power and importance into melodic progression. There was no division of time in the Gregorian Cantiis firmus. The rhythm of dance music was probably extremely simple. Moreover, melodic movement increased in richness and interest as the parts were multiplied. But the establishment of an artistic connection between the different voices, which, as we have seen, were at first perfectly free, required a new invention, and this, though it cropped up at first in a very humble form, has ended by obtaining predominant importance in the whole art of modern musical composition. This invention consisted in causing a musical phrase which had been sung by one voice to be repeated by another. Thus arose canonic imitation, which may be met with sporadically as ¶ early as in the twelfth century.t This subsequently developed into a highly artistic system, especially among Netherland composers, who, it must be owned, ended by often shewing more calculation than taste in their compositions.

But by this kind of pol}-phonic music — the repetition of the same melodic phrases in succession by different voices — it first became possible to compose musical pieces on an extensive plan, owing their connection not to any union with another fine art — poetry, but to purely mtisical contrivances. This kind of music also was especially suited to ecclesiastical songs, in which the chorus had to express the feelings of a whole congregation of worshippers, each with his own peculiar disposition. It was, however, not confined to ecclesiastical compositions, but was also applied to secular songs (madrigals). The sole form of harmonic music yet known, which could be adapted to artistic cultivation, was that founded on canonic

Footnote: ⁎ Geschichte des Claviers [History of the nos, PI. xxvii. No. iv., translated iu p. xxvii. Pianoforte], Leipzig, 1868, p. 49. No. xxix.
t Coussemaker, loc. cit. Discant
: Custodi
