page: 245

+ repetitions. If this had been rejected, nothing but homophonic nnisic remained. Hence we find a niuiiber of songs set as strict canons or with canonical repetitions, although they were entirely unsuited for such a heavy form of composition. Even the oldest examples of instrumental compositions in several parts, the dance music of 1529,* are written in the form of madrigals and motets, a character of composition which, more freely treated, lasted down to the suites of S. Bach and Handel's times. Even in the first attempts at musical dramas in the sixteenth century, there was no other way of making the personages express their feelings musically, than by causing a chorus behind or upon the stage to sing over some madrigals in the fugue style. It is scarcely possible for us, from our present point of view, to conceive the condition of an art which was able to build iip the most complicated constructions of voice parts in chorus, and was yet incapable of adding a simple accompaniment to the melody of a song or a duet, for the purpose of filling up ¶ the harmony. And yet when we read how Giacomo Peri's invention of recitative with a simple accompaniment of chorus was applauded and admired and what contentions arose as to the renown of the invention; what attention Viadana excited when he invented the addition of a Basso continuo for songs in one or two parts, as a dependent part serving only to fill up the harmony t; it is impossible to doubt that this art of accompanying a melody by chords (as any amateur can now do in the simplest manner ])ossible) was completely unknown to musicians up to the end of the sixteenth centur3\ It was not till the sixteenth century that composers became aware of the meaning possessed by chords as forming an harmonic tissue inde[)endently of the progression of parts.

To this condition of the art corresponded the condition of the tonal system. The old ecclesiastical scales were retained in their essentials, the first from D to cl, the second from E to e, the third from F to /, and the fourth from G to g. Of these the scale from F to / was useless for harmonic purposes, because it contained the Tritone F—B, in place of the Fourth F — B\). Again, there was no reason for^ excluding the scales from C to c and A to (/. And thus the ecclesiastical scales altered under the influence of polyphonic music. But as the old unsuitable names were retained notwithstanding the changes, there arose a terrible confusi(m in the meaning attached to modes. It was not till nearly the end of this period that a learned theoretician, Glai'ean, undertook in his Dodecachordon (Basle 1547) to put some order into the theory of modes. He distinguished twelve of them, six authentic and six plagal, and assigned them Greek names, which were, however, incorrectly transferred. However, his nomenclature for ecclesiastical modes has been generally followed ever since. The following are Glarean's six authentic ecclesiastical modes, keys or scales, with the incorrect Greek names he assigned to them.

Ionic . . . C D E F G A B c

Doric . . . D E F G A B c d

¶ Phrygian . . E F G A B c d e

Lydian . . F G A B c d e f

Mixolydian . . G A B c d e f g

Folic . . . A B c d e f g a

Ionic answers to our major. Folic to our minor system. Lydian was scarcely ever used in polyphonic music owing to the false Fourth F — 7i, and when it was employed it was altered in many diflferent ways.

Inability to judge of the musical significance of a connected tissue of harmonies again appears in the theory of the keys, by the rule, that the key of a polyphonic composition was determined by considering the separate voices independently. Glarean in certain compositions attributes different keys to the tenor and bass, the soprano and alto. Zarlino assumes the tenor as the chief part for determining the key.

Footnote: ⁎ Winterfeld, Johannes GahricU unci scin Zeitalter, vol. ii. p. 41. t Winterfeld, ibid., vol. ii. p. 19 and p. 59.
