page: 246

The practical consequences of this neglect of harmony are consjjicnous in various ways in musical compositions. The composers confined themselves on the whole to the diatonic scale; 'accidentals,' or signs of alterations of tone, were seldom used. The Greeks had introduced the depression of the tone B to B\) in a peculiar tetrachord, that of the si/nemmenoi, and this was retained. Besides this /it, cti and gV. were used, to introduce leading tones in the cadences. Hence modulation, as we undei'stand it, from the key of one tonic to that of another with a different signature was almost eiitirely absent. Moreover, the chords used hy preference down to the end of the fifteenth century, were formed of the Octave and Fifth without the Third, and such chords now sound poor and are avoided as much as possible. To medieval composers who only felt the want of the most perfect consonances, these chords appeared the most agreeable, and none others might be used at the close of a piece. The dissonances which occur are universally those which ¶ arise from suspended and passing tones; chords of the dominant Seventh, which, in modern harmony, play such an important part in marking the key, and in connecting and facilitating progressions, were quite unknown.

Great, then, as was the artistic advance in rhythm and the progression of parts, during this period, it did little more for harmony and the tonal system than to accumulate an undigested mass of experiments. Since the involved progression of the parts gave rise to chords in extremely varied transpositions and sequences, the musicians of this period could not but hear these chords and become acquainted with their effects, however little skill they shewed in making use of them. At any rate, the experience of this period prepared the way for harmonic music proper, and made it possible for musicians to produce it, when external circumstances forced on the discovery.

3. Harmonic Music,

¶ Modern harmonic music is characterised by the independent significance of its harmonies, for the expression and the artistic connection of a musical composition. The external inducements for this transformation of music were of various kindsFirst there was the Protestant ecclesiastical chorus. It was a principle of Protestantism that the congregation itself should undertake the singing. But a congregation could not be expected to execute the artistic rhythmical labyrinths of Netherland polyphony. On the other hand, the founders of the new confession, with Luther at their head, were far too penetrated with the power and significance of music, to reduce it at once to an unadorned unison. Hence the composers of Protestant ecclesiastical music had to solve the problem of producing simply harmonised chorales, in which all the voices progressed at the same time. This excluded those canonic repetitions of the same melodic phrases in different parts, which had hitherto formed the chief unity of the whole piece. A new connecting principle had to be looked for in the sound of the tones themselves, and this was

¶ found in a stricter reference of all to one j^redominant tonic. The success of this problem was facilitated by the fact that the Protestant hymns were chiefly adapted to existing popular melodies, and the popular songs of the Germanic and Celtic races, as already remarked, betrayed a stricter feeling for tonality in tho modern sense, than those of southern nations. Thus as early as in the sixteenth century, the system of the harmony of the ecclesiastical Ionic mode (our present major) developed itself with tolerable correctness, so that these chorales do not strike modern ears as strange, although they were still without many of our later contri vances for marking the key, as, for example, the chord of the dominant Seventh. On the other hand, it was much longer before the other ecclesiastical modes, in harmonising which much uncertainty still prevailed, were fused into the modern minor mode. The Protestant ecclesiastical hymns of that time produced great effects on the feelings of contemporaries — a fact emphasised on all sides in the liveliest language, so that no doubt can exist that the impression made by such nuisic, was something as new as it was peculiarly powerful.
