page: 248

What we miss in sucla examples as the one just adduced, is first, that the tonic chord does not play the same prominent part at the very commencement that is assigned to it in modern music. In the latter, the tonic chord has the same prominent and connecting significance among chords as the tonic or key-note among the tones of the scale. Next we miss altogether that feeling for the connection of consecutive chords which in modern times has led to the very general custom of giving them a common tone. This is evidently related to the fact that, as we shall see hereafter, it was not possible in the old ecclesiastical modes to produce chains of chords so closely connected with each other and with the tonic chord, as in the modern major and minor modes.

Hence, although we recognise in Palestrina and Gabrieli a delicate artistic sensitiveness for the esthetic eftect of separate chords of various kinds, and in so ¶ far a certain independent significance in their harmonies, yet we see that the means of establishing an intei'nal connection in the tissue of chords had still to be discovered. This problem, however, required a reduction and transformation of the previous scales, to our major and minor. On the other hand, this reduction sacrificed the great variety of expression which depended on diversity of scale. The old scales partly form transitions between major and minor, and pai'tly enhance the character of the minor, as in the ecclesiastical Phrygian mode [p. 245(7]. This diversity being lost, it had to be replaced by new contrivances, such as the transposition of the scales for different tonics, and the modulational passage from one key to another.

This transformation was completed during the seventeenth century. But the most active cause for the development of harmonic music is due to the coriimencement of opera. This had been occasioned by a revival of acquaintance with ¶ classical antiquity, and its avowed object was to rehabilitate ancient tragedy, which was known to have been recited musically. Here arose immediately the problem of allowing one or two voices to execute solos; but these again had to be harmonised so as to fit in between the choruses, which were treated in the polyphonic manner, the object being to make the solo parts stand prominently forward and keep the accompanying voices well under. These conditions first gave rise to Recitative, invented by Giacomo Peri and Caccini in 1600, and solo songs with airs, invented by Claudio Monteverde and Viadana. The new view taken of harmony shews itself in written music by the appearance of figured basses in the works of these composers. Every figured bass note represented a chord, so that the chords themselves were settled, but the progression of the parts of which they were constituted was left to the taste of the player. And thus what was merely secondary in polyphonic music, became principal, and conversely.

Opera also necessitated the discovery of more powerful means of expression ¶ than were admissible in ecclesiastical uuisic. Monteverde, who was extremely prolific in inventions, is the first composer who used chords of the dominant Seventh without preparation, for which he was severely blamed by his contemporary Artusi. Generally we find a bolder use of dissonances, which were employed independently, to express sharp contrasts of expression, and not, as before, as accidental results of the progression of parts.

Under these influences, even as early as in Monteverde's time, the Doric, Eolic, and Phrygian ecclesiastical modes [p. 254c, d] began to be transformed and fused into our modern minor mode. This was completed in the seventeenth century, and these modes were thus made more suitable for giving prominence to the tonic of the harmony, as will be more fully shewn hereafter.

We have already given an outline of the nature of the influence which these changes exerted on the constitution of the tonal system. The mode of connecting musical phrases hitherto in vogue— canonic repetitions of similar melodic figures — had necessarily to be abandoned as soon as a simple harmonic accompaniment
