page: 254

+ compound tones, and at the same time we hear nothing that we had not 2'reviously heard. Hence the repetition of a melody in the higher Octave is a real repetition of what has been previoush' heard, not of all of it, but of a part.* If we allow a low voice to be accompanied by a higher in the Octave above it, the only part music which the Greeks employed, we add nothing new, we merely reinforce the evenly numbered partials. In this sense, then, the compound tones of an Octave above are really repetitions of the tones of the lower Octaves, or at least of part of their constituents. Hence the first and chief division of our musical scale is that into a series of Octaves. In reference to both melody and harmony, we assume tones of different Octaves which bear the same name, to have the same value, and, in the sense intended, and up to a certain point, this assumption is correct. An accompaniment of Octaves gives perfect consonance, but it gives nothing additional; it merely reinforces tones already present. Hence it is musically applicable for in¶ creasing the power of a melody which has to be brought out strongly, but it has none of the variety of polyphonic music, and therefore is felt to be monotonous, and it is consequently forbidden in polyphonic unisic.

What is true of the Octave is true in a less degree for the Twelfth. If a melody is repeated in the Twelfth we again hear only what we had already heard, but the repeated part of what we heard is much weaker, because only the third, sixth, ninth, kc, partial tone is repeated, whereas for repetition in the Octave, instead of the third partial, the much stronger second and weaker fourth partial is heard, and in place of the ninth, the eighth and tenth occur, kc. Hence repetition of a melody in the Twelfth is less complete than repetition in the Octave, because only a smaller part of what had been already heard is repeated. In place of this repetition in the Twelfth, we may substitute one an Octave lower, namely in the Fifth. Repetition in the Fifth is not a pure repetition, as that in the Twelfth is. Taking 2 for the pitch numlier of the prime tone, the partials are (197f, d) ¶ for the fundamental compound .2 4 68 1012

for the Twelfth .... 6 12

for the Fifth 3 6 9 12

When we strike the Twelfth we repeat the simple tones 6 and 12, which already existed in the fundamental compound tone. When we strike the Fifth, we continue to repeat the same sim])le tones, but we also add two othei'S, 3 and 9. Hence for the repetition in the Fifth, only a part of the new sound is identical with a part of what had been heard, but it is nevertheless the most perfect repetition which can be executed at a smaller interval than an Octave. This is clearly the reason why unpractised singers, when they wish to join in the chorus to a song that does not suit the compass of their voice, often take a Fifth to it. This is also a very evident proof that the imcultivated ear regards repetition in the Fifth as natural. Such an accompaniment in the Fifth and Foui'th is said to have been systematically developed in the early part of the middle ages. Even in modern music, repetition ¶ in the Fifth plays a prominent part next to repetition in the Octave. In normal fugues the theme, as is well known, is first repeated in the Fifth; in the normal form of instrumental pieces, that of the Sonata, the theme in the first movement is transposed to the Fifth, returning in the second part to the fundamental tone. This kind of imperfect repetition of the impression in the Fifth induced the Greeks also to divide the interval of the Octave into two eqxiivalent sections, namely two Tetrachords. Our major scale on being divided in this manner would be: —

Footnote: d e f <i a h c d'
I. II. III.

Footnote: ⁎ [Some considerations have been omitted, powerful as in the higher tone. The upper
probably by design. The quality of tone of partials of the higher tone, which are still
the voice which sings the Octave above is quite effective, would be inaudible in the lower
materially different. The evenly numbered tone. — 'Translator.'] l^artials of the lower tone are by no means so
