page: 258

+ in which there is no c', and the upper tetrachord has no interval of a Semitone, although there is an interval of this kind in the lower.*

Olvmpos (circa B.C. 660-620), who introduced Asiatic flute music into Greece and adapted it to Greek tastes, transformed the Greek Doric scale into one of five tones, the old enhm-monic scale

h^c e^f at

This seems to indicate that he brought a scale of five tones with him from Asia, and merely borrowed the use of the intervals of a Semitone from the Greeks. Among the more cultivated nations, the Chinese and the Celts of Scotland and Ireland still retain the scale of five notes without Semitones, although both have also become acquainted with the complete scale of seven notes.

Among the Chinese, a certain prince Tsaj-ju is said to have introduced the

¶ scale of seven notes amid great opposition from conservative musicians. The division of the Octave into twelve Semitones, and the transposition of scales have also been discovered by this intelligent and skilful nation. But the melodies transcribed by travellers mostly belong to the scale of five notes. The Gaels and Erse have likewise become acquainted with the diatonic scale of seven tones by means of psalmody, and in the present form of their popular melodies the missing tones are sometimes just touched as appoggiature or passing notes. These are, however, in many cases merely modern improvements, as may be seen on comparing the older forms of the melodies, and it is usually possible to omit the notes which do not belong to the scale of five tones without impairing the melody. This is not only true of the older melodies, but of more modern popular airs which w^ere composed during the last two centuries, whether by learned or unlearned musicians. Hence the Gaels as well as the Chinese, notwithstanding their acquaintance with the modem tonal system, hold fast by the old.^ And it cannot be denied that by

¶ avoiding the Semitones of the diatonic scale, Scotch airs receive a peculiarly bright and mobile character, although we cannot say as much for the Chinese. Both Gaels and Chinese make up for the small number of tones within the Octave by great compass of voice. §

The scale of five tones admits of a certain variety in its construction. Assume c as the tonic and add to it the nearest related notes in the ascending Octave, till vou come to a Semitone. This gives

The next note c would form a Semitone with/. In the descending Octave we find in the same way

c — C — F—G — E\).

The great gaps in the scales betAveen c and /" in the first, and between G and c

¶ in the second are filled up by tones related in the second degree. Since the tones

related to the Octave can only be repetitions of those directly related to the tonic,

Footnote: Mese (a) was a Fourth, from the Mese («) to bition in Londou, 1884, gives many varieties
the Nete (c') a Fifth, from the Nete (c') to the of this scale, see App. XX. sect. K. Japan.—
Trite {li) a Fourth, from the Trite {h) to the Translator.]
Hypate (c) a Fifth '. This shews that c, not b, I Chinese INIelodies, in Ambrosch's Gc-
was the missing note. schicJdc dcr Musik, vol. i. pp. 30, 34, .35. Of
^' [The upper tetrachord was thus reduced Scotch melodies there is a fine collection
to a trichord, while the lower remained a per- with reference to the authorities and the older
feet tetrachord. If we take Pythagorean into- forms in G. F. Graham's Songs of Scotland,
nation the cents are c 90 / 204 g 204 a 204 8 vols. Edinbui-gh, 1859. The modern piauo-
b 294 d' 204 e'.— Translator'.] forte accompaniment which has been added, is
t [Taking Pythagorean intonation, the often ill enough suited to the character of the
cents in the intervals are b 90 c 408 c 90/ 408 airs.
a 204 b. The account of the popular tmiing § [Exclusive of the two drones there are
of the Ko-to, the national Japanese instru- only 9 tones on the bagpipe. For the whole
ment, furnished by the Japanese, but in Euro- of these observations see App. XX. sect. K.—
pean notes, at the International Health Exhi- Translator.']
