page: 265

+ distinguishable by the ear. The distinctness with which the yet sensible ditt'erence' can be felt then furnishes a measure of its magnitude. In this sense we have probably to explain the ])Ossibility of the later enhnrinontr mode of the Greeks, which, however, had already fallen into disuse in the time of Aristoxenus, and was perhaps hunted up again by later writers as an anti(iuarian curiosity. In this mode the Semitone of the ancient enharmonic mode already mentioned (No. I, p. 262(6) was again subdivided into two Quartertones, so that a tetrachord was ])roduced like the chromatic one, but with closer intervals between the adjacent tones. The division of this enharmonic tetrachord'^ was

11. 3 : 4

This Quartertone can only be considered as a transition in the melodic move¶ ment towards the lowest extreme of the tetrachord. A similar interval occurs in this way in existing Oriental music. A distinguished musician whom I requested to pay attention to it on a visit to Cairo, wrote to me as follows: ' This evening I have been listening attentively to the song on the minarets, to try to appreciate the Quartertones, which I had not supposed to exist, as I had thought that the Arabs sang out of tune. But to-day as I was with the dervishes I became certain that such Quartertones existed, and for the following reasons. Many passages in litanies of this kind end with a tone which was at first the Quartertone and then ended in the pure tone.f As the passage was frequently repeated, I was able to observe this every time, and I fovuid the intonation invariable.' The Greek writers on music themselves say that it is diflicult to distinguish the enharmonic Cj?uartertones.:{:

The later interpreters of Greek musical theory have mostly advanced the opinion that the above-mentioned differences, which the Greeks called colourings, (xpoai), wer-e merely speculative and never came into practical use.§ They con-^ sider that these distinctions were too delicate to produce any esthetic effect except on an incredibly well cultivated ear. But it seems to me that this opinion could never have been entertained or advanced by modern theorists, if any of them had })ractically attempted to form these various tonal modes and to compare them by ear. On an harmonium which will shortly be described I am able to compare

Footnote: ⁎ [It is not to be supposed that these number of vibrations for the sharpened and
two Quartertones, differing onlj- by two cents normal note, which gave the interval as 48
(32 : 31 = 55 cents, 31 : 30 = 57 cents), were cents. The effect was very peculiar, but can
exactly produced. The lutist or lyrist would of course be easily imitated on the violin. On
tune his Fourth t; :/byear (tolerably correctly), the classical Indian instrument, the Vina, the
then a major Third below/ or (P'jy also by ear frets are very high, sometimes about an inch,
(and proljably very incorrectly on account of Hence by pressing down the string behind the
the great difficulty of tuning a major Third), fret, the tension could be greatly increased, and
and then would by feeling divide the remaining as much as a Semitone could be easily added,
interval in halves as well as he could. Using so that the scale could be indefinitely altered
c- : t-tj for the approximate Quartertone he without changing the frets, which were fixed ^
would have about, c 56 c<\ 56 d'\;> 386/', or some- with wax. On the Arabic Rabab and the
thing sufficiently like it. Mesha'qah's c 50 curious Ciiinese fiddles, which have no frets or
ci\ 50 cji 400y would doubtless have been near finger-board, a note could be instantaneously
enough: Probably no two lyrists tuned alike. sharpened in a similar manner by pressing
I\Iy experience of tuning by ear is quite against more strongly. — Translator.^ any approach to the accuracy which the figures \ [And yet a quarter of a Tone is between
in the text would \my)\y.— Translator.] . 2 and 3 commas, and all the difficulties of tuning
t [Probably the effect was like that which in just and tempered intonation arise from iu-
I heard produced by Raja Ram Pal Singh on tervals of a single comma or less. — TraMs^n tor.] his Sitar. Here the tone of the note, played § Even Bellerman is of this opinion
by pressing the string against a fret, was shar- [Tonleiter der Griechcn, p. 27). Westphal,
pened a quarter of a Tone by sliding the finger in his Fragmenten der Gricchischcn Uhiilh-
along the fret (thus defiecting the string vdker, p. 209, has collected passages from
and increasing the tension), and then it was Greek writers proving the real practical use of
allowed to glide on to the proper note by these intervals. According to Plutarch {Dc
straightening the string without replucking Musica, pp. 38 and 39), the later Greeks had
it. I determined the amount of sharpening even a preference for these surviving archaic
by observing the distance of deflection, and intervals, then, at leisure, measuring bv mv forks the
