page: none

+ natural intonation with Pythagorean, and to play the diatonic mode at one time after the method of Didymus and at another after that of Ptolemy, and also to make other deviations. It is not at all difficult to distinguish the difference of a €omma |i in the intonation of the different degrees of the scale, when well-known melodies are performed in different ' colourings,' and every musician with whom I have made the experiment has immediately heard the difference. Melodic passages with Pythagorean Thirds have a strained and restless effect, while the natural Thirds make them quiet and soft, although our ears are habituated to the Thirds of the equal temperament, which are nearer to the Pythagorean than to the natural intervals. Of course where delicacy in any artistic observations made with the senses, comes into consideration, moderns must look upon the Greeks in general as inisurpassed masters. And in this particular case they had very good reason and abundance of opportunity for cultivating their ear better than ours. From ¶ youth upwards we are accustomed to accommodate our ears to the inaccuracies of equal temperament, and the whole of the former variety of tonal modes, with their diffei'ent expression, has reduced itself to such an easily apprehended difference as that between major and minor. But the varied gradations of expressions which moderns attain by harmony and modulation, had to be effected by the Greeks and other nations that use homophonic music, by a more delicate and varied gradation of the tonal modes. Can we be surprised, then, if their ear became much more finely cultivated for differences of this kind than it is possible for ours to be 1

The Greek scale was soon extended to an octave. Pythagoras is said to have been the first to establish the eight complete degrees of the diatonic scale. At first two tetrachords were connected in such a way as to have a common tone, the /xeo-tj:

Footnote: f'\>

¶ which produced a scale of seven degrees. Then this scale was changed into the following; form:

/,^ — d -

and thus made to consist of a tetrachord and a trichord, of which mention has already been made (p. 251d). Finally Lichaon of Samos (according to Boethius), or Pythagoras (according to Nicomachus), completed the trichord into a tetrachord, and thus established a scale consisting of two disjunct tetrachords.

The diatonic scale thus obtained could be continued either way at pleasure by adding higher and lower octaves, and it then produced a regularly alternating series of Tones and Semitones. But for each piece of music a portion only of this unlimited diatonic scale was employed, and the tonal systems were distinguished hj the character of the portions selected.

These sectional scales might be produced in very different ways. The first ¶ practical object which necessarily forces itself on attention, as soon as an instrument with a limited number of strings, like the Greek lyre, is iised for executing a piece of music, is, of coui-se, that there should be a string for every musical tone required. This prescribes a cei'tain series of tones which must be provided and tuned on the instrument. Xow as a rule when a certain series of tones is thus prescribed as a scale for the tuning of a lyre, no question is raised as to whether a tonic is to be distinguished or not, or if so which it should be. A tolerable number of melodies may be found in which the lowest tone is the tonic: others in which an interval below the tonic is touched; and others, again, in which the Fifth or Fourth above the Octave below the tonic is used. This is the kind of difference between the authentic and ^^%aZ scales of the middle ages. In the authentic scales the deepest tone of the scale, in the plagal its Fifth below or Fourth above, was the tonic; thus: * —

Footnote: ⁎ [See Mr. Rockstro's article, ' Modes Eccle- on ' Gregorian ]Modes,' vol. i. p. G25, in Grove's siastical,' vol. ii. p. 340, and Rev. T. Helmore's Didionarij of Music. What Prof. Helmholtz
