page: 280

Finally there is no perceptible reason in the series of Fifths why they should not be carried further, after the gaps in the diatonic scale have been supplied. Why do we not go on till we reach the chromatic scale of Semitones? To what purpose do we conclude our diatonic scale with the following singularly unequal arrangement of intervals —

1, 1, 1 1, 1, 1, I?

The new tones introduced by continuing the series of Fifths would lead to no closer intervals than those which already exist. The old scale of five tones appears to have avoided Semitones as being too close. But when two such intervals already appear in the scale, why not introduce more?

The Arabic and Persian musical system, so far as its nature is shewn in the

writings of the older theorists, also knew no method of tuning but by Fifths. But

¶ this system, which seems to have developed its peculiarities in the Persian dynasty

of the Sassanides (a.d. 226-651) before the Arabian conquest, shews an essential

advance on the Pythagorean system of Fifths.

In order to judge of this system of music, which has been hitherto completely misunderstood, the following relation has to be known. By tuning foiir Fifths iipwards from C

C±G±D±A±E

we come to a tone, E, which is f-J or a comma higher than the natural major Third of G, which we write Ey. The former E forms the major Third in the Pythagorean scale. But if we tune eight Fifths downwards from C, thus —

C ± F ± B\, ±E\) ± A\) ±D\, ± G\) ± (J\) ± F\)

¶ we come to a tone, F\), which is almost exactly the same as the natural E^. ¶ inter\^al of G to F\} is expressed by

I X Ifflf ' ^^ nearly f x

[ = 384 cents].

Footnote: their eyes whether they have done so. He multiplies examples until aU the class have their attention fully awakened to the effect of the new tone. This done he tells his pupils the Sol-fa name and the manual sign for the new tone, and guides them by the signs to Sol-fa the exercise and themselves produce the proper effect. The signs are better in this case than the notation, because with them the teacher can best command the attention of every eye and ear and voice, and at the first introduction of a tone, attention should be acute ' {ibid. p. 15). This passage, the result of practice with hundreds of thousands of children, shews that a totally new f! principle of understanding the relation of the " tones in a scale to the tonic has not only been introduced, but worked out on a large scale practically, and, as I myself know, successf ally. See Prof. Helmholtz's own impression of the success, as long ago as 1864, in App. XVIII. Since that time great experience has been gained and many methods improved. But the object of introducing this notice here is to shew t\x&t 2yroj)cr training (such as the ancient Greeks certainly had) could produce the corresponding /cc^mr/ for the effect of any tone in any scale anyhow divided, independently of the relation of consonances, and that this consideration may help to explain the persistence of many scales which are harmonically inexplicable. No doubt Pythagorean singers hit the degrees of their scale quite correctly, and no doubt the 'mental effects' of their A, E, B, were very different from those of the harmonisable A-^,
E-y, Bi- We can partially judge of them by the effects of equal temperament, which melodically cannot differ much, although they certainly differ sensibly, from those of Pythagorean intonation. And it must be remernbered that singers actually learn to sing in equal temperament, in which all major Thirds are 14 cents too sharp, and then find just major Thirds intolerably flat! To this I would add the following anecdote quoted from Fetis (Hist. Generale de la Musique, vol. ii. p. 27) by Prof. Land (Gamme Arabc, p. 19 footnote), containing 'a fact,' as he says, 'which could not be believed, if it were not attested by the person whom it concerns. The celebrated organist M. Lenmaens, who was born in_ a village of Campine [or Kempenland, a district in the Belgian province of Limbourg, 51°15' N. lat. , 5° 20' E. long.], studied music in early youth upon a clavecin (harpsichord), which had been long dreadfully out of tune, because no tuner existed in the district. Fortunately, an organ -builder was summoned to repair the organ at the abbey of Everbode near that village. By chance he called upon the young musician's father, aiid lieard the boy play on his miserable instrument. Shocked at the multitude of false notes which struck his ear, he immediately determined to tune the clavecin. When he had done so, M. Lemmens experienced the most disagreeable sensations, and it was some time before he could habituate his ear to the correct intervals, having been so long misled by different relations.' Hence, false intervals may seem natural. — Translatm:]
