page: 288

+ struggle against singing the leading note in minor scales, although it may be clearly struck on the organ.

Among the ancient tonal modes, the Greek Lydian (major mode) and the uumelodic Hypolydian (mode of the Fifth, p. 269a, No. 7) had the major Seventh as the leading note to the tonic, and hence the first was developed into the principal tonal mode of modem music, the major mode. The Greek Ionic (mode of the Fourth) differed from it only in having a minor Seventh. On simply altering this into a major Seventh, this mode also became major. On giving a major Seventh to each of the other three, they gradually converged to our present minor mode during the seventeenth century. From the Greek Phrygian (mode of the minor Seventh) by changing B\} into ^i we obtain

Footnote: THE ASCENDING MINOR SCALE.

G...D...E'\,...F...G...A,...B,...c

as we had already found from a simple consideration of the relationship of tones [p. 274i, No. 2]. The Greek Hypodoric or Eolic (mode of the minor Third), which answers to our descending minor scale, gives on changing B^\) into B^,

Footnote: THE INSTRUMENTAL MINOR SCALE.

C...D...E'\)...F..M...A'\,...B,...c

which is difficult for singers to execute, on account of the interval A'^^^...B^ [= ratio 64 : 75, cents 274] , but frequently occurs in modern music both ascending and descending.

The Greek Doric (mode of the minor Sixth) with a major instead of a minor Seventh, is still discoverable in the final cadence mentioned on p. 286/>.

The general introduction of the leading tone represents, therefore, a continually increasing consistency in the development of a feeling for the predominance of the ¶ tonic in a scale. By this change, not only is the variety of character in the ancient tonal modes seriously injured, and the wealth of previous means of expression essentially diminished, but even the links of the chain of tones in the scale were disrupted or disturbed. We have seen that the most ancient theory made tonal system consist of series of Fifths, and that each system had at first four and afterwards six intervals of a Fifth. The predominance of a tonic as the single focus of the system was not yet indicated, at least externally; it became apparent at most by a limitation of the number of Fifths to contain those tones only which occuiTcd in the natural scale. All Greek tonal modes may be formed from the tones in the series of Fifths —

F±C±G±D±A±E±B.

Directly we proceed to the natural intonation of Thirds, the series of Fifths is interrupted by an imperfect Fifth, as in ¶ F ±C ±G ± D ...A,± E,± B,

where the Fifth D...A^ [=680 cents] is imperfect. And when finally the sharp leading note is introduced, as by the use of G.^ for G^ in ^ i minor, the series is entirely interrupted [C: <?.,jj: = 16 : 25 = 772 cents] .

In the gradual development of the diatonic system, therefore, the various links of the chain which bound the tones together were sacrificed successively to the desire of connecting all the tones in a scale with one central tone, the tonic. And in exact proportion to the degree with which this was carried out, the conception of tonality consciously developed itself in the minds of musicians.

The further development of the European tonal system is due to the cultivation of harmony, which will occupy us in the next chapter.

But before leaving our present subject, some doubtful points have still to be considered. In the preceding chapter I have shewn that the melodic relationship of tones can be made to depend upon their upper partials, precisely in the same
