page: 289

+ way as their consonance was shewn to he deteniiineil in ("ha|)ter X. Now this method of explanation may in a, certain sense he c()nsi(U>iV(l to aui'ee with the favourite assertion that ^ xudodii ix rr'-'olrnl h<(nn<ni>/,' on whieli musicians do not hesitate to form musical systems without staying to inquii'e how harmonies could have been resolved into melodies at times and places where harmonies had either never been heard, or were, after hearing, repudiated. According to our explanation, at least, the same physical peculiarities in the composition of nnisical tones, which determined consonances for tones struck simultaneously, would also determine melodic relations for tones struck in succession. The former then wovild not be the reason for the latter, as the above phrase suggests, but both would have a common cause in the natural formation of musical tones.

Again, in consonance we found other pecnliar relations, due to combinational tones, which become effective even when simple tones, or tones with few and faint upper jiartials, are struck simultaneously. I have already shewn that combina-^ tional tones very imperfectly replace the effect of upper partial tones in a consonance, and that consequently- a chord formed of simple tones is wanting in brightness and character, the distinctions between consonance and dissonance being only very imperfectly developed.

In melodic passages, however, combinational tones do not occur, and hence the (piestion arises as to how far a melodic effect could be produced by a succession of simple tones. There is no doubt that we can recognise melodies which we have already heard, when they are executed on the stopped pipes of an organ, or are whistled with the mouth, or merely struck on a glass or wood or steel harmonicon, as a musical box, or are played on bells. But there is also no doubt that all these instruments, which generate simple tones, either alone or accompanied by weak and remote inharmonic secondary tones, are incapable of producing any effective melodic impression without an accompaniment of musical instruments proper. ¶ They may be often extremely effective for performing single parts when accom})anied by the organ, or the orchestra, or a pianoforte, but by themselves they produce very poor music indeed, which degenerates into absolute unpleasantness when the inharmonic secondary tones are somewhat too loud.

We are bound, however, to give some reason why any impression of melody at all can be produced by such instruments.

Now we must first remember that, as shewn at the end of Chapter VII., the actual construction of the ear favours the generation of weak harmonic upper partials within the ear itself, when pow^erful but objectively simple tones are sounded. Hence it is at most very weak objectively simple tones which can be regarded as also subjectively simple.

Next, there is an effect of memory to be brought into account. Supposing that I have been used to hear Fifths taken at all possible pitches, and have recognised them by aural sensation as having a very close melodic relationship, I should ¶ know the magnitude of this interval by experience for every tone in the scale, and should retain the knowledge thus acquired by the action of a man's memory of sensations, even of those for which he has no verbal expression.

When, then, I hear such an interval executed on tuning-forks, 1 am able to recognise it as an interval I have often heard, although its tones have eitlier none, or only some faint remnants of those upper partials which formerly gave it a, right to be considered as a favourite interval of close melodic relationship. And just in the same way I shall be able to recognise, as previously known, other melodic passages or whole melodies which are executed in simple tones, and even if I hear a melody for the first time in this way, whistled with the mouth or chimed by a clock, or struck on a glass harmonicon, I should be able to complete it by imagining how it would sound if executed on a real musical instrument, as the voice or a violin.

A practised nuisician is able to form a conception of a melody by merely reading the notes. If we give the prime tones of these notes on a glass harmonicon, we give a firmer basis to the conception by really exciting a large portion of the impression

u
