page: 290

+ on the senses which the melody would have produced if sung. Simple tones, however, merely exhibit an outline of the nielody. All that gives the melody iXs charm is absent. We know, indeed, the individual intervals which it contains, but we have no immediate impression on our senses which serves to distinguish those which are distantly from those which are closely related, or the related from the totally unrelated. Observe the great difference between merely whistling a melody or playing it on a violin; between striking it on a glass harmonicon or on the pitino! The difference is somewhat of the same kind as that between viewing a single photograph of a landscape, and seeing two corresponding photographs of it through a stereoscope. The first enables me, by means of my memory, to form a conception of the relative distances of its parts, and this conception may be often very satisfactory. But the stereoscopic fusion of the two figures gives me the real impression on the senses which the relative distances of the parts of the landscape would have them¶ selves produced, and which I am obliged in the case of a single image to supply by experience and memory. Hence the stereoscopic picture is more lively than the simple perspective view, exactly in the same way as immediate impressions on our senses are more lively than our recollections.

The case seems to be the same for melodies executed in simple tones. We recognise the melodies when we have heard them otherwise performed; we can even, if we have sufficient musical imagination, picture to ourselves how they would sound if executed by other instruments, but they are decidedly without the immediate impression on the senses which gives music its charm.

CHAPTER XV.

Footnote: THE CONSONANT CHORDS OF THii TONAL MODES.

¶ Polyphony was the form in which music for several voices first attained a certain degree of artistic perfection. The peculiar characteristic of this style of music was that several voices were singing each its own independent melody at the same time, which might be a repetition of the melodies already sung by the other voices, or else qidte a different one. Under these circumstances each voice had to obey the general law of tonality common to the construction of all melodies, and, moreover, every tone of a polyphonic passage had to be referred to the same tonic. Hence each voice had to commence separately on the tonic or some tone closely related to it, and to close in the same way. In practice each part of a polyphonic piece was made to begin with the tonic or its Octave. This fulfilled the law of tonality, but necessitated the closing of a polyphonic piece with a unison.

The reason why higher Octaves might accompany the tonic at the close, lies, as we saw in the last chapter, in the fact that higher Octaves are mei-ely repetitions of portions of the fundamental tone. Hence by adding its Octave to the tonic at the ¶ close, we merely reinforce part of its compound tone; no new compound or simple tone is added, and the union of all the tones contains only the constituents of the tonic itself.

The same is true for all the other partial tones which are contained in the tonic. The next step in the development of the final chord was to add the Twelfth of the tonic. Now the chord c.c' ±g' contains no element which is not also a constituent of the compound tone c when sounded alone, and consequently, being a mere representative of the single musical tone c, it is suitable for the termination of a piece of music having the tonic c.

Nay even the chord c ±g'...c" might be so used, for when it is struck we hear weakly indeed, but still sensibly, the combinational tone c, so that the whole mass of tone again contains nothing more than the constituents of the tone c. It must be owned, however, that this combination would answer to a rather unusual quality of tone, with a proportionably weak prime partial.

On the other hand, it was not possible to use the chords c.c' ...f or c ...f ±c"
