page: 291

+ to end a piece having the tonic c, althougli tliese chords are consonances as well as the preceding, because / is not an element of the compound tone c, and hence the closing chord would contain something which was not the tonic at all. It is here j)robably that we have to look for the reason why some medieval theoreticians wished to reckon the Fourth among the dissonances. Bnt perfect consonance was not s'ltlicient to make an interval available for the final chord. There was a second condition which the theoreticians did not clearly understand The tones of the final chord had to be constituents of the compoiuid tone of the tonic. This was the only case in which those tones could be employed.

The Sixth of the tonic is as ill suited as the Fourth for use in the final chord. But the major Third can be used, because it occurs as the fifth partial tone of the tonic. Since the qualities of tone which are fit for m\isic generally allow the fifth and sixth partial tone to be audible, but make the higher partials either entirely ¶ inaudible or at least vei-y faint, and since, moreover, the seventh partial is dissonaiit with the fifth, sixth, and eighth, and is not used in the scale, the series of tones available for the closing chord terminates Avith the Third. Thus we actually find down to the beginning of the eighteenth century, that the final chord has either no Third, or only a major Third, even in tonal modes which contain only the minor and not the major Third of the tonic. To attain fulness, it was preferred to do violence to the scale by using the major Third in the closing chord. The minor Third of the tonic can never stand for a constituent of its compound tone. Hence it was originally as much forbidden as the Fourth and Sixth of the tonic. Before a minor chord could be used to close a piece of music the feeling for harmony had to be cultivated in a new direction.

The ear is the more satisfied with a closing major chord, the more closely the order of the tones used imitates the arrangement of the partial tones in a compound. Since in modern music the upper voice is most conspicuous, and hence has the ¶ principal melody, this voice must usually finish with the tonic. Bearing this in mind, we can use any of the following chords for the close (combinational tones are added as ci-otchets): —

1_ 2 3 4 5

ei

mm

In the chords 1 and 2 all the notes coincide with partials of C, and they therefore most closely resemble the compound tone C itself. And then closer ¶ positions of the chord can be substituted, provided they resemble the first having C for the fundamental tone as in 3, 4, 5. They still I'etain sxifficient resemblance to the compound tone of the low C to be used in its place. Moreover, the combinational tones, written as crotchets in 3, 4 and 5, assist in the effect of making the deeper partials of the compound C, at least faintly, audible. But the first two positions always give the most satisfactory close. The tendency towards a deep final tone in harmonic music is very characteristic, and I believe that the above is its proper explanation. There is nothing of the kind in the construction of homophonic melodies. It is peculiar to the bass of part music.

Precisely in the same way that the tonic, when used as the bass of its major cliord at the close, gives it a resemblance to its own compound tone, and is hence felt as the essential tone of the chord, all major chords sound best when the lowest tone of their closest triad position (No. 4. p. 219c) is made the bass. The other major chords in the scale are those on its Fourth and Fifth, and hence for the scale of C major, are F+A^-C and G+B^-I). Hence if we make the

u 2
