page: 296

+ the chord of the dominant Seventh had actually come into use, and the Seventh F of the chord G + B^- D \ F ought by every right to have descended into the minor Third E^^ of the closing chord, musical pieces of the fifteenth century * avoid this progression, and make this Seventh F either ascend to the Fifth G, or descend to the major Third K^ of the final chord, instead of to A''(7, its minor Third. This custom prevailed down to Bach's time.

In Chapter Xlll. (p. "J -19a) we characterised modern harmonic music, as contrasted with medieval polyphony, by its development of a feeling for the independent significance of chords. In Palestrina, Gabrieli, and still more in Monteverde and the first composers of operas, we find the various degrees of harmoniousness in chords carefully used for the purposes of expression. But these masters i\xe almost entirely without any feeling for the mutual relation of consecutive chords. These chords often follow one another by entirely unconnected leaps, and the only bond of union ¶ is the scale, to which all their notes belong.

The transformation which took place from the sixteenth to the l)eginning of the eighteenth century, may, I think, be characterised by the development of a feeling for the independent relationship of chords one to the other, and by the establishment of a central core, the tank- chord, round which were grouped the whole of the consonant chords that could be formed out of the notes of the scale. For these chords there was a repetition of the same effort wdiich was formerly shewn in the construction of the scale, where interrelations of the tones were first grounded on a chain of intervals, and afterwards on a reference of each note to a central compound tone, the tonic.

Two choi-ds which have one or more tones in common will here be termed directly related.

Chords which are directly related to the same chord will be iiere said to be related trj each other in the second dee/ree. ¶ Thus c + ey - (J and ij + h^ - d are directly related, and so are '• + fi - // and a^ - r + e^ ; but (/ + h^ - d and 'ti - c + e^ are related only in the second degree.

When two chords have two tones in common they are more closely related than when they have only one tone in common. Thus r -i- f, - g and a, - r -|- e^ are more closely related than ^ + 'i - .'/ and >/ + ^i - d.

The tonic chord of any tonal mode can of course only be one which more or less perfectly represents the compound tone of the tonic, that is, that major or minor chord of which the tonic is the root. The tonic note, as the connecting core of all the tones in a regularly constructed melody, must be heard on the first accented part of a bar, and also at the close, so that the melody starts from it and returns to it; the same is true for the tonic chord in a succession of chords. In both of these positions in the scale we require to hear the tonic note, accompanied not by any arbitrary chord, but only by the tonic chord, having the tonic note itself as its root. This was not the case even as late as the sixteenth century, ;is is seen ¶ by the example on p. 2^1 c taken from Talestrina.

When the tonic chord is major, the domination of all the tones by the tonic note is readily reconciled with the domination of all the chords by the tonic chord, for as the piece begins and ends with the tonic chord, it also begins and ends at the same time with the pure xmmixed compound tone of the tonic note. But w^heu the tonic chord is minor, all these conditions cannot be so perfectly satisfied. We are obliged to sacrifice somewhat of the strictness of the tonality in order to admit the minor Third into the tonic chord at the beginning and end. At the commencement of the eighteenth century we find Sebastian Bach using minor chords at the end of his preludes, because these were merely introductory pieces, but not at the end of fugues and chorales, and at other complete closes. In Handel and even in the ecclesiastical pieces of Mozart, the close in a minor chord is used alternately

Footnote: ⁎ See an example in Anton Brumel, in will be found, ihicl. p. 550, where the voices Forkel's Geschichte der Musik, vol. ii. p. 647. might have easily been led to thi minor Another, with a i^lagal cadence by Josquin, Third.
