page: none

+ ness of the latter is made much more evident by the contrast. But it is precisely in the final chord that perfect consonance is essential to satisfy the feeling of the hearer. Hence this close could not become satisfactory until the chord of the dominant Seventh had been invented, which changed the dominant consonance into a dissonance.

.The preceding explanation shews that when we try to institute a close connection among all the chords peculiar to a mode similar to the close connection among the tones of the scale (that is, when we require all the consonant triads in the harmonic tissue to be related to one of their number, the tonic triad, in a manner analogous to that in which the notes of the scale are related to one of their number, the tonic tone), there are only tivo tonal modes, the major and minor, which properly satisfy such conditions of related tones and related chords. The major mode fulfils the two conditions of chordal relationship and tonal relationship in the most perfect manner. It has four triads which are immediately ¶ to the tonic chord

f + <ii - C + E^ - G + h^ - d

'i II M i

Its harmonisation can be so conducted (indeed, in popular pieces which must be readily intelligible, it is so conducted), that all tones appear as constituents of the three major chords of the system, those of the tonic, dominant, and subdominant. These major chords, when their roots lie low, appear to the ear as reinforcements of the compound tones of the tonic, dominant, and subdominant, which tones are themselves connected by the closest possible relationship of Fifths. Hence in this mode everything can be reduced to the closest musical relationship in existence. And since the tonic chord in this case represents the compound tone of the tonic ¶ immediately and completely, the two conditions -predominance of the tonic tone and of the tonic chord — go hand in hand, without the possibility of any contradiction, or the necessity of making any changes in the scale.

The major mode has, therefore, the character of possessing the most complete melodic and harmonic consistency, combined with the greatest simplicity and clearness in all its relations. Moreover, its predominant chords being major, are distinguished by full unobscured harmoniousness, w'hen such positions are selected for them as do not introduce inappropriate combinational tones.

The major scale is purely diatonic, and possesses the ascending leading note of the major Seventh, whence it results that the tone most distantly related to the tonic is brought into closest melodic connection with it.

The three predominant major chords furnish tones sufiicient to produce two minor chords, which are closely related to them, and can be employed to diversify the succession of major chords. ¶ The minor mode is in many respects inferior to the major. The chain of L-liords for its modern form is -

Footnote: f - a'r7 -I- C' - F?''o + G -\- l>x - d

Minor chords do not represent the compound tone of their root as well as the major chords; their Third, indeed, does not form any part of this compound tone. The dominant chord alone* is major, and it contains the two siipplementary tones of the scale. Hence when these appear as constituents of the dominant triad, and therefore of the compound tone of the dominant, they are connected with the tonic by the close relationship of Fifths. On the other hand, the tonic and subdouunant triads do not simply represent the compound tones of the tonic and subdominant notes, but are accompanied by Thirds which cannot be reduced to the close relation-

Footnote: ⁎ [That is, among the characteristic chords. text, contain the tones of one major chord, The two minor chords, as is shewn in the a^jj + c-e^lj. — Translator^
