page: none

+ ship of Fil'ths. The tones of the minor scule can therefore not be harmonised in snch a way as to link them witli the tonie note by so elose a relationship as in the major mode.

The conditions of tonality cannot be so simply reconciled with the predominance of the tonic chord as in the major mode. When a piece concludes with a minor cliord, we hear, in addition to the componnd tone of the tonic note, a second componnd tone which is not a constituent of the first. This accounts for the lonu' hesitation of musical com})Osers respecting the admissibility of a minor chord in the el')se.

The predominant minor chords have not the clearness and unobscured liarmonioiisness of the major chords, because they are accompanied In' combinational tones which do not fit into the chord.

The minor scale contains an interval a^\)...hi, which exceeds a whole Tone in ¶ the diatonic scale,* and answers to the numerical ratio 75 : 6-1 [= 274 ccntsi . To make the minor scale melodic it must have a diflFerent form in descending from what it has in ascending, as mentioned in the last chapter.

The minor mode, therefore, has no such simple, clear, intelligible consistency as the major mode; it has arisen, as it were, from a compromise between the different conditions of the laws of tonality and the interlinking of harmonies. Hence it is also much more variable, much more inclined to modulations into other modes.

This assertion that the minor system is much less consistent than the major, will be combated by many modern musicians, just as they have contested the assertion already made by me, and by other physicists before me, that minor triads are generally inferior in harmoniousness to major triads. Thei-e are many eager assurances of the contrary in recent books on the theory of harmony.t But the history of music, the extremely slow and careful development of the minor system in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the guarded use of the minor close by ¶ Handel, the partial avoidance of a minor close even by Mozart, — all these seem to leave no doubt that th« artistic feeling of the great composers agreed with our conclusions.]: To this must be added the varied use of the major and minor Seventh, and the major and minor Sixth of the scale, the modulations rapidly introduced and rapidly changing, and finally, but very decisively, popular custom. Popular melodies can contain none but clear transparent relations. Look through collections of songs now preferred by those classes among the Western nations which iiave often an opportunity of hearing harmonic music, as students, soldiers, artisans. There are scarcely one or two per cent, in minor keys, and those are mostly old popular songs which have descended from the times of homophonic music. It is also characteristic that, as I have been assured by an experienced

Footnote: ⁎ [The iutei'val is so strange, when uuaccom- falling upon the same note with which they
panied, that if it had to be taken merely as an began, wUl take e\, the major Third of r'.
inten-al, fti|) 274/^1, a singer woiild probably fail. Hence the difficulty is not avoided but in-
But the (i}\) is taken as the minor Third of/ creased by introducing the ambiguity of the „
with ease, and the b-^ is taken as the leading major key, into which this is a real modulation '■
note to (.•', with equal ease, so that the per- from // onwards. — Translator. '\ fectly unmelodic and inharmonic interval (t'^\) f [Can this be due to temperament? The
274i] never comes into consideration at all. sharp equally tempered major Third of 400
To get rid of it, the subdominant is often taken cents is worse of its kind than the flat equally
major, producing the chords of 1 C' ma. mi. ma., tempered minor Third of 300 cents, which
App. XX. sect. E. art 10, III., which makes the approaches close to 16 : 19 = 298 cents, an
scale f204 dll2 ci[>182./"204 ryl82 «i204 6^112 c', interval which many like, and which may be
and this differs from the major only by having tried as c'" : ^V'jj on the Harmonical. — Trans-
f^\) in place of e■^. In many pianoforte in- /ator.]
struction books this is giveii as the only form J [These composers played in meantone
of the ascending minor. Mr.CurwcnlSfaiu/ard temperament (App. XX. sect. A. art. 16), in
Course, p. 86 1 says that this major Sixth which the minor Third of 310 cents was much
' ascending is very difficult to sing,' and ' has rougher than the equally tempered one of 300
a hard and by no means pleasant effect,' and cents, having much slower beats. Possibly
points out that it leads singers to forget the this difference in the modes of tempering the
key, and in such a phrase asga^ b^ c' d' c''^\y, the minor Third, may have led to the difference of
pupils will sing e\ instead of c'^(j; and even in opinion mentioned in the text. — Translator.'] singing such a passage as g «j b-^ c' g, instead of
