page: 309

Similar relations exist for the mode of the Fourth and of the minor Seventh, although these are less specifically different from the major and minor modes respectively. They are, however, capable of giving a peculiar expression to certain mnsical periods, although difficnlties would arise in consistently carrying out these peculiarities through long pieces of music. The harmonic phrases which belong to these two last-named modes can of course also be executed within the usual major and minor systems. But perhaps it would facilitate the theoretical comprehension of certain modulations, if the conception of these modes and of their system of harmonisation were definitely laid down.

The only point, then, as historical development and physiological theory alike testify, for which modern music is superior to the ancient, is hannonisation. The development of modern music has been evoked by its theoretical principle, that the tonic chord should predominate among the series of chords by the same laws of ¶ relationship as the tonic note predominates among the notes of the scale. This principle did not become practically effective till the commencement of last century, when it was felt necessary to preserve the minor chord in the final cadence.

The physiological phenomenon which this esthetical principle brought into action, is the compound character of musical tones which are of themselves chords composed of partials, and consequently, conversely, the possibility under certain circumstances of replacing compound tones by chords. Hence in every chord the principal tone is that of which the whole chord may be considered to express its compound form. Practically this principle was acknowledged from the time that pieces of music were allowed to end in chords of several parts. Then it was immediately felt that the concluding tone of the bass might be accompanied by a higher Octave, Fifth, and, finally, major Third, but not by a Fourth, or minor Sixth, and for a long time also the minor Third was rejected; and we know that the first three intervals (the Octave, Fifth, and major Third) occur among the ¶ partials of the compound tone which lies in the bass, and that the others do not.

The various values of the tones of a chord were first theoretically recognised by Rameau in his theory of the fundamental bass, although Rameau was not acquainted with the cause here assigned for these different values. That compound tone which represents a chord according to our view, constitutes its Fundamental Bass, Radical Tone or Root, as distinguished from its bass, that is, the tone which belongs to the lowest part. The major triad has the same root whatever be its inversion or position. In the chords c + e^ - g, or g . . .c -\- e-^, the root is still c. The minor chord d -f + a has also as a rule only d as its root in all its inversions, but in the chord of the great [or added] Sixth /' + a...fZ' we may also consider/' as the root, and it is in this sense that it occurs in the cadence of c' major. Rameau's successors have partly given up this last distinction; but it is one in which Rameau's fine artistic feeling fully corresponded with the facts in nature. The minor chord really admits of this double interpretation, as we have already shewn (p. 294f/).

¶ The essential difference between the old and new tonal modes is this: the old have their minor chords on the dominant, the new on the subdominant side.

The reasons for the following construction have been already investigated.*

Footnote: In the
The chord of the 1
Subdominant
Tonic is
Dominant is
rMode of the minor Third . Old- ilode of the minor Seventh Ulode of the Fourth . IMajor Mode .... ■vr„_, /Minor-Major Mode . "^"^^t Minor Mode . . . .
Minor Major ]Major IMajor JMinor IMinor
Minor Minor jMajor IMajor Major Minor
Minor Minor Minor Major IMajor IMajor
(being a higher Octave of (/, of the Fifth of c, and of the major Third of fi[>), and hence calls it ' the phonic g tone,' whereas he con-
siders c-hCj-r/ in the same way as we do, as the ' tonic c tone '.

Footnote: ⁎ [It will be seen that this arrangement
