page: 310

CHAPTER XVI.

Footnote: THE SYSTEM OF KEYS.

There is nothing in the nature of music itself to determine the pitch of the tonic of any composition. If different melodies and mnsical pieces have to be executed by musical instruments or singing voices of definite compass, the tonic must be chosen of a suitable pitch, differing when the melody rises far above the tonic and when it sinks much below it. In short, the pitch of the tonic must be chosen so as to bring the compass of the tones of the piece within the compass of the executants, vocal or instrumental. This inevitable practical necessity entails the condition of being able to give any required pitch to the tonic.

Moreover, in the longer pieces of music, it is necessary to be able to make a temporary change of tonic, that is, to modulate, in order to avoid uniformity and to utilise the musical effects resulting from changing and then returning to the original key. Just as consonances are made more prominent and effective by means of dissonances, the feeling for the predominant tonality and the satisfaction which arises from it, is heightened by previous deviations into adjacent keys. The variety in musical turns produced by modulational connection has become all the more necessary for modern music, because we have been obliged entirely to renounce, or at any rate materially to circumscribe, the old principle of altering expression by means of the various tonal modes. The Greeks had a free choice among seven different tonal modes, the middle ages among five or six, but we can choose between two only, major and minor. Those old tonal modes presented a series of different degrees of tonal character, out of which two only remain suitable for harmonic music. But the clearer and firmer construction of an harmonic piece gives modern composers greater freedom in modulational deviations from the original key, and places at their command new sources of mvisical wealth, which were scarcely accessible to the ancients.

Finally I must just touch on the question, so much discussed, whether each different key has a peculiar character of its own.

It is quite clear that, within the course of a single piece of music, modulational deviations into the more or less distantly related keys on the dominant or subdominant side produce very different effects. This, however, arises simply from the contrast they offer to the original principal key, and would be merely a relative character. But the question here mooted is, whether individual keys have an absolute character of their own, independently of their relation to any other key.

This is often asserted, but it is difficult to determine how much truth the assertion contains, or even what it precisely means, because probably a variety of different things are included under the term character, and perhaps the amount of ¶ effect due to the particular instrument employed has not been allowed for. If an instrument of fixed tones is completely and uniformly tuned according to the equal temperament, so that all Semitones throughout the scale have precisely the same magnitude, and if also the musical quality of all the tones is precisely the same, there seems to be no ground for understanding how each different key should have a different character. Musicians fully capable of forming a judgment have also admitted to me, that no difterence in the character of the keys can be observed on the organ, for example. And Hauptmann,* I think, is right when he makes the same assertion for singing voices with or without an organ accompaniment. A great change in the pitch of the tonic can at most cause all the higher notes to be strained or all the lower ones obscured.

On the other hand, there is a decidedly difterent character in difterent keys on

Footnote: does not include the mode of the minor Sixth. E. art. 9, and thence to the general theory of It was this tabulation which led me to the duodenes in that section. — Translator.^ trichordal theory developed in App. XX. sect. * Harmonik unci Metrik, p. 188.
