page: 314

+ are much more disagreeable. For the Pythagorean Thirds c' + e and e - g the combinational tones are nearly C'jj: and B,, both differing by a Semitone from the combinational tone C, which would result from the perfect intervals in both cases. For the Pythagorean minor chord e -g +h' the combinational tones are B^ and very nearly G^. The first, 7i,, is very suitable, better even than the combinational tone C which results from perfect intonation. But the second, GT^, belongs to the major and not to the minor chord of E. However, as in perfect intonation one of the two combinational tones C and G is false, the Pythagorean minor chord can hardly be considered inferior in this respect. But the combinational tones of the equally tempered Thirds lie between those of the perfect and Pythagorean Thirds, and are less than a Semitone different from those of just intonation. Hence they correspond to no possible modulation, no tone of the chromatic scale, no dissonance that could possibly be introduced by the progression of the melody; they ¶ simply sound out of tune and wi*ong.*

These bad combinational tones have always been to me the most annoying part of equally tempered harmonies. When moderately slow passages in Thirds at rather a high pitch are played, they form a horrible bass to them, which is all the more disagreeable for coming tolerably near to the correct bass, and hence sounding as if they were played on some other instrument which was dreadfully out of tune. They are heard most distinctly on the harmonium and violin. Here every professional and even every amateur musician observes them immediately, when their attention is properly directed. And when the ear has once become accustomed to note them, it can even discover them on the piano. In the Pythagorean intonation the combinational tones sound rather as if some one were intentionally playing dissonances. Which of these two evils is the worse, I will not venture to decide. In lower positions where the very low combinational tones can be scarcely, if at all, heard, the equally tempered Thirds have the advantage ¶ the Greek, because they are not so rough, and produce fewer beats. In higher positions the latter advantage is perhaps destroyed by their combinational tones. However, the equally tempered system is capable of effecting everything that can be done by the Pythagorean, and with less expenditure of means.

C. E. Naumann,t who has lately defended the Pythagorean as opposed to the equally tempered system, grounds his reasons chiefly on the fact that the Semitones which separate the ascending leading tone from the tonic, and the descending minor Seventh from the Third of the chord on which it has to be resolved, are smaller in the Pythagorean (where they are about |i; as appears in the Table on p. 313c) than in the eiiually tempered, where they are about if; while they are greatest of all in just intonation, viz. \i. Now in the equally tempered scale there is only one tone between / and g, which is accepted at one time as /jj; to be a leading note to g, and at another as g\) to act as a Seventh resolving upon / ; but in the Pythagorean there are two tones, f^ and g\), of which the latter is the flatter.

Footnote: H * [This may be seen more clearly by calculating the pitch numbers, assuming c' to be 264 as on p. 17. Then—
Notes
Just, Difference
Pythagorean, Difference
Tempered, Difference
g'
264
264
264
66 = 0
70-12
68-61
e'
330
334-12
332-61
66 =(7
61-88 = ^,
62-94
<J'
396
396
395-55
99 = (?
105-19
102-81
h'
495
501-19
498-36
The 'differences' give the pitch numbers of the combinational tones. Now we have by p. 17a, C'=66, 6' = 99, ^, = 61-88, but the others correspond to no precise tones. The nearest equally tempered intervals are B 62-3, Cljf
= 69-93, and 0^ = 10^-16.— Translator.']
t Ueber die verschiedenen Bestimmungen der Tonvcrhaltnisse. [On the various determinations of the ratios of tones.] Leipzig, 1858.
