page: 320

+ chords of the same kind, and between consonances and dissonances are much more decided and conspicuous, than in the equal temperament. Hence modulations become much more expressive. Many fine distinctions are sensible, which otherwise almost disappear, as, for instance, those which depend on the different inversions and positions of chords, while, on the other hand, the intensity of the harsher dissonances is much increased by their contrast with perfect chords. The chord of the diminished Seventh, for example, which is so much used in modern music, borders upon the insupportable, when the other chords are tuned justly.*

Modern musicians who, with rai-e exceptions, have never heard any music executed except in equal temperament, mostly make light of the inexactness of tempered intonation. The eiTors of the Fifths are very small. There is no doubt of that. And it is usual to say that the Thirds are much less perfect consonances than the Fifths, and consequently also less sensitive to errors of intonation. The

¶ last assertion is also correct, so long as homophonic music is considered, in which the Thirds occur only as melodic intervals and not in harmonic combinations. In a consonant triad every tone is equally sensitive to false intonation, as theory and experience alike testify, and the bad effect of the tempered triad depends especially on the imperfect 'I'hirds.f

There can be no question that the simplicity of tempered intonation is extremely advantageous for instrumental music, that any other intonation requires an extraordinarily greater complication in the mechanism of the instrument, and would materially increase the difficulties of manipulation, and that consequently the high development of modern instrumental music would not have been possible without tempered intonation. But it must not be imagined that the difference between tempered and just intonation is a mere mathematical subtilty without any practical value. That this difference is really very striking even to unmusical ears, is shewn immediately by actual experiments with properly tuned instruments.

¶ And that the early musicians, who were still accustomed to the perfect intervals of vocal music, which was then most carefully practised, felt the same, is immediately seen by a glance at the musical writings of the latter half of the seventeenth anil the earlier part of the eighteenth centuries, at which time there was much discussion about the introduction of different kinds of temperament, and one newmethod after another was invented and rejected for escaping the difficulties, and the most ingenious forms of instrument were designed for practically executing the enharmonic differences of the tones. Pr?etorius;}: mentions a universal cymbalum, which he saw at the house of the court-organist of the Emperor Rudolph II. in Prague, and which had 77 digitals in 4 octaves, or 19 to the octave, the black digitals being doubled, and others inserted between those for e and /', and between those for h and c.§ In the older directions for tuning, several tones are usually tuned by Fifths which beat slightly, and then others as perfect major Thirds. The intervals on wdiich the errors accumulated were called ivolves.

Footnote: "' * [This should be tried on the Harmonical where the Fifth is only one-eleventh of a
as hy-d i, /'-"'[>• Although it has two per- comma or 2 cents too flat, and the major
feet minor Thirds and only one Pythagorean, Third is seven-elevenths of a comma or 14
it is a mere piece of noise, of a much worse cents too sharp, and hence the minor Third is
kind than the noise of the equally tempered eight-elevenths of a comma or 16 cents too
imitation of the same chord in the same flat. The effect is much more strongly felt
quality of tone. In just intonation the chord in playing passages than in playing isolated
of the diminished Seventh can therefore be chords. — Translator.']
used only with mild qualities of tone. But X Syntagma mitsicum, II., Chap. XI., p.
the real intonation of this chord is 10 : 12 : 14 63.
: 17, which can also be played on the Har- § [This was to make the meantone scale monical as Cj"316 (/"267 "b"}} 336 ^"cf'^^f. — more complete, the scale being C cU d\) U dji Translator.] _ _ _ 4 t [A triad in which the major Third is where the capitals represent the white, and perfect, but the Fifth and minor Third both small letters, the black digitals, all in meantoo small by a quarter of a comma or 54 cents tone temperament, the effect of which would (as in the meantone temperament, in which I have been very good on the organ. For the have a concertina tiuied), has a very much intonation of these notes see App. XX. sect. A. better effect than the equally tempered triad, art. 16. — Translator.]
^4^ 4 ^t* G 4 "^ ^ 4 ^^ ^ 4 *^'
