page: 322

+ work of gi'eat authority in its day 'on the true art of playing the clavier,' requires this instrument to be alwa^-s tuned in the equal temperciment.*

The old attempts to introduce more than 12 degrees into the scale have led to nothing practical, because they did not start from any right principle. They always attached themselves to the Greek system of Pythagoras, and imagined only that it was necessary to make a difference between cji and d\}, or between /tt and g\), and so on. But that is not by any means sufficient, and is not even always correct. According to our system of notation we may identify cA with d\), but we must distinguish the fjl found from the relation of Fifths, from the Cjtt found from the relation of Thirds.+ Hence the attempts to construct instruments with complex arrangements of manuals and digitals, have led to no result, which was at all commensurate with the trouble bestowed upon them, and the increased difficulties of fingering which they occasioned. The only instrument of the kind ¶ which is still used is the pedal harp a double mouvement, on which the intonation can be changed by the foot.

Not only habitual use, and the absence of any power to compare its effects with those of just intonation, but some other circumstances arc favoiu-able to equal temperament.

First, it should be observed that the disturbances due to beats in the tempered scale, are the less observable the swifter the motion and the shorter the diiration of the single notes. When the note is so short that but very few beats can possibly occur while it lasts, the ear has no time to remark their presence. The beats produced by a tempered triad are the following:

1. Beats of the tempered Fifth. Suppose we take the number of vibrations of c to be 26I-, the tempered Fifth c'+//' would produce 9 beats in 10 seconds, partly by the upper partials, and partly by the combinational tones. These beats are always quite audible. ¶ 2. Beats of the two first combinational tones of c' + e and c' - g' in tempered intonation; 5f in the second. These are plainly audible in all qualities of tones, if the tones themselves are not too weak.

3. Beats of the major Third c +e' alone, \0h in the second, which, however, are not plainly audible unless the qualities of tone employed have high upper partials.

4. Beats of the minor Third e - g\ 18 in the second, mostly much weaker than those of the major Third, and also heard only in qualities of tone having high upper partials.

All these beats occur twice as fast when the chord lies an Octave higher, and half as fast when it occurs an Octave lower.

Of these beats, the first, arising from the tempered Fifths, have the least injurious influence on the harmoniousness of the chord. They are so slow that they can be heard only for very slow notes in the middle parts of the scale, and ¶ then they produce a slow undulation of the chord which may occasionalh' have a good effect. Beats of the second kind are most striking for the softer quality of tone. In an Allegro^ of four crotchets in a bar, two bars occupy about three seconds. If, then, the tempered chord c -^-e - g is played on a crotchet in this bar, 2i of these beats will be heard, so that if the tone begins soft, it will swell, decrease, swell again, decrease and then finish. It would be certainly worse if this chord were played an Octave or two higher, so that 4j or %\ beats could be heard, because these could not fail to strike the ear as a marked roughness.

For the same reason the beats of the third and fourth kinds, arising from the Thirds, which are clearly audible on harsher qualities of tone (as on the .harmonium), are also decidedly disturbing in the middle positions, even in quick time,

Footnote: ⁎ [Equal temperament was not commer- Tcm-perament, pp. 27-32. — Translator.']
cially established in England till 1841-1846. f [That is, ti found from c±fj±d±ii±c
See App. XX. sect. N. No. 5. With regard to ±h±fi.±(^, from Cy^ fomad from first the
both Sebastian and Emanuel Bach's relation major Third c + i\ and then the Fifths ^1 +
to it, see Bosanquet's Musical Intervals and j +yJ+ + ^ij| Translator.']
