page: 323

+ and essentially injure the eahnness of the triad, because they arc twice and thrice as fast as the others. It is only in soft qualities of tone that they are but little observed, or, when observed, are so covered by stronger unbroken tones as to be very slightly marked.

Hence in rapid passages, with a soft cpiality and moderate intensity of tone, the evils of tempered intonation are but little ajiparent. Now, almost all instrumental music is designed for rapid movement, and this forms its essential advantage over vocal music. We might, indeed, raise the question whether instrumental music had not rather been forced into rapidity of movement by this very tempered intonation, which did not allow us to feel the full harmoniousness of slow chords to the same extent as is possible from well-trained singers, and that instruments had consequently been forced to renounce this branch of music.

Tempered intonation was first and especially developed on the pianoforte, and ¶ hence gradually transferred to other instruments. Now, on the pianoforte circumstances really favour the concealment of the imperfections due to the temperament. The tones of a pianoforte are very loud only at the moment of striking, and their loudness rapidly diminishes. This, as I have already had occasion to mention, CfHises their combinational tones to be audible at the first moment only, and hence makes them very difficult to hear. Beats from that source must therefore be left out of consideration. The beats which depend on the upper partials have been eliminated in modern pianofortes (especially in the higher Octaves, where they would have done most harm), owing to the mode in which upper partials are greatly weakened and the quality of tone much softened by regulating the strikingplace, as I have explained in Chap. V. (p. 776). Hence on a pianoforte the deficiencies of the intonation are less marked than on any instrument with sustained tones, and yet are not quite absent. When I go from my justly-intoned harmonium to a grand pianoforte, every note of the latter sounds false and disturbing, especially when I strike isolated successions of chords. In rapid melodic figures^ and passages, and in arpeggio chords, the effect is less disagreeable. Hence older musicians especially recommended the equal temperament for the pianoforte alone. Matheson, in doing so, acknowledges that for organs Silberman's unequal temperament, in which the usual keys were kept pure,* is more advantageous. Emanuel Bach says that a correctly tuned pianoforte has the most 2^^'>'fect intonation of all instruments, which in the above sense is correct. The great diffusion and convenience of pianofortes made it subsequently the chief instrument for the study of music and its intonation the pattern for that of all other instruments.

On the other hand, for the harsher stops on the organ, as the mixture and reed stops, the deficiencies of equal temperament are extremely sticking. It is considered inevitable that when the mixture stops are played with full chords an awfiil din {h'ollenlimn) must ensue, and organists have submitted to their fate. Now this is mainly due to equal temperament, because if the Fifths and Thirds in the pipes ¶ for each digital of the mixture stops were not tuned justly, every single note would produce beats by itself. But when the fifths and Thirds between the notes belonging to the different digitals are tuned in equal temperament, every chord furnishes at once tempered and just Fifths and Thirds, and the result is a restless blurred confusion of sounds. And yet it is precisely on the organ it would be so easy by a few stops to regulate the action for each key so as to produce harmonious chord s.f

Whoever has heard the difference between justly-intoned and tempered chords, can feel no doubt that it woidd be the greatest possible gain for a large organ to omit half its stops, Avhich are mostly mere toys, and double the number of tones

Footnote: ⁎ [Probably this was the meantone tem- 1850 there is a description of an organ by perament explained on p. .321, note t.— 7Va?is- Poole, which is tuned justly for all keys fdtor.'] by means of stops. [See App. XVIII. second
t From Zamminer's book (p. 140), I see that paragraph, and App. XX. sect. F. No. 7, where in Silliman's American Journal of Science for Poole's new keyboard without stops is figured.]
Y 2
