page: none

That ])erforniers of the highest rank do really play in just intonation, has been directly proved b}- the very interesting and exact results of Delezenne.* This observer determined the individual notes of the nmjor scale, as it was played by distingiushed violinists and violoncellists, b}' means of an accurately gauged string, and found that these players produced correctly perfect Thirds and Sixths, and neither equall}- tempered nor Pythagorean Thirds or Sixths. I was fortunate enough to have an opportunity of making similar observations by means of my harmonium on Herr Joachim. He tuned his violin exactly with the [/ + d + a + e of my instrument. I then requested him to play the scale, and immediately ho had played the Third or Sixth, I gave the coiTCsponding note on the harmoniiun. By means of beats it was easy to determine that this distinguished musician used //, and not b as the major Third to g, and e^ not e as the Sixth. f But if the best players who ai-e thoroughly acquainted with what they are playing are able ¶ to overcome the defects of their school and of the tempered system, it would certainly wonderfully smooth the path of performers of the second order, in their attempts to attain a perfect ensemble, if they had been accustomed from the first to play the scales by natural intervals. The greater trouble attending the first attempts would be amply repaid by the result when the ear has once become accustomed to hear perfect consonances. It is really much easier to apprehend the differences between notes of the same name in just intonation than people usually imagine, when the ear has once become accustomed to the effect of just consonances. A confusion between a^ and a in a consonant chord on my harmonium strikes me with the same readiness and certainty as a confusion between A and A\) on si pianoforte. ;{:

1 am, however, too little acquainted with the technicalities of violin-playing, to attempt making any proposals for a definite regulation of the tonal system of bowed instruments. This must be left to masters of this instrument who at the ¶ same time possess the powers of a composer. Such men will readily convince themselves by the testimony of their ears, that the facts here adduced are correct, and perceive that, far from being useless mathematical speculations, they are practical questions of very great importance.

The case is precisely similar for our present singers. For singing, intonation is perfectly free, whereas on bowed instruments, the five tones of the open strings at least have an unalterable pitch. In singing the pitch can be made most easily and perfectly to follow the wishes of a fine musical ear. Hence all music began with singing; § and singing will always remain the true and natural school of all music. The only intervals which singers can strike with certainty and perfection, are such as they can comprehend with certainty and perfection, and what the singer easily and naturally sings the hearer will also easily and natiu-ally understand.**

Footnote: ⁎ Recucil des Travaux dc la Sociite des when isolated from the rest of the scale, I
Sciences, de V Agriculture, et des Arts de Lille, find it difficult to distinguish between the just ^T
1826 et premier semestrc 1827 ; Mimoire siir and the Pythagorean major Third. But when
les Valeurs numerique des JVutcs de la Gamine, I play on my harmonium the complete melody
par M. Delezenno. [See especially pp. 55-6.] of some well-known air without harmonies the
For observations on corresponding circum- Pythagorean Third always feels to me strained,
stances in singing, see Appendix X\'III. the perfect Third calm and soft. It is only in
t Messrs. Cornu and Mercadier have indeed the leading note, perhaps, that the sharper
published contradictory observations. (Comj/tcs Third is more expressive. [See App. XX.
Jtendus de I'Acad. d"s Sc. dc Paris, 8 et 22 sect. G. arts. 6 and 7, for the results of later
Fevrier, 1869.) They let a musician play the experiments by INIessrs. Cornu and INIercadier.
Third of a major chord first in melodic sue- —Translator.]
cession, and then in harmonious consonance. \ [In a consonant chord the difference is
In the latter case it was always 4 : 5. But striking, mclodically not so. An eminent
in melodic succession the performer selected teacher of singing could only by great atten-
a somewhat sharper Third. I am bound to tion tell the difference when I alternated a-^, a
reply, that in melodic succession the major and </j, rHn the major scale of 6'.— 7'?-rt/(s^rt<w.] Third is not a very characteristically deter- ij [It must not be forgotten, however, that
mined interval, and that all living musicians the voice was the only musical instrmnont at
have been accustomed to sharp Thirds on the first known. — Translator.] pianoforte. In the simple succession c + c
-ij, ** [That this must also apply to non-har-
