page: 327

+ then have a means of checking his own voice in the most decisive manner. This is very easy on my justly-intoned harmonium, as I know by experience. It is only after the singer has learned to hear every slight deviation from correctness announced by a striking incident, that it becomes possible for him to regulate the motions of his larynx and the tension of his vocal chords with sufficient delicacy to produce the tone which his ear demands. When we require a delicate nse of the muscles of any part of the human body, as, in this case, of the larynx, there must be some sm-e means of ascertaining whether success has been attained. Now the presence or absence of beats gives such a means of detecting success or failure when a voice is accompanied by sustained chords in just intonation. But tempered chords which produce beats of their own are necessarily quite unsuited for such a purpose.

Finally, we cannot, I think, fail to recognise the influence of tempered intonation upon the style of composition. The first effect of this influence was favourable. 11 It allowed composers as well as players to move freely and easily into all keys, and thus opened up a new wealth of modulation. On the other hand, we likewise cannot fail to recognise that the alteration of intonation also compelled composers to have recourse to some such wealth of modulation. For when the intonation of consonant chords ceased to be perfect, and the differences between their various inversions and positions were, as a consequence, nearly obliterated, it was necessary to use more powerful means, to have recourse to a frequent employment of harsh dissonances, and to endeavour by less usual modulations to replace the characteristic expression, which the harmonies proper to the key itself had ceased to possess. Hence in many modern compositions dissonant chords of the dominant Seventh form the majority, and consonant chords the minority, yet no one can doubt that this is the reverse of what ought to be the case; and continual bold modulational leaps threaten entirely to destroy the feeling for tonality. These are unpleasant ¶ symptoms for the further development of art. The mechanism of instruments and attention to their convenience, threaten to lord it over the natural requirements of the ear, and to destroy once more the principle upon which modern musical art is founded, the steady predominance of the tonic tone and tonic chord. Among our great composers, Mozart and Beethoven were yet at the commencement of the reign of equal temperament. Mozart had still an opportunity of making extensive studies in the composition of song. He is master of the sweetest possible harmoniousness, where he desires it, but he is almost the last of such masters. Beethoven eagerly and boldly seized the wealth offered by instrumental music, and in his powerful hands it became the appropriate and ready tool for producing effects which none had hitherto attempted. But he used the human voice as a mere handmaid, and consequently she has also not lavished on him the highest magic of her beauty.

And after all, I do not know that it was so necessary to sacrifice correctness of ¶ intonation to the convenience of musical instruments. As soon as violinists have resolved to play every scale in just intonation, which can scarcely occasion any difficulty, the other orchestral instruments will have to suit themselves to the correcter intonation of the violins. Horns and trumpets have already naturally just intonation.*

Moreover, we must observe that when just intonation is made the groundwork of modulations, even comparatively simple modulational excursions will occasion enharmonic confusions (amounting to a comma) which do not appear as such in the tempered system, t

Footnote: To me it seems necessary that the new tonic into which we modulate should * [Referring to this passage, Mr. Blaikley in practice '. Sec the whole of this paper, says {Proceedings of the Musical Association, and the discussion on it, and also see supra, vol. iv. p. 56): 'This must be taken as being pp. 97rf, 99/>, notea.— Translator.'] particularly and not generally true, that is, + [See p. 324rZ, note*, and p. 310f, note*,
though the ideal instrument has such charac- — Translator.] teristics, this ideal is not necessarily attained
