page: 351

¶ coiiipouuil tone is t'aeu clearly detenniued for the ear. This is the hest and ¶ kind of connection. The closest relationship of this kind e.\ists when the ¶ jnnips a whole Octave; but this is not usual in melodies, except with the ¶ as the alteration of pitch is felt to be too sudden for the upper part. Next ¶ this comes the jump of a Fifth or Fourth, both of which are very definite ¶ clear. After these follow the steps of a major Sixth or major Third, both of ¶ can be readily taken, but some uncertainty begins to arise in the case of ¶ Sixths and minor Thirds. Esthetically it should be remarked, that of all ¶ melodic steps just mentioned, the major Sixth and major Third have, I might ¶ say, the highest degree of thorough beauty. This possibly depends upon ¶ position at the limit of cleai'ly intelligible intervals. The steps of a Fifth or ¶ are too clear, and hence are, as it were, drily intelligible; the steps of ¶ Thirds, and especially minor Sixths, begin to sound indeterminate. The ¶ Thirds and major Sixths seem to hold the right balance between darkness ^ ¶ light. The major Sixth and major Third seem also to stand in the same ¶ to the other intervals harmonically.

b.) indirect, of the second degree only. This occurs in the regular progression ¶ the scale, proceeding by Tones or Semitones. For exam[)le:

c ... d d ... ei f 1 f

^r^ ^sT ~c"

The whole major Tone c ..d proceeds from the Fourth to the Fifth of the ¶ tone G, which Rameau supposed to be subjoined as the fundamental bass ¶ the above melodic progression. The minor Tone c^..fi proceeds from the Fifth ¶ the major Sixth of the auxiliary tone G, and the Semitone 6'i.../from the major ¶ to the Fourth of the auxiliary tone C. But in order that these auxiliary ¶ may readily occur to both singer and hearer, they must be among the*T ¶ tones of the key. Thus the step ai...6i in the major scale of C causes ¶ singers a little trouble, although it is only the interval of a major Tone, and ¶ be easily referred to the auxiliary tone Ei. But the sound of e, is not so firm ¶ ready in the mind, as the sound of C and its Fifth G and Fourth F. Hence the ¶ of Guido of Arezzo, which was the normal scale for singers throughout ¶ middle ages, ended at the Sixth.* This Hexachord was sung with different ¶ of the first note, but always formed the same melody:

Ut

Re

Mi

Fa

Sol

La

either

G

A

B

C

D

E

or

c

D

E

F

G

A

or

F

G

A

^b

C

D

¶ that the interval Mi... Fa always marked the Semitone. f

¶ For the same reason Rameau preferred, in the minor scale, to refer the steps ¶ and e^\f...f to G and C as auxiliary tones, rather than to B\), the Seventh of

Footnote: ⁎ For the same reason d'Alembert explains certainly used for training singers in meantone
the limits of the old Greek heptachord, by temperament. It could not have been used for
means of two connected tetrachords — just intonation, because the melod}- c d c/is
, , ^ assumed to be identical with y k h c in the same
•'■-■>■•■ scale, whereas in just intonation f 204 f^ 182 Cj
in which the step «... 6 is avoided. But this 112/and (/ 182 «i 204 &j 112 c' are different. For
explanation would only suit a key in which c an excellent account of the Hexachord see
was the tonic, and this was probably not the Mr. Rockstro's article ' Hexachord,' in Grove's
case for the ancient Greek scale. Dictionary. To shew, however, how intona-
+ [Prof. Helmholtz leaves the intonation tious are mixed up, it may be observed that he
unmarked. Guido d'Arezzo, the presumed in- illustrates the use of the Hexachord in ' Real
ventor of the Hexachord, is said to have intro- Fugue ' by an example of Palestrina, who lived
duced it about 1024 a.d., that is long before in the sixteenth century, and is often credited
meantone temperament existed. Hence we with just intonation, but who being junior to
must assume Pythagorean intonation (see p. Salinas and Zarlino must have used meantone
'613d). Yet in later times the Hexachord was temperament. — Translator.^
