page: 353

In the same way steps of a whole Tone may be made, provided the notes He in the scale, when they serve merely to connect two other tones which belong to chords. These are the so-called passing or changing notes. Thus if while the triad of C major is sustained, a voice sings the passage c...d...e^...f...g, the two notes d and / do not suit the chord, and have no relation to the harmony, but are simply justified by the melodic progression of the single voice. It is usual to place these passing notes on the unaccented parts of the bar, and to give them a short duration. Thus in the above example c, ^i, g would fall on accented parts of the bar. Then d is the passing note between c and e, and / between e^ and g. It is essential for their intelligibility that they should make steps of Semitones or whole Tones. They thus produce a simple melodic progression, which flows on freely, without giving any prominence to the dissonances produced.

Even in the essentially dissonant chords the rule is, that dissonant tones which in¶ trude isolatedly on the mass of the other tones must proceed in a melodic progression, which can be easily understood and easily performed. And since the feeling for the natural relations of such an isolated tone is almost overpowered by the simultaneous sound of the other tones which force themselves much more strongly on the attention, both singer and hearer are thrown upon the gradual diatonic progression as the only means of clearly fixing the melodic relations of a dissonant note of this description. Hence it is generally necessary that a dissonant note should enter and leave the chord by degrees of the scale.

Chords must be considered essentially dissonant, in which the dissonant notes do not enter as passing notes over a sustained chord, but are either accompanied by an especial chord, differing from the preceding and following chords, or else are rendered so prominent by their duration or accentuation, that they cannot possibly escape the attention of the hearer. It has been already remarked that these chords are not used for their own sakes, bvit principally as a means of increasing the ¶ feeling of onward progression in the composition. Hence it follows for the motion of the dissonant note, that when it enters and leaves the chord, it will either ascend on each occasion or descend on each. If we allowed it to reverse its motion in the second half, and thus return to its original position, there would seem to have been no motive for the dissonance. It would in that case have been better to leave the note at rest in its consonant position. A motion which returns to its origin and creates a dissonance by the way, had better be avoided; it has no object.

Secondly it may be laid down as a rule, that the motion of the dissonant note should not be such as to make the chord consonant without any change in the other notes. For a dissonance which disappears of itself provided we wait for the next step, gives no impetus to the progress of the harmony. It sounds poor and unjustified. This is the principal reason why chords of the Seventh which have to be resolved by the motion of the Seventh, can only permit the Seventh to descend. For if the Seventh ascended in the scale, it would pass into the octave ¶ of the lowest tone, and the dissonance of the chord would disappear. When Bach, Mozart, and others use such progressions for chords of the dominant Seventh, the Seventh has the effect of a passing note, and must be so treated. In that case it has no effect on the progression of the harmony.

The pitch of a single dissonant note in a chord of many parts is determined with greatest certainty, when it has been previously heard as a consonance in the preceding chord, and is merely sustained while the new chord is introduced. Thus if we take the following succession of chords:

Footnote: G...
d...g + J>,

c + fi — g + fji the />, in the first chord is determined by its consonance with G. It simply remains while the tones c and Ci are introduced in place of G and d, and thus becomes a dissonance in the chord of the Seventh c + e^ - g + 6,. In this case the dissonance is said to be prepared. This was the only way in which dissonances might be

Footnote: A A
