page: 354

+ introduced down to the end of the sixteenth century. Prepared dissonances produce a peculiarly powerful effect: a part of the preceding chord lingers on, and has to be forced from its position by the following chord. In this way, an effort to advance against opposing obstacles which only slowly yield, is very effectively expressed. And for the same reason the newdy introduced chord (c + e, - fj in the last example) must enter on a strongly accented part of the bar; as it would otherwise not sufficiently express exertion. The resolution of the prepared dissonance, on the contrary, naturally falls on an unaccented part of the bar. Nothing sounds worse than dissonances played or sung in a dragging or uncertain manner. In that case they appear to be simply out of tune. They are, as a rule, only justified by expressing energy and vigorous progress.

Such prepared dissonances, termed susj^ensions, may occur in many other chords besides those of the Seventh. For example: ¶ Preparation: G ...c + e^

Suspension: G ...c ... d Resolution: G + B^ - d

The tone c is the prepared dissonance; in the second chord, which must fall on an accented part of the bar, d the Fifth of G is introduced and generates the dissonance c.d, and then c must give way, and according to our second rule, must go further from d, which results in the resolution G + B^ - d. The chords might also be played in the inverse order, and then d would be a prepared dissonance which w-as forced away by c. But this is not so good, because descending motion is better suited than ascending motion to an extruded note. Heightened pitch always gives us involuntarily the impression of greater effi^rt, because we have continually to exert om- voice in order to reach high tones. The dissonant note on desSfending seems to yield suitably to superior force, but on ascending it as it were rises by its ¶ exertion. But circumstances may render the latter course suitable, and its occurrence is not unfrequent.

In the other case, especially frequent for chords of the Seventh, when the dissonant note is not prepared but is struck simultaneously with the chord to which it is dissonant, the significance of the dissonance is different. Since these unprepared Sevenths must usually enter by the descent of the preceding note, they may be always considered as descending from the Octave of the root of their chord, by supposing a consonant major or minor chord having the same root as the chord of the Seventh to be inserted between that and the preceding chord. In this case the entrance of the Seventh merely indicates that this consonant chord begins to break up immediately and that the melodic progression gives a new direction to the harmony. This new direction, leading to the chord of resolution, must be emphasised, and hence the dissonance necessarily falls on the preceding unaccented part of a bar. ¶ The introduction of an isolated dissonant note into a chord of several parts cannot generally be used as the expression of exertion, but this character will attach to the introduction of a chord as against a single note, supposing that this single note is not too powerful. Hence it lies in the nature of things that the first kind of introduction takes place on unaccented and the last on accented parts of a bar.

These rules for the introduction of dissonances may be often neglected for the chords of the Seventh in the reverted system, in which the Fourth and Second of the scale occur, and notes from the subdominant side are mixed up with notes fi*om the dominant side. These chords may also be introduced to enhance the dynamical impression of the advancing harmony, for they have the effect of keeping the extent of the key pei-petually before the feeling of the hearer, and this object justifies their existence.

Of several voices which are leaving the chord of the tonic C, it is quite easy for some to pass on to notes of the dominant chord g + h - d, and for others to
