page: 355

+ proceed to the notes of the siibdominant chords /"+ r/i - '• or f- n^\y + c, as each voice will he able to strike the new note with perfect certainty, on account of the close relationship between the chords. When, however, the dissonant chord has been thus formed and sounded, the dissonant notes will have the feeling for their more distant relations obscured by the strangeness of the other parts of the chord, and must generally proceed according to the rule of resolution of dissonances. Thus the singer who sounds /" in the chord ^ + ^i - d | /' would vainly endeavour to picture to himself the sound of the a, which is related to f with sutficient clearness to leap \\p or down to it with certainty; but he is easily able to execute the small step of half a Tone, by which / descends to e^ in the chord c + ei-g. But the note ff itself, on the other hand, having its own compound tone approximatively indicated by the chord of the Seventh, has no difficulty in passing by a leap to its related notes, as c for example, or 61 to //.

In the chords b^-d If+a^ and 6, - (/ \f-a^''Q, in which neither dominant nor^ subdominant prevails, it would not be advisable to let any note proceed by a leap.

And it would also not be advisable to pass by a leap into the chords of the reverted system from any other chord but the tonic, because that cliord alone is related to both dominant and subdominant chords at the same time.

It is not possible to pass to chords of the Seventh in the direct system, from another chord related to both extremities of the chord of the Seventh, and hence in this case the dissonance must be introduced in accordance with the strict rules.

Musicians are divided in opinion as to the proper treatment of the subdominant chord with an added Sixth, /+«!- c.o? in C major. The rule of Rameau is probably correct (p. 347f/), making d the dissonant note, to be resolved by rising to fj. This is also decidedly the most harmonious kind of resolution. Modern theorists, on the other hand, regard this chord as a chord of the Seventh on d, and take c as the dissonant note to be resolved by descent; whereas when c remains, d ¶ is quite free and may therefore even descend.

Chordal Sequences.

Just as the older homophonic music required the notes of a melody to be linked together, modern nuisic endeavours to link together the series of chords occurring in a tissue of harmony, and it thus obtains much greater freedom in the melodic succession of individual notes, because the natural relationship of the notes is much more decisively and emphatically marked in harmonic music than in homophonic melody. This desire for linking the chords together was but slightly developed in the sixteenth century. The great Italian masters of this period allow the chords of the key to succeed each other in leaps which are often surprising, and which we should at present admit only in exceptional cases. But during the seventeenth century the feeling for this peculiarity of harmony also was developed, so that we find Rameau laying down distinct rules on the subject in the beginning ¶ of the eighteenth century. In reference to his conception of fundamental bass, Rameau worded his rule thus: ' The fundamental bass may, as a general rule, proceed only in perfect Fifths or Thirds, upwards or downwards '. According to our view the fundamental bass of a chord is that compound tone which is either exclusively or principally represented by the notes of the chord. In this sense Rameau's rule coincides with that for the melodic progression of a single note to its nearest related notes. The compound tone of a chord, like the voice of a melody, may only proceed to its nearest related notes. It is much more difficult to assign a meaning to progression by relationship in the second degree for chords than for separate notes, and similarly for progression in small diatonic degrees without relationship. Hence Rameau's rule for the progression of the fundamental bass is on the whole stricter than the rules for the melodic progression of a single voice.

Thus if we take the chord c -f <=, - </, which belongs to the compound tone of C, we may pass by Fifths to g + b^-d, the compound tone of G, or to Z+aj-c the
