page: 364

+ the leading note of the key when similarly used. But this is always a Seniitone (p. 352c), an interval well known in the series of related tones, which, owing to its smallness, is easily measured by the sensation of its difference, even in places where its tonal relationship is not immediately sensible.

The decisive importance acquired by the Octave and Fifth in all musical scales from the earliest times shews, that the construction of scales must have been originally influenced by another principle, which finally became the sole regulator of every ai'tistic form of a complete scale. This is the principle which we have termed tonal relationshi'p .

Relationship in the first degree between two compound tones consists in their each having a partial tone of the same pitch.

In singing, the similarity of two musical tones which stand in the relation of Octave or Fifth to one another, must have been very soon observed. As already ¶ this gives also the Fourth, which has itself a svifficiently [jerceptible natural relationship to have been remarked independently. To discover the tonal similarity of the major Third and major Sixth, required a finer cultivation of the musical ear, and perhaps also pecxdiar beauty of voice. Even yet we are easily led by the familiar sharp major Thirds of equal temperament, to endure any major Thirds which are somewhat too sharp, provided they occur melodically and are not sounded together. On the other hand, we must not forget that the rules of Archytas and Abdul Kadir,* both of which were applicable to homophonic music only, gave a preference to the natural major Third, although its introduction obliged both musicians to renounce a musical system so theoretically consistent and invested with such high authority as that of Pythagoras.

Hence the principle of tonal relationship did not at all times exclusively determine the construction of the scale, and does not 'jven yet determine it exclusively among all nations. This principle must, therefore, be regarded to some extent as ¶ freely selected princijde of style, as I have endeavoured to shew in Chapter XIII. But, on the other hand, the art of music in Europe was historicall}' developed from that principle, and on this fact depends the main proof that it was really as important as we have assumed it to be. The preference first given to the diatonic scale, and finally the exclusive use of that scale, introduced the principle of tonal relationship in all its integrity into the musical scale. "Within the diatonic scale various methods of execution were possible, and these generated the ancient modes which had equal claims to attention in homophonic song, and hence stood on a level.

But the principle of tonal relationship penetrated far deeper in its harmonic than it did in its melodic form. In melodic sequence the identity of two partial tones is a matter of memory, but when the notes are sounded together the immediate sensible impression of the beats, or else of the undisturbed flow of sound forces itself on the hearer's attention. The liveliness of- melodic and harmonic ¶ impressions differs in the same way as a recollected image differs from the actual impression made by the original. As an immediate consequence arose that far superior sensibility for the correctness of the intervals which is seen in the harmonic union of tones, and which admitted of being developed into the finest'" physical methods of measurement.

It must also be remembered that relationship in the second degree can in

harmonic music be reduced to audible relationships of the first degree, by a proper

selection of the fundamental bass, and that generally more distant relationships

can easily be made clearly audible. By this means, notwithstanding the variety

of progression, a much clearer connection of all parts with their origin, the tonic,

can be maintained and rendered objectively sensible to the hearer. It cannot be

doubted that these are the essential foundations of the great breadth and wealth of

expression which modern compositions can attain without losing their artistic unity.

Footnote: ⁎ [For Archytas of Tarentum, about b.c. 281, note f.— Trans/ator.] 400, see p. 262c, and for Abdulqadir, see p.
