page: none

APPENDICES,

APPENDIX I.

Footnote: ON AN ELECTRO-MAGNETIC DRIVING MACHINE FOR THE SIREN.

(See p. 13rt.)

1 HAVE lately had a small electro-magnetic machine constructed with a constant velocity of rotation, and it has proved of great service in driving the siren. A rotating electro-magnet, in which the direction of current is changed every semirotation, moves between two fixed magnetic poles. The current in this electromagnet is inteiTupted, as soon as the velocity begins to exceed the desired amount, by the centrifugal force of a mass of metal fastened to its axis of rotation. Two spiral springs whose elasticity is opposed to the centrifugal force may be tightened or loosened, and thus made stronger or weaker at pleasure. By this means the velocity can be maintained at any required rate. A figure and description of this machine were given by Herr S. Exner, in the ' Proceedings ' [Sitzungsherichte) of the Vienna Academy: 'Math. Naturw. CL' vol. b-iii. part 2, 8 Oct. 1868.

The machine was improved in 1875 by separating from it the centrifugal regulator, and letting it only open and close the weak current for a relay. It is the relay which makes or breaks the strong current that drives the electromagnetic machine.

The siren is connected with the machine by a thin driving band, and then it does not require to be blown. Instead of blowing, I placed on the disc a small turbine constructed of stiff paper, which drove the air through the openings whenever they coincided with those in the chest. This arrangement gave me extremely constant tones on the siren, rivalling those on the best constructed organ pipes. Latterly I have given the siren straight holes, so that the strength of the wind has no longer any influence on its speed, and then I blow through the box. [See App. XX. sect. B. No. 2.]

APPENDIX II.

Footnote: ON THE SIZE AND CtJNSTRUCTION OF RESONATORS.

(See pp. Uh and 166(7, note*.)

Spherical Resonators with a short funnel-shaped neck for insertion into the ear as shewn in fig. 16 a (p. 43/v), are most efficient. Their advantage consists partly in their other proper tones being very distant indeed from their prime tones, and hence being very slightly reinforced, and partly in the spherical form giving the most powerful resonance. But the w^alls of the sphere must be firm and smooth, to oppose the necessary resistance to the powerful vibrations of air which take place within them, and to impede the motion of the air as little as possible by friction. At first I employed any spherical glass vessels that came to hand, as the receivers of retorts, and inserted into one of their openings a glass tube which had been adapted to my ear. Afterwards Herr R. Koenig, maker of acoustical instruments, Paris [now of 27 Quai d'Anjou], constructed a series of these
