page: 382

+ waves proceed similar to those which proceed from x^. Moreover suppose that iu all those places for which x = - x^ ± 2vl, a blow be applied equal to that given to iTp and at the same time, but iu the opposite direction, so that from all these latter points waves will proceed of an identical form, but with a negative height. Those points of the infinite string which correspond with the extremities of the finite string will then be agitated by positive and negative waves of equal magnitude at the same time, and will hence be completely at rest, and consequently all the conditions of the real finite string will be fulfilled by the state of this section of the infinite string.

From the moment that the hammer quits the string, the motion of the string may be regarded as two systems of waves, one advancing (or in the direction of positive x), and the other retreating (or in the direction of negative x). Of these systems of weaves we have as yet found only certain isolated portions, namely those which correspond to the sections of the string lying nearest the point struck. We have now to complete these waves properly and obtain a connected advancing ¶ and retreating system.

Advancing in the direction of the positive x on the string, we have 3/ = 0 until

Aa we come to a positive retreating wave, and then it rises to — tji, vvhich is its value

in the positive striking points. If we proceed beyond the striking point, and over the wave thence proceeding, we again find values of 1/ which = 0, and sink to

Tr, as soon as the first negative retreating wave has been passed over. This is

the value of y in the first negative striking point. To connect the positive and negative retreating waves properly with each other, we must suppose the values of yi to be increased between every positive striking point and the next following

negative striking point, by the magnitude + —j,, so that the height of the wave

retains this value, which it had at x^, until the corresponding negative wave begins.

aA ¶ Here then the height of the wave becomes 7^—rn - l/i and sinks to zero. Similarly,

a A suppose that - — y, is added to the height of the wave in advancing waves between

any negative striking point and the next following positive striking point. The retreating waves will thus be everywhere positive, and the advancing waves everywhere negative, and the waves at the same time are so constituted that their continued motion will generate that kind of motion which we have found to exist in the string after the hammer quits it.

We have now to express this system of waves as the sum of simple waves. ¶ The length of the wave is 21, because the points of simultaneous impact lie at

intervals of '21. Let us take the positive retreating waves at the time t - —

then

Footnote: rtTT

1) y. = 0,

2) y. = ^

from X =

0 to

Footnote: X —
•'0 -

m

4

■ 1

1 +

Footnote: COS

a

(•'■■ -

■'■0)

from

Footnote: X = ..
'0
-
air m

to X

= x^

aA air

4)

from x =21 - x„ - — to x = 21 - .r„

.5) yi = 0, from x = 21 - x^ to x = 2f.
