page: 390

+ frames very exactly, in order to produce a powerful tone. Striking reeds, which effect a more perfect stoppage, are superior in this respect. According to the information obtained by Mr. A. J. Ellis [see p. 95c?', note t], organ-builders have really been more inclined in recent times to use striking reeds. But the vibratmg laminae are very slightly curved, so that they do not strike the frame all at once, but roll themselves gradually out upon it.

B. Theory of the Blowing of Pt23es.

When longitudinal waves have once been excited in the mass of air in a tube, they may be reflected backwards and forwards many times between the ends of the tube, and form constant, periodically returning vibrations, before they die away. At the closed end of a stopped pipe, the reflexion of every train of waves is tolerably complete, but at the open ends a perceptible fraction of the wave always passes into the open air, and hence the reflected wave has not the same ¶ intensity as the incident wave possessed. Indeed the intensity of the waves reflected backwards and forwards in the tube continually diminishes, and finally dies off, if the lost work is not replaced at every backwards and forwards reflexion by some other kind of action. What has to be replaced, however, is usually only a small part of the whole vis viva of the undulatory motion, that is, just as much as is lost by reflexion at the open ends. If the inner radius at the open end of a cylindrical tube be B, the fraction of the amplitude which is lost at the open end for a tone having the wave-length X, is, according to theory,

where E is small in comparison with X. In the pipes examined by Zamminer, the wave-length X varied between SiH and 15-6i?. In the first case the loss would be 2^oth, and in the latter about ith of the amplitude.

Now, this loss of vis viva can be rei.)laced in various ways. Supposing that

¶ small volume dV, which was under the pressure p^, were forced over into a space filled with air under the pressure^), the required work would be (i> - 2^o)dV. Hence if during the vibrations of sound, at those places and times where the air is condensed, either a small quantity of air is regularly forced in, or the pressure of the compressed air is increased by heating, this mass of air generates by its expansion a greater quantity of vis viva than was lost by its resistance to the condensation at the time the loss occurred. The first of the two causes is eff"ective in reed pipes, the second in the tubes of the Pyrophone [see App. XX. sect. N. No. 4], in which, together with the air which streams back into the tube, an increased quantity of gas is poured in from the gas tube, and this on burning increases the pressure during the time of re-expansion.

The conditions which must be fulfilled to make reed pipes speak were given by me in the 'Transactions of the Association for Natural History and Medicine' {Verhandhmgen des naturhistorisch-medicinischen Vereins) at Heidelberg (26 July 1861), and I take the liberty of reprinting this short explanation here with a few

¶ improvements.

I. The Blowing of Reed Fi2)es.

By a reed pipe I mean any kind of wind instrument in which the path of the stream of wind is alternately opened and closed by means of a vibrating elastic body. The first work which made the mechanics of reed pipes accessible was that of W. Weber. But he experimented chiefly with metal reeds, which on account of their great mass and elasticity, could not be powerfully moved by the air unless the tone given by the pipe was not materially difterent from the proper tone of the reed independently of the pipe. Hence pipes with metal reeds are usually capable of producing only a single tone, namely that one among those theoretically possible which is closest to the proper tone of the reed.

The case is different for reeds of light material which off'ers but little resistance, such as the cane reeds of the clarinet, oboe, bassoon, and the muscular reeds of the human lips in trumpets, trombones, and horns. Reeds of vulcanised indiarubber, placed similarly to the vocal chords in the larynx, are also well adapted for
