page: 391

+ experiments; but, to make them speak easily and well, care must be taken to place them obliquely to the current of air (p. 97/^).

The action of reeds differs essentially according as the passage which they close is opened when the reed moves against the wind towai-ds the windchest, or moves with the wind towards the pipe. I shall say that the first strike imvards, and the second stril-e outwards. The reeds of the clarinet, oboe, bassoon, and organ all strike inwards. The Inuuan lips in brass instruments, on the other hand, are reeds striking outwards. The india-rubber reeds that I employ may be arranged to strike either inwards or outwards.

The laws for the pitch of reed pipes are completely found, when we have determined the motion of the reed as influenced by the alternating pressure of the air in the pipe and air chamber [see fig. 29, B, p p, on p. 966] ; remembering that the effluent air cannot attain its maximum velocity until the passage closed by the reed has been opened as widely as possible.

¶ 1) Reeds with ci/Undricafjnp'' ^''ithout air dutmher. The reed is regarded as a body which returns to its position of equilibrium by elastic forces, and is again brought out of that position by the pressure of the air in the pipe, which changes periodically with the sine of the time. The equations of motion * shew that the instant of greatest pressure within the pipe must fall between a maximum displacement of the reed outwards, which precedes it, and a maximum displacement of the same inwards, which follows it. If the vibrational period be divided into 360°, like the circumference of a circle, the angle e, by which the maximum pressure precedes the passage of the reed through its position of equilibrium, is given by the equation

where L is the length of the wave of the reed in the air w^ithout the pipe, A, the wave-length of the tone which is actually produced, and fi'^ a constant which is greater for reeds of light material and greater friction than for heavy and perfectly ¶ elastic materials. The angle e must be taken between - 90° and -i- 90°.

In the same way we must determine the time at which the greatest pressure within the pipe separates from the greatest velocity. The latter must coincide with the position of the reed for which the opening is greatest. The calculation of this magnitude results from my investigations on the motion of air within an open cylindrical tube {Journal filr reine mid angewandte Mathematik, Ivii.). The maximum of the velocity in the direction of the opening precedes the maximum of pressure by an angle 8 (considering the vibrational period as the circumference of a circle) which is given by the equation

tan 6 = — , sm '

\-ti \

where *S' is the transverse section, I the length of the tube, and a a constant depending on the form of the opening, being 45° [but see note t and | p. 91] for cylindrical tubes, of which the section has the radius p. The angle 8 in this case is again to be taken between - 90'^ and -f 90°.

¶ Now as air can only enter the pipe when the reed leaves the passage open, it follows that for reeds which stril-e imvards the maximum velocity of the air directed outwards must coincide with the maximum displacement of the reed inwards. Hence we must have

and both 8 and e must be negative.

For reeds which strike outwards, on the other hand, the maximum effluence of the air must coincide with the maximum displacement of the reed outwards, and we must have

and both 8 and c must be positive.

Footnote: ⁎ To be treated as iu Seebeck's theory of the following App. IX. But the e there is the sympathetic resonance, Repertorium dcr Phij- complement of the e here, and wave-lengths are sik, vol. viii. pp. 60-64. Also see equation 4c in here used instead of pitch numbers, as there.
