page: 395

This inclination of the dividing surfaces of masses of air when moved discontinuously, to resolve themselves into vortices, can also be clearly seen on cylindrical streams of air, driven from cylindrical pipes and mixed with a little smoke to make them visible. In perfectly quiet air and under favourable conditions, they may reach a length of one foot to three feet. The least noise however makes them shrink up, as the vortices then commence close to their origin. Professor Tyndall has also observed and described a great number of similar phenomena of this kind, in burning gas jets.*

This resolution into vortices takes place in the blade of air at the mouth of the pipe, where it strikes against the lip. From this place on it is resolved into vortices, and thus mixes with the surrounding oscillating air of the pipe, and accordingly as it streams inwards or outwai'ds, it reinforces its inward or outward velocity, and hence acts as an accelerating force with a periodically alternating direction, which turns from one side to the other with great rapidity. Such a blade of air follows the transvers^d oscillations of the surrounding mass of airH without sensible resistance. During the phase of entrance of air, the blade is also directed inwards, and thus on its part reinfoi'ces the vis viva of the inward currents. Conversely, for the outward current. f

If we suppose the accelerating force of the current of air to be represented by one of Fourier's series, the amplitude of any term of the order m will in general diminish as 1 -f- m (see p. 35d). In fact we require only to use the expression given in App. III. p. 375, equations (lb) and (3) for the displacement;?/ of a

plucked string, in order to find the value of ^, for the time t — 0. We thus find the

dx series which expresses the periodical alternation between a greater and smaller value of y, as shewn in fig. 19, p. 54c.

From my memoir 'On the Vibrations of Air in Tubes with Open Ends,' already cited (p. 388a), it follows that throughout the tube a positive component of pressure coincides with the maximum velocity in the direction of the opening, and ¶ when multiplied by such velocity this component has the value

a A-^ F S

where

a is the velocity of sound,

A the maximum velocity at the end of the tube,

iS' the transverse section of the c^dindrical portion of the tube,

k = 27^-^A, A. Ijeing the length of the wave.

If, then, two trains of waves start from any transverse section in the directions of the two ends, and have the same velocity at that section, the above component of pressure must be directed in opposite ways in the two trains of waves. This holds for the place of blowing even when it is quite close to the end of the tube, so that one train of waves is infinitesimally short. Under these circumstances the acceleration produced by the air blown in, must correspond to twice that difference ¶ of pressure. Since A is the velocity at the opening, twice this difference of pressure for the mth tone, will be

Footnote: a A,„ 2ir Sn-iP'

This would be the only difference of pressure if the tone blown exactly corresponded to the proper tone of the tube. But it may be shewn that this cannot be made to agree with the mechanism of blowing, and there is always a length /? which must be intercalated between the two trains of waves in order to reduce

Footnote: ⁎ J. Tyndall On Sound, Lect. VI., also in Journal, -January, 1867 ; Katnrc, vol. viii. pp.
Philosophical Ma(/a~ine, series iv. vol. xxxiii. 25, 45, 38.3, vol. x. pp. 161, 481, vol. xi. !>. 325,
pp. 92-99, and 375-391. [24 June 1875, p. 145 ; 27 April 1876, p.
fThe formation of this blade of air has 511]). Herr Schneebeli also gave a mechani-
been described by Messrs. Schneebeli (Pogg., cal explanation of the principal features of
Ann. cliii. p. 301), Sonreck {lb. clviii. p. 129), the process. [See the Translator's addition
and Hermann Smith (Enylish Mechanics' at the end of this Appendix, p. 396ft] .
