page: 397

¶ upper open end immediately descends to ¶ this vacuum, and by so doing not ¶ bends the flat exciting stream of air ¶ but also of course produces a rare¶ in the tube, which by extending from ¶ mouth upwards necessarily weakens the ¶ of the outward rush of wind. The ex¶ (not the exciting) air, taking advantage ¶ this relaxation of force, enters the tube at ¶ lip, causing a condensation in the lower ¶ of the pipe, and the resulting wave of ¶ before it has proceeded half-way ¶ the former wave of rarefaction, which ¶ to proceed from the further end of ¶ tube, and thus forms a node. The node ¶ consequently always nearer the mouth than ¶ end of the pipe. The ratio of the length ¶ the segment further from the mouth to ¶ nearer to it varies from 4 : 3 to 7 : 6 ac¶ to the diameter or scale of the pipe ¶ the strength of wind (see p. 91/>, and ¶ t, +)• In the meantime the exciting ¶ of air rights itself, passes over the ¶ bends inwards, and a small portion ¶ it enters the pipe with the external air, to ¶ cast out again by the returning wave of ¶ and by this time the exciting ¶ of air has been converted into a vibra.¶ air-reed. That the first (but momentary) ¶ of the upward rush of the exciting ¶ of air is to abstract air from the pipe ¶ Hermann Smith considers to be demon¶ by inserting on the 'languid,' just ¶ the mouth, some filaments of cotton ¶ or down, which, in larger pipes, are shot ¶ with energy. He supposes the air-reed ¶ to abstract and admit air in con¶ succession, thus producing the necessary ¶ for the sound heard, which would on ¶ theory depend, among other conditions, ¶ the force of blast, its inclination to the ¶ the size and form of the mouth and ¶ the interposition of obstructions between ¶ reed and outer air (as the shading bar of ¶ Gamhi), the capacity and length of the ¶ and whether a node has to be formed in ¶ pipe in the mode explained for open pipes, ¶ in the mode used for stopped pipes, which ¶ acknowledged to speak more readily than ¶ former. The external air of course passes ¶ but intermittently, through the ¶ of the pipe.

¶ law of vibration of the air-reed as ¶ by Mr. Hermann Smith, but unob¶ and possibly unobtained by Herr Schnee¶ is: ^ As its arcs of vibration are less, ¶ speed is greater,' or ' the times {of ribra¶ vary with the amplitude,' being different ¶ the usual law of a vibrating reed in ¶ the time is independent of the ampli¶ of vibration. If by extraneous influence ¶ pitch of the pipe is flattened, as by partly ¶ the mouth from the external air, Mr. ¶ Smith states that the path of the ¶ is lengthened, and conversely. When ¶ organ pipe speaks the tones of the air¶ and pipe are distinct and may be sepa¶ or combined; and when a pipe is said ¶ to fly off to its Octave,' he says that the air-

reed leaps back to its Octave speed, compelling the pipe to follow, and that this can be made visible. The natural pitch of the airreed is also, he states, far higher than the pitch of the tones of the pipe.

Herr Sonreck's account, although thoroughly independent, agrees with ]\Ir. Hermann Smith's so closely as regards the origin of the motion of air in the pipe that it seems unnecessary to cite it. He calls the blade of air merely the Anblasestrom, i.e., ' blow-cur¶ rent ' or ' blast

But so far as I have hitherto found, the first person who drew attention to the mode in ¶ which flue pipes were naade to speak, was Aristide Cavaille-Coll, the celebrated French organ-builder, who in a paper presented to the ¶ French Academy of Sciences on February ¶ 1840 (which was never printed, owing apparently to the death of M. Savart, one of the referees), 'demonstrated,' as he states in his paper printed in the Comptcs Rendus for 1860 (even then anterior to all the other writers), vol. 1. p. 176, ' more clearly than had hitherto been done, the real function of the originator of the sound in the mouth of flue pipes, which originator he assimilated to a free aerial reed {anche libre airiciine) '. He also investigated the mode of blowing the flute, by the mouth or a mouthpiece. And lastly he treated of the analogy between ' the transversal vibrations of vibi-ating laminas of air, and solid vibrating laminae,' which he supposed to be governed by the same laws, and from this examination he deduced ' positive data for determining the height of mouths of flue pipes ¶ in relation to their intonation and the elastic force of air which excites them '. He informs me that he intends to publish this paper.

In conclusion, it should be observed that this blade or flat current of air acts like a metal reed only so far as it oscillates backwards and forwards, and not in other respects. It does not shut off and open out a stream of air alternately. It is moved inwards by the ¶ outward air, and outwards by the inclosed air, • ¶ whereas the metal reed is moved only ojne way ¶ by the current of air, and the other way its own elasticity. There is therefore simply an analogy and not a substantive similarity, so that the terms aero-plastic reed, air-reed, free aerial reed, suggesting a different operation to what actually ensues, might be disused with advantage. The action seems really to be one of alternate rarefaction and condensa¶ tion. But there are numerous little points which require very careful study — the shape of the upper lip; straight (as usual) or arched (as ill Renatus Harris's flue pipes), the height of the opening of the mouth, the exact direction of the blade of air in relation to that of the upper lip, the presence and shape of the ears, and the general arts of the ' voicer ' whereby he makes a pipe ' speak ' satisfactorily. All of these matters influence both pitch and quality of tone, and though they are daily practised, their theory is as good as unknown.

For observations on the action of reeds see ¶ App. XX. sect. N. No.
