page: 398

APPENDIX VIII.

Footnote: PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS FOR PERFORMING THE EXPERIMENTS ON THE COMPOSITION' OF VOWELS.

(See p. I22d.)

To make the forks vibrate powerfully, it is necessary that the ratios of their pitch numbers should agree with the simple arithmetical ratios to the utmost nicety. After the forks have been tuned by the maker by ear and to the piano as accurately as is possible in this way, the necessary greater exactness is obtained by the electrical current itself. First the interrupting fork, fig. 33, p. \'22c, is connected with the fork that gives the prime tone, and the movable clamp on the former is

¶ arranged so as to make the unison perfect. This gives a maximum intensity to the prime tone, easily recognised by both eye and ear. The vibrations of this lowest fork are so powerful that the excursions of the extremities of the prongs under favourable circumstances amount to 2 or 3 millimetres (from "08 to '12 inch). It should also be observed that if the unison has not been perfectly attainedj a few beats of the fork are heard when the electric current is first brought to bear upon it, although these disappear when the apparatus is in full action. [This is accounted for in Appendix IX.]

After perfect unison has been accomplished between the interrupting fork and that of the prime tone, the other forks are successively brought into electrical connection, with their resonance chambers wide open, and they are tuned until they reach a maximum intensity when excited by the current. The tuning is first performed with the file. The forks are sharpened, as is well known, by taking off some metal from their extremities, and flattened by reducing the thickness of the root of the prongs. Both must be done with the greatest possible uniformity to each prong. To discover whether the fork is too sharp or too flat, stick a little

¶ piece of wax at the ends of its prongs (which flattens the fork) and observe whether the tone becomes louder or weaker. If louder, the fork was too sharp; if weaker, it was too flat. Since alterations of temperature, and, perhaps, other causes exert a slight influence on the pitch of the forks, I have preferred to make the higher forks a little too sharp by filing, and to bring them into exact tune by attaching small quantities of wax to the extremities of the prongs. The quantity of wax is easily altered at pleasure, aud by this means slight accidental variations of pitch can be readily corrected.

It is not necessary to tune the resonance tubes so accurately; if, when blown across, they give the same pitch as the forks, they are sufticiently well tuned. If they are too flat, some melted wax may be poured in to sharpen them. If they are too sharp, the opening must be reduced.

It cost me some trouble to get rid of the noise of the spark at the point of interruption. At first I inserted a large condenser of tin foil such as is used in induction machines. But this merely reduced the spark to a certain size. No ¶ good eftect followed from increasing the size of the condenser. The layers of the condenser are separated by thin varnished paper; one is connected with the interrupting fork, and the other with the cup of quicksilver into which its end dips. xVfter many vain attempts, I at last found that, by inserting a very long and thin wire between the two extremities of the conduction at the point of interruption, the noise of the spark was almost entirely destroyed, without injuring the action of the current on the forks. The wire thus inserted must have an amount of resistance far greater than that occasioned by the coils in all the electro-magnets taken together. When this is the case no sensible portion of the current will go through this wire. It is not till the conduction is broken and the thin wire forms the only connection for the extra current of the electro-magnets, that the current discharges itself through the wix'e. But to prevent the thin wire itself from generating any secondary current, it must not be coiled round a cylinder, but must be stretched up and down on a board in such a way that two adjacent pieces of the wire should be traversed by two currents, proceeding in opposite directions. For this purpose I screwed two hard india-rubber combs at the two ends of a board
