page: 400

+ through the electro-magnet f to k and ei. Between h and k it is generally necessary to insert a lateral branch h 1 k, having moderate resisting power, to weaken the current in the electro-magnet f sufficiently to prevent the foi-k b from making violent vibrations. The zigzag at 1 shews this branch.

When the prongs of the fork move apart, the conduction will be broken at h, and after a short interval again completed at i, so that the current now passes from g through the lower prong of the fork to i, and thence by k to the battery at ej. But at the moment the conduction is broken either at h or at i, powerful secondary currents are formed by induction in the 8 electro-magnets of the tuningforks, which would emit luminous and noisy sparks at the points of interruption, if the rush of electricity were not partly stored for the moment in the condenser c, and partly discharged through the very great resistance dd.

This resistance dd, as is seen by the figure, forms a perpetual connection between g and the battery, but it conducts so badly that no sensible part of the cur¶ rent can pass through it, except at the moment when, on breaking the conduction, the great electro-motive force of the secondary currents is generated.

The arrangement just described is preferable when the fork in front of the resonance chamber 1 is the Octave above the fork b. But if the fork opposite 1 makes the same number of vibrations as the fork b, the wire i k must be removed, and both the other wires ending in i must be connected with h.

To exclude particular forks from the circuit, short secondary connections of the coils of wire of their electro-magnets are introduced. The arrangement is shewn in fig. 32, p. 1216. The metal knobs h h are connected conductively with the clamping screw g in which the wire of the electro-magnet terminates. If the lever i is moved down, it presses with some friction on the nearer knob h, and forms so good a secondary conducting connection for the wire of the electromagnets, that the greater part of the electric current passes by h h, and only an infinitesimally small part travels round by the much longer path of the electromagnets.

As regards the theory of the motion of the forks, it is immediately seen that ¶ the force of the current in the electro-magnets must be a function of the time. The length of the period is equal to the period of a vibration of the interrupting fork b. Let the number of interruptions in a second be n. Then the strength of the current in the electro-magnets, and consequently the magnitude of the force exerted by the electro-magnets on the forks, will be of the form:

Aq + A^ . cos {2i7nt + c,) -f A., . cos {i-Trnt + c.^)

Footnote: + ^3 . COS (QlTTlt + Cj) + (tc.

The general tenia of this series A,„ . cos {^irmnt + c,„) is adapted for setting in motion a fork making mn vibrations in a second, but would have little effect on forks otherwise tuned.

APPENDIX IX.

Footnote: ON THE PHASES OF WAVES CAUSED BY RESONANCE.

(Seep. 124/a)

Let a tuning-fork be brought near the opening of a resonance chamber, and suppose the ear of the listener to be at a great distance off in comparison with the dimensions of the opening. In the Journal far reine und angeivandte Mathematik, vol. Ivii. pp. 1-72, in my paper on the ' Theory of Aerial Vibrations in Tubes with Open Ends,' I have shewn that if a sonorous point exists at £ in a space partly bounded by firm walls, and partly unbounded, the motion of sound at another point A, in the same space, will be identical in intensity and phase with that which wovild have existed at -5 if ^ had been the sonorous point. Let £ be the position of the tuning-fork (or more properly of the end of one of its prongs), and A that of the ear. The motion of the air which begins when the tuning-fork is placed near the opening of the resonance chamber, is not easily determined, but
