page: 411

The value of this ma.ximum, which we call Xn is

Footnote: TV n V

The smaller the coefficient of friction v, the larger will be this maximum at the point in question.

If we call b the value of /? which satisfies the ecjuation (6), we may write the equation (5d) thus

X.

When I' is infinitesimal, and the condition of the maximum is not fulfilled in equation (6), the denominator of this expression becomes infinite, and hence »S',„

infinitesimal. The amplitude of the vibrations —. ;S„„ will become finite forH

m those values of ft only which are so nearly = 6, that fj-ft is of the same order as V. Under these circumstances, therefore, each simple tone sets in vibration only some narrow strips of the membrane in the direction of x, of which the first

has one, the second three, the third fourth, &c., vibrating segments, and in which ",

m

that is the length of the vibrating segments, has always the same value.

The greater the coefficient of friction v, the greater in general will be the extent of the vibrations of every tone over the membrane.

The present mathematical analysis shews that every superinduced tone must also excite all those transverse fibres of the membrane on which it can exist as a proper tone with the formation of nodes. Hence it would follow, that if the membrane of the labyrinth were of completely imiform structure, as the membrane here assumed, every excitement of a bundle of transverse fibres by the respective fundamental tone must be accompanied by weaker excitements of the unevenly^ numbered harmonic undertones, the intensity of which would, however, be multiplied bv the factors , —, and generally — . Although this hypothesis has been

9 25 m'^

advanced by Dr. Hugo Riemann in his Musikalische Logik, there is nothing of the kind observable in the ear. I think, however, that this cannot necessarily be urged as an objection against the present theory, because the appendages of the basilar membrane probably greatly impede the foinnation of tones with nodes.

The solution can also be extended without difficulty to the case where the membrane in the field of ^, v is bounded by two circular arcs, with their centre at the vertex of the angle. To this case correspond as boundaries in the real case, that is, in the field of -x, y, two elliptic limiting arcs, which when P vanishes become straight lines. It is only necessary to add to the value of s,„ in (4b), a complete integral of the equation (3c), which can be expressed by Bessel's functions ¶ with two arbitrary constants, and to determine these constants in such a manner as to make .«,„ = 0 on the limiting curves selected. When v is small this change in the limits has no essential effect on the motion of the membrane, except when the maximum of vibration itself falls in the neighbourhood of the limiting curves.

APPENDIX XII.

Footnote: THEORY OF COM15IXATIONAL TONES.

(See pp. 152, note f, and 158, note■^^)

It is well known that the principle of the undisturbed superposition of oscillatory motions, holds only on the supi)osition that the motions are small, — so small, indeed, that the moving forces excited by the mutual displacements of the particles of the oscillating medium should be sensibly proportional to these displace-
