page: 413

+ ossicles, and if the intensities rt and v are nearl}- the same, the tone (/> - 7) will have the greatest intensity of all the tones in the terms of .*•., ; it corresponds with the well-known deep combinational tone. The tone (/? + 7) will be much weaker, and the tones '2p and 27 will be heard with difficulty as weak harmonic upper partial tones of the generating tones.

The third term .r.^ [of the series for .c\ contains the tones 'ij), 87, %j + 7, 2^:) - 7, 2) + '2(1, p - 27, p and 7. Of these 2p - 7 or 27 - p is a combinational tone of the second order according to Hallstroem's nomenclature (p. 154rf). Similarly the fourth term ,(4 [of the series for .r] gives combinational tones of the third order; and so on.

If, then, we assume that in the vibrations of the tympanic membrane and its appendages, the square of the displacements has an effect on the vibrations, the preceding mechanical developments give a complete explanation of the origin of combinational tones. Thus the present new theory explains the origin of the tones (^p + 7), as well as of the tones (p - 7), and shews us, wdiy when the intensities ¶ u and V of the generating tones increase, the intensity of the combinational tones, which is proportional to u v, increases in a more rapid ratio.

The previous assumption respecting the magnitude of the force called into action, namely

k = ax + bx-

implies that when x changes its sign, k changes not merely its sign, but also its absolute value. Hence this assumption can hold only for an elastic body wdiich is unsymmetrically related to positive and negative displacements. It is only in such that the square of the displacement can aifect the motion, and combinational tones of the first order arise. Now among the vibrating parts of the human ear, the drumskin is especially distinguished by its want of symmetry, because it is forcibly bent inwards to a considerable extent by the handle of the hammer, and I venture therefore to conjecture that this peculiar form of the tympanic membrane conditions the generation of combinational tones.

¶ [See especially App. XX. sect. L. art. 5.1

APPENDIX XIII.

Footnote: DESCRIPTION OF THE MECHANISM EMPLOYED FOR OPENING THE SEVERAL SERIES OF HOLES IN THE POLYPHONIC SIREN.

(See p. 162, note *.)

Fig. 65 (p. 414a, b) shews the vertical section of the vipper box of the double siren, in order to display its internal construction. E is the wind pipe which is prolonged into the interior of the box, and firmly fixed in the cross beam AA of the support of the apparatus. The prolongation of the wind pipe into the box B has ¶ conical surfaces at its upper and lower ends, on which slide corresponding hollow surfaces in the bottom and top surfaces of the box, so that this box can revolve freely about the wind pipe as an axis. At a may be seen a section of the toothed wheel fastened to the cover of the box. At /5 is the driving wheel which is turned by the handle y; and 8 is a pointer which is directed to the graduation on the edge of the disc ee.

D is the upper extremity of the axis of the movable discs, of which only the upper one CC is here shewn. The axis turns on fine points in conical cups. The upper cup is introduced into the lower end of the screw 77, which can be more or less tightened by the milled screw head introduced above, so that any required degree of ease and steadiness in the motion of the axis may be attained.

Inside the box are seen the sections of four pierced I'ings kX, Xfi, /xv, and vo, which fit on to one another with oblique, tile-shaped edges, and thus mutually hold each other steady. Each of these rings lies beneath a series of holes in the cover, and contains precisely the same number of holes as the corresponding series of the cover and of the rotating disc. By means of studs, shewn at i i in fig. 56 (p. 162),
