page: 417

+ the neighbouring fibres, but their intensity rapidlj^ diminishes. It might therefore appear to be a more exact process to integrate the vahie of 4 B^ B., in equation (7a) with respect to v, in order to obtain the sum of the beats in all Corti's organs. This would require an at least approximate knowledge of the density of Corti's organs for difterent values of v, that is, for different parts of the scale, and of that we know nothing. In sensation, the highest degree of roughness is certainly more important than the distribution of a less degree of roughness over many sensitive organs. Hence I have preferred to take only the maximum of the vibrations from (7b) into account.

Finally we have to consider that very slow beats cause no roughness, and that when the intensity of the beats remains unaltered, and their number increases, the roughness reaches a maximum and then decreases. To express this, the value of s must be also multiplied by a factor, which vanishes when the number of beats is small, attains a maximum for about 30 beats in a second, and then diminishes, and again vanishes when the number of such beats is infinite. Supjjose then that ¶ the roughness Vj,, due to the j>t\\ partial tone, is expressed by

t (6' + pK 8-^y "'''-

The factor of s^, reaches its maximum value = 1, when jjS = 0 ; and becomes = 0, when S, that is, half the interval between the two tones in the scale, is = 0 or CO . Since 8 may be indifferently positive or negative, the expression can only involve even powers of 8. The above is the simplest expression which satisfies the conditions, but it is of course to a certain extent arbitrary.

For 6 we must put half the extent of the interval which at the pitch of the lower beating tone causes 30 beats to be made in a second.

Since we have taken c-' with 264 vibrations in a second, as the lower tone, 6

15 has been put = — — . Hence we have finally

r„= 16 £' B"

J2^2g2^2

And from this formula I have calculated the roughness of the intervals, shewn graphically in the diagrams, fig. 60, A and B, p. 193i, c, and fig. 61, p. 333a. The rougluiesses due to the separate partial tones have been drawn separately and superimposed on one another in the drawing.

Although the theory leaves much to be desired in the matter of exactness, it at least serves to shew that the theoretical view we have proposed is really capable of explaining such a distribution of dissonances and consonances as actually occurs in nature.

Professor Alfred M. Mayer, of Hoboken, New .Jersey,* has instituted experiments on the duration of sensations of sound, and the number of audible beats. Between a vibrating tuning-fork and its resonator he interposed a revolving disc with openings of the same shape as that of the resonator, so that the sound was heard loudly when an opening in the disc came in front of that in the resonator, and faintly when the latter was covered. His results agree essentially with the assumptions I have made on pp. 143 to 145, and 183 to 185, but are more com-fj plete as they have been pursued throughout the whole scale. His conclusions are as follows: —

Footnote: ⁎ Sillirnan's Journal, ser. iii. vol. viii. tmuity would have the ratio 2048 : 2249, giving
October 1874, Philosophical Magazine, May 162 cents, and the interval of maximum disso-
1875, vol. ii. [From the following table, p. nance would be 67 cents, and hence the beats
418ft, it is seen that the interval of a minor of b'" c"" should be quite conspicuous, agree-
Third as the limit of continuity applies only ing with observations. In reference to p. 144Z>,
to the Octave c to c'. For y"" , supposing the Prof. ]\Iayer observes that the law abruptly
law connecting 1) and N, given on p. 418rf, to breaks down for vibrations below 40 in a
hold for such a high pitch, the interval of con- second, and thinks that this abrupt breaking
tinuity would have the ratio 3072 : 3072 + 225, down ' can only be explained by the highly
or 122 cents, and the interval of maximum probable supposition that co-vibrating bodies
dissonance would be 49 cents, so that the in the ear, tuned to vibrations below 40 per
interval of one Semitone is near the limit of second, do not exist, and therefore . . . the
continuity; hence it is not surprising that no inner ear . . . can only vibrate en viassc,' and
beats were heard in the case referred to on also that such oscillations cannot last ^^ sec.
p. 173c-, note *. But for c"" the interval of con- — Translaior.]
E E
