page: 423

The organ was erected in the Sunday School Chapel, 10 Jewin Street, Aldersgate, London,* and -was built by Messrs. Eobson, 101 St. Martin's Lane, London. It contains only one stop of the usual 2^'>'incipal work, has Venetian shutters forming a swell throughout, and is provided with a peculiar mechanism for correcting the influence of temperature on the intonation.

]\Ir. H. W. Poole has lately transformed his organ f so as to get rid of stops for changing the intonation, and lias constructed a peculiar arrangement of the digitals, which enables him to play in all keys with the same fingering. His scale contains not merely the just Fifths and Thirds in the series of major chords, but also the natural or^subminor Sevenths for the tones of both series. There are 78 pipes to the octave, and F\) has been identified with E^, &.C., as upon my harmonium. :{:

Successions of chords on General Thompson's instrument are extraordinarily harmonious, and, perhaps, on account of their softer quality of tone, even more surprising in their agreeable character than on my harmonium.i^ I had an oppor¶ tunity, at the same time, of hearing a female singer, who had often sung to it, perform a piece to the accompaniment of the enharmonic organ, and her singing gave me a peculiarly satisfactory feeling of perfect certainty in intonation, which is usually absent when a pianoforte accompanies. There was also a violinist ** present who had not been much accustomed to play with the organ, and accompanied wellknown airs by ear. He hit oft' the intonation exactly as long as the key remained unchanged, and it was only in some rapid modulations that he w^as not able to follow it perfectly.

In London I had also an opportunity of comparing the intonation of this instrument with the natural intonation of singers who had learned to sing without any instrumental accompaniment at all, and are accustomed to follow their ear alone. This was the Society of Tonic Sol-faists, who are spread in great numbers (there were 150,000 in 1862 ft) over the large cities of England, and whose great

Footnote: ⁎ [Shortly before his death General Perronet Thompson presented this organ to ]\Ir. John Curwen, mentioned in note tf, below. The General's executors had it reconstriicted in a schoolroom at Plaistow, Essex. It was afterwards exhibited at the Scientific Loan Exhibition at South Kensington IMuseum in 1876, and has remained there ever since, at the top of the staircase leading to room Q of the Science Collections. — Translator.']
+ Sillima7i's American Journal of Science and Arts, vol. xliv., July 1867. [In its original form the instrument, with an ordinary keyboard and pedals, was termed the L'nharmonic Organ, and is described in SiUiman's Journal, vol. ix. p. 209, for May 1850. The new fingerboard is figured and described hereafter, App. XX. sect. F. No. 7. — Translator.']
\ [The text is in error. There are 100 not 78 pipes to the octave, and E-^ is not identified with F\y.— Translator.]

Footnote: § [' On organs of many stops, one or more ought certainly to be tuned with mathematically correct intonation, on account of their wonderful effect, to be employed (of course without using any others at the same time) as the music of the spheres (als Gesang der Splidrcn). It is impossible to form any notion of the effect of a chord in mathematically just intonation, without having heard it. I have such a one to compare with the others. Every one who hears it expresses his delight and surprise at a correctness of intonation that it does one good to hear {Jedcr, dcr ihn hort, sjyi-icht scin frohes Erstauncn iiber diese u-ohHliuende Reinheit aus).' — Scheibler, Ueher mathematische Stiwmuvg, Temjjcraturen iind Orgelstimmung nach l^ihrations-Diffcrcnzcn Oder Stossen, 1838. I have given the original words of the last German sentence, as it was impossible to do justice to its homely force in
any translation. Every one who has heard just intonation will understand it. — Translator.]
'

Footnote: ⁎ * [A blind man, who had therefore no ^ notes to guide him. I had the pleasure of taking Professor Helmholtz to hear the organ on this occasion (20 April 1804), and can corroborate his statements. Unfortunately the proper blind organist was not present. It is to this lady that General Thompson dedicates his little book, already recited, in these words: To Miss E. S. Northcote, Organist of St. Anne and St. Agnes, St. IMartin's-le-Grand. In commemoration of the talent by which, after six lessons, she was able to perform in public on the enharmonic organ with 40 sounds to the octave; thereby settling the question of the practicability of just intonation on keyed instruments, and realising the visions of Guido and Mersenne, and the harmonists of classical antiquity.' — Translcdor.]
tt [The 20 years which have elapsed since Prof. Helmholtz's first acquaintance with the ^ Tonic Sol-fa movement have made a struggling system, slowly elaborated by a Congregationalist minister in connection with his ministry, into a great national system of teaching singing. And as the system had the cordial approval of Prof. Helmholtz (see note p. 427f^), I feel justified in adding a short account of its orisin, progress, and present condition. In 1812 the two Miss Glovers, daughters of a clergyman of Norwich, then young women, now both dead at a very advanced age, invented and introduced into the schools under their superintendence a new sol fa system, based upon the ' movable doh,' that is, the use of doh as the name of the keynote, whatever that might be. This was little known beyond the town where it was used, but was published about 1827 as a Scheme for
