page: none

JUST INTONATION IN SlN(;i\(;.

425

Do, where Do is always the tonic [vowels as in Italian]. Their vocal music is not written in ordinary musical notation, but is printed with conuuon types, the initial letters of the above words representing the pitch.*

When the tonic is changed in modulations, the notatit)n is also changeil. The new tonic is now called Do, and the change is pointed out in the notation by giving two different marks to the note on which it occurs, one belonging to the old, and one to the new key. This notation, therefore, gives the very first place to representing the relation of every note to the tonic, while the absolute i)itch in which the piece has to be performed is marked at the commencement only. Since the intervals of the natural major scale are transferx'ed to each new tonic as it arises in the course of modulation, all keys are performed without tempering the intervals. That in the modulation from C major to G major, the Mi (or />,) of the second scale answers precisely to the Ti of the first is not indicated in the notation, and is only taught in the further course of instruction. Hence the ])U]iil has ¶ no inducement to confuse <( with (t^.\

Footnote: John Curweii il- Sons, and are of such a remarkable character that a gold medal was awarded for them at the International Health and Education Exhibition at South Kensington in 188i. It would indeed be difficult to find so much information on music and the method of teaching it (in both notations), so succinctly and plainly given, and at so cheap a rate, as in the late John Curwen's IVachcr's Manual, Standard Course, Musical Theory, How to Ohserm Harinoni/, How to read Music, not to mention the very large number of books and music intended for immediate class use. John Curwen's especial desire was to teach ' the thimj Music,' as he words it, and the peculiar means which he elaborated for this purpose, he valued only because it proved effectual for that purpose.
As one who was personally acquainted with John Cui-wen and his work for a quarter of a century, I may be permitted to give this testimony, and to refer all those who would learn the history of this successful musical educationalist to the Memorials of John Curwen, compiled by his son, J. Spencer Curwen, im2. — Translator.^

Footnote: ⁎ [Great care has also been bestowed on the representation of rhythm, and exercises in rhythm form an important part of the Standard Course and the practice of Tonic Sol-fa teachers. — Translator.]
t [In a footnote to this passage Prof. Helmholtz gives a list of the Tonic Sol-fa works, which is superseded by the note I have inserted above, and at the end of it he says In France singing is taught by the GalinParis-Cheve system, on similar principles and with the help of a similar notation. [This statement is misleading. Neither principles nor notation are alike. In 1818 P. Galin, ' Instituteur a I'Ecole des Sourds-Muets de Bordeaux,' published his Exposition d'unc Nouvelle Mithode pour VEnsciynemenl dc la Musique. It follows from p. ^ 162 of his book (3rd ed. 1862, reprinted by Emile Chevu) that Galin adopted as his normal intonation Huyghens's cycle of 31 divisions of the octave, which closely represents the meantone temperament (see App. XX. sect. A. art. 22, ii.), although Galin did not seem to be acquainted with it under that name, and seems to announce, as his own discovery {ibid. p. 80, and especially p. 107) what was in fact Huyghens's more than 120 years previously: viz. that 1 of a whole Tone = | major Semitone = | of a
:]
minor Semitone, but the curious thing is that he considers the resulting flat Fifth of ()96-773 cents to be correct, and the Fifth with 701-955 cents from the ratio of 2 : 3 to be wrong. This is enough to shew how widely Galin's principles differed from Curwen's. The notation of intervals which Galin used was Rousseau's numerical expression of the major scale as 1 2 3 4 5 6 7, indicating a rising Octave by overdotting and a falling by underdotting, but calling the figures ut re mi fa sol la si. Here the only resemblance is the movable ut { = doli), as distinguished from the usual French custom of making ut = C. In marking sharps aud flats and time the difference is greater, but need not be pursued. We should observe, however, that on this system, as Galin expressly states (p. 81), lAi is flatter than a\t. ^ Galin was born 16 Dec. 1786, and died 30 Aug. 1822. His pupils and especially Aime and Nanine Paris (the latter of whom married Emile Cheve, a surgeon), continued to teach his system, and supplied it with text-books. The principal one is Mithode elemental re par Mme. Chelae (Nanine Paris). La ^^a/'^ie theorique de net nuvrage est ridigic par Emile Ghevu. In this theoretical part, p. 292, I find that Cheve imagined Galin to have called his single division half of a minor Second, whereas he says, as above, that it was half of a minor Semitone, which is totally different. The consequence is that Cheve makes Galin's scale a division of the octave into 29 divisions, instead of 31, and hence he obtained a sharp Fifth of 703-46 cents, a very sharp major Third of 413-8 cents, much sharper than the Pythagorean (App. XX. sect. A. art. 23, vi.). If he ^\ could have tuned an harmonium to this major scale and played the major chords, ho would have been scared at the result. He makes g^ much sharper than a\y; his a,\t was indeed flatter and [A sharper than on the Pythagorean system. It is evident that his pupils when they sang in chorus could not have used his theoretical scale. Hence his principles were entirely different from Curwen's. The notation remained the same as with Galin, sharps and flats being denoted by acute and grave accents drawn through the stems of the figures, but their meaning was altogether different. Also he retained the movable ut of Galin, and on p. 327 he made out a general table of the relation of modulations, which resembles my Dnodenarium, App. XX. sect. E. art.l8. ]\I. Ainu- Paris also introduced a plan for
