page: 426

It is impossible not to acknowledge that this method of notation has the great ¶ to the singer of giving prominence to what is of the greatest im¶ to him, namely, the relation of each tone to the tonic. It is only a ¶ persons, nnusually gifted, who are able to fix in their mind, and re-discover ¶ pitches, when other tones are soiuided at the same time. But the ordinary ¶ "* gives directly nothing but absolute pitch, and that too only for tempered ¶ Any one who has frequently sung at sight is aware how much easier ¶ is to do so from a pianoforte vocal score, in which the harmony is shewn, than ¶ the separate voice part. In the first case it is easy to see whether the note to ¶ sun"- is the root, Third, Fifth, or dissonance of the chord which occurs, and it is ¶ comparatively easy to find one's way; t in the second case the only resource ¶ the singer is to go up and down by intervals as well as he can, and trust to ¶ accompanying instruments and the other voices to force his own to the right ¶

Now the instruction conveyed to a singer who is familiar with musical theory ¶ by an examination of the pianoforte vocal score, is conveyed by the notation itself ¶ the Tonic Sol-faist even to the uninstmcted. I have convinced myself that by ¶ this notation, it is much easier to sing from the separate part than in ordinary musical notation, and I had an opportunity when in one of the primary schools' in London, of hearing more than forty children of between eight and

marking modulations which has a great resemblance to John Curweu's ' bridge tone,' but both plans were absolutely independent. The ' langue des durees ' of Aime Paris was, however, avowedly adapted to the Tonic Sol-fa system by John Curwen. Both M. and Mme. E Cheve are dead, and after some time their son Amand Cheve revived the system, which has had great success in France, and gained many, prizes in choral competitions, shewing that Emile Cbeve's theoretical scale could not have been adopted. From a correspondence I ¶ had with il. Amand Cheve I found he did ¶ not hold with his father's 29 division of the octave, but adopted the 5-3 division (not however as representing just intonation with a major Third of 17 degrees or .384-9 cents, but) as representing the Pythagorean intonation with a major Third of 18 degrees or 407-5 cents (App. XX. Sect. A. art. 22, iii.). As this would be frightful in part singing, it is probable that his pupils, although strictly taught to make g^ sharper than «|j (indeed to make the intervals g to «(j and c/ji to a identical, each containing 4 degrees or '90-6 cents, with an interval of 1 degree or 22-6 cents between them), in choral singing insensibly use, the equal temperament which Galin and Emile Cheve for different reasons inveighed against. At any rate the Galin-Paris Cheve system, ¶ clever "and successful as it is, is after all and was from the first a tempered system, and in its Cheve form a (theoretically) very_ badly tempered system, and hence not in the slightest degree similar in principle to the Tonic Sol-fa, which as taught by John Curwen was always a system of just intonation. Another immense difference must be noted. Curwen founds everything upon the major chord do mi so at all pitches, then proceeds to its dominant so ti re, and finally to its subdominant fa la do, in every case drawing attention to the character of the notes in the scale. The Cheve system began by teaching the melody, id ri mi fa sol, and not advancing till this melody was thoroughly impressed on the mind of the pupil for any id, taken backwards or forwards, or stopping at any note and beginning again at that note. Afterwards the system took the melodv ut^ si la sol, and treated

it in the same way. Finally the two were united as ut re mi fa sol la si id^. On these melodies all is founded, and the pupil is told to take any other intervals by imagining the intermediate notes, withoid idtering them, thus (the notes in roman letters being merely imagined), ?/< re mi fa sol la si ut. This is developed in Mme. Cheve's Science et Art de rintoncdiori, theorie et pndiqiie, systems des 'points d'appui, 1868. On the title-page she says: ' Les grands ressorts de notre methods, pour I'etude de I'intonation, consistent en ceci: 1° Chercher les sons un a im et les emettre aussi un d un, en les detachant les uns des autres. Hors de la point de succes possible. 2* Se servir de deux rapports que Ton connait, pour trouver irn troisieme rapport qu'on ignore; c'est-a-dire, aller du connu a I'inconuu; ce qui conduit a penser par degres conjoints, en chantant par degres disjoints,' ]\Iay 1868. The two systems of Cheve and Curwen are therefore distinct in principle, value of the signs, form of the signs, notation of rhythm, and mode of teaching. They are alike in being taught without an instrument, but for very different reasons; in the Tonic Sol-fa to allow just intonation to become the pupil's guide; in the Cheve to allow of taking gjt sharper than a]y, and to make e to / the ¶ same as gt to a, but different from a'ly to They are also alike in having a movable do or id, a very ancient device. And also alike in their nomenclature of lengths, 'langue des durees,' which was an original invention of Aime Paris. As to priority of invention. Miss Glover taught her system in 1812. Galin published his in 1818. Both used tempered systems.— Translator.]

* [Usually called ' the Staff Notation ' or ' the Old Notation ' by the tonic Sol-faists by way of distinction. — Translator.]

"t [After a pupil has thoroughly acquired music on the Sol-fa notation, it becomes part of his duty to learn the other, and a course of instruction has been prepared for this purpose by Mr. Curwen, which when properly mastered (a comparatively easy task) puts the pupil in a condition to sing at sight from the old notation as readily as from the new. — Translator.]
