page: 444

¶ furk) with that fork, is the pitch of the ¶ fork. Hence the pitch of all the forks ¶ known. The extra high forks are for verify¶ by the Octaves of several lov/ forks, and ¶ the purpose of subsequently measuring. ¶ such a tonometer any other can be ¶ and the value of each fork at another ¶ calculated.

¶ made a 52-fork tonometer with ¶ trouble, on another plan, described in ¶ book and counted it with marvellous accu¶ This tonometer, which I have made ¶ efforts to find, has absolutely disap¶ and his family knows nothing of it. ¶ he left behind him a 56-fork tonometer, ¶ to proceed from 220 to 440 vibra¶ by steps of 4 vibrations, and through ¶ kindness of Herr Amels, an old friend of ¶ the Scheibler family, who obtained it from ¶ grandson, I had the use of it for ¶ year. I had to count it as well as I could, ¶ as if it had been a set of forks such as I ¶ described, and I found it was not what ¶ thought, but that only 32 sets of beats ¶ 4 in a second, and the other 23 sets ¶ from 88 to 42 in 10 seconds. I found ¶ that the extremes were probably of the ¶ pitch as in the original 52-fork tono¶ After then counting it as well as I ¶ and obtaining 219-27 vibrations in place ¶ 219-67, at 69 ' F. , I distributed the error of ¶ beats in 10 seconds, as 2 in 100 seconds, ¶ 20 of the 23 sets which were not ¶ 4 beats in 10 seconds, leaN-ing the ¶ 3 sets, which I had repeatedly counted ¶ felt sure of, unaltered. Then I reduced ¶ the values from 69= to 59° F. Finally ¶ to verify my result I measured by beats ¶ Scheibler's forks as thus determined; ¶ 5 large forks of various pitches, which ¶ had had made for me in Paris, and then ¶ forks of Koenig's belonging to Professor ¶ Professor McLeod himself kindly ¶ all of them, also, by his machine, ¶ Professor Mayer also obligingly measured ¶ first 5 forks by his electrographic method, ¶ with the greatest care and precaution. ¶ three sets of measurements agreed to ¶ than 1 beat in 10 seconds, and more ¶ less than 1 beat in 20 seconds, when ¶ to the same temperature. Thus the ¶ of the tonometrical measurement by ¶ only, and the possibility of counting ¶ tonometer sufficiently, was fully esta¶ Koenig's measurements of his own ¶ reduced to 59° F., and of the actual ¶ Diapason Normal at the Conservatoire, Paris, ¶ to be used at the same tempera¶ also agree with miire within less than ¶ same limits.

¶ pitch of all sufficiently sustained tones ¶ thus be determined mechanically. We ¶ two forks, whose pitch is known, with ¶ of which the new tone beats more slowly ¶ the forks beat with each other, and we ¶ the count, by seeing that the simi of ¶ beats with both forks is the number of ¶ of the forks with one another. The ¶ number is then that of the lower fork ¶ by the number of beats made with ¶ in a second, and that of the upper fork ¶ by the number of beats made ¶ it in a second. The following notes ¶ the result of much experience.

Tuning-forks are comparatively simple in quality of tone but always x^ossess an audible second partial or Octave, and sometimes higher partials still, capable of being so reinforced by resonance jars properly tuned to them, that beats can be separately obtained from them and counted. This, as we have seen, is a matter of great importance in the construction of a tuning-fork tonometer. When the tone is very compound, as in the case of bass reeds (especially those of Ai:)punn's tonometer, furnished with a bellows giving, when properly managed, a perfectly steady blast for an indefinite length of time), beats can be obtained and counted from the 20th to the ¶ 30th and even the 40th partial, without any inforcement by a resonance jar. (See p. llSd'.) Taking tuning-forks first, I find it advantageous to hold the beating forks over one or two resonance jars, tuned, by pouring in ¶ water, to the pitch of the partial to be served, whether it be the prime of both or ¶ the prime of one and the second partial Octave) of the other. There may be small differences, but I have not found any difference appreciable by my methods of observation in the number of beats in a second, whether the resonance jar is the same or different for the two forks, and whether it is exactly or very indifferently tuned to each fork, but a tolerably accurate tuning much ¶ improves the tone and length of the beat. that case the resonance jar practically quenches all other partial tones, and the beats are distinctly heard as loudnesses separated by silences. If no jar is used, the other partials are heard. In the case of the Octave, the low prime becomes a drone and fills up the silences. In the case of beating primes, the Octaves, which are beating twice as fast, tend to confuse the ear. Sometimes the second partial of a fork is so much stronger than the prime, that when the fork is applied to a sounding-board, only the Octave is heard, which is often inconvenient to the fork tuner. This is entirely avoided by the resonance jar. Beats being a case of interference, the amplitude of the beating partials should be equalised as much as possible. With two forks of very different size and power, it is easy to regulate the amplitude by holding the louder fork further from the jar. Otherwise the ¶ beats become blurred and indistinct. powerful reeds or organ pipes, beating with forks, it is best to go to a considerable distance from the reed or pipe and hold the fork close to the ear or over a jar. I find 30 or 40 feet necessary for organs; in Durham Cathedral, where the pressure of wind was strong and my forks weak, I found 60 or 70 feet distance much better. As I was not alile latterly to go to a distance from Appunn's reed tonometer, having to pump it myself. I found it impossible to count the primes of the upper reeds by the Octaves of my forks, which were completely drowned by the reeds.

I find beats of all kinds most easy to count when about 3 or 4 in a second. They can be counted well from 2 to 5 in a second. ¶ Above 5 they are too rapid for accuracy below 2, aud" certainly below 1, they are too slow, so that it is extremely difficult to tell from what part of the swell of sound the beat should be reckoned. Partly from this reason.
