page: 445

¶ I have found great variety in count¶ successive sets of such slow beats. I ¶ use beats of less thau one in a second, ¶ I can avoid it. When the beats are slow it ¶ difficult to discover by ear which of the ¶ beating tones is the sharper; and even ¶ ears are often deceived. It is easy to ¶ however, by putting one of the forks ¶ the arm for a minute. This heats and ¶ it by 2 or 3 beats in 10 seconds. ¶ if the beats with the heated forii are ¶ that fork was sharper, because it has ¶ brought nearer the other; if faster, it ¶ flatter and has been brought further away. ¶ for 10, 20, or 40 seconds, according to ¶ fork. Up to 20 or 30 beats in 10 seconds ¶ is easy to count in ones, but from 30 to 50 ¶ is best to count in twos, as one-ee, two-ee. ¶ , beginning with unc, and hence throwing ¶ one at the end. When counting for 20 ¶ I always count in twos, and for 40 ¶ in fours, as one-ee-ah-tee, two-ee-ah¶ &c., because I have to divide the result by ¶ or 40 ; and this division is avoided by the ¶ itself. As my counting was never for ¶ than 40 seconds, small errors of the ¶ or pendulum were imperceptible. I ¶ used a marine or pocket chrono¶ when making the principal count for ¶ seconds, but tor merely determining pitch ¶ a fork of known pitch, 10 seconds of ¶ and any ordinary seconds watch suffice. ¶ Prof. McLeod's observations, which lasted ¶ minutes or more, extreme accuracy in rating ¶ astronomical clock was necessary. Sup¶ a watch to gain 5 minutes or 300 seconds ¶ 24 mean hours, which is an extreme case, ¶ that 86,700 watch seconds = 86,400 mean ¶ then 10 watch seconds = 9 "9654 mean ¶ and 40 watch seconds = 39 -8616 mean ¶ Hence no perceptible error will arise ¶ identifying watch and mean seconds. ¶ 300 watch seconds = 298-962 mean seconds, ¶ the error would have to be allowed for. ¶ used a metronome corrected daily by ¶ astronomical clock, and graduated. On ¶ a movable weight enabled him to make ¶ swing of the pendulum take place in the ¶ time as 4 beats were heard, and then ¶ the graduation he read off the rate. ¶ counting by the seconds hand of a watch ¶ much easier and altogether more conve¶ while it is probably as accurate. Owing ¶ difficulties in beginning and ending the ¶ I find the possible error per second ¶ be 2 divided by the number of seconds ¶ which the count extends; and that ¶ is best to take a mean of 5 to 10 counts ¶ each set of beats. As most persons, in¶ myself, begin to count from one and ¶ from nmigltt, it must be remembered that ¶ last number uttered on counting the last ¶ is one in excess of the real number of ¶ Thus if in counting for 10 seconds ¶ end with 37, the number of beats was 36 ¶ 10 seconds. If in counting by twos, one-ee, ¶ &c., the last was 19, then we have ¶ only 18 pairs, and hence there were ¶ 36 beats in 10 seconds. If we end with ¶ there were 18J pairs or 37 beats in a ¶ It is best to count the same set of ¶ in one, twos and fours to realise these ¶ which are extremely important. ¶ must never be neglected.

¶ Porks sliould not bo touched with the protected hand; they otherwise easily flatten by 2 beats in 10 seconds. Interpose folds of paper. I use two folds of brown paper stitched between two pieces of wash-leather. Large forks are generally on resonance boxes and need not be touched, otherwise the same precautions should be used, as they are very sensitive, and retain the heat longer than small forks. Scheibler's forks are fitted with wooden handles. In tuning, the file heats and flattens; the result of tuning, therefore, can seldom be known for a day or two, when the forks have cooled and 'settled,' as they will be sure to ' jump up '. I find it best to leave off filing when the forks are two or three tenths of a vibration too flat. In sharpening there is, therefore, great danger of doing too ¶ much, as the fork remains apparently at the same pitch, the flattening by heat balancing the sharpening by filing. Hence all copies should be compared some days after, by means of a third fork about four vibrations flatter or sharper than each, to avoid the ¶ slow beats of approximate unisons. filing also seems to interfere with the molecular arrangement of the forks.

The thermometer should be always consulted when beats are taken. But if the beats are between two forks, of which the pitch of one at a given temperature is known, and both forks may be assumed to be altered in the same ratio by heat, then the temperature need not be observed; but the unknown fork may be presumed to be as many vibrations sharper (or flatter) than the measured fork at the temperature at which the latter was ¶ measured, as beats in a second were observed to take place. This is because the alteration is very small, and would be quite inappreciable for the few vibrations between them. But for tonometrical purposes an allowance must be made.

When forks are counted without a resonance jar, they should not be applied to a sounding-board, or held one to one ear and one to the other, but should both be held about six inches from the same ear, and their strengths should be equalised by holding the weaker fork closer to the ear than the stronger.

When the forks are screwed on and off a sounding-board or resonance box, there is great danger of wrenching the prongs, unless they are held below the bend, but I have con¶ stantly seen this precaution neglected. A wrench immediately affects the pitch and duration of sound of a fork, and renders it comparatively worthless. Such cases have come within my observation. To prevent wrenching when filing forks, only one prong should be inserted in the vice. And for evenness file the same quantity of? the inside of each prong, counting the nunrber of strokes with the file, near the tips for sharpening, and near (not at) the bend for fiattening.

The next enemy to be guarded against is rust. Forks should be kept dry, and occasionally oiled with gun-lock oil. Rust towards the tip affects the fork much less than rust at the bend. My observations and experiments shew that errors from rust can scarcely exceed a flattening of 1 vibration in 250, and are generally very much less. But as the amount
