page: 488

Footnote: he remember the original pitch? In some a series of modulations be noticed? We know
cases in the above observations of Cornu and indeed that unaccompanied singers constantly
Mercadier the Octave (and hence the original 'flatten
" by much more than a comma. The
pitch) will be seen to be sharpened or flattened Duodenarium simply shews what sounds ought
by more than two cents. In the course of a few to be played in modulations, and would be
modulations this twocentsmight easily become played on instruments with fixed tones pro-
22 or a comma. Where is the guarantee for perly arranged; not what intervals are -now
remembering the original pitch? Would an played and sung, and mere memory of ear
alteration of a whole comma in passing through does not suffice.

Art. 8. — Scbeibler's method of tuning instruments was theoretically perfect. It consisted in tuning by his fork tonometer a series of forks 4 vib. flatter than the pitches required. The string, pipe, or reed was then tuned sharper than the fork by 4 beats in a second. (See p. 4466 for Koenig's forks for this purpose.) This only applied to one octave, and perhaps the octave below; the others were tuned from, them by estimation of Octave. The errors thus made were a minimum, but

¶ there was the obvious disadvantage of having to tune a new set of forks for each pitch desired. This Scheibler overcame by tuning auxiliary octaves on organs, and counting beats by rather a trotiblesome rule, entailing the need of an accurate metronome. Even then he only taught how to tune in equal temperament. For practical pui-poses we require not only the equal but the meantone temperament, and also the 53 division of the octave. The only svu-e way is by calculating the pitch number of each note, and thus determining the beats between the note and the forks of a tuning-fork tonometer. This method may be dismissed as generally impracticable. So may any method which depends upon accurately knowing the pitch number of the tuning-note. AVhat is required is a method of tuning at any unknown pitch which an organ or piano may happen to possess at the moment within the limits of, say c'256 and, c'270 without determining exactly what that pitch really is. This would save the great trouble of entirely altering the pitch of the piano (never very certain in its results), and the still greater trouble and expense of entirely altering the pitch of an organ or harmonium.

Art. 9. — For this purpose I invented an approximative method (given on p. 785

¶ the 1st edition of this translation and subsequently communicated to the Musical Times), which I here subjoin in an improved form. It is based on the result of Prof. Preyer's investigations, (supra, p. 147<:/') that errors of 4 or '2 of a vibration cannot be heard in any part of the scale, so that any attempt to tune more accurately is labour thrown away. Moreover, even at high pitches -S, "4, and •5 vib. are scarcely perceptible in melody and quite inoffensive in harmony. It will be found very difficult when the beats are less than 4 in 10 seconds, that is, when the eiTor is less than -4 vib., to count them with any ap])roach to accuracy. But it is only by beats that we can work effectively.

Footnote: Any one who undertakes tuning should only there are 10 double swings in 10 seconds,
learn to estimate the meaning of 6, 10, 15, 20, By watching and counting this, say for half an
30 beats in 10 seconds. This is best done by hour, the tuner will learn to feel the rate of
short pendulums constructed of a piece of these two sets of swings. Then make another
thread with one end tied to a curtain ring, and pendulum with a length of string of 4| inches
the other passed through a slit in a piece of measured as before. This vibrates much more
^firewood, round which it is ultimately tied. quickly, making 180 single and hence 90
The stick is put under a book by the side of a double swings in CO seconds, and consequently
table, so that the pendulum swings freely. 30 single and 15 double swings in 10 seconds.
Measure the length of the string from the Finally make the length 27-1-7; inches, always
centre of the ring to the beginning of the from the centre of the ring t(j the stick, and
wood, which allows of an easy alteration of the pendulum will make 6 double and 12
the length by drawing the string through the single \ibratious in 10 seconds. Remember
slit. ]Make this length 9§ inches. The pendu- that if you begin counting with anc, you will
lum swings l)ackwards and forwards 120 times end with scrc/i for 6, eleven for 10, sixteen
in 60 seconds, and hence 20 times in 10 for 15, and so on, so that you will always have
seconds. Adjust it more accurately by a to throw off one from your count, seconds watch. Counting the swings one way

Art. 10. — The rule has to be arranged in several forms according to the custom of tuning instruments. Harmoniums are best tuned from c to c", that is, in the two-foot octave. Organs are generally tuned in the principal stop, so that on touching the keys from c to c'\ the sounds are from c" to c'", in the one-foot octave, and hence the beats are twice as fast. But for pianos it is the custom to time from /to/' (see art. -5). Most tuners in England begin with c", from which
