page: 513

+ or over a quarter of a Tone, sharper than Mozart's pitch, although it was 80 cents, fully three-quarters of a Semitone, flatter than the old Vienna sharp pitch a -lyC'l, and 49 cents, or a quarter of a Tone, flatter than the then French opera pitch a 448. This pitch had been reached independently in many places, and the French commission had been twitted at taking a Carlsruhe pitch. But it is not generally known that Sir George Smart's pitch a 433, adopted with much hesitation for the London Philharmonic Society about 1820, and extensively sold in London as the 'London Philharmonic' for many years before the French Commission of 1859, was in fact an anticipation of the French pitch. Both were compromises, a partial yielding to the new without entirely disregarding the old. The pitches a 430 to a 436-9, therefore (interval 28 cents, or about i Tone), foi'ming Table I. Sect. 5, pp. 497-8, are termed the 'compromise pitch.' As instruments exist for this pitch it is the only one that has a chance of being used beside the present sharp pitch of England. Several attempts have been made to restore it, iiotably at Covent Garden Opera in 1880. But the expense of new instruments for a ¶ band, about 1,000/., renders any alteration extremely difficult to carry out. The tendency in England has been to sharpen, and our orchestral and pianoforte pitch is now from a 449-7 to a 454-7, a difference of only 19 cents, not quite a comma. In the United States, however, the pitch has reached a 460-8, that is 23 cents, or about a comma more. In Germany the compromise pitch adopted was a 440*2 as proposed by Scheibler, and it is curious that the standard pipes of the English church organ builders vary from a 436 to a 445-2, 36 cents, but are mostly between 440 and 441*7, an interval of only 7 cents. The concert organs, of course, follow orchestral pitch. (See Postscript, p. 555.)

Art. 14. — -In England the pitch of organs varied with the note on which the four-foot or one-foot pipe was placed. We have only one record that the onefoot pipe was placed on c" giving a 395*2, whereas the same pipe made to give b' produced a 423, the mean pitch, which so long prevailed. Put on b'\^ it produced a 442, which as a 441*7 was Bernard Schmidt's low pitch, and is still the pitch of Mr. T. Hill, the organ-builder. Placed on a it gave a 472*9, which as a 474*1 was the highest church pitch used in England, just a Tone above mean pitch. ¶ (See p. 505c, III. 3, for details.)

Art. 15. — If w^e look into the secrets of the rise of pitch we find it always connected with wind instruments. The first rise was from a military band, and the wind and the brass have constantly rebelled against a low pitch. The singers have not l^re vailed against them except for a very short time. The great violin sch:)ol of Cremona in Italy lived in the time of mean pitch with a higher chamber pitch, and the resonance of the boxes of their violins seems to shew traces of the action of both pitches (supra, p. 87, note*), but their great object was to insure tolerable uniformity of reinforcement, and hence they are a treasure for all time.

Art. 16. — The only possible conclusion seems to be that to sing music written for pitches different fi*om our own, we must either transpose a Semitone (always a difficulty, and for some instruments an impossibility) or adopt a new compromise pitch, the French, ah'eady once firmly rooted in England as Sir George Smart's, and standing half-way between the extremes. On the continent, as formerly shewn in France, and quite recently in Belgium and Italy, the government has a certain power in fixing musical pitch, by refusing to subsidise conservatories and theatres ¶ which do not adopt the pitch ordered, and commanding the regimental bands to make the change. But beyond this their power does not extend, and the various regulations which have been made in the two countries last named shew the great difficulties that have to be overcome in introducing a new pitch even within the area under government control. In England, however, there are no subsidised operas or musical conservatories, and even the instruments of the military bands are not provided by government. Hence the change must be left to the gradual action of musical feeling. We have already changed in England almost imperceptibly. The raising of English pitch from Sir George Smart's a 433 was to a gre-at extent due to the individual action of the late Sir Michael Costa while conductor of the Philharmonic concerts 1845-46 (mean a 452*5, extreme a 454*7), to whose insistence is also due the high pitch of the Albert Hall concert organ, a 453*9. Perhaps a similar energetic conductor will arise to turn the tide of musical opinion in the opposite direction.
