page: 521

¶ additional intervals, 612, 816, 1110, ¶ 1200 + 114, played on a tambour. ¶ very long-necked guitars allow of ¶ subdivision of the string. ¶ 09 to 71 are the various notes produced ¶ the Rabi'ib, according to the three methods ¶ tuning the second string as 316, 408, or ¶ cents, the intervals between pairs of ¶ on both strings being identical. In ¶ 69 the note 520 cents is played on the ¶ string, but is here inserted in order ¶ pitch. ¶ 72 gives the most extraordinary and most ¶ scale known, produced by using only ¶ open string and 39, 38, 37, 36, and 85 ¶ of it; the open second string being ¶ in unison with the sharpest note of ¶ first string. It is valuable as showing ¶ primitive method of obtaining scales and ¶ division of one-eighth of the keyboard ¶ 5 equal parts. ¶ 73 and 74 are an attempt to represent ¶ Indian Chromatic Scale from indications ¶ Rajah Sourindro IMohun Tagore's Musical ¶ of tlic Hindus, Calcutta, 1884, and ¶ Annuairc du Conservatoire de BrvirJles, ¶ pp. 101-169, the latter having been ¶ up by Mons. V. IMahillon from in¶ furnished by the Rajah. As ¶ the 7 fixed notes {prakrifd) of the 0 ¶ [sharja <^rdma), C, D, E, F, G, A (a ¶ sharper than our A^), B, there ¶ to be no doubt of the theoretical ¶ As to the 12 chainjiiuj notes ¶ the values given can be con¶ only as approximative. The divi¶ of the intervals of a major Tone of 204 ¶ into 4 degrees [s'ruiis); of a minor ¶ of 182 cents into 3 degrees; and of ¶ Semitone of 112 cents into 2 degrees, as ¶ by the superscribed nuinbers, is ¶ certain. But whether the 4 parts of a ¶ Tone were equal and each 51 cents, ¶ the three parts of a minor Tone were ¶ equal and each equal to 60:f cents, and ¶ two parts of a Semitone were also equal ¶ each therefore 56 cents, is quite un¶ This, however, was assumed to be ¶ case in calculating No. 73, and the ¶ are probably not much out. Nor is ¶ likely that the alterations by degrees ¶ on increasing the tension of the ¶ by pressing behind high frets, or ¶ the string along low frets, or by ¶ the movable frets) were even ¶ constant. In No. 74 we ¶ the modern Bengali division of the ¶ referred to in the above books. ¶ seems that the string is first divided into ¶ and a quarter, giving the Octave and ¶ (theoretically). Then the distance ¶ the First to the Fourth on the finger¶ is divided into 9 equal parts, and that ¶ the Fourtli to the Octave into 13 equal ¶ and each distance represents the ¶ of a degree {s'ruti). From these ¶ the values of No. 74 have been calcu¶ It will be seen by subtraction that ¶ first 9 degrees thus found vary from 49 ¶ 68 cents, and the last 13 from 45 to 64 ¶ The cents found, however, from the ¶ ratio of the lengths will differ ¶ from those used practicallj-. The ¶ and [j {tihra and kovialu) arc used in this ¶ for deviations of two degrees when a

major Tone is divided, and for deviations of one degree wlien a minor Tone or Semitone is divided. This is done by the Rajah in ¶ his translations into ordinary notation. ¶ addition I have taken the liberty to use \) to represent only one decree flatter than the ¶ single [j, and wish it to be read 'very flat {ati-l-oinala)\ similarly Jfjf is one degree sharper than J, and should be read 'very sharp' {ati-tihra). The Rajah not having distinguislied the very flat and very sharp notes from the simply flat and sharp ones in his 304 scales, I have avoided citing them at length. Similarly I have not been able ¶ satisfactorily to find the cents for the scale or viad'hyamn (jrdma (usually represented as our just major scale in which A should be one comma instead of one degree flatter than in the C scale, as it il would appear to be), or for the E scale or (jaiuVhdra grdma (in which D and A appear to be one degree flatter, and B one degree sharper than in the normal C scale or sharja (irdma), and hence I have not given them in the table. But, using numbers before the notes for degrees, they may ¶ possibly be for the F scale, 10, 5D, lOF, UG, 11 A, 21/;, which would use degree 17, and the corresponding note may be called grave A, and written A\ For the ¶ E scale v/e may possibly have 16', 'ID, lOF, 14G, 17^, 22^, where 4Z) is now utilised, and becomes grave Z)\ But these A\ I)\ are not our Ai, D^, and hence the ¶ scales are different from ours. This however, pure conjecture.

No. 75, for the old national Indian instrument, a Vina from Madras, in the South 51 Kensington Museum, gives the value of 24 notes by measuring vibrating lengths of string from fret to bridge, and is, of course, very i^ncertain. It will be found, however, that the notes agree with No. 74 better than ¶ with No. 78, for the scale C D\) D E\f F FZ <T A\) k B\y c. The other degrees could be easily produced by pressing the string behind the frets, which were about one inch in height.

Nos. 76 to 80 are five observations of scales ¶ played by Rajah Ram Pal Singh, and served with forks. These were set by altering the movable frets of a sitar. The first and fourth are placed together in the table, as they are believed to have been meant for the same scale, and differed only because they were set on different days. They seem ¶ to be meant for Rajah Sourindro Mohun Tagore's first scale. The second setting seems meant for his 13th, the third for his 29th, and the fifth for his 9th.

No. 81. A wood harmonicon iuthe South Kensington IMuseum, stated to have come from Patna, but probably arrived from some liill ¶ tribes. Its scale resembles one which deduced by measurements of strings from a Tar of Cashmere, which was 0 175 854 512 720 896 1062 1237, l)ut I thought this scale too uncertain to put in the table.

No. 82. A wood harmonicon sent direct from Singapore to ]\Ir. A. J. Hipkins, taking the central Octave.

Nos. 88 to 87. Wood hiimionicons in Soutli ¶ Kensington IMuseum, of which the last longed to fieneral Pitt- Rivers.

Nos. 88 to 92 are inserted because thev are the
