page: 023

+ inversely proportional to the length of the string holds but very roughly for such instruments. Thus stopping a violoncello string exactly at its middle gives a note sharper than the Octave, hence the finger has to be placed sensibly nearer the nut. Moreover, the anioiuit of error depends on the nature of the string. The examples Nos. 134 to 137 in the table are very instructive. The determination with which those differences are overlooked (see Annotations to these Nos.) is e(]ually instructive. It is evident that Euclid in his Canon for the Pythagorean notes No. 32, and Abdulqadir in giving his rule for obtaining the 17 notes of his scale No. 67, considered the division to be perfect, and Prof. Land in calculating the value of the notes had, of course, to assvime that it was so. The old intervals were, therefore, not so accurately tuned as was supposed, and hence when we take them to be accurately tuned we are ourselves inaccurate.

The fact was strongly impressed on me in making an instrument on which I could play any scale expressed in cents. I had a Dichord, that is, a double monocliord, constructed with wires 1,200 millimetres long, diameter -3 mm., height of nut 7 mm., of bridge 24 mm., from sound board. Then having a number of laths 5 mm. thick, I used them as moveable fingerboards, and marked on one the place of the notes of the just scale as determined by the theory of inverse ratios. Trying, by my Harmonica], I found every place much too sharp, and it was only by marking the places which gave unisons that I was able to correct the error. If any one constructs such an instrument, I recommend his setting off the place where lie sbould stop for each semitone for two octaves, by a well-tuned pianoforte, and then dividing each distance representing a semitone into 10 part's. Each of these parts will I'epresent 10 cents with quite sufficient accuracy, and can be subdivided by the eye. Thus a geometrical scale can bo constructed by means of which the places to touch the string can be marked oif on a new lath, and the scale played. This geometi-ical scale was placed under one string and the finger-board to be played from under the other. I found it best for accuracy to stop the string witli the side of mj' thumb-nail. All the principal scales above given were thus realised.

Now assuming the usual lav/ of division, suppose a string, divided in half, giving the Octave, and each half subdivided in half, giving the Fourth and double Octave. This division being the simplest possible would naturally give a preponderance to the Fourth, whence would arise the tetrachords, the foinidation of Greek, and hence of European, and of Persian and Arabic music. The Fourth is also recognised in India; but in pentatonic regions, especially in Java, where the string is not in use (the rabab they use is Arabic in name and origin, Nos. 69 to 71), the Fourth is not correct. It is clearly, therefore, not a primitive interval, and the quartering of the string may really have much to do with its adoption.

The interval was, however, too wide, and it was necessary to subdivide it. The most obvious plan was again to quarter it. Thus, the additional distances of ^V. t'it = ii Vtt of the string from the nut would be obtained, giving the vibrating lengths \%,i, ff, the ratio. The first gives tbe diatonic Semitone of 112 cents, and its defect from the Fourth 498 cents, the major Third of 386 cents, see No. 1. This ^ of the string = 112 cents is conspicuous in Nos. 1 to 4, some of the oldest forms. The ^ = 2.31 cents, we find in No. 72. The ^ = 360 cents did not

come into use, but it is practically Zalzal's 355 cents. No. 51.

Continuing this simplest of all subdivisions 11 by two, we have half of -iV = TiS of the string from the nut, giving the vibrating length {fi of the string = 55 cents. Hence we obtain the enharmonic division No. 11. At the same time my observations on p. 265, note *, hold good, for the errors in coniing so near the nut as J.T of the string would be too great to obtain anything like accurate results by measurement. On my dichord I found it impossible to take less than a semitone of 100 cents with any degree of certainty. It is interesting to observe that this f J- of the string gives very nearly 50 cents or the Quarterton.e, and stiil more nearly 54i\, the 22nd part of an Octave, corresponding to the Indian degree (Nos. 73 and 74 Annotation), and is really the commencement of the variation of notes by about a Quartertone.

¶ Then the divisions attempted in the Southern Tambour No. 72, and also in forming the Persian middle-finger note, 303 cents (see No. 66), by taking a place half-way between that for 294 cents and 408 cents, and again for Zalzal's middle-finger note of .355 cents, by taking a place half-way between 303 and 408 cents, and finally the modern Bengali division of the distance occupied by a Fourth on the fingerboard into 9 parts (see No. 74) and that for the following Fifth into 13 parts, suggest that the attempts were made to divide the ^ of the string from the nut to the Fourth, by other simple numbers beside 2. The division into three parts would be more difficult, but might be done very fairly by guess. Now the distances of flie stopping-place from the nut -,'^, y^ =i of the string or the vibrating lengths J.J ¶ and f of the string corresponding to 151 cents and 316 cents, the first, the Threequartertone, which is the real paroit of all the neutral intervals to be considered presently, and the second the minor Third. Both occur in No. 10, and the minor Third occurs also in Nos. 3 and 6.

The division of the whole string into thirds could hardly have taken place, but } of the string from nut gives the vibrating length t of the string = 702 cents, the Fifth, which, as exceeding the Fourth of 498 cents, would not be regarded till the tetrachord had been extended to the Octave. The defect of a Fourth from a Fifth gave the major Tone, one cf the most important intervals, also obtained directly by taking I of i, or ^ of the string from the nut, giving ^ of the string as the vibrating length = 204 cents. This interval finally absorbed all the others, except the Fourth,
