page: 526

¶ chromatic scale of 12 semitoues. Euro¶ musicians, indeed, persist in hearing and ¶ the Sulendw scales,

¶ 0 240 480 720 9G0 1200, as 0 200 500 700 900 1200, orO 300 500 700 1000 1200

¶ this must arise from their not appreciating ¶ cents, which is almost a neutral interval ¶ a Tone, 200, and a minor Third, 300, ¶ is hence mistaken by European ears some¶ for one and sometimes for the other. ¶ for the Pelog scales, I cannot find that ¶ one has ventured to put their airs into a ¶ dress, the intervals No. 96 are so ¶ I have however tried to appreciate ¶ by having a concertina tuned with the ¶ studs in Salendro (tuning A' and F and ¶ also £ and 0 as unisons), and the black studs ¶ Pelog, and writing them with the notes

which would belong to the stud used in the ordinary tuning. For the Salendro I used the airs in Raffles's Java, and in Ci'awford's paper in the Tagore collection. For the Pelog I had to invent airs myself. The characters of the two sets are quite unlike. But pentatonic Scotch airs played with the Salendro scale are quite recognisable. Whether this scale is the primitive pentatonic scale it is quite impossible to say.

In Japan the koto tunings are all penta¶ tonic, and according to theory the ' popular have intervals of a Semitone, a Tone, and a viajoi- Third, whei'eas the ' classical ' have intervals only of a Tone and a minor Third, just as on the commonly received black digitals of a piano; but the classical is said to come from China. In practice probably these intervals are varied as in Nos. Ill and 112.

G. Pentatonic scales ¶

do not necessarily arise from iiuibility to appreciate

¶ is shewn by the Javese Pelog notes, ¶ contain intervals of 137, 129, 112, 133, ¶ 102 cents, and by the Japanese popular ¶ tunings, No. 110 and Nos. 113 to 123, all ¶ and theoretically founded on the

diatonic Semitone. If in practice the diatonic Semitone sometimes grows to a Tbreequartertone, it also sinks to a small Semitone, see Nos. Ill and 112.

8. Tliere is an entire absence of tonality in onr sense of the term and of any ¶ at harmony.

¶ is regard to the final cadence, at ¶ in ]\Ieshaqah's scales, and probably in ¶ There is iu the Indian a rulcrnote{vddi),

¶ see p. 243(;', and vtinidcr notes {s(imvddi), ¶ function as our tonic, dominant and ¶ in certain respects, and Prof. ¶ thinks he discovers a reference to a ¶ in Aristotle (p. 241). But the European ¶ of tonality is one of very late growth, ¶ in non-harmonic scales must have been ¶ quite different, and if we refer it to ¶ same feeling as our own, it is from want of ¶ to appreciate the feeling of those who ¶ non-harmonic scales. This is parallel to ¶ constantly happens in appreciating the ¶ of these scales.

¶ is plenty of ensemble playing with ¶ of very different qualities of tone, but ¶ ngularly proceed in unisons and Oc¶ -. Ill the Indian instruments there are ¶ iii'iic and secondary strings. The for¶ have tlieir partials evoked by the notes ¶ The latter, generally tuned in rela-

¶ tions of an Octave Fourth or Fifth, are occa¶ thrummed. But there is nothing like ¶ chord, or a tissue of harmony. It woiild not ¶ possible with the notes at command. There ¶ also discant playing as in the old polyphony ¶ harmony proper was invented. Prof. ¶ speaking of the Gamelan, or band of ¶ musicians sent by the independent ¶ of Solo to the Arnheim Industrial Ex¶ in 1879, says: ' The musical treat¶ is this. The rabab plays the tune in the ¶ of leader ' [at the Aquarium, the ¶ of the gambang (wooden bar harmo¶ seemed to be leader] ; ' the others play ¶ same tune, but figured, and each for him¶ and in his own way; the saron (metal bar ¶ resumes the motive or tune. All ¶ is accompanied by a sort of basno osti¶ and a rhythmical movement of the drum,

and the whole is divided into regular sections and subsections by the periodical strokes of the gongs and kenongs [kettles]. The variations of the same tune by the different instruments produce a sort of barbarous harmony, which has, however, its lucid moments, when the beautiful tone of the instruments yields a wonderful effect. But the principal charm is in the quality of the sound, and the ¶ rhythmical accuracy of the playing. players know by heart a couple of hundred pieces, so as to be able to take any of the instruments in turn.'

¶ In his report on Japanese music, Mr. Isawa, director of the Musical Institute at Tokio, distinctly claims a species of harmony for Japan, and gives an arrangement of the Greek ' Hymn to Apollo ' (Chappell, p. 174), which he had directed ' a Court musician, and a member of the [Musical] Institute, to harmonise purely according to the principles of Japanese classical music' It was set for five instruments, the Riuteki (fuye), Hichiriki, Sho, Koto, and Biwa. I possess the copy of the music in European notation, sent to the Educational Section of the Health Exhibition in 1884. Though much was in Octaves, the koto played a figured form, with dissonances, followed by consonances. A non-professional ¶ Japanese gentleman, a student of physics, quainted with European music, in answering my questions, says: ' Anything like European [harmony] cannot be heard iia Japan. If it exist, it is of the rudest possible description. We have certainly ensemble playing with many instruments of different sorts; but it seems to me that we have no idea of such things as chords. . . . We go generally parallel in Octaves and in Fifths, rarely in Fourths, but there are cases where two different tones, not belonging to the three consonances, are sounded, but they are not harmonic, but what
