page: 528

+ ii. R. KoBNiG. Ueber die Erreijung harmonucher Ohertune durch Schwingiongen eines Grundtones (On the excitement of harmonic npper partials by the vibrations of a fundamental tone). Wiedemann, Annal. 1880, vol. xi., pp. 857-870.

Footnote: This treatfi of a subject incidentally mentioned, supm, p. 159«, in reference to combinational tones.

iii. R. KoBNiG. Ueber den Ur sprung der Stosse und Stosstbne bei Jiarmonischen Intervallen (On the origin of beats and beat-tones for harmonic intervals). Wiedemann, Annal. 1881, vol. xii. pp. 335-349, introducing an entirely new method of experimenting by means of the wave-siren.

iv. R. KoBNiG. Beschreibung eines Stosstoneapparates ,fiir Vorlesmigsversuche (Description of a beat-tone apparatus for lecture-room experiments), Wiedem., 1881, immediately after the last paper, vol. xii. pp. 350-353.

V. R. KoENiG. Bemerl-ungen dber die Klangfarbe (Remarks on quality of tone) ¶ Wied., 1881, vol. xiv., j^p. 369-393, more fully describing the wave siren of No. iii.

Footnote: In drawing up this notice I made use solely 2^'^^'^'^^^'^'^^ d'Acou.itiqioe, 1882, to be had at his
of the original German papers just cited. But present establishment, 27 Quai d'Anjou, Paris,
I find that Dr. Koenig has republished the and I have made some use of the additional
whole of his 16 acoustical papers, of which notes then added. I cordially recommend
those just cited form the 9th, 14th, 10th, 11th, this collection as a valuable and almost indis-
and 16th, respectively, in the French language, pensable supplement to Prof. Helmholtz's
jn one volume, with beautifully printed wood- work, engravings, under the title of Qmlqiies Ej-

vi. R. H. M. BosANQUET. On the Beats of Consonances of the Form h: 1. Proceedings of the Physical Society of London, vol. iv., Aug. 1880 to Dec. 1881, pp. 221-256. This was written before B. had seen No. iii. and iv. above.

vii. W. Preyer. Ueber die Qrenzen der Tonwahrnehmung (On the limits of the perception of tone) containing the sections. I. The Lower Tones, II. The Highest Tones. III. Sensitiveness for Difference of Pitch. IV. Sensitiveness for the Sens.-ition of Interval. V. Sensation of Silence. Forming the first part ¶ of the first series of Physiologische Abhandlnngen (Physiological Essays) edited by W. Preyer, M.D. and Ph.D., Prof, of Physiology and Director of the Physiological Institute at Jena, 1876, the year before the publication of the 4th German edition of Helmholtz, who quotes it several times. It is here inserted for completeness.

viii. W. Preyer, Akustische Untersuchungen (Acoustical Investigations) in the same collection, second series, fourth part, containing I. Deepest Tones without upper partial Tones (supra, see footnote, pp. 176-7). II. Combinational Tones and upper partial Tones of Tuning Forks. III. Contributions to the Theory of Consonance. IV. Notice on the Perception of the smallest differences of Pitch, Jena, 1879.

Footnote: These will be cited by the initial of the editions of vii. and viii. Prof. Helmholtz will
author, K. or B. or P. followed by the number be cited as H., generally followed l)y the page
of the paper, and generally by the page, which of this edition, in the case of P. will refer to the separate

¶ Art. -. Koenig^s Simple Tones.

(a) Simple Tones of Forks. The tones dealt with Ijy K. are as simple as K. could make them. ' The forks that I used with resonators,' says K. iii. 337, ' had no recognisable harmonic upper partials at all. The occurrence of harmonic upper partials in tuning-forks depends not so much on the lowness of their pitch and the amplitude of their vibrations as on the relation of the amplitude to the thickness of the prongs.'

Footnote: From a c fork (128 d. v.) with prongs openingof the resonator tuned to them, almost
7 mm. ( = -28 inch) thick, K. obtained as many touched the prongs of the fork. The pitch of
as 4 partials. From another c fork with forks varies directly as the thickness, and in-
prongs 15 mm. (=-59 inch) thick and 20 mm. versely as the square of the length, of their
(=■79 inch) wide, only two partials were gene- prongs (K. iii. 338). K. proceeds to mention
rally obtained, but extremely violent blows that the forks he used, even the largest, when
brought out a 3rd partial. With prongs placed before properly tmied resonators, had no
29 mm. (1-14 inch) thick and 40 mm. (=1-57 detectable upper partials. Subsequently B.
inch) wide, it was not possible to hear even a repeated K.'s observations in part with the
faint Octave, and a Twelfth, except when the stopped organ-jDipes of B.'s experimental
