page: 529

+ tial was perceptible and could be allowed for. with the pipe, and not the strong tones of his

Also, afterwards, K. iii. 34:2, used stopped tuning-forks mentionud in K. i. organ-pipes and tuniug-forks. B. used tones

(/;) Simple Tones of the Wave Siren. To avoid the siisj)icioii of uppei- partials, however, K. invented the wave siren.

An harmonic curve constructed on a large of which the ratio numbers lie between 1 and scale and reduced by i^hotography was cut on 16. Hence, although upper partials are found the edge of a wheel. The wheel revolved on most tuning-forks, and especially on cerunder a narrow slit, placed exactly in the tain of K.'s forks, it would be wrong to assume position of a radius of the wheel, through (as P. ii. 88 apparently assumes) that in all which wind was driven as the wheel rotated. K.'s cases, at least the Octave was audible. The curve alternately cut off and let pass the This was not the case with stopped organstream of air, and produced a perfectly simple pipes used by both K. and B., and still less so tone, the pitch of which depended on the ra- with the tones of the wave siren. K.'s results pidity of rotation. Forms of this wave siren therefore cannot be explained by upper partial are figured in K. iii. 346, 347, and K. v. 386. tones. But when we are dealing with com¶ The last shews 16 liarmonic curves which pound tones, each pair of partials forms a may be made to act in an}^ groups, producing combination of simple tones to which K.'s all Ihe combinations of perfectly simple tones, observations apply.

Art. 3. — The Phenomena which ai'ise luhen two notes are sounded together, according to Koenig and, Bosanquet.

(a) The facts as distinct from theory. We must distinguish the phenomena from any theoretical explanation of them that may be proposed. The phenomena described by such an acoustician as K., so careful in experiments, so ampW provided with the most exact instruments, will, I presume, be generally accepted. The theory by which he seeks to account for them is a matter for discussion. The following relates to two simple tones only, and this must be carefully borne in mind, because H. 159/> apparently imagined that the tones used really had upper ])artials.

(fj) Upjier and Lower Beats and Beat-Notes.

If two simple tones of either very slightly or greatly different pitches, called ¶ generators, be sounded together, then the upper pitch number necessarily lies between two multiples of the lower pitch number, one smaller and the other greater, and the differences between these multiples of the pitch number of the lower generator and the pitch number of the upper generator give two numbers which either determine the frequency of the two sets of beats which may be heard or the pitch of the two beat-notes which mas}^ be heard in their place. The term ' beat-notes ' is here used without anij theory as the origin of such tones, but only to shew that they are tones having the same frequency as the beats, which are sometimes heard simultaneously.

Referring to the tables in the Translator's But if they were higher, as 5 x 20 = 100 and

footnote to p. 191 supra, which relate to com- 12 x 20 = 240, the beats would be 2 x 20 — 40,

pound tones, and therefore contain multiples and 3 x 20 = 60, which, though far too rapid

of the pitch numbers (or of the numbers which to be counted, would be clearly heard as beats,

give the interval i-atios) of two generators, we and at the same Ihiie the beat-notes of 40 and

see froin the minor Tenth 5 : 12, that the 60 vib. would afso be audible. If, however,

prime 12 of the upper generator lies between they were much higher, as 5 x 100 = 500 and

10 and 15, the 2nd and 3rd multiples of the 12 x 100 = 1200, then only the beat-notes of

¶ lower generator, and hence the beat or beat- 2 x 100 = 200 and 3 x 100 = 300 vib. would

note frequencies would be 12 - 10 = 2, and be heard. The beats heard are then the same

15 - 12 = 3. If, then, the two generators are as if the upper generator were simple and the

low enough, say, having the pitch-numbers lower generator compound; but it must be

5 X 6 = 30 and 12 x 6 = 72, the beats heard remembered that both generators are really

would be 2 X 6 = 12 and 3 x 6 = 18, which simple, would be plainly distinguishable as beats.

The frequency arising from the lower multiple of the lower generator is called the frequency of the lower beat or Imver beat-note, that arising from the higher multiple is called the freqiiency of the higher beat or beat-note, without at all implying that one set of beats should be greater or less than the other, or that one beat-note should be sharper or flatter than the other. They are in reality sometimes one way and sometimes the other.

(c) Limits tvithin ivhich either one or both Beat-Notes are heard. Both sets of beats, or both beat-notes, are not usually heard at the same time. If we divide the intervals examined into groups (1) from 1:1 to 1 : 2, (2) from 1 : 2 to 1 : ,3, (3) from 1 : 3 to 1 : 4, (4) from 1 : 4 to 1:5, and so on, the lower beats and

Footnote: M M
