page: 533

+ supposed actuully to generate and be generated by other bkewise inaudible tones '. We have an example in the first dift'evential of a tone whieh, when it does not coincide with the lower beat-note, is appreciable only by beats with an auxiliary tone, and is hence vei'y faint indeed in respect to the generators; and yet these are supposed to be the progenitors of others relatively weaker, till at last they j)roduce one strong enough to be well heard (K. i. 186). The difficulty is surmounted by B., so far as the existence of the ultimate tone, without assuming the action of hypothetical intermediate generators. But we know nothing of the strength of these idtimate tones as determined by the formula, and we are constrained to believe that what depends upon the higher powers of the displacement, when the latter is not infinitesimal in respect to the length of the wave, must be extremely small, not at all comparable with the beat-notes actually heard, and hence must be insuflicient to explain them. That is, we may admit all the difterential and summational tones of H. and B. without having approached a satisfactory explanation of the main phenomenon, the beat-note.

¶ (h) Can Beats f/eiieyate Tones? First, Beats of Int(n-iHittence. Now, the obvious hypothesis is that the beats coming within the freipieucy of musical notes are heard as tones. H. 156c, in mentioning this, states three objections, of which P. viii. 27 says that not one is at present tenable. They are: (1) that this hypothesis does not explain summational but only difterential tones. On which P. remarks that summational tones, which have been heard only when at least the second partial of the generators was audible, can be explained as diffei-ential tones of the second order, as noted supra, p. 532 b. (2) That ' under certain conditions the combinational tones exist objectively,' which is against art. 4, p. 531 ; and P. viii. 25 especially observes that the only experiment which H. has cited (Pogg. Animl. vol. xcix" p. 539) to prove the objective existence of summational tones by sand strewed on a membrane cannot be critically examined because the two generators are not specified. (3) That 'the only tones which the ear hears correspond to pendular vibrations of the air '. P. considers this to be disproved by the intermittence tones obtained by K., who rotated a disc perforated with 128 holes before tuning forks of diff'erent pitches, and obtained the same tone of intermittence what¶ ever was the pitch of the fork. This tone was accompanied by two variant tones having pitch numbers e(iual to the sum and difterence of the frequencies of the fork and intermittences.

Footnote: K. i. 230, varied the experiment by con- quickly, the 16 periods of the first, then the
structing a disc ' with three circles, each with 12 of the second, and finally the 8 of the third
96 equidistant holes, the diameters of which circle, passedover into a musical tone. Finally,
increased and diminished on the first circle 16 when the high tone of the 96 holes on revolv-
times from 1 to 6 mm. ( = -04 to -24 inch), on ing 8 times in a second had reached ij" with
the second 12, and on the third 8 times. On 768 d. vih., the deep tones c, G, 6'— answering
blowing through a tube 6 mm. ( = -24 inch) in to the numbers of the periods 128, 96, 64 d.
diameter, and revolving the disc slowly, the vib. — could be heard loudly and powerfully at
separate periods of holes on each circle gave the same time as (/".' separate beats. On revolving continually more

(c) Can Beats generate Tones? Secondly, Beats of Interference. Now, in reference to these tones of intermittence, K. i. 231 remarks that although they shew great similarity to beating combinations, as proving the possibility of separate ¶ maxima of intensity passing over into a continuous tone, they were in reality very diff'erent from such combinations, because in the case of beats there was a change of sign, a maximum of condensation being followed by a maximum of rarefaction.

Footnote: This was precisely the objection made by equal to half the difference of the frequencies
Lord Rayleigh when Mr. Spottiswoodc gave of the primaries'. Then B. says that if the
his account of Koenig's experiments {Proc. law held for widely separated notes, as for the
Mas. Ass. 1878-9, p. 128), and lie in conse- ' Fifth (4 : 6), the note heard would be the
quence could not understand how beats could major Third, which would beat rapidly . . .
generate tone. B. {Ibhl. p. 129) raised the but as a matter of fact the note 5 is not heard
same objection, which he developed in B. vi. at all in the above case'. Further, ' supposing
223-5. He there shews that in the case of that in some unexplained way the beats whose
two tones of equal strength, les^ than two speed is
' /<yri'/ the difference of the freqiiencies
commas from a unison, 'the re.-;ultant dis- of the primaries, as just stated, ' gave rise to a
placement ' would produce a tone ' wliose fre- note as supposed by K., then the speed of that
quency is the arithmetical mean between the note does not agree with that required for K.'s
frequencies of the two primaries, and having first [lower] beat-note, which has the same
oscillations of intensity whose frequency is speed as H.'s difference-tone,' or the «;/(o/cm
defined by a pendulum vibration of frequency stead of half the difference of the frequencies.
