page: 535

+ corresponding to those observed when two tuning-forks were sounded together. Thus the major Second 8 : 9 produced the lower beatnote 1 ; the major Seventh 8 : 15, the upper beat-note 1 ; the disturbed Twelfth 8 : 23, the upper beat-note of the second period, which is

again = 1, loudly and distinctly. In the same way the ratios 8:11 and 8 : 13 gave quite distinctly and at the same time the upper and lower beat-notes 3 and 5 for the first, and 5 and 3 for the second:' 11-8 = 3, 2x8-11 = 5, and 13-8 = 5, 2x8-13 = 3.

(/) i)Vcj/.s- and Beat-Xofes hmrd tot/ether. The preceding experiment shews the gradual [)assage of beats into tones, the transitional part being where both beats and toiies are heard together. This occurs where the rotation is sufficiently quick to generate a tone (see H. 174-9, and especially footnote f top. 176), but not so fast as to destroy the distinct perceptions of beat.

To tliis I drew attention in a footnote to p. 231 of the 1st edition of this translation, now reproduced in a modifiGd form (supra, p. 153c', note). This hearing of the two phenomena K. i. 227 explains by a theory of H. (contained on pp. 217-8 of the 1st English ed., but omitted in this 2nd English ed., because it was struck out in the 4th German ed., H. having altered his opinion) that tones are heard in the cochlea and noises in other parts of the ear. In the additions to the 4th German ed. (supra, pp. 150i to 151'/) H. attributes the hearing of both musical tone and noise to the cochlea, and reserves the labyrinth for the sensation of revolution of the head, thus agreeing with Exner. P. viii. 29-33, thinks there are many reasons why we should not accept the theory that all i^erceptions of noise are due to the cochlea. If so, he says, ' animals without a cochlea would be deaf. Fishes certainly are mostly dumb, and do not hear acutely, as anglers well know, but they are not deaf.' On examining Exner's paper (supra, p. 151ti, note *), and especially Anna Tomaszewicz's ' Contributions to the Physiology of the Labvi-i nth of tlic Ear," (Iliiirdiiczur Physiologic ds' (>/n-/.'h,,rii,//is, MviUc. ' Inaugural Dissertation. Zurich, 1S77 i, with other phenomena, he comes to the conclusion that the cochlea hears only musical tones with a pitch-number not less than about IG (the lowest audible musical tone as usually produced), and that separate noises are heard by other parts of the ear — if not in the vestibule, then in the saeculus. He considers it probable, as others have also thought, that the function of the semicircular canals is rather to give a sensation of the direction whence sound comes. The point is, however, still undecided.

K., in the French repulilication of his paper (p. 137), says: 'At all events the simultaneous perception of separate beats and the sound which results from their succession is no more in contradiction with the new

hypothesis than with the old, for we ca,n very well suppose that, beside the general excitement of the basilar membrane due to each separate beat, the particular pa,rts of this ¶ membrane, whose proper tones correspond to the period of the impulses, are more strongly shaken, and execute lasting vibrations giving the perception of sound '.

Lord Rayleigh, in his Presidential Address to the British Association meeting at Montreal, Canada, in Aug. 1884, says: ' Every day we are in the habit of recognising, without much difficulty, the quarter from which a sound proceeds, but by what step wo attain that end has not yet been satisfactorily explained. It has been proved that, when proper precautions are taken, we are unable to distinguish whether a pure tone (as from a vibrating tuning-fork lield over a suitable resonator) comes to us from in front or from behind. This is what might have been expected from an a priori XJoint of view; but what would not have been ¶ expected is, that with almost any other sort of sound the discrimination is not only possible, but easy and instinctive. In these cases it does not appear how the possession of two ears helps us, though there is some evidence that it does; and even when sounds come to us from the right or left, the explanation of the ready discrimination which is then possible with pure tones is not so easy as might at first appear. We should be inclined to think that the sound was heard much more loudly with the ear that is turned towards than with the ear which is turned from it, and that in this way the direction was recognised. But if we try the experiment we find that — at any rate with notes near the middle of the musical scale — the difference of loudness is by no means so very great. The wave-lengths of such notes are long enough, in relation to the dimensions of the head, to forbid the forma¶ tion of anything like a sound-shadow in which the averted ear might be sheltered.'

[g) Beat-Xutefi and Beat-Tones. After K.'s final experiment (p. 532(7') on the passage of beats into tones, w'e might perhaps disuse the interim term ' beat-note,' which implied no theory as to its origin, but only a statement as to its frequency, and use K.'s term 'beat-tone,' implying that the tone is generated by beats. But just because 'beat-note' does 7io< in^ply a theory, and because no theory has been at present generally accepted, nor is sufficiently supported by proofs to be so, it will be convenient to continue the use of the word ' beat-note,' which simplj' states that the frequency of the beat is identical with that of the note. At the same time we must not disuse the terms ' differential and summational tones, of various orders,' because if they really exist they are a decidedly different phenomenon from beat-notes, and only in the most frequently observed case coincide in pitch (but not in intensity) with beat-notes. P. viii. 29, however, decides to identify the two. K., on the other hand, considers the existence of differential and summational tones not proved.
