page: none

Footnote: for any length of time, whereas those from tiiuiug-forks vanished so rapidly that they conld be with difficulty recognised. But this did not suffice foi- lecture ■demonstrations. Hence K. invBiited a machine which ])roduces beat toiu's audibU' •over a whole lecture room.
This consists (K. iv.) of pairs of glass tubes tones and either our or both of the beat-notes
adjusted so as to give notes with definite inter- continuonsly, and loud enough to be appre-
vals bv longitudinal vibrations. These are held ciated by the whole audience. A piece ot
at the node bv two clamps against the surface paper wrapped round the node and bearing the
of a wheel bearing a thick cloth tire, which con- number of the rek^tive pitch enables the glass
tinually dips into a trough of water, and thus tubes to be selected and chaugcid with the
rubs the tubes sufficiently to produce loud greatest rapidity.

Art. 6. — Infiuenre of dlfWence of Phase on Quality of Tone.

H. p. 126(1 "finds that difference of phase has no effect on quality of^ tone. But, ■cup. 127c, H. points out 'an apparent exception,' on which K. v. 376 remarks ¶ that if quality depends on the relative intensity of the harmonic upper partials, and this relative intensity is really altered by difference of phase, the influence of this difference is 'actual, and not merely ajjparent'. Then observing on the difficulties attendant on H.'s rule for finding the differences of phase (supra, p. 124c), he proceeds to describe his new experiments with the wave su'en (for which reason they are mentioned in this place), which certainly admit of very much more precision. They were conducted thus: K. compounded harmonic curves of various pitches, and with various assumptions of amplitudes, under four varieties of phase: (1) the beginning of all the waves coinciding; (2) the first quarter, (.3) the halves, and (4) the third quarter of each wave coinciding; briefly said to have a difference of phase of, 0, }, \, f • These were reduced by photography, inverted, and placed on the rim of the disc of a wave siren, and then made "to speak. He gives the remarkable curves which residted in a few cases, and instructions for "repeating the experiments. The following are his conclusions (K. V. 391): —

' The composition of a number of harmonic tones, including both the evenly ¶ and unevenly numbered partials, generates in all cases, quite independently of the relative intensity of these tones, the strongest and acutest quality tone for the i difference of phase, and the weakest and softest for f difference of phase, while the differences 0 and I lie between the others, both as regards intensity and acuteness.

'When unevenly numbered partials only are compounded, the differences of phase I and f give the same quality of tone, as do also the differences 0 and ^ ; but the former is strtmger and acuter than the latter.

' Hence, although the quality of tone principally depends on the number and relative intensity of the harmonic tones compounded, the influence of dift'erence of tone is not by "anv means so insignificant as to be entirely negligible. We may say, in general terms, that the differences in the number and relative intensity of the harmonic tones compounded produces those differences in the quality of tone which are remarked in musical instruments of different families, or in the human voice uttering different vowels. But the alteration of phase between these harmonic tones can excite at least such differences of quality of tone as are observed ¶ in musical instruments of the same family, or in different voices singing the same vowel.'

Of course, as K. v. 392 observes, the complete wave siren figured on k. v. 3S6 is applicable to numerous other investigations.

Art. 7.— Influence of Combinational Tones, on the consonance. of Simple Tones.

This is a brief notice of P. viii. III. It would appear from H.'s theory of consonance (see specially supra, pp. 200f/ and 2051,) that, if there were no upjjer partial or combinational tones, dissonance and consonance could not be distinguished—in the Thirds for exam^jle. P.'s experiments rendered this doubtful. He had a series of 11 forks made, very accurately tuned to —

Vib. 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 ISOO 1900 2000 Cents 165 151 138 129 119 112 105 99 93 S9

Sums 0 165 316 454 583 702 814 91v» lOlS 1111 1200

where the upper line gives the numbers of vibrations, the second the cents in the
