page: 538

+ intervals between two successive forks, and the bottom the sums of those cents, or the cents in the intervals between any fork and the lowest, from which the cents in the intervals between any two forks can be immediately deduced by subtraction; and by a reference to the table in Sect. D. the names of such intervals can be found. P. selected the dift'erence of 100 vib. because it was small enough to allow of a sensation of roughness when twt) successive forks were sounded together. And he selected the pitches 1000 and 2000 because they precluded hearing upper partials, while the frequency 1000 to 2000 not being sufficient to have any effect on distinguishing consonance, the absence of power to distinguish it could not be ascribed to the high pitch.

Both practised and unpractised ears imme- pair of sounds, it loses the disagreeable effect

diately recognised on them that siiccessive forks of dissonance '.

were dissonant to each other; this was due " The Octave and Fifth were generally re-

to the small difference of 100 vib. Almost all cognised with certainty, probably from long

other intervals of these 11 forks, when the forks practice. This appears to be an excellent

¶ were not too loud, were freq^^ently considered proof of H.'s theory. And the less care there

consonant, especially by musicians— such as was taken to exclude upper partials and com-

10 : 13, 11 : 1-S, 12 : 19, 17 : 20, &c. Also the binational tones, the more unpleasant became

ratios expressible by small numbers (except the dissonance, and the easier it was for the

8 : 9 and 9 : 10), namely, 5:7, 5:9, 6:7, ear alone to determine the interval immedi-

7 : 8, 7 : 9, 7 : 10, often passed as consonances; ately. But this is not all. H.'s theory that

and though the 1 : 2, 2:3, 3:4, 3 : 5, 4 : 5, dissonances should be recognised only by beats

5:6, 5:8 were generally preferred, some of the partials or combinational tones implies

observers found 6:7, 15 : 19, 11 : 13, &c., that, if these were too far distant in pitch to

more harmonious than the pure Thirds and produce beats, there would be no roughness,

Sixths, 4:5, 5 : 6, 5 : 8, 3 : 5, especially than and hence no beats. This did not prove to be

the minor Sixth 5:8. The listener was the case. The pair 1400 : 1600 vib. formed _a

always kept in ignorance of the numerical dissonance, although all partials and combi-

ratios, and only one person was tried at a national tones differed by 200. The ratio

time. The sum of the different judgments 8 : 9 was universally called a cutting disso-

was therefore: nance, even in the 4 times and 8 times accented

' After all upper partials and combinational Octave. tones have been eliminated from a dissonant

¶ The explanation of the above phenomena seemed to require a remodelling of H.'s theory, and P.'s conclusions are stated thus (P. viii. 58): —

' (1) The larger the least two numbers required to express the ratio between two tones, the greater the number of combinational tones, which always form an arithmetical series, and arise, whether upper partials be present or not (H. 155c).

' (2) The greater the number of simple tones which affect the ear simultaneously, the less distinct is each single tone.

' (3) The more coincidences there are between the tones which might be and are generated by any interval, the more pleasing is the sensation; and the fewer the coincidences the more confusing, and hence unpleasant, the impression.'

And as these conclusions hold for tones which, on account of their own distance from each other and the distance of their partials and combinational tones, cannot generate sensible beats, P. considers that this is both a formal and an actual extension of H.'s theory of consonance. But if, with K., we consider these diff"erential tones absolutely insensible, it would be difficult to see how they would affect the result, and the facts noted would still re(iuire explanation. ¶ The whole subject of combinational tones and beats evidently reipiires much more examination.

SECTION M.

Footnote: ANALYSIS AXD SYNTHESIS OF VOWEL SOUNDS.

(See Notes, pp. 75, 118, 124.)

Art. Art.

1. Analysis of Vowel Sounds by means of the 2. Synthetical Production of Vowel Sounds, Phonograph, p. 538 p. 542.

Art. 1. — Anali/sis of Voii'd Sound>< hi/ means of the Fhono<jraph. The following is a brief account of a paper by Prof, Fleeming Jcnkin, F.R.SS. L. and E., and Mr. J. A. Ewing, B.Sc, F.R.S.E., On the Harmomc Anahisis of certain Voioel Sounds, 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,' vol. xxviii.
