page: 542

' At the pitches ordinarily i;sed in speech, the vowel o consists almost wholly of the two constituents—a prime "^and its Octave— the ratio of whose amplitudes may vary widely. But when the range is extended so as to reach lower pitches, higher partials successively appear in such a way as to allow the highest strongly reinforced partial to remain in the neighbourhood oi h'\y. . . . Generally we may say, . . . that there is a wide range of reinforcement, extending over about two Octaves (from / ov cjio f"), within which all tones are more or less strongly reinforced, and that there is a specially strong reinforcement at the pitch h'\y.'

But this last did not appear for the artificial o's produced by Prof. Crum Brown's instrument (described in the paper), and recognised by the ear as t^'s. They also draw attention to the sudden alteration of amplitude of the 4th partial with voice 6, and also of the 5th partial, for pitches B\), A, G, as compared with F; and to similar sudden alterations in the 3rd and also 4th partial with voices ¶ 3, 5.

After discussing the results condensed in these tables, the authors review former vowel theories and give their own conclusions, of which the following may be noted; but the whole paper requires careful examination, as a most original and laborious study of a very diflicult subject.

' In distinguishing vowels the ear is guided by two factors, one depending on the harmony or group of relative partials, and the other on the absolute pitch of the reinforced constituents. It seems not a little singular that the ear should attach so distinct a unity to sounds made up of such very various groups of constituents as we have obtained from different voices and at different pitches, so as to recognise all these sounds as some one particular vowel. We are forced to the conclusion . . . that the ear recognises the kind of oral cavity by which the reinforcement is produced. . . . The vowel-producing resonance cavities are clearly distinguished in virtue of two properties — first, the absolute pitch at which they produce a maximum reinforcement; and, second, the area of pitch over which reinforcenieut acts. The latter property, when it \6 extensive, is very probably due to the existence of subordinate proper tones not far from each other in pitch. . . . We ¶ should . . . describe the u cavity as an adjustable cavity, with a very limited range of resonance, whose effect is to reinforce strongly only one partial above the pitch of a. . . . If we assume that the u cavity is absolutely constant, we must describe it as a cavity reinforcing tones throughout nearly two Octaves, or from (j to /". . . . We are disposed to regard it as more probable, that in human voices the o cavity is shghtly tuned or modified according to the pitch on which the vowel is sung; ... the genuine character of 6 is given by a cavity reinforcing tones over rather more than one Octave, with an upper proper tone jiever far from 6'r>. ... It is very satisfactory to find that the ci's given by the human voices which we have experimented with are marked by the strong resonance on 6'tj which Helmholtz has noticed by quite different methods of observation. It tends to shew that our 6 was essentially the same vowel sound as his, and to give us confidence in the mode of experiment we have adopted.' {Ibid. pp. 772-115.)

Art. 2. — Synthetical Production of Voivel Sounds. A most ingenious method of producing artificial vowels was invented, and is explained by Messrs. W. H. Preece and A. Strob in their paper entitled Studies in Acoustics: On the Synthetic Examination of Vowel Sounds, 'Proceedings of the Royal Society,' Feb. 27, 1879, vol. ¶ No. 193, pp. 358-67. My. Stroh, to whom all the machinery is due, was kind enough, on May 29, 1884, for the purposes of this Appendix, to shew me the machines in action, and to reproduce the results many times over in order that I should be able to judge of them. Essentially there are four machines. First, one to produce the curve resulting from compounding 8 harmonic curves, representing partials, with maximum amplitudes deci'easing inversely as the number of the partial increased, but with arrangements for altering the amplitudes and phases of composition. The resulting figures are extremely beautiful. Secondly, a machine for cutting the curve thus produced, but on a reduced scale, on the edge of a brass disc, so that 30 periods were included in one circumference of this disc, the curves being automatically transferred from the first machine. Third, a machine by which an axis on which 8 of the discs thus cut were placed, representing 8 partials. These discs by springs could be brought into action in any combinations, and could convey the resulting vibration to a style working against a sensitive disc like that of the telephone. The sensitive disc on vibrating produced the corresponding sound audibly. Not being satisfied with these results, Mr. Stroh took the combiua-
