page: 544

SECTION N.

Footnote: MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.

(See pp. 78, 179.)

¶ of the Human Voice, p. 544. ¶ and Partials of a Pianoforte

¶ struck at one-eighth of its length,

¶ 545. ¶ of Mean Tone Temperament, p. 546. ¶ of Equal Temperament, p. 548. ¶ Mayer's Analysis of Compound Sounds

¶ Harmonic Curves, p. 549.

No.

6. Presumed different characters of Keys, both

Major and Minor, p. 550.

¶ 7. Dr. W. H. Stone's Restoration of 16-foot

to the Orchestra, p. 552.

¶ 8. On the Action of Reeds, from notes by

Hermann Smith, p. 553.

9. Postscript, p. 555.

¶

1. Compass of the Human Voice

¶ can be tuned or manufactured ¶ almost any required pitch. The human ¶ is born, not manufactured. Although by ¶ training its compass can generally be ¶ extended, both upwards and down¶ yet it must iu general be considered to ¶ an instrument beyond human control. The ¶ of Europe have, however, made it the ¶ instrument, and, when it is present, ¶ reduced all others to an accompaniment. ¶ it is necessary that these other instru¶ should have their compass and pitch ¶ by that of the human voice. Xow ¶ voice, like the viol family, represents at ¶ four different instruments — soprano, alto, ¶ and bass, with two intermediate ones,

¶ mezzo-soprano, between soprano and alto, and ¶ between tenor and bass. It is there¶ as necessary to determine the average and ¶ compass of these species of voice ¶ it is to know the compass of any other ¶ in order that composers may be ¶ as to what sounds can be reproduced, ¶ not demand any other. To do this, the ¶ acoustic meaning of each written musi¶ note should be ascertained. The difficulty ¶ determining it has been shewn by the pre¶ history of musical pitch (pp. 494-513), ¶ which, combined with the tables of mean¶ and equal intonation (pp. 434 and 437), it ¶ evident that Handel's sustained a" in the ¶ chorus had 845 vib., but would ¶ be sung to 904 vib. ; and that ]\Iozart's ¶ in the ZauherfMe would have meant 1349

¶ vib., but would now have to be sung at 1455 ¶ The strain that this would put upon ¶ is e\ade'it, and no composer who wished ¶ music to be well represented would think ¶ making such demands on his singers. It ¶ therefore, necessary to ascertain ¶ precisely than had been hitherto done, ¶ to express in numbers of vibrations, the ¶ of the different kinds of voices. If the ¶ will then only translate his written ¶ into UMmbers of vibrations, by the table ¶ p. 4.37, according to the pitch he employs, ¶ wall avoid all danger of straining singers.

¶ the kindness and liberality of the ¶ conductors, Messrs. Henry Leslie, \V. ¶ McNaught, J. Proudman, Ebenezer Prout, ¶ C. & G. J. Venables, and 542 members of ¶ choirs they conducted, I was able to

¶ examine a sufficient number of singers, in ¶ 1880, to arrive at something like a

trustworthy account of the compass of the voice. I gave each singer a paper with the words do re mi fa sol la ti do' printed on them in four columns up and down to the requisite extent, and then started them on do in 4 different pitches, 507, 522-5, 528, 540-7 vib. ¶ (representing the just c" corresjDonding to 422-5 Handel's pitch, u' 4.35-4 the French pitch, «' 440 Scheibler's pitfh, and the equal c" of «' 454-7, the highest Philharmonic pitch of 1874, respectively). I got them to sing up and down in chorus under the direction of the conductor, and to mark with a pencil the highest and lowest note each one could reach, first easily, or secondly by an effort (falsetto of male voices being excluded in the first case, but not in the last). From these papers I determined by calculation, on the assumption of just intonation (as being most probable for unaccompanied singers), the numbers of vibrations in the limiting notes. These are contained in the following table, together with the mean height and depth of all the voices. The extreme highest limit for male voices, as ¶ it included falsetto, is a mere curiosity. ¶ writing music, the mean should not be sumed as the limit, for perhaps half the chorus could not reach it. But it would be perfectly safe to wi-ite from the highest low easy limit ¶ to the lowest high easy limit. Thus, for pranos it would not do to write up to h" 993 and down to/ 180, but it would be quite safe to write up to /" 704 and down to h 253. Viewed in this way, my results agree more nearly with Randegger's, which I add for compariso]!. These last are given in a staffnotation form in his primer on Siiu/inr/ (Novello, 1879); and as he politely informed me that he assumed Broadwood's medium pitch a' 446-2, 1 was able to calculate the vibrations. All the numbers of vibrations are given to the nearest integer only, and it is to these numbers that attention should be especially paid, the names of the notes being merely guides. Those letters preceded by a turned period relate to high pitch in the column ' Actual,' and those not so preceded relate to a medium pitch, as French or German. But in the column ' IMean ' no precise system at all could be selected. In Randegger's, of course, Broadwood's medium jjitch is intended. If, however, the notes be played on any ordinary piano, they wiU seldom be" in error to the extent of a quarter of a Tone.
