page: 546

¶ (wrongly, as I believe) cast by at least ¶ observer. Calculating the pitch of the ¶ which would be the same as that of ¶ harmonics, and the interval which the ¶ notes of the piano would make with ¶ (as in Table II., supra, p. 457), a string ¶ the correspondmg note was slackened (or ¶ as convenient; sometimes both al¶ while the other unison strings were ¶ with the usual tuners' wedges; and in ¶ same way only one of the three lower ¶ was allowed to vibrate. Then the low ¶ and the high note were struck simul¶ It is evident that the high note ¶ slightly out of unison with the upper ¶ of the lower note, beats would ensue if ¶ a partial existed. Now, for the 5th, 6th, ¶ 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, and 11th partial such beats ¶ perfectly audible, but their duration for ¶ 11th partial with 1487 vib. was so short ¶ higher ones were not tried. For the 8th ¶ the beats were quite distinct, and, on ¶ the wedges that damped the unison ¶ for the high note, and striking the three ¶ strings without the lower note, it was ¶ that the beats heard were the same in ¶ and character as when the single ¶ was sounded with the low one.

¶ fact, therefore, that the 8th partial ¶ was conclusively proved. Various ¶ have been assigned. On p. 38.3rf, note *, ¶ have suggested that if terms omitted by the ¶ named were introduced, perhaps ¶ would be a residuimi which would account ¶ hearing the 8th partial. Tliis partial was ¶ really much weaker than the 7th. The last, ¶ was quite clear and ringing, so that it ¶ not seem affected by striking the string so ¶ its node.

¶ is curious th when the nodes do not ¶ very close the harmonic could be brought ¶ by touching the string somewhat near the ¶ place. Thus for the 2nd harmonic, ¶ at 22-5 inches from the belly-bridge; the ¶ nodes were 1 -2 inch nearer and 1-2 inch ¶ from that spot, and on trial the 2nd ¶ or Octave came out when the string ¶ touched between 22-1 and 22-95 inches

from the beUy-bridge, but not at 22-05 and 23-0, so there was a ' play ' of -85 inch. For the 3rd harmonic there was similarly a ' play ' of •65 inch. A very remarkable fact was that by stopping within 1-5 inch of the belly-bridge, the ¶ simple prime or lowest partial came out accompanied by any other audible partials. This was tested by beats of forks, shewing that the 2nd and 4th partials did not exist.

¶ Various causes for the sounding of the harmonic have been suggested. One of these was that the hammer of the pianoforte, being round and soft, did not strike at one point, and so excited the string on each side of the node. To avoid this action the much harder hammer of the highest note {A in the 3-inch octave) was used in supplementary experiments made on 2 April 1885. The width of the part of the hammer that came in contact with the string did not exceed ^^ inch. And again, an ivory edge, not more than -^-^ inch in width, was used instead of the felt covering of the hammer. The 8th partial, tried by beats, in both cases came out much stronger than before, and the beats could be distinctly heard 10 or 12 feet off. Again, it was supposed that the string might not be uniform, and that if the striking-place were slightly moved from the theoretical node, an actual node would be reached, and the partial quenched. Hence the ivory head of the ¶ hammer was shifted so as to strike up to ¶ inch away from the node on either side. partial was heard strongly, but the sound of the note was not so pleasant as when the string was: truck at the actual node.

It has been also suggested that the string moved the points of support, but that we had no means of testing. The phenomenon, there¶ fore, remains unexplained; but thanks to Hipkins, who had the resources of Broadwoods' establishment and the assistance of experienced tuners at command, there is no doubt whatever of the fact, that a pianoforte string when struck at a node by a hard or soft hammer does not lose the corresponding partial, and does not materially enfeeble the partials with adjacent nodes.

3. History of Meantone Temperament.

¶ is the temperament usually, but ¶ known as ' uneqiial ' (supra, p. 434a'), ¶ prevailed so long over Europe, and is ¶ yet entirely extruded. ¶ Arnold Schlick, Spiegel dcr Orgelmacher ¶ Organisten (Mirror of Organ-builders and ¶ 1511, chap, viii., orders the Fifths ¶ CG, GD, DA to be tuned as flat as the ¶ could bear, so as to make the major Third ¶ decent. Then he tunes AE, BD in the ¶ manner. Beginning again with F, he ¶ the Fifths down FB\), B\^, E\), sharpen¶ the lower note for the same reason. Then ¶ tunes E\f A\) and makes ^[^ ' not sharp, but ¶ flatter than the Fifth requires, on ¶ of the proof {vmh das brifen), although, ¶ the G'Jf thus made is never a good ¶ or perfect Sixth to the Fifth E and i?|^ ¶ cadences in A.' He prides himself, how¶ on the A\) or G^, and shews how to dis¶ inaccuracies. And he refutes those who ¶ make Gjj^ good for cadences in A in the ¶ E (?Jf B, by saying this produces weak-

ness, and takes away the effect of good and strange consonances. For the rest, he tunes B Fjf with the upper note flat, and apparently Ft C'5 in the same way. This was really an unequal temperament, and looks very like the meantone temperament spoiled, but that system was not yet discovered. Schlick's editor (Rob. Eitncr, in the Monatshefte dcr MusikGeschichte, monthly parts of the History of Music, part I., 1869) says that what Schlick claims for A \y and G^ was supposed to be the invention of Barth. Fritz of Brunswick in 1756, 245 years later.

Giuseppe Zarlino of Chioggia, 50 years after Schlick, in his Le istitvtioni harnioniche (Institutes of Harmony), Venice, 1562, speaks of alcwni (some people) who seemed to think that the interval of the comma should be distributed among the two nearest intervals, and ¶ the others left in their natural form (cap. p. 128). This would give a meantone for the ¶ second of the major scale = ^ x (204-1-182) 193 cents, but leave the others very dissonant,
