page: 549

¶ Hipkius has been at some pains to ascer¶ how far that was the case, and from him ¶ learn that Mr. Peppercorn, who tuned origin¶ for the Philharmonic Society, was concert ¶ at Broadwoods', and a great favourite of ¶ James Broadwood. His son writes to IMr. ¶ that his father ' always tuned so that ¶ keys can be played in, and neither he nor ¶ [neither father nor son] ever held with making ¶ keys sweet and others sour.' Mr. Bailey, ¶ who succeeded IMr. Peppercorn as ¶ tuner, and tuned Mr. James Broad¶ own piano at Lyne, his country house, ¶ the meantoue temperament to Mr. Hip¶ own knowledge, and no other. Not one ¶ the old tuners Mr. Hipkins knew (and some ¶ been favourite tuners of Mr. James Broad¶ tuned anything like equal temperament. ¶ the Wilkies, Challenger, Seymour, all ¶ the meantone temperament, except that ¶ Arnold Schhck, 1511 (see p. 546(f), they ¶ the 0^ somewhat to mitigate the ' wolf ' ¶ from the Fifth E[f: Gg in place of ¶ : A\;f. Hence Mr. James Broadwood did ¶ succeed in introducing equal temperament ¶ even into his own establishment, ¶ all tradition of it died out long ago. So ¶ runs Mr. Hipkins's interesting information.

¶ 1812 Dr. Crotch (Elements of Musical ¶ pp. 134-5) gives the proper ¶ for equal temperament, shews how it ¶ that its Fifths are too flat and its major ¶ too sharp, adding ' this will render all ¶ equally imperfect,' but says nothing to ¶ it. Yet in 1840 Dr. Crotch (who ¶ in 1847) had his own chamber organ ¶ in equal temperament, as I have been ¶ by Mr. E. J. Hopkins, author of The ¶ cCr.

¶ is one thing to propose equal tempera¶ to calculate its ratios, and to have trial ¶ approximately tuned in accord¶ with it, and another thing to use it com¶ in all instruments sold. For pianos ¶ England it did not become a trade usage ¶ 1846, at about which time it was iutro¶ Broadwoods' under the superintend¶ of Mr. Hipkins himself. At least eight ¶ more elapsed before equal temperament ¶ generally used for organs, on which its

defects are more apparent, although not to such an extent as on the harmonium.

In 1851, at the Great Exhibition, no English organ was tuned in equal temperament, but the only German organ exhibited (Schulze's) was so tuned.

In July 1852 Messrs. J. W. Walker & Sons put their Exeter Hall organ into equal temperament, but it was not used publicly till November of that year. Meanwhile, in Sept., Mr. George Herbert, a barrister and amateur, then in charge of the organ in the Romar Catholic Church in Farm Street, Berkele^, Square, London, had that organ tuned equally ¶ by Mr. Hill, the builder. Though much posed, it was visited and approved by many, and among others by ]\Ir. Cooper, who had the organ in the hall of Christ's Hospital (the ¶ Bluecoat School) tuned equally in 185.3.

In 1854 the first organ built and tuned originally in equal temperament, by IMessrs. Gray & Davison, was made for Dr. Fraser's Congregational Chapel at Blackburn (both chapel and organ have since been burned). ¶ In the same year IMessrs. Walker and Willis sent out their first equally tempered organs. This must therefore be considered as the commercial date for equal temperament on new organs in England. On old organs meantone temperament lingered much later. In 1880, when I wrote my History of Musical Pitch, from which most of these particulars have been taken, I found meantone temperament still general in Spain, and used in England on Greene's three organs, at St. George's Chapel, Windsor (since altered), at St. Katharine's, Regent's Park (see p. 484f'), and at ¶ Kew Parish Church; and while many others had onlv recently been altered, one (Jordan's at Maidstone Old Parish Church) was being altered when I visited it in that year. Hence, in England, equal temperament, though now (1885) firmly established, is not yet quite 40 years old on the pianoforte, and only 30 years old on the organ.

The difficulty of tuning in equal temperament led to the invention of Scheibler's tuningfork tonometer. In Sect. G., art. 11, p. 489, will be found a practical rule for tuning in sensibly equal temperament at all usual pitches

¶ Mayer's Analysis of Compound Tones and Harmonic Curves.

¶ following are two of the numerous ¶ contrivances of ]\Ir. Alfred M. Mayer, ¶ Member of the National (American) ¶ of Sciences, and Professor of Physics ¶ the Stevens Institute of Technology, Hobo¶ New Jersey, United States (see supra, p. ¶

¶ New Objective Analysis of t'omj>oand ¶ The analysis of compound sounds by ¶ has two disadvantages: first, that ¶ is subjective, inasmuch as but one observer ¶ a time is capable of hearing the results; ¶ secondly, that the range of pitch reinforce¶ by a resonator is too great for extreme ¶ in the estimation of the actual com¶ sound present. Both of these disad¶ were thus overcome (Fhil. May. Oct. ¶ vol. xlviii. pp. 271-3, with a figure).

¶ Grenie's free reed pipe, of the pitch ¶ had part of its wooden chamber re¶ and replaced by morocco leather, at

one point of which 8 silk cocoon fibres were attached, having their opposite extremities ¶ attached to 8 tuning-forks tuned to C, c, y, c', '•' .'/'> "^'b' '^"> ^* *1^® point of the upper node in each where it divides into segments when giving its upper harmonic, so that this harmonic was eliminated. The cocoon fibres were stretched till they made no visible ventral segments when vibrating. The reed was tuned accurately to the C fork (of 64 vibrations) by means of the g fork. The forks were placed on proper resonance boxes. When the reed was sounded each fork ' sang out ' loudly, but if the prongs of any fork were only slightly loaded the fork was mute, and was so rapidly affected that Prof. ]\Iayer estimates (same vol. p. 519) that the effect of intervals such as 2000 : 2001 (or -87 or not quite 1 cent) can be rendered sensible to the ear. On ceasing to sound the reed the forks continued to sound, and produced a tone of so nearly the same
