page: 550

¶ as that of the reed that it was easy to ¶ that the difference was due to the absence ¶ partials higher than the eighth. By this ¶ then, the analysis and synthesis of a ¶ tone can be shewn to a large ¶ at once, and all doubt as to its ob¶ reality removed. At the same time Lhe ¶ in the resonance chamber of the reed acts ¶ the leather cover as in hearing it would ¶ acted on the drumskin of the ear, and ¶ conduction of that vibration by the cocoon ¶ replaces the complicated arrangements ¶ the interior of the drum and the fluid of the ¶ of the ear, while the forks themselves ¶ as the organs in the cochlea. Prof. ¶ physiological theory of audition is ¶ perfectly exhibited in a ' working model.' ¶ The action of the resonance chambers of the ¶ is simply to make the effects heard at a ¶

2. HarviovAc Curves (see p. 387c^). In the ¶ Mnqazine, Supplement for Jan¶ 1875, vol. xlviii. pp. 520-525, Prof. INIayer ¶ curves compounded by six curves of sines ¶ 23rf'), representing six partial tones, where, ¶ convenience, the amplitudes are taken to ¶ as the wave lengths, and to have the same ¶ phase. They are combined by taking

the algebraical sum of their ordinates, which ¶ law would of course not hold true for the plitudes chosen (about one-third of the length of the wave). The resulting figure bears a most remarkable reseinblance to fig. 25, supra, p. Mb. There is the same sudden rise on the left and step-like descent on the right, but the steps are more rounded, and the upper crest more pointed, and there are five steps in addition to the crest. Prof. Mayer then combines two such compound curves, and thus produces the resulting curves of two compound tones forming an Octave (with one high and one low crest, and also one high and one low trough, and the steps uneven and reduced in number), a Fifth (with four crests, two with long and two with short descents, the shorter having only one step), and a major Third (with eight crests, two extreniely small, two moderate, three intermediate between the two last kinds, and one high, the ascents being abrupt as before, the descents rather wavy than stepped). These had all been drawn on a large scale with several hundred ordinates, and were reduced photographically. They form an excellent practical illustration of the nature of harmonic motions.

6. The presumed different Characters of Keys, both Major and Minor.

See supra, p. 310c to 311r. It is first neces¶ to know what is the presumed pheno¶ to account for. In the discussion of ¶ paper ' On the Measurement and Settle-

¶ ment of IMusical Pitch ' {Journal of the Society ¶ Arts, 25 May 1877, p. 686), Prof, (now Sir ¶ ]\Iacfarren, Principal of the Royal ¶ of Music, spoke of ' the difficulty of ¶ the compositions of different eras, ¶ had been written for different standards ¶ pitch,' and added ' it was a marvellous fact ¶ while the pitch was felt to be changed, ¶ impression of the character of the keys ¶ to remain with reference to the nominal ¶ not to the number of vibrations of each ¶ note. Thus the key of D at the ¶ day represented the same effect as was ¶ by the same key according to one's ¶ recollections; it did not sound like the ¶ of E\j, although it might be of the same ¶ If ^Mozart's symphony in C were to ¶ played a Semitone lower, to bring it to the ¶ pitch, it would not sound at all the

¶ How far this result was subjective — ¶ much depended on the imogination of the ¶ and how much on the physical facts — ¶ a deep, perhaps an insoluble question; but ¶ was one which really ought to be considered. ' ¶ Chairman (Mr. William Pole, F.R.S., ¶ D. Oxon) , onthe contrary, said: ' In a prac¶ point of view the French did an exceed¶ good thing when they fixed on one pitch, ¶ . . and they had practically done so, not ¶ for France, but the Continent generally. ¶ had the gratification some time ago of ¶ Beethoven's Sinfonia Eroica played ¶ a Conservatoire concert in E\), as it should ¶ but he could not get rid of the idea, when ¶ heard it played at the Philharmonic con¶ that it was in E^."

The mention of the performance of symphonies by Sir G. Macfarren and Dr. Pole takes the whole question out of the action of individual instruments, in which there is no doubt of considerable variety depending on the tonic, hut this can be traced in every case to some defect of the instrument itself, as has ¶ been considered in the text (loc. cit.). point of the long and short keys on a pianoforte, spoken of by Prof. Helmholtz, has been well worked out by INIr. G. Johnstone Stoney, D.Sc. , F.R.S. Dublin, in a paper read before the Royal Dublin Society on 16 March 1883 (Scientific Proc. E. Dub/in Soc. p. 59), who calls attention to the fact that in J all the Fifths are on white digitals and the major Thirds on black digitals, while in A\) the Fifths are on black and the major Thirds on white digitals, and argues that this must ¶ make considerable difference in playing. Hipkins, however, gives it as his opinion that it is impossible to tell in the performance of a first-rate player whether he is striking a white or a black key. Tliat would relegate the difference to the degree of skill of the player. But this does not at all affect the organ, the harmonium, or the voice. And by reference to symphonies we are constrained to consider the question independently of any particular instrument, as a simple acoustical fact.

In order to ascertain what that fact is supposed to be, according to recognised musicians of high standing, I give a condensed re-arrangement of the characters attributed to different keys in Mr. Ernst Pauer's Elements of the Beautiful in Music (Novello), p. 28, placing the major and minor keys in opposite columns, and proceeding by intervals of a Semitone.
