page: 551

¶ Keys.

¶ Expressive of feeling in a pure, certain, ¶ decisive manner, of innocence, powerful ¶ manly earnestness, deep religious ¶

¶ Scarcely used; as Z>jj it has fulness ¶ tone, sonorousness, and euphony.

¶ Expressive of majesty, grandeur, pomp, ¶ festivity, stateliness.

¶ Greatest variety of expression; emi¶ masciiline, serious and solemn; expres¶ of courage and determination, brilliant, ¶ dignified.

¶ Expressive of joy, magnificence, splen¶ and highest brilliancy; brightest and ¶ powerful key.

¶ Expressive of peace and joy, also of ¶ passing regret and religious sentiment.

¶ Brilliant and very clear; as (j\y ¶ softness and richness.

¶ Favourite key of youth; expresses sin¶ of faith, quiet love, calm meditation, ¶ grace, pastoral life, and a certain ¶ and brightness.

¶ Full of feeling and dreamy expres¶

¶ Full of confidence and hope, radiant ¶ love, redolent of genuine cheerfulness; ¶ expresses sincerity.

¶ Has an open, frank, clear, and bright ¶ admitting of the expression of quiet ¶ ; favourite classical key.

¶ Expresses boldness and pride in for¶ purity and perfect clearness in ¶ ; seldom used.

Minor Xei/s.

0. Expressive of softness, longing, sadness, earnestness and passionate intensity, and of the supernatural.

D\). The most intensely melancholy key.

I). Expressive of subdued melancholy, grief, anxiety, and solemnity.

¶ E\y. Darkest and most sombre key of all rarely used.

E. Expressive of grief, mourufulness, and restlessness of spirit. m

F. Harrowing, full of melancholy, at times rising into passion.

F^. Dark, mysterious, spectral, and full of passion.

G. Expresses sometimes sadness, at others quiet and sedate joy, with gentle grace or a slight touch of dreamy melancholy, occasionally rising to a romantic elevation.

A\}. Fit for funeral marches; full of sad, heartrending expression, as of an oppressed and sorrowing heart.

A. Expresses tender womanly feeling, especially the quiet melancholy sentiment of Northern nations; also fit for Boleros and Mauresque serenades; and finally for sentiments of devotion mingled with pious resignation.

B\f. Full of gloomy and sombre feeling, ¶ like E\)\ seldom used.

B. Very melancholy; tells of quiet expectation and patient hope.

¶ reading over this Table it is impossible ¶ to feel that the character, often contra¶ arises from the reminiscence of pieces ¶ music in those keys, as the author indeed ¶ {ib. p. 22). , Such a distinction as that ¶ between F% and G\f, which, in equal ¶ is a mere matter of notation, ¶ is here made to yield incompatible results, ¶ that the writer was thinking more of ¶ than of actual sound. This is con¶ by his saying (;7;. p. 26): ' We shall often ¶ that the general character of a key may be ¶ by peculiarities and idiosyncrasies of ¶ composer; and thus a key may appear to ¶ a cheerful character in the hands of ¶ writer, whilst another composer infuses ¶ it a melancholy expression; all depends ¶ the treatment, on the individual feeling of ¶ composer, and on his acute understanding ¶ the characteristic qualities of the key he ¶ The writer then goes on to consider ¶ effect of rhythm and time, and the different ¶ which he assigns to their varieties, ¶ of the key emploj^ed, clash so ¶ with the preceding that it is difficult to ¶ what is supposed to belong to one and ¶ to the other.

¶ the acoustical facts, independently of ¶ particular instrument or temperament or ¶ errors of tuning or performance (both ¶ but variable), are these. Whether

we take just intonation, or that of any uniform linear or cyclic temperament, carried on to a sufficient number of tones to prevent the occurrence of ' wolves ' within the piece of music performed, the one thing aimed at is to have the intervals between the same notes of the same scale precisely the same, at whatever pitch they are played, or however they may be conventionally noted. If there is any ¶ difference between the scales of, say, just and A^\f, which have a difference of 70 cents, or equal A and A \y, which differ by 100 cents, ¶ or meantone A and A [j, which differ by 76 cents, or Pythagorean A and A \y, which differ by 114 cents, this difference must be due solely to pitch. There is no doubt that on the piano, the organ, and each instrument of the orchestra, the difference will be considerable and very appreciable, but that does not enter into consideration. What effect does simple difference of pitch in the tonic produce? In the human voice and in all instruments quality of tone varies together with the pitch. A change of tonic implies a different pitch for the most frequently returning sounds, and those most important to the nature of the key. Hence it produces a different quality of tone, with a variation in the range of partials possessed, and consequently affects the distinctness of the delimitation of the principal consonances and dissonances of
