page: 552

¶ keys, and by that means alters their audi¶ effect. For intervals so small as we have ¶ this difference must necessarily be ¶ whereas the difference of the keys of A ¶ A'q is said to be great. If so, it can only ¶ from errors of intonation or performance. ¶ the days of the old meantoue temperament ¶ its defective state of 12 notes only to the ¶ there was a vast difference between ¶ keys of A and A\f; the first had all its ¶ correct (supposing G% were not sharp¶ supra, p. 5i.Gd), the latter had all the ¶ involving A[f and D\f (which had to be ¶ by G^ and Ci) frightfully erro¶

¶ seems to me that the feeling of a dif¶ in the character of the keys whose

¶ tonics vary but slightly in pitch was esta¶ at this time (in Sir George Mac¶ younger days, b. 1813). Any differ¶ so slight as a Semitone would have been ¶ felt (except in passing from A to B\f, ¶ two extreme good keys). Whereas for ¶ of a Fifth there would generally ¶ have been such violent distinctions (except ¶ the extremes A to E and i>[j to A'|>). It ¶ appear that these mechanical distinc¶ partly influenced composers in their ¶ of a key, and produced what has be¶ an hereditary prejudice, for which there ¶ no longer any ground, and which never ought ¶ have existed in just unaccompanied singing. ¶ even at that time we have composers ig¶ the difference. Handel composed his ¶ march in Saul in (J, and having written ¶ anthem (' 0 sing unto the Lord a new song ')

¶ for St. James' Chapel Royal, in which the

organ had a pitch one Tone higher than his own (see sect. H. p. 503ft, under a'474'1), he directed the singers, as the voice parts were too high, to take them a Tone lower, and the accompanying organ to play two Tones lower. Had Handel any idea of the innate difference of the character of keys? and, if he had not, what does it all amount to? Beyond those differences inevitable to varieties of pitch, already pointed out, and easily perceived by slowly playing up the major scale on any instrument from its lowest note, or singing it on any voice from the lowest note it can reach easily (see p. 544(/) — beyond such differences, all seems to be subjective, or due to hereditary feeling created by former defective temperaments, or at present to mechanical errors of tuning, stopping, or blowing, especially in unusual keys. Possibly a composer at the present day would write a piece of a totally different character, as pointed out in the table, according as he made the signature i^jt or G'ly, but that must have been a reaction on his own mind, for the tones he would play would be precisely the same in both cases.

That tuners of the piano sometimes still intentionally tune unequally, and hence make the effect of A and A}) really very different, has nothing whatever to do with the matter. Those who do so have not learned their profession. Similarly for players on a pianoforte who cannot equalise the effect of the long and short keys. But the singer knows very well when a piece of music falls upon his bad notes, and ruthlessly transposes the key, quite reckless of thesj presumed varieties of key-character.

Br. W. H. Stones Restoration of \&-foot C, to the Orchestia.

¶ p. 175f on the deepest tones which can ¶ heard. The following is condensed from ¶ furnished me by Dr. Stone.

¶ Stone has for some years endeavoured ¶ restore to the orchestra the lower notes of the ¶ Octave, which appear to have been ¶ of late. It seems to him a contra¶ that, while the organ possessed that ¶ and another, the 32-foot, below it, and ¶ even an instrument of so comparatively ¶ a tone as the pianoforte could obtain ¶ deep notes, they should be absent from ¶ full band. Most of the great composers ¶ employed them, especially Beethoven and ¶ Onslow. INIany i^assages of their compositions ¶ to be partially transposed, often (as in the ¶ minor Symphony of Beethoven) much to the ¶ of the general effect. In the Trio ¶ this great work a scale passage occurs ¶ times for the double basses alone, ¶ on the 16-foot G ,. But this note ¶ entirely absent on the ordinary three¶ basses, as used in England, it was there ¶ to take it either altogether or in ¶ in the Octave above. Some players, ¶ were in the habit of letting down the ¶ or lowest string, by a Tone to G, for this ¶ passage; but the resonance of a string ¶ slackened was far inferior to what could ¶ obtained by more legitimate means. The ¶ part for the contrafagotto in the same ¶ descending to C',, was usually ¶ or played an Octave higher by the ¶ The Pastoral Symphony likewise

frequently contains F^ natural, a note quite unattainable except on the four-string basses, whose lowest note is E, (p. 18t).

It was obvious, in attempting to remedy this defect, that of the three modes by which vibrations in a stretched string may be slackened, two, namely, length and thickness, ¶ were inadmissible. The first renders the strument so large as to be unwieldy and out of the reach of an ordinary arm. The second was found to cause rotation of the string under the impulse of the bow acting at its periphery,', and thus to generate false notes. The third remained, in increasing the specific gravity of the string without enlarging its diameter. This was satisfactorily accomplished by covering a gut string with heavy copper wire such as is ¶ used for the lowest strings of pianos. note O, was obtained, and an instrument thus strung was exhibited in London in the International Exhibition of 1872.

But it became clear that to give the new notes full power, and to prevent the danger of shaking the instrument to pieces, a means of strengthening the belly in the direction of strain was required, which should not unduly increase the weight of the soundboard. This requisite was ingeniously fulfilled by jMr. Meeson: — Four strips of white pine are glued on to the back of the belly, running its whole length, one on one side of the ordinary bassbar, and three on its other side, thus corresponding in number, and to a certain degree in position, to the increased number of strings.
