page: 553

¶ of them cross and intercept the usual ¶ sound-holes, thus removing a weak ¶ in the helly, and causing it to vihrate ¶ homogeneously. They appeared on trial ¶ add great power to the instrument through¶ and to remove the inequality and varying ¶ of vibration which exists on most ¶ instruments even by celebrated makers, ¶ which musicians usually designate by ¶ term ' wolf.' The bars are curved to an ¶ shape to fit the hollow of the belly, ¶ to give the greatest resistance to com¶ with the smallest quantity of mate¶ Even in a double bass the quantity of ¶ required is very small, and from its ¶ when periectly dry it hardly exceeds ¶ ounce in weight. Prom their shape and ¶ tliey are termed elliptical tension ¶

¶ appeared from subsequent experiments ¶ the same system was applicable to the ¶ members of the viol and violin family, ¶ an increased sonority and firmness to ¶ tone, it succeeds best with violins of

sweet but feeble quality, and in some of the older Italian instruments, where the progress of decay had to a certain extent diminished the volume of souud.

The contrafagotto or double bassoon as made on Dr. Stone's designs by Herr Haseneier of Coblenz, consists of a tube 16 feet 4 inches long, truly conical in its bore, and enlarging from ^-inch diameter at the reed to 4 inches at the bell or lower extremity. It is curved on itself for convenience of manipulation, so that in actual length it is about equal to the ordinary bassoon. Its extreme compass is from C, to c'', but its ordinary range is to y only, the other notes being difficult to bring out. Haydn gives a part to such an instrument in his Creation, Mozart uses it occasionally, Beethoven frequently, ]\Iendelssohn ¶ sometimes.

Both of these instruments I have heard in use. Their tone is not jjerfectly continuous, but is very good, and when played in conjunction withother instruments, musically effective.

8. On the Action of Reeds.

¶ pp. 95 to 100.) Knowing the long, ¶ and practical attention which Mr. ¶ Smith had paid to the action of ¶ I requested him to furnish me with an ¶ of the results of his experience. He ¶ sent me a series of elaborate and ¶ notes, which the space at my com¶ utterly precludes me from giving at ¶ length, and which I am tlierefore forced ¶ represent by the meagrest possible outline, ¶ the hope that they will appear elsewhere ¶ suitable detail. Only passages in inverted ¶ contain Mr. Hermann Smith's actual ¶ the rest is my own necessarily imperfect ¶ to condense his statements.

¶ may be classed as, 1. single, whether ¶ (in clarinet of cane, and reed-pipe of ¶ of metal) or free (harmoniani and ¶ organ, both of metal); 2. paired ¶ and oboe, both of cane, in action ¶ ; horns and larynx, both mem¶ in action extensible); 3. strcaining ¶ flageolets, flue-pipes of organ, all of ¶ air, in action abstracting). The last ¶ has been partly considered, supra, ¶ 396-7.

¶ the clarinet the reed is straight and ¶ thin at the tip, but the edge of the sec¶ of the wooden tube against which it ¶ presents a slight curve, whereas in the ¶ pipe the reed is curved and the edge ¶ which it strikes is straight (p. 96f). ¶ time of vibration consists (1) of the time ¶ forward motion, which may vary slightly;

¶ of the time of rest, which may vary greatly;

¶ of the time of recoil, which does not vary. ¶ When the reed is placed in the mouth, the ¶ on both surfaces of the reed is of equal ¶ and on increase of strength in the ¶ the tendency would be to separate ¶ reed still further from the edge of the ¶ were it not that a current of air ¶ passing into a tube exercises suction ¶ the orifice of entry; therefore the elastic ¶ yields in the direction of the place of ¶ so that it is held there. The current ¶ wind having been sent forward with im-

petus, leaves behind it a partial vacuum, which is strongest close upon the inner face of the tongue. There, then, is a region of least pressure, which continues to exist during the ¶ transit of the pulse of compressed air to the first found point of outlet. When that point is reached, the external air rushes in and restores equilibrium, and in doing so causes the shock of arrested motion in which the reed recoils, ¶ and forthwith the action commences as before.'

The clarinet sliould not be described as a stopped pipe, though both have unevenly numbered partials and give similar pitcli for similar length, because ' in the clarinet there is a propulsive current going through the pipe; in the stopped pipe, on the contraiy, there is an abstracting current acting outside by suction.' Too much has been attributed to the cylindrical bore for producing only the unevenly numbered partials. ' An oboe reed fixed on the clarinet tube gives oboe pitch of tone and oboe partials.' The Japanese Hichi-riki has an inverted conical bore, that is, the diameter is the smallest at the point furthest from the reed. ' Like the clarinet, it gives notes which are an Octave lower in pitch than would be calculated from its length. The first note after the fundamental is the ¶ Twelfth. The reed is broad, not single as on the clarinet, but double and as the bassoon reed, differing, however, in having an enlarged ¶ base where it fixed into the tube. . . . substituting an oboe reed, the pitches of the notes correspond to those of the oboe and the first tone after is the Octave. ... If the end of the pipe is placed full within the mouth, and is blown through without the use of any reed whatever (and without any action from the lips), clear and powerful sounds are elicited, varying as the openings of the holes are varied, provided one of the upper holes is left open ... it is indifferent whether the end of the wide diameter or that of the narrow is taken into the mouth, either waj' sounds are in this ¶ manner readily produced.' This effect Hermann Smith attributed to a stream reed from the open hole.
