page: 554

¶ aud oboes have paired reeds, which ¶ down their outer edge, and do not vibrate ¶ but cross-wise, so that a transverse ¶ through them has alternate!}- the form ¶ the outer lines in fig. 6-3, p. 387t% when ¶ are open, and of two parallel lines when ¶ are closed. The reeds are sections from ¶ small hollow reed-plant of particular growth ¶ dona.r or sativa), made very thin at ¶ tip, and rendered supple by the moisture ¶ the mouth. The player's lip restricts the ¶ of the oval in notes of high pitch. ' The ¶ of wind would keep the pair of reeds ¶ but for the influence of the suction when ¶ current is thrown through. The vibration ¶ is produced by the same kind of action ¶ in the clarinet, but there is a new mechani¶ method for bringing it about.'

¶ The membranous reeds formed by the lips ¶ vocal chords are reeds of extension, be¶ to vibrate from a state of clnsHre, ¶ to all other reeds. In horns the cup ¶ as an exhaust chamber, and when it is ¶ large the upper notes cannot be well pro¶ ; ' that is to say, the necessary degree of ¶ cannot be brought about in time to ¶ with the reciprocating return of the ¶ of air in the tube.' In the larynx ¶ ventricles of ]\Iorgagni between the true and ¶ chords probably act as exhaust chambers. ¶ stream reeds have been already con¶ (p. 396f'), but Mr. Hermann Smith ¶ developed his theory of (lisphtcemcyit ¶ or the actual tone of air under cleav¶ deduced originally from observations of ¶ different sounds of wind sweeping through ¶ branches of leafless trees, in which tone is

¶ produced without a vibrating agent. ]\Ir. Her¶ Smith found the common doctrine of ¶ unsatisfactoiy. In 1870 he had made ¶ series of rods about 5 ft. long, the sides of ¶ having same smoothness and of the uni¶ ^vidth of 1\ inches, with a V-shaped or ¶ section, and these he swept swiftly ¶ the air like swoi-ds, sharp edge first. ¶ found that, although the friction surface ¶ similar on each, they developed different ¶ which he discovered to be according to ¶ thickness of the back, the pitches being ¶ as the thickness. C 528 vib. re¶ a thickness somewhat less than half an ¶ ' Covering irregularly the tips of the rods ¶ not affect the sound. Half an inch thick¶ of spongy felt fixed on the back of the ¶ the same width being preserved, lowered ¶ pitch a Fourth. The felt entangled air in

¶ its pores, so that the vacuum by suction was ¶ perfect. . . . With less speed of stroke the ¶ is again lowered. . . . In organ pipes, &c., ¶ all wind instruments, a certain displacement ¶ air must take place immediately near the ¶ of vibration, in which space a right de¶ of vacuum is requisite, else the right note ¶ not follow. To this result all the devices ¶ mouthpieces tend. This work of displace¶ in the origination of sound raises a ques¶ distinct from the transmission of sounds ¶ waves."

¶ free reed is supposed to have been ¶ from China. But the European and ¶ forms are different. The Chinese ¶ is stamped out in the same jjiece as the ¶ with which it lies level. The reeds act ¶ tubes which (agreeing with ]\I. W. Weber's ¶ though made long before its discovery)

are three-quarters of the half- wave length. The harmonium reed is placed above the frame, and the end turns up from it. If it is set level with the frame it wiU not vibrate. To produce vibration a stream of air must pass between the tongue and the frame, producing a partial vacuum on the underside of the reed, and the amount of suction thus caused must be properly graduated or there will be no action. The chief peculiarity of the free reed is that the pitch is only slightly affected by the cavities with which it is associated, but these boxes or cavities, according to their dimensions, and governed by the operation of partial occlusion, mainly determine the qu tlity of tone.

The reed is not properly compared to a vibrating rod, because the reed actually in use is not uniform. In a series, the low reeds ¶ are thickest at tip and thinnest at root high reeds thinnest at tip and thickest at root. Hence they are affected differently by different pressures of wind, and alter their pitch differently. Expressive playing therefore becomes playing out of tune. Only with a constant blast will a free reed maintain a constant pitch. The stronger blast flattens deep reeds and sharpens high ones, and from this cause arises much of the painful disso¶ nance of series of chords played on these struments.

To remedy this defect the action of the wind on the tongue in the American organ is limited by making the frame very thin, which is ' dished out ' underneath till the edge passed by the tongue is barely thicker than the tongue, instead of being 8 or 10 times as thick as on the harmonium. The suction in the har¶ monium is longer in time and stronger in gree, the tongue moves a greater distance, and ¶ more intensity of tone is produced. ' American reed cannot make a deep excursion, for the suction is spent as soon as the tongue gets below the edge of the frame.' It is therefore not suited for expression, but produces a smooth and flexible kind of tone.

I\Ir. Hermann Smith considers the harshness of the free reed, resulting from its large number of partials, to be chieflv due to its proportions. ' The tongue is inordinately long in proportion to its width, aud hence under the stress of the wind (which necessarily shifts its incidence during the movements of the tongue and its re-course) there is developed a diagonal strain or torsion from one corner at the tip of the tongue to the opposite corner of the root, so that a lateral irregular motion is set up accompanying the longitudinal vibration." Hence he concludes that ' the long reed is a wrong reed,' and that, ' in view of its liability to lateral torsion, the rectan,gular form is about the worst. . . . Trial of various reeds shews that a long rectangular reed is strident in tone, that increase of width in reeds brings in increasing proportion smoothness of tone, and that the width may be increased till it equals the length.'

In ' voicing,' a bend is made across the tongue, turning the point upwards. This somewhat checks lateral vibration. By an early plan of his, ' reeds were yoked together by a bar across the middle of the length, and the improved quality of tone was obviously due to the fact that the two reeds were equivalent to one broad reed, aud that the bar across hindered the operation of any diagonal strain or
