page: 555

¶ during vibration. . . . When a reed is mucli ¶ it is slow in speecli, and a great amount ¶ wind passes wastefully, compensated only ¶ the smoother tone.' Mr. Hermann Smith ¶ his ' best toned reeds have been series in ¶ according to his design, the openings ¶ by the curve given to the reed were filled ¶ at the sides by arched blocks added to the ¶ of the frame, ' following the line of curve. ¶ discontinuity was therefore sharply de¶ yet the tones were mellow and rich. A ¶ mounted on wood surface may have its ¶ greatly changed by an interposed pad ¶ leather or felt between the reed frame and ¶ wood, the extreme harshness disappears ¶ the tone is smoother altogether, shewing ¶ mucli that is unpleasant is due to the ¶ from arrested motion.'

¶ Hermann Smith's ' conclusions are that, ¶ the making of free reed instruments, broad ¶ should be used, and witli broad channels ¶ boxes or cavities of varied shape; that within ¶ large chamber small suction chambers ¶ be placed below or beyond the reed ¶ in imitation of the ventricles of the ¶ : and if these afford areas and cavities ¶ for the displacement accordant with ¶ pitches, the speech will be quickened and ¶ given to the tones, or, in other words, ¶ mechanical motion of air and reed will be ¶ The rectangular form of reed, except ¶ stops of hard metallic quality are re¶ should be abandoned, and broad shapes ¶ having tips semicircular, semi-oval, ¶ ovate, or shapes to ensure a central line of ¶ Weighting the tips of reeds should be ¶ as much as possible.'

¶ Hermann Smith's latest device in the ¶ of reeds is designed to overcome the ¶ of inordinately long or weighted ¶ His plan is ' to use metal or material of

uniform thickness, and to get the degrees of flattening by drilling out or excising portions of material at or near the root of the reed, and then to fill such spaces as are thus made with other fixed pieces of metal that are neutral, and do not enter into vibration. Thus the sides of the reed tongues remain with the fibre intact, unweakened by thinning or scraping, which takes the best vigour out of the ¶ reed. Any degree of ffattening may be tained according as the excision is made to extend up the tongue. A like treatment of the half of the tongue forming the tip will produce the opposite effect, sharpening pitch by ¶ lightening the tip; the spaces left by the cised portions are then covered with lighter ¶ material, such as goldbeater's skin.'

]\Ir. Hermann Smith states that his device of ' adding to the large cavities siuall exhaust chambers or cup-like cavities, fixed just below ¶ the tongue of the reed, causes the most manageable reeds, even those in the 32-foot Octave, when made broad on the above plan, to render good musical service, to be free in speech, and to produce a full pervading quality of tone, devoid of the harshness of long reeds having heavily weighted tips.' Mr. Augustus Stroh (See Sect. M. No. 2, p. 542rf) informs me that he has been led to a similar contrivance in a machine he has recently constructed.

For further details of Mr. Hermann Smith's inventions respecting reeds, see Specifications ¶ to his Patents 1878, No. 227 and No. 4942 1880, No. 68; and 1884, No. 7777. A large amount of varied information may also be ¶ found in his treatise entitled ' In the Organ and in the Orchestra,' now (18845) publishing in Mmic((l Opin inn , a monthly magazine. Of this treatise 2,5 chapters have already appeared full of interesting elucidations of instrumental difficulties.

9. Postscript.

¶ Musical Pitch in Englnnd. In ¶ of a communication from our ¶ Oftice, due to the Belgian change of ¶ (p. 501r^), Sir G. A. Macfarren, Prin¶ of the Royal Academy of IMusic, con¶ a public meeting of musicians, theorists, ¶ and their friends, ' to con¶ the desirability of a standard musical ¶ for the United Kingdom.' It took place ¶ 20 June 1885, and was well attended. ¶ resolutions were passed: (1) declaring ¶ desirable; (2)recommending French ¶ ; (3) declaring it advisable to take steps ¶ its adoption in civil and military hands. ¶ committee of 4 theorists, 15 musicians, and ¶ instrument-makers was appointed to carry ¶ the resolutions. See the Times, 22 June ¶ p. 7, col. 2, and p. 9, col. 3, and Musical ¶ 1 July 1885, p. 493.

¶ to History of Pitch. In 1845 the ¶ of the Philharmonic Society was a' 447-1, ¶ to a fork tuned in the orchestra at ¶ date by Mr. R. S. Rockstro.

¶ Eduard Strauss, of Vienna, perform¶ at the Inventions Exhibition 1885, used ¶ 452-5, but the bandsmen said the pitch of ¶ opera was nearly a Quartertone flatter, say ¶ 447.

¶ band of the Pomeranian (Bliicher) ¶ performing at the same Exhibition ¶ a' 400-8, or, as the bandmaster said,

' exactly a Semitone sharper than French pitch.'

¶ Effect if Rust, (t-f., i>n Tuning-forks. p. 445 rf'. Mr. Rockstro possesses a fork which in 1859 was at French pitch, and now through rust (and possibly bad treatment) shews only «,' 424-5, that is, has gone down by 42 cents, far exceeding any other fork examined.

Flute Intonat'io,'. Mr. R. S. Rockstro, in June 1885, kindly brought me an eight-keyed^ flute, about 40 years old, an excellent instrument of its kind. This he played so as to preserve its natural intonation without correction. Before striking any new note it was ascertained that y' 404 vib. remained constant. The a' 461 vib. was a quarter of a Tone too ¶ sharp. The result gave in cents, reckoning ¶ as 1200=0, c' 488, c'jj 564, d' 678. f^jf 763, ¶ 906, f 1000, r% 1098, g' 1200 = 0, ^'392, 229, a'^ 292, ^'431, c" 513, c;"fl: 566. This seems meant for meantonc intonation, sharpening many of the sharps to pass as the flats above them. But even in this case the intonation was imperfect, and Mr. Rockstro thought it was rather due to a series of compromises.

Mr. R. S. Rockstro brought at the same time the ' Rockstro model ' flute, invented by himself, to have a more correct equal intonasion than Boehm's. This was blown in the same way, hut in this case «' was always brought to 452 vib. Result in cents, reckon-
