The Third Day

(Part 3 of 16)

Simplicio
I can't quite get hold of what you're saying, nor make out on my own how it can be that at the very greatest distances a wilder exaggeration should spring from an error of a single minute than at small distances from an error of 10 or of 100; and so I'd be glad to have it explained.

Salviati
You'll see it — if not by theory, at least by practice — from this short summary I've drawn up of all the combinations, and of some of the investigations the author left out, which I've calculated and noted down on this very sheet.

Sagredo
So it must be that from yesterday to now — and it's not been more than 18 hours — you've done nothing but calculate, taking neither food nor sleep.

Salviati
On the contrary, I've had both those refreshments: but I run through such calculations very quickly; and, to tell the truth, I've been more than a little amazed that this author should go on at such length, larding it with so many computations that have nothing to do with the question being asked. And so that this may be fully understood, and also so that one may quickly see how much more probably it follows, from the observations of the astronomers the author himself relies on, that the new star could have been above the Moon — and even above all the planets, and higher still, among the fixed stars — I have copied onto this sheet all the observations recorded by that same author, made by 13 astronomers, where the polar elevations and the star's altitudes on the meridian are noted, both the lowest under the pole and the highest above: and here they are.

Now, to see my whole procedure, we can begin with these calculations — 5 of them the author passed over, perhaps because they tell against him, seeing that they set the star above the Moon by many terrestrial semidiameters. The first of them is this one, worked from the observations of the Landgrave of Hesse and of Tycho, who are, even by the author's own admission, among the most exact observers: and in this first one I'll spell out the order I keep in the investigation, and that knowledge will serve you for all the rest, since they go by the same rule, differing only in the quantity of the data — that is, in the number of degrees of the polar altitudes and of the elevations of the new star above the horizon, whose distance from the Earth's center we seek in proportion to the semidiameter of the terrestrial globe. And in this case it doesn't matter in the least to know how many miles that semidiameter is, so that working out that figure, and the distance between the places where the observations were made — as this author does — is labor and time thrown away, nor do I know why he did it, especially since in the end he turns the miles he found back into semidiameters of the terrestrial globe.

Simplicio
Perhaps he does this to find, by such smaller measures and their fractions, the star's distance pinned down to the last 4 fingerbreadths; because we others, who don't understand your rules of arithmetic, are struck dumb on hearing the conclusions, when we read, for instance: "Therefore the comet, or the new star, was distant from the Earth's center three hundred seventy-three thousand eight hundred and seven miles, plus two hundred eleven four-thousand-ninety-sevenths, 373807 211/4097" — and over such precise exactitudes, where these tiny fractions are set down, we form the notion that it's impossible that you, who in your calculations take account of a single finger, could in the end deceive us by 100 miles.

Salviati
This reasoning of yours, and this excuse, would be acceptable if, over a distance of thousands of miles, an arm's length more or less were of great weight, and if the suppositions we take for true were so certain that they assured us we'd draw out an indubitable truth in the end: but here you see, in the author's 12 investigations, that the star's distances gathered from them differ one from another — and therefore stray from the truth — by many hundreds and thousands of miles. Now, since I'm more than sure that what I'm looking for must necessarily differ from the right figure by hundreds of miles, why torment myself over the calculation out of a jealous fear of slipping by a single finger? But let's come at last to the operation, which I work out in this way.

Tycho, as you see in the note, observed the star at the polar altitude of 55° 58′; and the Landgrave's polar altitude was 51° 18′: the star's altitude on the meridian, taken by Tycho, was 27° 45′; the Landgrave found it at 23° 3′: which altitudes are the ones noted here below, as you see:

...the quantity for the star, which here is 62° 15′, gives us the size of angle BDC, 154° 45′; which — together with its sine, taken from the table, which is 42657 — I note down; and beneath it I note the angle of the parallax, BCD, 0° 2′, with its sine, 58. And since in triangle BCD side DB is to side BC as the sine of the opposite angle BCD is to the sine of the opposite angle BDC, therefore when line BD is 58, BC would be 42657; and since the chord DB is 8142, of which the radius BA is 100000, and we want to know how many of those same parts BC amounts to, we'll say, by the rule of three: if when BD is 58, BC is 42657, then when that same DB is 8142, how much would BC be? So I multiply the second term by the third; I get 347313294, which must be divided by the first — that is, by 58 — and the quotient would be the number of parts of line BC of which the radius AB is 100000: and to know how many radii BA that same line BC contains, we'd have again to divide that quotient by 100000, and we'd have the number of semidiameters comprised in BC. Now, the number 347313294 divided by 58 gives 5988160¼, as you see here:

and this, divided by 100000, gives us 59 and 88160/100000.

But we can greatly shorten the operation by dividing the first product we found — that is, 347313294 — by the product of multiplying the two numbers 58 and 100000, which is 5,800,000;

and it likewise comes out 59 and 5113294/5800000.

And that many semidiameters are contained in line BC, to which, adding one for line AB, we'll have a little less than 61 semidiameters for the two lines ABC together, and so the straight distance from the center A to the star C will be more than 60 semidiameters; therefore it comes out above the Moon — by Ptolemy's reckoning more than 27 semidiameters, and by Copernicus's more than 8, granting that the Moon's distance from the Earth's center, by Copernicus's account, is, as the author says, 52 semidiameters.

By this same kind of investigation I find, from the observations of Camerarius and Muñoz, that the star comes out set at a like distance — this one too more than 60 semidiameters: and these are the observations, and here following is the calculation.

The next investigation is made upon two observations of Tycho and Muñoz, from which one calculates that the star was distant from the Earth's center 478 semidiameters and more.

From this other investigation the star is found to be distant from the center more than 716 semidiameters.

These, as you see, are five investigations that render the star well above the Moon; and here I want you to weigh that particular point I mentioned to you a little while ago — namely, that at the great distances the changing, or say the correcting, of very few minutes shifts the star through enormous stretches. As, for example, in the first of these investigations, where the calculation made the star 60 semidiameters remote from the center with a parallax of 2 minutes, anyone who wanted to maintain that it was in the firmament has only to correct, in the observations, 2 minutes and even less — for then the parallax ceases, or grows so small that it puts the star at an immense distance, such as everyone grants the firmament's to be. In the second investigation an amendment of less than 4′ does the same. In the third and the fourth, again just as in the first, a mere 2 minutes lift the star even above the fixed stars. In the previous one a quarter of a minute — that is, 15 seconds — gives us the same. But it won't go this way at the sublunar heights: for imagine whatever distance you please, and try to correct the investigations the author made and adjust them so that they all answer to that same fixed distance; you'll see how much larger the amendments you'll need to make.

Sagredo
It can only do us good, for our full understanding, to see some example of what you say.

Salviati
Fix, at your own pleasure, whatever determined sublunar distance you like, where the star is to be set; for with little trouble we'll be able to satisfy ourselves whether corrections like these — which we've seen suffice to bring it among the fixed stars — will bring it to the place you've fixed.

Sagredo
To take the most favorable distance for the author, let's set it at the greatest of all those he investigated in his 12 investigations; because, while the astronomers and he are in controversy — they saying the star was above the Moon, and he that it was below — every little space by which he proves it to have been below gives him the victory.

Salviati
Let's take, then, the seventh investigation, made upon the observations of Tycho and Thaddeus Hagecius, from which the author finds the star to have been distant from the center 32 semidiameters — the site most favorable to his side; and to give him every advantage, I want us, on top of this, to set it at the least favorable distance for the astronomers, which is to place it even above the firmament. That granted, then, let's go looking for what corrections would be needed to apply to his other 11 investigations, so as to raise the star up to the distance of 32 semidiameters; and let's begin with the first, calculated upon the observations of Hainzel and Maurolyco, in which the author finds the distance from the center to be about 3 semidiameters, with a parallax of 4° 42′ 30″: let's see now whether, by pulling it back to just 20′, it rises to 32 semidiameters. Here is the operation, very brief and exact: I multiply the sine of angle BDC by the chord BD, and divide the result — dropping the last 5 figures — by the sine of the parallax; out comes 28½ semidiameters: so that not even with a correction of 4° 22′ 30″, taken away from 4° 42′ 30″, does the star rise to the height of 32 semidiameters; which correction, for Simplicio's understanding, amounts to 262½ minutes.

In the second operation, made upon the observations of Hainzel and Schuler, with a parallax of 0° 8′ 30″, the star is found at a height of about 25 semidiameters, as you see in the following operation.

And pulling the parallax of 0° 8′ 30″ back to 7′, whose sine is 204, the star rises to about 30 semidiameters: so a correction of 1′ 30″ isn't enough.

Now let's see what correction is needed for the third investigation, made upon the observations of Hainzel and Tycho, which renders the star at a height of about 19 semidiameters, with a parallax of 10′. The usual angles, and their sines and chord, found by the author, are these; and they render (as also in the author's own operation) the star distant about 19 semidiameters; so, to raise it, we must shrink the parallax, following the rule he himself observes in the ninth investigation: let's put the parallax, then, at 6′, whose sine is 175; and, the division done, one finds still less than 31 semidiameters for the star's distance. So a correction of 4′ is too little for the author's need.

Let's come to the fourth investigation, and to the rest, by the same rule, and with the chords and sines the author himself found. In this one the parallax is 14′, and the height found less than 10 semidiameters; and diminishing the parallax from 14′ to 4′, you see all the same how the star doesn't rise even to 31 semidiameters: so a correction of 10′ out of 14′ isn't enough.

In the author's fifth operation we have the sines and the chord as you see:

and the parallax is 0° 42′ 30″, which renders the star's height about 4 semidiameters; and correcting the parallax by reducing it from 42′ 30″ to just 5′ isn't enough to raise it even to 28 semidiameters: so an amendment of 37′ 30″ is too little.

In the sixth operation the chord, the sines, and the parallax are these,

and the star is found to be at a height of about 4 semidiameters: let's see where it's brought by lowering the parallax from 8′ to a single 1′. Here is the operation, and the star is raised no higher than to about 27 semidiameters: so a correction of 7′ out of 8′ isn't enough. In the eighth operation the chord, the sines, and the parallax, as you see, are these:

and from these the author calculates the star's height at 1½ semidiameters, with a parallax of 43′; which, reduced to 1′, still leaves the star distant less than 24 semidiameters: so a correction of 42′ isn't enough. Now let's see the ninth. Here is the chord, the sines, and the parallax, which is 15′: from which the author calculates the star's distance from the Earth's surface to be less than a forty-seventh of a semidiameter. But this is a calculation error; for it truly comes out, as we shall see right now, more than a fifth: here it comes to about 90/436, which is more than a fifth.

What the author then adds by way of amending the observations — namely, that it isn't enough to draw the parallax difference back even to a single minute, nor even to an eighth of 1′ — is true. But I say that not even a tenth of 1′ will reduce the star's height to 32 semidiameters: for the sine of a tenth of 1′, that is, of 6 seconds, is 3; by which, if in our rule we divide 90 — or rather, if we divide 9058672 by 300000 — it will come to 30 and 58672/100000, that is, a little more than 30½ semidiameters. The tenth gives the star's height at a fifth of a semidiameter, with this angle, sines, and parallax, which is 4° 30′: and I see that, reduced from 4° 30′ to 2′, it still doesn't advance the star to 29 semidiameters.

The eleventh renders the star, for the author, remote about 13 semidiameters, with a parallax of 55′: let's see, reducing it to 20′, how high it will lift the star. Here is the calculation: it raises it to a little less than 33 semidiameters: so the correction is of a little less than 35, out of 55′.

The twelfth, with a parallax of 1° 36′, renders the star at a height of less than 6 semidiameters: pulling the parallax back to 20′ brings the star to less than 30 semidiameters of distance: so a correction of 1° 16′ isn't enough.

From this it is seen (as I have noted here on the back) that if the author decided to accept, as the true site of the new star, the distance of 32 semidiameters, then correcting his other 10 investigations (and I say 10, because the second, being quite high already, is brought to the height of 32 semidiameters with a 2′ correction) so as to make them all restore the said star to that distance would require such a drawing-back of the parallaxes that all the subtractions together would amount to more than 756′: whereas in the 5 I calculated, which render the star above the Moon, to correct them so that they set it in the firmament, a correction of only 10¼ minutes suffices. Now add to these 5 others that render the star precisely in the firmament with no need of any correction at all, and we'll have 10 investigations agreeing to set it in the firmament, with only 5 of them corrected (as we've seen) by 10¼ minutes: whereas to correct the author's other 10, so as to bring the star to a height of 32 semidiameters, you'll need amendments of 756′ out of 836′; that is, from the sum of 836 one must subtract 756 if the star is to rise to the height of 32 semidiameters — and even that correction isn't enough.

The investigations that, at once and without any further correction, render the star with no parallax, and therefore in the firmament, and even in its most remote parts — in short, as high as the pole itself — are these 5 noted here:

As for the rest of the pairings that can be made from the observations of all these astronomers, those that render the star sublime by an infinite interval are far more numerous — about 30 more — than the others that, by calculation, place the star below the Moon; and since (as we've agreed) it's to be believed the observers erred by a little sooner than by a lot, it is plain that the corrections to be applied to the observations that place the star infinitely high, in drawing it back down, will bring it to the firmament sooner, and with a smaller amendment, than below the Moon: so that all of these applaud the opinion of those who set it among the fixed stars. Add to this that the corrections required for such amendments are far smaller than those by which the star can be brought from its improbable nearness up to the height most favorable to this author, as we've seen in the past examples: among which impossible nearnesses there are 3 that seem to move the star from the Earth's center by less than a semidiameter's distance, making it in a certain way go wheeling under the Earth; and these are the combinations in which, the polar altitude of one of the observers being greater than the polar altitude of the other, the star's elevation taken by the former is less than the star's elevation by the latter. And such are the combinations noted here below. This first is the Landgrave's with Gemma: where the Landgrave's polar altitude, 51° 18′, is greater than Gemma's polar altitude, which is 50° 50′; but the Landgrave's star altitude, 79° 30′, is less than that of Gemma's star, 79° 45′.

The other two are these below:

From what I've shown you up to now, you can grasp how unfavorable to his own cause is this first method of investigating the star's distance and proving it sublunar, introduced by the author — and how much more probably and clearly one gathers that its distance was among the most remote fixed stars.

Simplicio
Up to this point it seems to me that the small force of the author's demonstrations has been quite plainly uncovered; but I see that all this is contained in not many pages of the book, and it could be that other arguments of his are more conclusive than these first ones.

Salviati
On the contrary, they can only be less valid, if we let the past ones be our sample for the rest; for (as is manifest) the uncertainty and inconclusiveness of those plainly derives from the errors committed in the instrumental observations, from which the polar altitudes and the star's altitudes were believed to have been correctly taken, when in fact they're all easily in error; and yet for finding the altitudes of the pole the astronomers have had centuries of time to spend on it at their leisure, and the star's meridian altitudes are the easiest to observe, being very sharply defined and allowing the observer some room to keep at them, since they don't change appreciably in a very short time, as do those far from the meridian: and if this is so — as it most truly is — what faith shall we place in calculations founded on observations more numerous, harder to make, more momentary in their variation, with the added burden of more awkward and more fallacious instruments? From a single glance I've given at the demonstrations that follow, the computations are made upon altitudes of the star taken in various vertical circles, which they call by the Arabic word azimuths: in which observations movable instruments are used, not only on the vertical circles but on the horizon as well, at the same time; so that at the very moment one takes the altitude, one must also have observed on the horizon the distance of the vertical circle in which the star lies from the meridian; besides which, after a notable interval of time, one must repeat the operation and keep close account of the elapsed time, trusting either to clocks or to other observations of stars: such a tangle of observations is then compared with another like it, made by a different observer, in a different country, with a different instrument and at a different time; and from this the author tries to draw out what the star's altitudes and horizontal latitudes would have been at the time and hour of those other, first observations, and upon such an adjustment he finally builds his calculation. I leave it now to you to judge how much faith is to be placed in what is drawn from such investigations. Besides, I've no doubt at all that if anyone chose to martyr himself over such enormously long computations, he'd find, as in the past ones, more that favored the opposing side than the author: but it doesn't seem to me worth the trouble of taking on such a labor for a thing that isn't among the primary matters we have in view.
