DON QUIXOTE — RUNNING NOTES
===========================
The consistency ledger. Everything here is settled; do not re-decide it.
Strategy and register live in text_analysis.txt.

FILE FORMAT
-----------
Line 1 of every modern file is the title, exactly as it stands in
manifest.json:
    Chapter 12: Of What a Goatherd Told Those Who Were With Don Quixote
For a split chapter, line 2 is "(Part 2 of 3)". Front-matter files carry
their English title alone.

CHAPTER TITLES live in titles.json, keyed "1-1" .. "2-74" for chapters and
by the Spanish heading for front matter. prep.py reads it, so the manifest
and the file agree and cannot drift. WRITE THE TITLE IN BOTH PLACES.
The titles are jokes. Translate them with the same relish as the text.

VERSE is tab-indented, one line per line, as everywhere else in this
project. The source marks none of it; prep detects it by line length, so
89 blocks arrive already indented. Keep the stanza breaks — the source runs
whole poems together and breaking them up is an improvement, so verse-block
counts will NOT match between source and translation and are not a check.

LOCKED VOCABULARY
-----------------
ínsula          -> "isle", ALWAYS, never "island". Cervantes has Quixote and
                   Sancho say ínsula where ordinary Spanish says isla; it is
                   a chivalric affectation and half the comedy of Sancho's
                   governorship in Part Two depends on his using a word he
                   does not quite understand. "Isle" carries the same slight
                   archaic strangeness in English. Ormsby flattens it to
                   "island" and the joke goes.
vuestra merced  -> "your grace" in Quixote's mouth and in formal speech;
                   Sancho's slurred "vuesa merced" gets the same, since his
                   comedy is in the proverbs, not here.
caballero andante -> "knight errant", never "wandering knight".
hidalgo         -> "gentleman" (the first sentence). Not "hidalgo": the
                   whole point is that he is minor gentry with a lance and
                   no money, which "gentleman" carries and the loanword does
                   not.
escudero        -> "squire".
duelos y quebrantos -> "'griefs and groans' — bacon and eggs". The Spanish
                   name is a joke and the dish needs explaining; three words
                   does both, and no footnote is possible.
Cide Hamete Benengeli — keep. The narrator's Arab "author" is load-bearing.

NAMES. Familiar English forms where they exist: Amadís of Gaul, Palmerín of
England, the Knight of Phoebus, Roland (for Roldán) but Orlando where
Cervantes means the Italian poem's hero, Ganelon, Trebizond, Bucephalus.
Spanish names keep their accents: Rocinante, Dulcinea, Sansón Carrasco,
Cardenio, Dorotea, Zoraida.

LATIN QUOTATIONS are kept verbatim, in the form Cervantes printed them, with
a plain English rendering immediately after in square brackets. The joke in
the Prologue is that the tags are banalities dressed as learning, and that
only lands if the reader can see what they say.

TEXTUAL DECISIONS
-----------------
"por Hepila famosa" (Prologue-adjacent, chapter 1, of Amadís adding his
country's name) is a 1605 misprint and means nothing. Read with the modern
editions as "por hacerla famosa" and translated "in order to make it
famous". Recorded here because it is an emendation, not a translation.

THE PRINTING PAPERWORK is not translated and is in reference/licences.txt —
Tasa, errata certificates, royal Privilegio, three Aprobaciones, 2,782
words. Both prologues and both dedications ARE translated.

REGISTER — THE ONE THING THAT MATTERS MOST
------------------------------------------
Don Quixote and Sancho must not sound alike. Quixote is formal, courtly and
elaborate, and genuinely eloquent when he is on a subject he understands;
his language goes absurd only in the chivalric fits, and there the absurdity
must read AS absurdity. Sancho is plain, fast, physical and shrewd. If both
come out in the same modern middle register, the book stops working, and
that is exactly what the Victorian translations did to it.

SANCHO'S PROVERBS: translate for the FUNCTION. Use a real English proverb
where one does the same work; invent an English-sounding one where none
does. Never render the Spanish literally — a literal proverb is not a
proverb, it is a sentence about a goat. Keep the avalanches at full length
(the length is the joke) and keep the misfires misfiring.

ESTABLISHED SO FAR (files 000-003)
----------------------------------
000 To the Duke of Béjar        189 ->   217   1.15
001 Prologue                  2,459 -> 2,768   1.13
002 Verses                    1,276 -> 1,619   1.27  (verse runs long)
003 Chapter 1                 1,879 -> 2,092   1.11
Ormsby runs 1.06x the Spanish; we should sit a little above him. Verify:
    python3 verify.py quixote --min-ratio 0.95 --max-ratio 1.35
A file that comes in UNDER the Spanish is summarising.

THE CABO ROTO VERSE (002) is reproduced in English: the last syllable of
every line is lopped off, exactly as Cervantes does it, with one bracketed
note at the head of the file telling the reader to finish the words aloud.
Alex approved this. Solisdán's sonnet, written in mock-archaic Spanish, is
rendered in mock-archaic English on the same principle.

DECIDED IN FILES 013-021 (chapters 13-19)
-----------------------------------------
CERVANTES' OWN INCONSISTENCIES — the rule, now that three have come up.
Reconcile a slip a reader could only take for OUR error; keep a slip that
is part of the book's texture.
  - RECONCILED. Chapter 15 calls the carriers "gallegos" in the body but
    "yangueses" in its own title and everywhere afterwards; all of them are
    now Yanguesan carriers. Their ponies stay Galician — that is the breed,
    not the men. Alifanfaron is printed Alifanfaron / Alefanfaron /
    Alifanfuon within four pages of chapter 18; normalised. A reader has
    only the English in front of them and cannot hear that the seam is
    Cervantes'.
  - KEPT. Sancho's wife changes name (Juana Gutierrez / Mari Gutierrez /
    Juana Panza / Teresa), the saddlebags are lost and then reappear, and
    the ass is stolen and returns. These are famous and Cervantes himself
    answers for two of them in Part Two. Do NOT tidy them.

THE EPITHET IS LOCKED: "the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance" (coined,
file 021). It is the phrase English has kept and it is pinned in
must_contain.txt. "Countenance" is above the reading level of the rest of
the book and stands anyway — Sancho glosses it on the spot ("your worship
really does have the worst-looking face I have ever seen"), so the joke
carries even for a reader who does not know the word. It recurs ~30 times
from here on; do not paraphrase it, ever.

SANCHO'S MISHEARINGS need an English mishearing, not a footnote. Locked:
"the balm of Fierabras" -> Sancho's "that drink of Fiery Brass" (feo Blas).
Pedro's "cripse"/"sterrile" and the sorrow/Sarah pair are in files 013-014.
Build each one out of the English word, never out of the Spanish.

TWO PUNS CARRIED WHOLE, both in file 021: the bachelor's "you have turned
me from straight to crooked" (enderezar tuertos / quedar tuerto), and the
sugared-almond pebbles of chapter 18, where "peladilla" is both a smooth
brook stone and a sweet, so the second stone arrives as "another almond".

NO MARKUP IN THE TEXT FILES. Book titles inside the prose are plain — no
asterisks, no underscores. The pipeline is markup-free by design and both
renderers would ship the characters literally. Structure comes only from
convention: tab indent = verse or table, ALL CAPS = heading (so never write
one), [Figure N: ...] = plate (unused in this book).

must_contain.txt WRITTEN at file 021, covering the opening sentence, the
coined names, the windmills, Marcela's two sentences and the two running
gags. Add to it as each famous passage lands.
