DON QUIXOTE — TRANSLATION STRATEGY
==================================

THE CASE FOR DOING IT
---------------------
This is the strongest copyright argument on the whole roadmap. Every good
modern translation of Don Quixote is in copyright — Grossman, Rutherford,
Lathrop, Montgomery. What is free is Ormsby (1885), Jarvis (1742), Motteux
(1700) and Shelton (1612). So the Don Quixote that a reader actually meets
for nothing is a Victorian one, and the book's reputation as a slog — long,
arch, hard to get into, funnier in theory than in practice — is very largely
an artifact of that. The book is not arch. Cervantes writes fast, plain,
speakable Spanish full of jokes, and the jokes are mostly still funny.

Compare Ormsby, chapter 1: "In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I
have no desire to call to mind, there lived not long since one of those
gentlemen that keep a lance in the lance-rack, an old buckler, a lean hack,
and a greyhound for coursing." Every word of that is right and the whole of
it is dead. That sentence is the job.

SOURCE AND CRIB
---------------
Translate FROM THE SPANISH (Gutenberg #2000, 379,021 words in chapters).
Ormsby sits under reference/ormsby/ as a per-file crib — one file per
chapter, aligned 1:1 because the Spanish has 126 chapter headings and the
Standard Ebooks Ormsby has 126 chapter files. Use him for who-does-what, for
the hard idiom, for the proverbs, and for the many topical references. Never
translate from him. His register is the thing this edition exists to remove.

SIZE. 134 files, 379k Spanish words; expect ~400–420k English. Second only
to Plato's Dialogues in this collection and larger than The Wealth of
Nations. Ormsby runs 1.06x the Spanish, so verify with
    python3 verify.py quixote --min-ratio 0.95 --max-ratio 1.35
and expect to land near 1.10. A retelling that comes in UNDER the Spanish is
almost certainly summarising.

VOICE
-----
Fast, warm, speakable modern English. The narrator is a comedian with a
straight face who keeps pretending to be a scrupulous historian working from
a manuscript by an Arab author he does not trust. Keep the pretence and keep
the deadpan; do not explain the joke.

THE TWO VOICES ARE THE BOOK. Don Quixote speaks in the high chivalric
register — long periods, archaic vocabulary, "vuestra merced" — and Sancho
speaks in proverbs and malapropisms. The comedy is the collision. If both
come out in the same modern middle register the book stops working.
  - DON QUIXOTE: formal, courtly, syntactically elaborate — but not
    incomprehensible. He is grandiloquent, not obscure; when he lectures on
    arms and letters or the Golden Age he is genuinely eloquent and must be
    allowed to be. Only in his chivalric fits does the language go
    deliberately absurd, and there the absurdity should be legible AS
    absurdity, which is what Ormsby's uniform Victorian gravity destroys.
  - SANCHO: plain, rapid, physical, greedy, shrewd. His proverbs are the
    single hardest thing in the book (see below).
  - EVERYONE ELSE sits between them. The Duke's household speak courtly; the
    innkeepers and goatherds speak plainly; the Canon and the curate speak
    like educated men.

SANCHO'S PROVERBS — THE CENTRAL PROBLEM
---------------------------------------
Sancho speaks in refranes, and in Part Two he fires them in avalanches, six
or eight in a row, several of them not quite fitting. Three things are true
at once: they are proverbs, they are FUNNY, and the joke is often that he
has used the wrong one or mangled it.
  RULE: translate for the FUNCTION, not the words. Where English has a real
  proverb that does the same work, use it. Where it does not, make an
  English-sounding proverb rather than a literal rendering of the Spanish —
  a literal proverb is not a proverb, it is a sentence about a goat.
  KEEP THE AVALANCHE. When he strings eight together, eight must arrive. The
  length is the joke, and Don Quixote's exasperation is the punchline.
  KEEP THE MISFIRES. Where Sancho mangles a proverb or picks an irrelevant
  one, the English must mangle or misfire too. Ormsby footnotes these; we
  cannot, so the English has to carry it.
  MALAPROPISMS likewise: Sancho says "fósil" for "fértil", "cananea" for
  "cana". Find an English malapropism of the same shape and register.

CHAPTER TITLES ARE JOKES AND MUST STAY JOKES
--------------------------------------------
Cervantes' chapter headings are part of the comedy and he plays with them —
they promise things they do not deliver, they apologise, they cross-refer.
II.70 is headed "Which follows sixty-nine and deals with matters
indispensable for the clear understanding of this history." I.9 announces
the conclusion of a battle that the previous chapter broke off mid-stroke.
Translate them with the same relish as the text.
  MECHANICS: titles live in titles.json, keyed "1-1" .. "2-74", and prep.py
  uses them for the manifest when present. Until a title is written there,
  the manifest carries Cervantes' Spanish. Write the English title into
  titles.json AND as the file's own first line, so the two cannot drift.

WHAT IS KEPT, AND WHY
---------------------
THE INTERPOLATED TALES ARE KEPT WHOLE. The Curioso impertinente (I.33–35),
the Captive's tale (I.39–41), Cardenio and Dorotea, Leandra, the
Camacho wedding, Ricote, Ana Félix. Abridgements cut these first, and
cutting them is how the book got its reputation for sagging in the middle.
They are also the part of the book Cervantes' own characters argue about in
Part Two, so removing them removes a joke the sequel depends on.

THE FOUR INTERNAL "PARTES" of the 1605 volume are kept where Cervantes put
them, as headings before chapters 9, 15 and 28. Ormsby drops them. They stay
because the break at chapter 9 is a joke: the narrative stops in mid-
swordstroke because the manuscript ran out, and the narrator has to go and
buy the rest in a market in Toledo.

THE VERSE. Eighty-nine verse blocks, tab-indented in chapters/. Set them as
verse, not prose. Two need decisions of their own:
  - THE TEN PRELIMINARY POEMS (chapters/002.txt) are burlesque commendatory
    verses supposedly written by Amadís, Orlando, Oriana and Rocinante —
    parodies of the real puffery that opened books of the period.
    URGANDA'S and EL DONOSO'S are in *versos de cabo roto*: the last
    syllable of every line is chopped off, which both makes the rhyme and
    mocks affected poets. RECOMMENDATION: do the same thing in English —
    chop the last syllable — with one bracketed note the first time, because
    the joke is visible on the page and dies completely if smoothed away.
  - DE SOLISDÁN'S sonnet is written in deliberately fake-archaic Spanish
    ("Maguer", "fazañas", "vuesa"). Render it in fake-archaic English, the
    same way Don Quixote's own chivalric fits are handled.

WHAT IS DROPPED
---------------
The printing-office paperwork bound into both volumes: the Tasa (the price
per sheet the book might legally be sold at), the Testimonio de las erratas,
the royal Privilegio, and the three Aprobaciones. Cervantes did not write
them, they are civil-service documents, they would open the book with tax
paperwork, and Ormsby drops them too. They are in reference/licences.txt so
that the omission is recorded rather than silent. 2,782 words.

BOTH PRÓLOGOS AND BOTH DEDICATIONS ARE KEPT AND TRANSLATED. The 1605
prologue — in which Cervantes complains that he cannot think how to begin,
and a friend tells him to pad the book with invented citations and a list of
authorities in alphabetical order — is one of the great prefaces in any
language and is the book's thesis in miniature. The 1615 prologue answers
Avellaneda, who had published a fake sequel, and answers him with a
gentleness that is more devastating than abuse.

THINGS THAT WILL GO WRONG
-------------------------
1. SUMMARISING. At 379k words the temptation is to compress, and Cervantes'
   long comic sentences are exactly what compresses most easily and must
   not. Watch the per-file ratio.
2. FLATTENING THE TWO REGISTERS into one. See VOICE above. This is the
   failure that would make the whole thing pointless.
3. LOSING THE NARRATOR. The found-manuscript conceit, Cide Hamete Benengeli,
   the marginal notes, the chapter that breaks off — these are not framing
   devices to be tidied away. They are the reason the book is called the
   first modern novel.
4. THE PROVERBS going literal. See above.
5. ANACHRONISM in the other direction. Modern and speakable is not modern
   and slangy: no "okay", no "guys". The test is whether a sentence could
   have been said aloud in 1605 by someone who happened to speak modern
   English.
