tf H E \

'PHOENIX LIBRARY
*
POSSIBLE WORLDS

A list
o f other titles in the Phoenix Li
w ill be found at the end
o f this book

POSSIBLE WORLDS
AND OTHER ESSAYS

J. B. S. HALDANE
SIR W ILLIA M

DUNN I^EADER IN BIO C H EM IST R Y

IN THE U N IV E R SIT Y OF C A M BR ID G E 2
HEAD OF C E N E T IC A L D E P A R T M E N T
JOHN IN N ES HO RTICULTURAL IN ST IT U T IO N , M ERTO N 2
SO M ET IM E FELLO W OF NEW CO LLEGE
OXFORD

CHATTO and WINDUS
LONDON

First published December 1927
Fourth impression 1929
First issued in the Phoenix Library
19 3 °

Printed in Great Britain : all rights reserved

PREFACE

T

HE essays collected in this book have mostly,
but not all, appeared in print.. In Europe they
have appeared in the Rationalist Annual, the
Bermondsey Book, the Nation, the Daily M ail, the World
To-Day, the Manchester Guardian, the Graphic, the
Weekly Dispatch, Discovery, Modern Science, and the
Haagsche Maandblad. In America they have been
published by Harper's Magazine, the Forum, the
Century Magazine, the Atlantic Monthly, and the New
Republic. They have been written in the intervals of
research work and teaching, to a large extent in railway
trains. Many scientific workers believe that they
should confine their publications to learned journals.
I think, however, that the public has a right to know
what is going on inside the laboratories, for some of
which it pays. And it seems to me vitally important
that the scientific point of view should be applied, so far
as is possible, to politics and religion. In such spheres
the scientific man cannot, of course, speak with the
same authority as when he is describing the results of
research ; and in so far as he is scientific he must try
to suppress such of his own views as have no more
scientific backing than those of the man in the street.
Some of these essays are on medical topics. As I do
not hold a medical degree I can speak more freely than
a qualified physician. But if a doctor cannot answer
questions with regard to individual cases which he has

vi

POSSIBLE WORLDS

not examined, an unqualified person is still less able to
do so. I have rarely written on a medical subject
without receiving letters from would-be patients. It is
obvious that I cannot answer such communications.
The essays in the first part of this book deal mainly
with matters of fact. Those which follow are more
speculative. In scientific work the imagination must
work in harness. But there is no reason why it should
not play with the fruits of such work, and it is perhaps
only by so doing that one can realize the possibilities
which research work is opening up. In the past these
results have always taken the public and the politicians
completely by surprise. The present disturbed con­
dition of humanity is largely the result of this un­
preparedness. If the experience is not to be repeated
on a still greater scale it is urgent that the average man
should attempt to realize what is happening to-day in
the laboratories.

T A B L E OF C O N T E N T S

Preface
page v
On Scales
i
Some Dates
7
On Being the Right Size
18
Darwinism To-Day
27
Enzymes
45
Vitamins
51
Man as a Sea Beast
57
Food Control in Insect Societies
64
Oxygen Want
69
Water Poisoning and Salt Poisoning
76
Immunity
82
Blood Transfusion
86
Cancer Research
90
The Fight with Tuberculosis
96
Food Poisoning
99
The Time Factor in Medicine
103
On being one’s own Rabbit
107
What Use is Astronomy ?
120
Kant and Scientific Thought
124
Thomas Henry Huxley
130
William Bateson
135
The Future of Biology
139
Nationality and Research
154
Scientific Research for Amateurs
162
Til

•••
Vlll

POSSIBLE WORLDS

Should Scientific Research be
Rewarded ?
page 176
182
Science and Politics
190
Eugenics and Social Reform
Occupational Mortality
197
204
When I am Dead
211
The Duty of Doubt
Science and Theology as Art Forms 225
241
Meroz
249
Some Enemies of Science
260
Possible Worlds
287
The Last Judgment

ON SCALES

I

E silence eternel de ces espaces infinies m’effraie,’
said Pascal, as he looked at the stars and
between them, and his somewhat irrational
terror has echoed down the centuries.
It is fashionable to find the distance of even the
nearest fixed stars inconceivable, and to make no
attempt to grapple with the number of atoms in one’s
thumbnail. And this habit of mind makes it quite
unnecessarily hard for the plain man to understand
the main results of modern science, many of which are
quite straightforward, but happen to involve rather
large numbers. For Pascal’s attitude is neither
scientific nor religious. ‘ I shall soon be above that
fellow,’ said Sir Thomas More, as he took his last look
at the sun before his execution, and the modern
astronomer views the sun as a rather small but quite
fairly typical star in a particular cluster.
There is no reason to suppose that interstellar space
is infinite. Very probably the whole of space is finite,
and certainly the distances of all the visible heavenly
bodies are within the range of the human mind. In­
finity is the prerogative of mind rather than matter.
We can reason about it, but we certainly cannot and
do not observe it. As for the silence of interstellar
space, one could not live in it, and hence could*not
discover whether it is silent or not. But if one were
shut up in a steel box in it, like Jules Verne’s travellers

2

POSSIBLE WORLDS

to the moon, one would probably hear fairly frequently
(at least in the neighbourhood of a star) the sound
made by a minute dust particle moving at enormous
speed hitting one’s abode. \ (
The average man complains that he cannot imagine
the eighteen billion miles which is the unit in modem
astronomy when once we leave the solar system, and
is oalled a parsec because the apparent parallax of a
star at this distance is a second ; in other words the
earth’s orbit from a parsec away would subtend an
angle of a second, or look as large as a halfpenny at
six thousand yards’ distance. Of course one cannot
imagine a parsec. But one can think of it, and think
of it clearly.
For every educated person learns a process which is
really of extraordinary difficulty, and involves a stu­
pendous change of scale. That process is map-reading.
In ordinary life our practical unit is about a centimetre,
or two-fifths of an inch. Rather few of the measure­
ments of everyday life exceed this in accuracy. Now
suppose we look at a map of the world on a globe
measuring sixteen inches round the equator, we are
using a model on a scale of one in a hundred million
(io'8) and the average man learns to understand its
meaning and draw-practical information from it. An
Englishman hears that his son is going to New Zealand,
and has only to look at the globe to see that his letters
will take longer to arrive than those from his other son
in Newfoundland. But although we are at home on
this particular scale, of 1000 kilometres or about six
hundred miles to a centimetre, as regards the earth,
the average person has not yet grasped the fact that

ON SCALES

3

on the same scale the sun is a mile off and as large
as a church.
Our grandchildren will have learnt to do the opposite
mental trick, namely, to be familiar with models on a
scale of a hundred million to one. On this scale the
atoms of the common elements are represented as less
than an inch across, and molecules of fairly complex
organic substances are a foot or so long. The electrons
in these atoms and the nuclei round which they are
believed to circulate would still be too small to be
visible, but we could mark out their orbits, just as in
a map we can represent railway lines, though only by
exaggerating their width. It is doubtful whether a
much greater magnification would serve any real
purpose. When we come to deal with the events
inside the atom the attempt to represent them in space
and time breaks down, or at any rate the properties of
space and time in very small quantities are so unlike
those of common-sense space and time, that models
are of rather slight value. On the other hand models
of chemical molecules deduced from X-ray analysis
of crystals are most reliable guides, and are opening
up a new era in chemistry.
Let us now take a second step in the opposite direc­
tion and try to construct a model such that in it the
globe will be as much reduced as the earth had been in
representing it as the globe. That is to say our model
is to be on a scale of one in ten thousand million million
(io'16). This would really show us very little, for not
only the earth, but its orbit round the sun would be
invisibly small, and even the orbit of Neptune would
be comfortably contained on a pin’s head, which would

4

POSSIBLE WORLDS

also represent the size of the largest known star.
Unfortunately however even on this scale the nearest
fixed star would be four yards away, and only about
a hundred would be within thirty yards. The Milky
Way would be a good day’s walk across. Light would
creep much more slowly than a snail, but quicker than
the growth of most plants !
A third step in the same direction would probably
be legitimate. If we reduced our scale once more by a
hundred million times, the Milky Way would be almost
invisibly small, and the nearer spiral nebulae would be
represented only a fraction of an inch away from it,
while probably all the spiral nebulae visible with the
best telescope could be represented within a radius of
half a mile. It is not clear that we could repeat the
operation a fourth time. For the extended theory of
relativity seems to lead inevitably to the view that the
universe is finite, and that progress in any direction
would ultimately lead back to the starting-point. In
fact an attempt to make a model on this scale would
perhaps produce results as misleading as those obtained
when, by Mercator’s projection, we try to represent the
surface of the earth on a single plane. On the fourth
order model the volume of the whole of space might
be as small as one hundred thousandth of a cubic
millimetre, though this is a lower limit.
We have seen then that we can usefully think of
models up to a hundred million times life-size, and
down to a scale of about a million million million
millionth. Beyond those limits space does not have
the properties ascribed to it by common sense, and
visual imagination does not help us. We are com-

ON SCALES

5

pelled to plunge into the mathematics of the quantum
theory at the small end, of relativity at the big end.
But long before that is necessary, people are frightened
off the attempt to think, apparently by the word
‘ million.’ This is because it is generally applied to
large aggregates like a million pounds or a million
years, which we cannot easily imagine, though as a
matter of fact a quite ordinary room would hold a
hundred million gold sovereigns, provided its floor did
not give way. But we ought to get the million habit by
remembering that we wash ourselves daily in a bath
containing about ten million drops of water, and often
walk ten million millimetres during the day.
It is a pity that outside India no opportunities are
presented of seeing a million men and women, for
crowds of this size only occur on Hindu religious
pilgrimages, and very impressive they are. A crowd
of three million may sometimes be seen at the Kumbh
Mela, a twelve-yearly festival which, if I remember,
will next be held at Allahabad in January 1930. I can
cordially recommend attendance there to any one who
cannot imagine a million. Incidentally I am informed
that participation in it gets one off several million
reincarnations.
In science we soon get accustomed to these large
numbers. The astronomer switches over merrily
enough from measuring stellar distances in kiloparsecs,
which take light 3000 years to travel, to determining
its wave-length correct to a fraction of an Angstrom
unit, which is a hundred-millionth of a centimetre.
And there is a certain thrill when the final result of a
calculation which has involved hundreds of millions

6

POSSIBLE WORLDS

comes out at one or two, when up till the last moment
it might apparently have been anything from a million
to a millionth, and thus leads to a simple theory. I
am thinking, for example, of Eddington’s famous
calculation as to why stars are no heavier (for none
are known as much as a hundred times heavier than
the sun). Starting from the data of physics he calcu­
lated the internal temperatures of the stars; and since
radiation exerts a push on matter emitting, absorbing,
or reflecting it, he was able to discover what proportion
of the weight of a star of given mass was supported by
its own radiation. This proportion is negligible for
stars lighter than the sun, but increases to half in
a star about five times the sun’s weight, while any star
much heavier would burst. Thus through a wilderness
of millions we arrive at a rational explanation of why
all stars have about the same weight. ^
Again Gorter and Grendel, and Fricke and Morse,
have shown by quite independent methods that the
oily film surrounding a red blood corpuscle is just two
molecules thick. Gorter extracted the oil, and spread
it out in a film on water, Fricke measured the electro­
static capacity of the corpuscles by putting blood in
a very rapidly alternating electric field. Both used
numbers including the five thousand million corpuscles
in a cubic centimetre and the six hundred thousand
million million million atoms in a gram of hydrogen,
but the final answer was ‘ two ’ in the one case, and
* one or two ’ in the other. It is the success of such
calculations that makes it impossible for a scientifically
trained person to disbelieve in the numbers on which
they are based.

SOME DATES

F

IVE hundred years ago the human mind was
limited to a tiny patch of space, and the universe
must have seemed even smaller after Magellan’s
men had girdled the earth. The heavenly bodies were
known to be distant, but it was not clear that celestial
distances were so much greater than terrestrial. So
Cassini’s proof, in A .D . 1672, that the sun was nearly
a hundred million miles away was at first too shocking
a fact for the mind to accept. Only eighty-nine years
ago Bessel measured the distance of one of the nearest
fixed stars, 700,000 times greater than that of the sun,
and to-day Hubble and other astronomers are estimat­
ing distances several million times those that staggered
our great-grandfathers.
The range of our minds in time is also increasing, but
the process has been slower, partly because time is
harder to measure than space, and partly because the
chronology of the Old Testament is more precise than
its astronomy. So when it was admitted that the earth
was older than the six or eight thousand years which the
biblical record allowed, scientific men were at first
very moderate in their estimates of geological time.
Twenty-five years ago geologists and physicists would
not admit that the earth could be more than twenty
million years old, although the biologists were asking
for hundreds of millions for the process of evolution.
In the last generation, however, evidence has accumu-

8

POSSIBLE WORLDS

lated along at least five different lines which allow us
to measure the past with complete accuracy for nearly
four thousand years, and with tolerable exactitude for
over a thousand million. We may conveniently begin
with the nearer dates which fall within the range of
history. A generation ago the earliest date known
with any certainty was that of the first Olympic Games,
776 B.c. Even if the accuracy of the ages of the
patriarchs in the book of Genesis was accepted, the
length of.time
between
the births of Jacob and David
.A* % Y •
0
was very uncertain ; and the dates fixed by Archbishop
. ^Ussher were to that extent at least conjectural.
But there were certain records of eclipses on historic
occasions whose dates were known within a few years.
Now a total eclipse of the sun visible from any given
place is a very rare even t; indeed only five have been
visible in any part of the British Isles since a . d . 1433.
So if wre know the place where the eclipse was total, and
the date within a century or so, we can calculate the
latter with great accuracy. Every one, for example,
has heard of Tweedledum and Tweedledee,. whose
battle was interrupted by a monstrous crow as big as a
tar-barrel. The true story of these heroes is as follows :
King Alyattes of Lydia, father of the celebrated Croesus,
had been engaged for five years in a war with Cyaxares,
king of the Medes. In its sixth year, on May 28,
585 B.c., as we now know, a battle was interrupted by
a total eclipse of the sun. The kings not only stopped
the battle, but accepted mediation. One of the two
mediators was no less a person than Nebuchadnezzar,
who in the preceding year had destroyed Jerusalem
and led its people into captivity. Other eclipses

SOME DATES

9

recorded by the Assyrians enable us to date their kings
who were contemporary with the kings of Judah and
Israel, and incidentally show us that Archbishop
Ussher was forty-six years out in his chronology of that
period. This is no discredit to the learned prelate,
but is highly disgraceful to the publishers who continue
to print bibles containing it, and the clergy who
continue to use them. Whoever else may have been
inspired, Archbishop Ussher was not, and we need not
pay much attention to clergymen who protest their
reverence for Scripture, and yet continue to use, or
permit their flocks to use, bibles adorned with the
conjectures of an Irish divine whose political talents
were at least as marked as his intellectual.
Readers of Homer will remember that Odysseus’
return to Ithaca was marked by an eclipse of the sun
which portended the doom of Penelope’s suitors. As
early as a . d . 16 12 the attempt was made to date the fall
of Troy by this means. But it was only in 1925 that
Dr. Schoch of Munich, using far more exact tables of
the moon’s motion, arrived at the startling result that
in the year 1178 b .c . there actually was a total eclipse
of the sun in or very near to Ithaca at 11.4 1 a . m . on
April 10th. Since the track of an eclipse is only 120
miles broad at most and generally less, and Ithaca is
only 15 miles long, the sun has probably not been
totally eclipsed in Ithaca since Odysseus’ time, or for
thousands of years before. Now the most probable
date for the siege of Troy was generally given at about
1200 b . c ., so presumably both this date and Homer’s
story of the eclipse were approximately correct. One
need not suppose that the suitors were actually killed
B

10

POSSIBLE WORLDS

on the day of the eclipse; but for the hero’s return and
the darkening of the sun to become connected in local
tradition, as they apparently were, they must have
occurred within a few years of one another.
The first date which is known with nearly complete
certainty is 19 15 b . c . We have accurate tables of the
appearances and disappearances of the planets in the
reign of King Ammizaduga, tenth king of the first
dynasty, who reigned in the city of Babylon from 1922
to 1902 B.c. In the sixth year of his reign, for example,
we read on a cuneiform tablet recently discovered,
‘ In the month Arahsamnu on the 28th day Venus
disappeared in the west (i.e. as an evening star). Three
days she tarried in heaven, and rose in the east on the
first day of Kislev.’ On the basis of such data as these,
Father Kugler, a German Jesuit, and Dr. Fotheringham
of Oxford, have been able to arrive at the only possible
system of dates which will fit the facts.
It is indeed fortunate that King Assurbanipal, who
reigned in Nineveh from 668 to 626 b . c . approximately,
was so addicted to astrology as to have copies made of
the observations of predecessors who, when he lived,
were already as remote as are King Penda of Mercia
or the Caliph Ali to-day. The goodness of the agree­
ment between dates found astronomically and those
derived from lists of Mesopotamian dynasties has
augmented the faith of historians in the latter, and by
their use Professor Langdon of Oxford has calculated
back to about 3357 b . c . as the date of the beginning of
the second dynasty in the city of Ur. Unfortunately
the kings who are recorded as having lived before this
date are often alleged to have reigned for many cen-

SOME DATES

ii

tunes. If we allow them lives of a reasonable length
we arrive at a date for the great Mesopotamian flood
somewhere between 5000 and 6000 B.c. This event,
which is probably historical, though greatly exagger­
ated, will not be fully explained till Iraq and Armenia
have been studied by competent geologists. At this
time a good deal of Scandinavia was still covered by an
ice sheet left over from the last glacial epoch, and the
same was probably true of Armenia. Noah’s flood
may well have been due to an abnormal thaw, perhaps
accompanied by the bursting out of a lake or lakes pent
up behind a glacier or moraine.
For in Scandinavia and Canada the melting ice has
left very exact records, which Baron de Geer and his
pupils have investigated. The whole of Scandinavia,
12,000 years ago, was covered by ice. Then the cover­
ing of its southern tip began to melt, and each year
the thaw water from it deposited a layer of mud. At
any given spot a number of such layers may be found
wherever a road or railway cutting or a pit allows the
examination of the subsoil. The thick layers due to
warm years which thawed much ice can easily be
identified. As one travels northward each layer is
gradually overlaid by fresh ones and finally disappears.
As lately as 9000 years ago the site of Stockholm was
still covered by ice, but now the icefields are restricted
to high ground. The final 7000 years in de Geer’s
calculations were reached by the counting of annual
layers of clay laid down in a lake. In Canada the
northern ice-sheet probably reached the great lakes
less than 20,000 years ago, though here the evidence is
not so complete. De Geer’s counting of the mud bands

12

POSSIBLE WORLDS

gives us an idea of the geological time scale. There
were four ice ages during the Pleistocene period. The
last of them was already waning 20,000 years ago, and
as there were lengthy warm periods between them, the
whole Pleistocene period must have lasted for some
hundreds of thousands of years, perhaps the best part
of a million. Similar bands, if they consist of mud laid
down in annual floods, record the work of a great river
in Burma in mid-tertiary times during about a million
and a half years.
But the principal evidence for the geological timescale is of a different kind. Uranium and thorium break
down into a series of short-lived radio-active elements
which end up as lead. If the rate of decay has always
been the same as at present, half of any given mass
of uranium is transformed in the course of about
4,600,000,000 years. The fixity of this rate may seem
a large assumption. But it is justifiable for two
reasons. Firstly no chemical or physical treatment has
the slightest effect on it. Secondly the speed with
which a-particles are shot out from radio-active atoms
depends on their rate of decay. Now particles of
radio-active matter in mica and other rocks are sur­
rounded by definite spheres of discoloration where the
a-particles from them have stopped. If the velocity
and hence the range of these particles had altered
during geological time these spheres would not be
definite. Assuming then that the ‘ clocks ’ have not
slowed down or speeded up one can use them to cal­
culate the age of the rocks in the following way.
Many volcanic minerals contain uranium or thorium
but very little lead. But there is always some lead;

SOME DATES

13

and the older the rock, as judged by ordinary geological
standards, the more lead is present. From its quantity
we can calculate how long the change has been going
on. This gives us the following ages for various strata.
(B.M. means before man. It does not matter what
individual man we consider !):—
Eocene (London Clay)
. 60 million B.M .
Carboniferous (British coal 260-300 million B.M .
measures).
Upper Pre-Cambrian
. 560 million B.M .
Oldest known rock .
. about 1500 million B.M .
These dates may be as much as ten per cent, out, but
can hardly be a great deal more.
That is to say, 60,000,000 years ago our ancestors were
mammals, probably not unlike lemurs, 300,000,000
years ago amphibians somewhat resembling newts or
mud-puppies, and 500,000,000 years ago very primitive
fish, combining some of the characters of sharks and
lampreys. The origin of life on our planet was prob­
ably over a thousand million years ago, so that the
record furnished by fossils only refers to half—perhaps
much less than half of the time during which life
has existed.
If all the lead in our planet is of radio-active origin,
which is rather unlikely, it can hardly be more than
eight thousand million years old. Astronomical evi­
dence points to a somewhat smaller age.
As the earth goes round, the moon, and to a lesser
extent the sun, raise tides in the sea. The energy used
in raising them comes from the earth’s rotation, hence
they slow it down and lengthen the day. The moon

14

POSSIBLE WORLDS

thus acts as a brake on the earth, and by so doing is
pushed onwards in its orbit, and moves further away.
If we calculate backwards instead of forwards we find
both the day and the month becoming shorter, until at
a sufficiently early date they possessed the same length
of about four hours, and the moon was so near to the
earth as to be practically touching it. It is fairly clear
that the moon is a portion of the earth thrown off as the
result of excessive rotation, almost certainly before the
earth’s crust had solidified. Unfortunately the fric­
tional effect of the tides depends on the detailed form
of the sea’s bed. At present the main retarding action
takes place in the Bering Sea. At a geological epoch
characterised by many shallow and partly land-locked
seas tidal friction must have been greater than now, at
other times less. So we can only say that the moon
was born somewhere about four thousand million
years ago, but the true figure might be as low as one
thousand million, or as high as twenty thousand.
The birth of the moon was only one event in a
greater catastrophe. Our sun, after a relatively brief
period, probably a few thousand million years or less,
of youthful exuberance as a giant star radiating energy
at thousands of times its present rate, settled down as a
respectable dwarf, which it now is, and has been
throughout geological time.
For many thousands of millions of years it probably
shone as a lonely star unaccompanied by planets.
Then it appears to have passed near to another, prob­
ably heavier star, which raised tidal waves in it. The
detached crests of these waves, or one of them, formed
the planets, and it is fairly clear that the moon broke

SOME DATES

15
off from the earth within a few years of its formation.
So the approximate dating of the moon’s birth gives
us that of the earth’s. This is further confirmed by
the eccentricity of Mercury’s orbit, which is still far
less circular than the earth’s, but is gradually settling
down towards circularity. It can be calculated that
it has not been going round the sun for more than ten
or less than one thousand million years. Various other
lines of evidence converge to a date somewhere between
8,000,000,000 and 1,500,000,000 B.M . for the origin of
the solar system. If science continues we shall arrive
at the exact date in the following way. The relative
motions of the various * fixed ’ stars will be determined,
and on calculating backwards it will be found that one
passed very near to our sun at a certain date in the
remote past. The star in question must be very far
away by now. It is a wise child that knows its own
father, and we shall probably not know ours for
thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands of years.
It is possible to penetrate still further into the past
and to arrive at a very rough date for the origin of the
sun. But any such date depends on some particular
hypothesis as to the origin of stellar energy, and there
are several such hypotheses, leading to very different
dates. On the other hand a number of independent
arguments, based on well-ascertained facts, converge
to the same date for the origin of the earth. There
are, of course, respectable scientific theories, such as
the planetesimal, which lead to different conclusions.
The reason for rejecting such theories, and the detailed
evidence for many of the dates here given, are to be
found in such books as Jeffrey’s The Earth (Cambridge

\

i6

POSSIBLE WORLDS

University Press). In a popular exposition it has been
necessary to be dogmatic. If I have been so it is
because I consider it unlikely that any of the figures
I have given will be very seriously upset in the
future.
In a few generations it is probable that these dates
will meet with general acceptance and their meaning
will gradually penetrate the human imagination. As
the earth has lasted for at least a thousand million years
in a condition not very unlike the present, it will
probably continue habitable for a future period of at
least the same order of magnitude, possibly for very
much longer. An acceptance of such a future is bound
to affect human thought. It will be realized that the
things which seem to us most stable, such as human
nature and the facts of geography, are really not only
changeable but certain to change. On the other hand
it will be realized that remarkably little change can
occur within a lifetime.
Such a world-view leaves room for optimism in the
most desperate circumstances, but yet reduces the
probable effects of the vastest human efforts to the
tiniest dimensions. As it is accepted, people will
probably become more and more prone to devote
themselves to their own affairs and those of their
immediate neighbours. And when they turn their
attention to greater things, they will perhaps be less
occupied with institutions as ephemeral as nations.
They will be more disposed to serve Man than England
or America. A just law may outlive the state in which
it was made, a scientific discovery the civilization which
brought it forth.

X

1

SOME'DATES
•i

i '\

, And religion will inevitably alter its standpoint, even
if some of its fundamental beliefs survive. On a planet
more than a thousand million years old it is hard to
believe—as do Christians, Jews, Mohammedans, and
Buddhists—that the most important event has occurred
within the last few thousand years, when it is clear that
there were great civilizations before that event. It is
equally difficult to doubt that many events as significant
for humanity will occur in the future. In that im­
measurable future the destiny of humanity dwarfs that
of the individual. If our planet was created a few
thousand years ago to end a few years or a few thousand
years hence, it is conceivable that the main purpose to
be worked out on it is the salvation and perfection of
individual human beings. No religion which accepts
geology can regard such a purpose as anything but
subsidiary.
If we define religion as our attitude to the universe
as a whole, the new time-scale will make us humbler as
individuals, but prouder as a race. Our individual
lives are the merest spangles of existence. The life
of our ancestors goes back for a thousand million years.
That of our descendants may last very much longer
And we cannot say with any certainty that it will not
endure for ever.

ON BEING THE RIGH T SIZE

T

H E most obvious differences between different
animals are differences of size, but for some
reason the zoologists have paid singularly little
attention to them. In a large textbook of zoology
before me I find no indication that the eagle is larger
than the sparrow, or the hippopotamus bigger than the
hare, though some grudging admissions are made in
the case of the mouse and the whale. But yet it is easy
to show that a hare could not be as large as a hippo­
potamus, or a whale as small as a herring. For every
type of animal there is a most convenient size, and a
large change in size inevitably carries with it a change
of form.
Let us take the most obvious of possible cases, and
consider a giant man sixty feet high—about the height
of Giant Pope and Giant Pagan in the illustrated
Pilgrim's Progress of my childhood. These monsters
were not only ten times as high as Christian, but ten
times as wide and ten times as thick, so that their total
weight was a thousand times his, or about eighty to
ninety tons. Unfortunately the cross sections of their
bones were only a hundred times those of Christian,
so that every square inch of giant bone had to support
ten times the weight borne by a square inch of human
bone. As the human thigh-bone breaks under about
ten times the human weight, Pope and Pagan would
have broken their thighs every time they took a step.
IB

ON BEING THE RIGHT SIZE

19

This was doubtless why they were sitting down in the
picture I remember. But it lessens one’s respect for
Christian and Jack the Giant Killer.
To turn to zoology, suppose that a gazelle, a graceful
little creature with long thin legs, is to become large,
it will break its bones unless it does one of two things.
It may make its legs short and thick, like the rhinoceros,
so that every pound of weight has still about the same
area of bone to support it. Or it can compress its
body and stretch out its legs obliquely to gain stability,
like the giraffe. I mention these two beasts because
they happen to belong to the same order as the gazelle,
and both are quite successful mechanically, being
remarkably fast runners.
Gravity, a mere nuisance to Christian, was a terror to
Pope, Pagan, and Despair. To the mouse and any
smaller animal it presents practically no dangers. You
can drop a mouse down a thousand-yard mine sh aft;
and, on arriving at the bottom, it gets a slight shock and
walks away. A rat would probably be killed, though it
can fall safely from the eleventh story of a building ; a
man is killed, a horse splashes. For the resistance pre­
sented to movement by the air is proportional to the
surface of the moving object. Divide an animal’s
length, breadth, and height each by ten ; its weight is
reduced to a thousandth, but its surface only to a
hundredth. So the resistance to falling in the case
of the small animal is relatively ten times greater than
the driving force.
An insect, therefore, is not afraid of gravity ; it carr*
fall without danger, and can cling to the ceiling vdth
remarkably little trouble. It- oan go in for elegant arid \

20

POSSIBLE WORLDS

fantastic forms of support like that of the daddy-long­
legs. But there is a force which is as formidable to an
insect as gravitation to a mammal. This is surface
tension. A man coming out of a bath carries with him
a film of water of about one-fiftieth of an inch in
thickness. This weighs roughly a pound. A wet mouse
has to carry about its own weight of water. A wet fly
has to lift many times its own weight and, as every one
knows, a fly once wetted by water or any other liquid
is in a very serious position indeed. An insect going
for a drink is in as great danger as a man leaning out
over a precipice in search of food. If it once falls into
the grip of the surface tension of the water—that is to
say, gets wet—it is likely to remain so until it drowns.
A few insects, such as water-beetles, contrive to be
unwettable, the majority keep well away from their
drink by means of a long proboscis.
Of course tall land animals have other difficulties.
They have to pump their blood to greater heights than
a man and, therefore, require a larger blood pressure
and tougher blood-vessels. A great many men die
from burst arteries, especially in the brain, and this
danger is presumably still greater for an elephant or a
giraffe. But animals of all kinds find difficulties in size
for the following reason. A typical small animal, say
a microscopic worm or rotifer, has a smooth skin
through which all the oxygen it requires can soak in,
a straight gut with sufficient surface to absorb its
food, and a simple kidney. Increase its dimensions
tenfold in every direction, and its weight is increased
a thousand times, so. that if it is to use its muscles as
efficiently as its miniature counterpart, it will need

ON BEING THE RIGHT SIZE

21

a thousand times as much food and oxygen per day and
will excrete a thousand times as much of waste products.
Now if its shape is unaltered its surface will be in­
creased only a hundredfold, and ten times as much
oxygen must enter per minute through each square
millimetre of skin, ten times as much food through
each square millimetre of intestine. When a limit is
reached to their absorptive powers their surface has to
be increased by some special device. For example, a
part of the skin may be drawn out into tufts to make gills
or pushed in to make lungs, thus increasing the oxygen­
absorbing surface in proportion to the animal’s bulk.
A man, for example, has a hundred square yards of
lung. Similarly, the gut, instead of being smooth
and straight, becomes coiled and develops a velvety
surface, and other organs increase in complication.
The higher animals are not larger than the lower
because they are more complicated. They are more
complicated because they are larger. Just the same is
true of plants. The simplest plants, such as the green
algae growing in stagnant water or on the bark of trees,
are mere round cells. The higher plants increase their
surface by putting out leaves and roots. Comparative
anatomy is largely the story of the struggle to increase
surface in proportion to volume.
Some of the methods of increasing the surface are
useful up to a point, but not capable of a very wide
adaptation. For example, while vertebrates carry the
oxygen from the gills or lungs all over the body in the
blood, insects take air directly to every part of their
body by tiny blind tubes called tracheae which open to
the surface at many different points. Now, although by

22

POSSIBLE WORLDS

their breathing movements they can renew the air in
the outer part of the tracheal system, the oxygen has to
penetrate the finer branches by means of diffusion.
Gases can diffuse easily through very small distances,
not many times larger than the average length travelled
by a gas molecule between collisions with other mole­
cules. But when such vast journeys—from the point
of view of a molecule— as a quarter of an inch have to be
made, the process becomes slow. So the portions of
an insect’s body more than a quarter of an inch from
the air would always be short of oxygen. In conse­
quence hardly any insects are much more than half an
inch thick. Land crabs are built on the same general
plan as insects, but are much clumsier. Yet like our­
selves they carry oxygen around in their blood, and are
therefore able to grow far larger than any insects. If
the insects had hit on a plan for driving air through their
tissues instead of letting it soak in, they might well have
become as large as lobsters, though other considera­
tions would have prevented them from becoming as
large as man.
Exactly the same difficulties attach to flying. It is an
elementary principle of aeronautics that the minimum
speed needed to keep an aeroplane of a given shape in
the air varies as the square root of its length. If its
linear dimensions are increased four times, it must
fly twice as fast.
Now the power needed for the
minimum speed increases more rapidly than the weight
of the machine. So the larger aeroplane, which
weighs sixty-four times as much as the smaller,
needs one hundred and twenty-eight times its horse­
power to keep up. Applying the same principles to

ON BEING THE RIGHT SIZE

23

the birds, we find that the limit to their size is soon
reached. An angel whose muscles developed no more
power weight for weight than those of an eagle or a
pigeon would require a breast projecting for about four
feet to house the muscles engaged in working its wings,
while to economize in weight, its legs would have to be
reduced to mere stilts. Actually a large bird such as
an eagle or kite does not keep in the air mainly by
moving its wings. It is generally to be seen soaring,
that is to say balanced on a rising column of air. And
even soaring becomes more and more difficult with
increasing size. Were this not the case eagles might
be as large as tigers and as formidable to man as hostile
aeroplanes.
But it is time that we passed to some of the advantages
of size. One of the most obvious is that it enables one
to keep warm. All warm-blooded animals at rest lose
the same amount of heat from a unit area of skin, for
which purpose they need a food-supply proportional
to their surface and not to their weight. Five thousand
mice weigh as much as a man. Their combined surface
and food or oxygen consumption are about seventeen
times a man’s. In fact a mouse eats about one quarter
its own weight of food every day, which is mainly used
in keeping it warm. For the same reason small animals
cannot live in cold countries. In the arctic regions
there are no reptiles or amphibians, and no small
mammals. The smallest mammal in Spitzbergen is
the fox. The small birds fly away in the winter, while
the insects die, though their eggs can survive six
months or more of frost. The most successful
mammals are bears, seals, and walruses.

24

POSSIBLE WORLDS

Similarly, the eye is a rather inefficient organ until it
reaches a large size. The back of the human eye on
which an image of the outside world is thrown, and
which corresponds to the film of a camera, is composed
of a mosaic of ‘ rods and cones ’ whose diameter is
little more than a length of an average light wave.
Each eye has about half a million, and for two objects
to be distinguishable their images must fall on separate
rods or cones. It is obvious that with fewer but larger
rods and cones we should see less distinctly. If they
were twice as broad two points would have to be twice
as far apart before we could distinguish them at a given
distance. But if their size were diminished and their
number increased we should see no better. For it is
impossible to form a definite image smaller than a
wave-length of light. Hence a mouse’s eye is not a
small-scale model of a human eye. Its rods and cones
are not much smaller than ours, and therefore there
are far fewer of them. A mouse could not distinguish
one human face from another six feet away. In
order that they should be of any use at all the eyes
of small animals have to be much larger in propor­
tion to their bodies than our own. Large animals
on the other hand only require relatively small eyes,
and those of the whale and elephant are little larger
than our own.
For rather more recondite reasons the same general
principle holds true of the brain. If we compare the
brain-weights of a set of very similar animals such as
the cat, cheetah, leopard, and tiger, we find that as
we quadruple the body-weight the brain-weight is only
doubled. The larger animal with proportionately

ON BEING THE RIGHT SIZE

25

larger bones can economize on brain, eyes, and certain
other organs.
Such are a very few of the considerations which show
that for every type of animal there is an optimum size.
Yet although Galileo demonstrated the contrary more
than three hundred years ago, people still believe that
if a flea were as large as a man it could jump a thousand
feet into the air. As a matter of fact the height to
which an animal can jump is more nearly independent
of its size than proportional to it. A flea can jump
about two feet, a man about five. To jump a given
height, if we neglect the resistance of the air, requires
an expenditure of energy proportional to the jumper’s
weight. But if the jumping muscles form a constant
fraction of the animal’s body, the energy developed
per ounce of muscle is independent of the size, provided
it can be developed quickly enough in the small animal.
As a matter of fact an insect’s muscles, although they
can contract more quickly than our own, appear to be
less efficient; as otherwise a flea or grasshopper could
rise six feet into the air.
And just as there is a best size for every animal, so
the same is true for every human institution. In the
Greek type of democracy all the citizens could listen
to a series of orators and vote directly on questions of
legislation. Hence their philosophers held that a
small city was the largest possible democratic state.
The English invention of representative government
made a democratic nation possible, and the possibility
was first realized in the United States, and later
elsewhere. With the development of broadcasting it
has once more become possible for every citizen to

C

26

POSSIBLE WORLDS

listen to the political views of representative orators,
and the future may perhaps see the return of the
national state to the Greek form of democracy. Even
the referendum has been made possible only by the
institution of daily newspapers.
To the biologist the problem of socialism appears
largely as a problem of size. The extreme socialists
desire to run every nation as a single business concern.
I do not suppose that Henry Ford would find much
difficulty in running Andorra or Luxembourg on a
socialistic basis. He has already more men on his
pay-roll than their population. It is conceivable that
a syndicate of Fords, if we could find them, would
make Belgium Ltd. or Denmark Inc. pay their way.
But while nationalization of certain industries is an
obvious possibility in the largest of states, I find it no
easier to picture a completely socialized British Empire
or United States than an elephant turning somersaults
or a hippopotamus jumping a hedge.

V/"

DARWINISM TO-DAY
*

Darwinism is dead '
—Mr. H. B e l l o c .

T

H ERE is a singularly universal agreement
among biologists that evolution has occurred;
that is to say, that the organisms now living are
descended from ancestors from whom they differ very
considerably. One or two, including a distinguished
Jesuit entomologist, try to narrow down its scope, but
so far as I know none deny it. To do so it would be
necessary either to affirm that fossils were never alive,
but created as such, presumably by the devil as
stumbling blocks ; or that species were wiped out, and
their successors created, on a slightly fantastic scale.
For example, the members of one single genus of sea
urchins would have to have been destroyed and replaced
by barely distinguishable successors some dozens of
times during the course of the deposition of the English
chalk. This is a reductio ad absurdum of a view which
was tenable when only a few groups of extinct organ­
isms belonging to very different epochs were known.
But if evolution is admitted as a historical fact it can
still be explained in many different ways.
The iguanodon has been replaced by the sheep and
cow, the Austrian empire by the succession states.
Some few people will attribute both these events to the
direct intervention of the Almighty, a few others to the
mere interaction of atoms according to the laws of
physics and chemistry. Most will adopt some inter27

23

POSSIBLE WORLDS *

mediate point of view. We have therefore to ask our­
selves whether evolution shows signs of intelligent or
even instinctive guidance ; and if not, whether it can be
explained as the outcome of causes which we can see at
work around us, and whose action is fairly intelligible.
Popular ideas of evolution are greatly biased by the
fact that so much stress is laid on the ancestry of such
animals as men, horses, and birds, which are, according
to human standards of value, superior to their ancestors.
We are therefore inclined to regard progress as the rule
in evolution. Actually it is the exception, and for
every case of it there are ten of degeneration. It is
impossible to define this latter word accurately, but I
shall use it to cover cases where an organ or function
has been lost without any obvious corresponding gain,
and in particular the assumption of a parasitic or sessile
mode of life.
To take an obvious example, the birds were almost
certainly derived from a single ancestral species which
achieved flight. This achievement was followed by a
huge outbreak of variation which has given us the
thousands of bird species alive to-day. The essential
step was made once, and once only. But the power
of flight has been lost on many different occasions, for
example by the ostrich and its allies, the kiwi, the dodo,
the great auk, the penguin, the weka, the pakapo (a
flightless parrot), and so on.- Only the auk and penguin
converted their wings into flippers and may, perhaps,
be absolved from the stigma of degeneracy. Similarly,
hundreds of groups have independently taken to
parasitism, and in many cases very successfully. On
the average, every vertebrate harbours some dozens of

DARWINISM T®-DAY

29

parasitic worms, whose remote ancestors were freeliving. Blake asked somewhat doubtfully of the tiger,
1 Did he who made the lamb make thee ? *
The same question applies with equal force to the
tapeworm, and an affirmative answer would clearly
postulate a creator whose sense of values would not
commend him to the admiration of humanity.
But in spite of this he might be an intelligent being.
Now it is perhaps the most striking characteristic of an j
intelligent being that he learns from his mistakes. On ;
the hypothesis of an intelligent guidance of evolution
we should, therefore, expect that when a certain type of
animal had proved itself a failure by becoming extinct
the experiment of making it would not be tried re­
peatedly. Yet this has often happened. Both reptiles
and mammals have on numerous occasions given rise
to giant clumsy types with from one to six short horns
on the head. One remembers Triceratops, Dinoceras,
Titanotherium, and others. Not only did they all
become extinct, but they did not even, like some other
extinct animal types, flourish over very long periods.
And the rhinoceros, which represents the same scheme
among living animals, was rapidly becoming extinct
even before the invention of the rifle. But all these
animals were evolved independently. Among the
titanotheres alone, eleven distinct lines increased in
size, developed horns, and perished.
Two or three such attempts would have convinced an
intelligent demiurge of the futility of the process.
That particular type of mistake is almost the rule in
vertebrate evolution. Again and again during Mesozoic

3°

POSSIBLE WORLDS

times, great groups of reptiles blossomed out into an
inordinate increase of bulk, a wild exuberance of scale
and spine, which invariably ended in their extinction.
They doubtless enjoyed the satisfaction of squashing
a number of our own ancestors and those of the existing
reptilian groups, who seem to have been relatively
small and meek creatures.
It would appear, then, that there is no need to postu­
late a directive agency at all resembling our own minds,
behind evolution. The question now remains whether
it can be explained by the so far known laws of nature.
In the discussion which follows we do not, of course,
raise the questions as to how life originated, if it ever
did ; or how far the existence of an intelligible world
implies the presence behind it of a mind.
Darwin recognized two causes for evolution, namely,
the transmission to the descendants of characters
acquired by their ancestors during the course of their
lives, and selection. He laid more stress on the latter
and was the first to point out its great importance as a
cause of evolution ; but—as might be noted by certain
anti-Darwinian writers, were they to read Chapter I.
of the Origin o f Species—he was far from neglecting
the former. Nevertheless, thanks in the main to
Weissmann, the majority of biologists to-day doubt
whether acquired characters are transmitted to the
offspring. A vast amount of work has been done to
demonstrate the possible effect on an organ of its use
or disuse throughout many generations. To take a
recent example, Payne bred Drosophila—a fly which
tends to move towards light—in darkness for seventyfive generations. At the end of that time no visible

DARWINISM TO-DAY

3i

change had occurred in the eyes; and when one
thousand such flies were given the opportunity of
moving toward a light, no change was found from the
normal, either in the proportion which moved within
a minute, or in the average rate at which they moved.
The majority of the experiments on the inheritance
of the effects of use and disuse lead to equally negative
results.
Some of the apparently successful experiments can
be explained by selection. For example, wheat taken
from Scandinavia to Central Europe and brought back
again after some years was found to germinate earlier
than its ancestors, and the results were attributed to
the effects of earlier germination in a warmer climate.
But whereas in Scandinavia the earliest germinating
shoots would tend to be nipped by frost, in a warmer
climate they would get a start over the later and be
represented in greater numbers in each successive
generation. Hence, if there was any inheritable
variation in time of sprouting, selection would occur,
and the wheat as a whole would sprout earlier.
Nevertheless a certain number of cases remain which
can hardly be explained away in this manner, nor by
the transmission of micro-organisms. It must be
remembered that, however many experiments fail, it
is always possible that the effects of use and disuse
may be impressed on a species at a rate not susceptible
of experimental verification, yet rapid enough to be of
importance in geological time. But the acceptance of
this principle, and in particular of the corollary that
instinct is in part inherited memory, raises difficulties
at least as great as it solves. The most perfect and

32

POSSIBLE WORLDS

complex instincts are those of the workers of social
insect species, such as bees and termites. Now a
worker bee is descended almost if not quite exclusively
from queens and drones. None, or extremely few, of
her ancestors have been workers. If therefore memory
were inherited, the instincts of workers should slowly
alter in such a way that their behaviour came to
resemble that of sexual forms, and insect societies
should be inherently unstable—whereas in fact they
appear to date back for at least twenty million years.
The case for natural selection is far stronger. Let
us first be clear what is meant by this phrase. Among
the offspring of the same parents variations occur.
Some of these are due to accident or disease and are not
transmitted to the next generation, others are inherit­
able. For example, a single litter of rabbits often
contains both coloured and white members. If the
whites are bred together, they produce only white
young. The coloured will produce a majority like
themselves and a proportion of whites. That is to
say, both characters are more or less markedly inherited.
I f now the animals bearing one inheritable character
produce on the whole more offspring which survive
to maturity in the next generation, the proportion of
the population bearing that character will tend to
increase. The phrase ‘ survival of the fittest ’ is often
rather misleading. It is types and not individuals
that survive.
Of two female deer, the one which habitually
abandons its young on the approach of a beast of prey
is likely to outlive one which defends them ; but as
the latter will leave more offspring, her type survives

*

DARWINISM TO-DAY

33

even if she loses her life. Hence, in so far as courage
and maternal instinct are inherited they will tend to
survive, even if they often lead to the death of the
individual. Of course, the fact that nature favours
altruistic conduct in certain cases does not mean that
biological and moral values are in general the same.
As Huxley pointed out long ago, this is by no means
the case, and an attempt to equate moral and biological
values is a somewhat crude form of nature worship.
But that is not to say that the moralist can neglect
biological facts.
The assertion is still sometimes made that no one has
ever seen natural selection at work. It is therefore
perhaps worth giving in some detail a case recently
described by Harrison. About 1800 a large wood in
the Cleveland district of Yorkshire containing pine
and birch was divided into two by a stretch of heath.
In 1885 t^ie pines in one division were replaced by
birches, while in the other the birches were almost
entirely ousted by pines. In consequence the moth
Oporabia autumnata, which inhabits both woods, has
been placed in two different environments. In both
woods a light and a dark variety occur, but in the pine
wood over ninety-six per cent, are now dark, in the birch
wood only fifteen per cent. This is not due to the
direct effect of the environment, for the dark pine wood
race became no lighter after feeding the caterpillars
on birch trees in captivity for three generations, nor can
the light form be darkened by placing this variety on
pines. The reason for the difference was discovered
on collecting the wings of moths found lying about in
the pine wood, whose owners had been eaten by owls,

34

POSSIBLE WORLDS

bats, and night-jars. Although there were more
than twenty-five living dark moths to each light one,
a majority of the wings found were light coloured.
The whiter moths, which show up against the dark
pines, are being exterminated, and in a few more years
natural selection will have done its work and the pine
wood will be inhabited entirely by dark coloured
insects. Naturalists are at last beginning to realize
the importance of observations of this kind, but they
require a combination of field observations with experi­
ment such as is too rarely made.
Now it is clear that natural selection can only act
when it finds variations to act on. It cannot create
them, and critics have therefore objected that it cannot
really be said to create a new species. It would follow
from this line of reasoning that a sculptor who hews a
statue from a block of marble has not really made the
statue. He has merely knocked away some chips of
stone which happened to be round i t ! Natural
selection is creative in the same sense as sculpture. It*v
needs living organisms exhibiting inheritable variations'
asits raw material. Itis not responsible for the existence
of organisms, but it remains to be shown that without
it organisms would display any tendency to evolve.
Of course, if variation is biased in some one direction,
a new problem arises. Variation has been adequately
studied only during the last twenty years, and it is
necessary to digress on the results of this study. Most
inheritable variations which have been investigated are
transmitted according to Mendel’s laws, except that
complete dominance is rather rare. That is to say,
they are due to the handing on from parent to offspring

DARWINISM TO-DAY

35

of a unit which we call a gene, and wrhich is a material
structure, located at a definite point in the nucleus of
the cell and dividing at each nuclear division. Char­
acters which appear to vary continuously generally
prove on analysis to be due to the interaction of a
number of such genes. Now apart from non-inheritabl^‘ fluctuations ’ due to the environment, there are
two distinct types of variation. The first and common­
est kind is caused by a mere reshuffling of genes. If
we mate a black and white rabbit with a blue angora
(long-haired) doe, the offspring, if the parents were pure
bred, will be black short-haired rabbits ; but among
their children, if they are mated together, will appear
an outburst of variation. Black, blue, black and white,
blue and white rabbits will appear, some of each kind
having short hair, some long, due to a reshuffling of the
genes contributed by the parents This sort of varia­
tion obeys the laws of chance, and selection will only
be able to pick out one most favoured combination, say
short-haired blue rabbits. Almost all variation in the
human race is due to this cause.
r But there is another and far rarer kind of variation,
known as mutation, which consists in the origin of a
new gene. I might breed a million rabbits without
getting more than a dozen or so well-marked mutations.
But the sort of mutations I should expect would be on
jnore or less familiar lines. I should not be surprised
if I got an outbreak of hereditary baldness, or came on
a new race of rabbit with pink eyes and a yellow coat,
for these types have arisen in mice ; but I should be
dumbfounded if one of my rabbits developed hereditary
horns, and still more so if feathers were to appear!

36

POSSIBLE WORLDS

As a matter of fact, there is a marked parallelism be­
tween the new genes which have arisen in nearly related
species ; and this is intelligible because the structure
of their nuclei is similar, and the changes likely to
occur in them are therefore also similar. New genes
appear to arise as the result of accidents—that is to say,
causes which are no doubt determined by the laws of
physics, but are no more the concern of the biologist
than those governing the fall of a chimney-pot, which
has been known to alter the shape of a human head,
though not in an inheritable manner. Mutations have
been provoked in mice and flies by mild injury of the
germ plasm with X-rays. The vast majority of
mutations are harmful, resulting in an impairment of
some structure or function, and are eliminated by
natural selection. Others are neutral. In a fly of
which some tens of millions have been bred in labora­
tories, over four hundred mutations have occurred,
some of them on many different occasions Only two
have yielded types as healthy as the normal. Ad­
vantageous mutations are still rarer—that is why
evolution is so slow. But they do occur.
On a Sumatran tobacco plantation a new type of
tobacco plant, due to a mutation inherited on Mendelian
lines, arose suddenly. It was found that the new
variety, though no better off than its ancestors in
Sumatra, gave distinctly better crops in a cool climate.
If it had arisen in the wild state it would have enabled
the tobacco plant to extend its northerly range and
form a new subspecies. It must be remembered that
a mutation which in most circumstances would be
disadvantageous, may be useful in a special environ­

DARWINISM TO-DAY

37

ment. Wingless varieties of normally winged insects
are common on small oceanic islands, though by no
means universal. Mutations causing loss of wings
are also common in the laboratory. It is clear that
after an island has been colonized by a winged insect
carried by the wind from an adjoining continent,
hereditary loss of wings, if not accompanied by de­
generation of other structures, will be of value in pre­
venting its successors from being blown out to sea.
It is clear, then, that in mutations of this type we have
a means by which subspecies may be formed in nature,
and there is strong evidence that they have been so
formed. For example, the three varieties of the black
rat, which have different geographical distributions,
differ from one another by single genes quite similar
to those which arise by mutation in the laboratory.
But there is no evidence at all that mutations are biased
in a direction advantageous to the species. The
possibilities of mutation do, however, limit the direc­
tions in which a species can evolve. Whether it will
do so along any of the lines thus laid open to it depends
on natural selection. In some cases, as among flower­
ing plants, a good many species seem to be neither
better nor worse off than their ancestors—and therefore
to owe their origin primarily to variation. However,
a slight change in leaf or flower form can hardly be
called evolution.
In many cases a change in one character will only be
of advantage to a species if some other varies simul­
taneously in the same direction. This has been used
as an argument against natural selection. But in the
first place, although one gene may affect one structure

38

POSSIBLE WORLDS

only or mainly, others will modify a whole group.
Thus of the genes which alter the wing of the fly
Drosophila some have little effect elsewhere, some also
affect the balancers (rudiments of the second wing
pair), others the legs, and so on. A mutation will,
therefore, often be found to kill the two birds with one
stone, so to speak. Should this be impossible, selection
can still work, i .
Suppose it is to the advantage of an animal that two
structures A and B—say bones—should increase to­
gether, but that variations in them are inherited in­
dependently. We can classify the animals according as
the two are of less than the average size, greater than
the average or about equal to it. So that we get nine
classes in all. Those in which the two are unequally
developed will be at a disadvantage, only where both
are increased will there be any gain. Putting the
number of the normal type surviving at 100, we should
get survival rates somewhat as follows :—
A=
AA+
IOI
98
B+
96
B=
98
100
98
B96
98
99
where the figure 101 represents the fact that animals
with both A and B increased have a one per cent,
better chance of survival than the normal. It will be
seen that the A— and B — groups will tend to die out,
so that both structures will increase in size.
To my mind the most serious argument against
selection on these lines is that it does not explain the
origin of interspecific sterility, except where it is due
to external causes such as differences of size or breeding

DARWINISM TO-DAY

39

time. It is on these grounds that Bateson, a thorough
believer in evolution, has criticized natural selection.
But I have pointed out elsewhere,1 a difference of a
single gene between two animals may cause the produc­
tion of an excess of one sex on crossing, as occurs in
fowl-pheasant and cow-bison crosses ; and several such
genes may well cause complete sterility
Moreover, there is a second type of inheritable varia­
tion, leading to a change in the chromosome number,
which causes inter-varietal sterility, often without a
very marked change in external characteristics. This
is quite common in plants, less so in animals. Al­
though, therefore, the problem of interspecific sterility
is serious, we are already well on the way to solving it.
We must now turn to the palaeontological evidence.
In a few groups we can trace the course of evolution in
some detail. Thus we know over five thousand species
of ammonites, and nearly two hundred of extinct
horses. In the horses, advance took place along several
parallel lines, only one of which has left living descend­
ants. In each line the toes were gradually reduced
from three to one, while the molar teeth increased in
length and complexity. When in the past we find two
different species competing in the same area, one is
usually further on the road towards a single toe, the
other towards a long molar. We know that these two
characters were of value, because we find fossils in
which the thin lateral toes—reduced to mere vestiges
in the modern horse—had been broken during the
animal’s life, as shown by subsequent heali ng. We also
find that in the more primitive types the teeth were
1 Journal of Genetics, vol. 12.

40

POSSIBLE WORLDS

often worn down to the roots, leading to death from
starvation. Hence for two species to compete equally
their advantages in these two respects must be balanced,
since species combining both advantages—as does the
modern horse— would oust those possessing one only.
Evolution in the cases where the evidence is most
complete is known to have been very gradual. Such
large changes as those produced by most genes so far
studied were rare in evolution. This is natural enough.
Geneticists have concentrated their attention on genes
which produce striking effects. Now, however, that
they are beginning to look for those causing very small
effects only, and often apparently continuous variation,
they are finding them.
A more serious objection is that rudimentary char­
acters sometimes appear which can be of no use to
their owners, but only become so on further develop­
ment some thousands of years later. This is almost
certainly true and is at first sight fatal to the selection
hypothesis. But it can be met along several lines. A
change in one organ, as Darwin pointed out, generally
carries with it a change in others. Hence an increase
in the complexity of one molar brought about by natural
selection may cause the beginning of a new cusp in its
neighbour. This cusp will at first be useless, but as it
increases selection will begin to act on it also, so that
the process will gather momentum until we arrive at
the extremely complex grinders of the elephant or horse.
Moreover, we can trace just the same gradual begin­
nings of apparently quite useless organs, the excessive
skeletal outgrowths which have been the harbingers of
extinction in many animal groups, both vertebrate and

DARWINISM TO-DAY

41

invertebrate. If we knew more about these creatures’
soft parts we could perhaps elucidate these problems.
Some light is thrown on them by recent work of
J. S. Huxley and others. They have shown that, in
certain animals, growth of the whole body leads to
disproportionate growth of one part. Thus in a
group of crabs, whenever the body doubles in weight,
the large claw increases three times, until it finally
becomes almost as large as the rest of the animal. Any
cause promoting growth of the whole body, therefore,
leads to a disproportionate growth of the claw. And
such a cause is to be found in competition within the
species, more especially the competition between males
for females by fighting, as is common among mammals,
rather than display, as seems to be the custom with
many birds.
Still the possibility of some deeper underlying cause
of evolution is often suggested by the study of a whole
great group, such as the ammonites, which furnish the
best available material, for the following reasons :
They were sea-beasts, hence their shells were preserved
far better than the skeletons of land animals. The
number of known fossil species is nearly double that of
living mammals. Their shells tell us of their develop­
ment, for the whorls formed by the young animal are
preserved in the middle of the complete structure.
Finally, their history is over. The last of them died
in Eocene times, about sixty million years ago.
The earliest forms were often not coiled at all and
always had very simple patterns on the sutures between
different shell chambers ; and their descendants still
made these simple patterns in the embryonic stages.
D

42

POSSIBLE WORLDS

In the great ages of ammonites during the first twothirds of the Mesozoic era, the most complex ornamen­
tation was generally made by the adult animal. But as
time went on, it showed a tendency to slur its work.
The most complex patterns were made by the halfgrown creatures, and in Cretaceous times the adult
shells were sometimes even uncoiled, as in the very
earliest forms. Now this ‘ second childhood ’ occurred
independently in some scores of different lines of
descent, always as a prelude to extinction. In other
groups the same phenomenon may be observed, though
the stigmata of degeneration are different.
This degenerative process is often described as the
old age of a race, but we must remember that this
phrase is only a metaphor. Some very obvious
explanations for it are as follows :—
A step in evolution in any animal group is followed
by an evolutionary advance on the part of their parasites.
When our fish ancestors came out of the water, they
lost their louse-like crustacean parasites ; and it was
only after some time that insects can have taken their
places ; and later still that micro-organisms such as
those of malaria and typhus were evolved, which pass
part of their life-cycle in insects and part in vertebrates.
So the apparent degeneration of a group may only mean
that evolution of their enemies has caught up with their
own. Again, specialization—while it leads to tem­
porary prosperity—exposes a species to extinction or
at least to very unfavourable conditions when its
environment alters. A small change of climate will
lead to a disappearance of forests over a wide area,
and with them of most of the animals highly adapted

DARWINISM TO-DAY

43

to life in them, such as squirrels, woodpeckers, wood­
eating beetles, and so forth. A few, like our own
ancestors, adapted themselves to a new environment;
but the majority, and all the more highly specialized,
died out, the new population of the area being recruited
from among the less well adapted forms. Also, as
pointed out above, competition within the species, man
included, may lead to results desirable for a few indi­
viduals, but most undesirable for the species as a whole.
To my mind the closest analogy to the evolution of
a given group is the history of the art and literature
of a civilization. The clumsy primitive forms are
replaced by a great variety of types. Different schools
arise and decline more or less rapidly. Finally a
period of decline sets in, characterized by archaism
like that of the last ammonites. And it is difficult not
to compare some of the fantastic animals of the declin­
ing periods of a race with the work of Miss Sitwell,
or the clumsy but impressive with that of Epstein.
The history of an animal group shows no more evidence
of planning than does that of a national literature.
But both show orderly sequences which are already
pretty capable of explanation.
To sum up, no satisfactory cause of evolution other
than the action of natural selection on fortuitous
variations has ever been put forward. It is by no
means clear that natural selection will explain all the
facts. But the other suggested causes are unverified
hypotheses, while selection can be observed by those
who take sufficient trouble. Some of the alleged causes,
moreover, are difficult to reconcile with the facts of
palaeontology and genetics. The evidence as to the

44

POSSIBLE WORLDS

earth’s age from radioactive minerals shows that about
six hundred million years have elapsed since the
first known fossils were laid down, and perhaps twice
as long since life appeared on the earth. This is a
larger time than the early supporters of Darwin
demanded, and seems long enough to satisfy any
quantitative objections as to the slowness of evolu­
tion. There are qualitative objections, such as those
connected with the origin of consciousness. But
consciousness arises anew in every human being.
Its first origin on the earth presents no more and no
less mystery than its last.
Finally, no facts definitely irreconcilable with
Darwinism have been discovered in the sixty years
and more that have elapsed since the formulation of
Darwin’s views. Such a fact would be, for example,
a convergence in the course of geological time of
members of two or more groups to form a single
species. Actually, we observe the convergence of
forms as we go down and not up a geological series.
And there have been quite enough anti-Darwinian
palaeontologists to have seized on such a case had it
existed.
As an explanation of evolution Darwin’s ideas still
hold the field to-day, and subsequent work has necessi­
tated less modification of them than of those of his
contemporaries in physics and chemistry. Just as
physiology has found no case of interference with the
order of nature as revealed by physics and chemistry,
the study of evolution has brought to light no principle
which cannot be observed in the experience of ordinary
life and successfully submitted to the analysis of reason.

ENZYM ES

T

HE chemical processes which take place in a
living animal or plant are just as characteristic
as its form or behaviour. Yet, taken one at a
time, they can often be imitated by artificial means.
Rhumbler made an artificial ‘ cell ’ which would absorb
a glass thread covered with sealing-wax, remove the wax
and spit out the thread. Hammond made a motor ‘ dog *
with selenium ‘ retinae ’ which would follow a light or
a white object. And similarly we can imitate many of
the chemical reactions which take place in the cell,
though often we require rather violent means, such as
heat or the application of strong acids. What is
characteristic of life is not the individual details of
structure or behaviour, but the way in which they
cohere to form a self-regulating and self-preserving
whole.
When we succeed in investigating the details of a
chemical process in the cell we generally, if not always,
find that it is determined by the presence of an enzyme
or ferment, which can be more or less completely
separated from the rest of the cell and is not alive. In
favourable cases we can break up the cell, and, by a
series of processes not utterly unlike those employed
in extracting the rarer metals from their ores, except
that no heat is used, obtain one of the enzymes in a
fairly pure state. A solution of cane sugar in water is
stable, but if we warm it with a strong acid it breaks

45

46

POSSIBLE WORLDS

up into the mixture of sugars found in honey. This
can also be done by enzymes found in plant cells, the
saliva of bees, and our own intestines. The most
active enzyme preparations, when dissolved in water,
will break up ten times their weight of sugar per
second and, as far as we know, will continue to
do so indefinitely. Certainly they can break up
more than a million times their own weight without
wearing out.
The early workers on enzymes believed that a little
‘ vital force ’ resided in these particles, a belief analogous
to that of primitive men in the magical nature of their
own tools. But enzymes are certainly not alive. They
do not reproduce themselves nor adapt themselves to
changes in their environment. They are simply the
tools of the cell. Their action is similar to that of
inorganic catalysts, such as finely divided nickel or
platinum, which are used in industry to speed up many
chemical reactions, or to allow them to occur at a lower
temperature than would be possible in their absence.
And although we have not yet been able to make an
enzyme artificially, and shall not be able to do so for
many years, we are gradually elucidating their chemical
composition. Many of them would seem to be pro­
teins, and it has been suggested that the protein of
certain cells consists almost wholly of enzymes.
One of the most characteristic things about an enzyme
is its specificity. The enzyme which digests cane
sugar will not touch milk sugar or malt sugar, and
conversely. Enzymes have been compared to keys
which will only open certain locks. One might go
further and say that they are Yale keys. Many mole­

ENZYMES

47

cules which are attacked by them are asymmetrical,
as is shown by the asymmetry of their crystals, and the
fact that their solutions rotate the plane of polarized
light passed through them. We can often make the
mirror images of these molecules, and we then find
that the corresponding enzymes will only attack them
slowly if at all. On going through the looking-glass,
Alice would have found her digestive enzymes of no
more use on the looking-glass sugars than her Yale
key on the looking-glass locks. This asymmetrical
behaviour is not, however, peculiar to enzymes. It
has been found to hold good for the action of other
catalysts, including some synthetic substances
Our knowledge of enzymes has so far had rather little
direct application. Those first studied were the ones
found in digestive juices, which break up our food into
readily absorbable substances, and are unique in that
their action normally takes place outside the cell where
they are formed. Preparations of these can readily
be made, and one of them, rennet, has long been
employed in dairies to clot milk. But no very great
success has attended the treatment of various forms
of digestive trouble by administering enzymes. The
main reason for this is that indigestion is seldom due
to a shortage of them. So at the present day, apart
from rennet and an extract of the pancreas used in the
partial digestion of hides to furnish certain kinds of
leather, preparations of the digestive enzymes are of
more benefit to their sellers than their buyers. For
example, a mixture containing pepsin is widely
advertised as a tooth-paste, although pepsin is
inactive in such fluids as saliva, a fairly strong acid

48

POSSIBLE WORLDS

being needed to make proteins susceptible to its
action.
Several diseases and abnormalities are due to the
absence of an enzyme, but we cannot cure albinism,
for example, by injecting tyrosinase as we cure diabetes
with insulin. For insulin appears to have a small
enough molecule to allow it to get through the walls of
the cells, whilst enzyme molecules are too large for
this to be at all easy, and they seem generally to be
manufactured on the spot where they will be used. So
far, therefore, our efforts in medicine are directed
rather to enabling such enzymes as exist in the cell to
act more efficiently than to supplying them in their
absence. We are now, however, beginning to study
the enzymes not only of bacteria but of cancer cells,
which seem to be slightly but significantly different
from those of normal tissues.
In industry we generally find it better to use enzymes
in the cell than out of it. Yeast makes alcohol from
sugar much more rapidly than does any extract con­
taining the three or four enzymes concerned in the
process. But it does a good deal more. The yeast
cell breaks up proteins as well as sugar, and from these
it forms the fusel oil which not only gives an alcoholic
liquor much of its characteristic taste and smell, but
also in many cases makes it a great deal more poisonous
than its alcohol content would lead one to suppose.
It is quite possible, therefore, that if the liquor trade
has a future it may be on the lines of utilizing enzyme
preparations rather than living yeast cells. When
yeast cells are given cane sugar, they break it up into
simpler sugars before making these latter into alcohol.

ENZYMES

49

The enzyme which they employ for this purpose may
easily be separated from those concerned in fermenta­
tion. Now the new sugars formed are both more
tenacious when wet, and more retentive of water, than
cane sugar, and therefore better material for making
sweets. So the use of yeast invertase is spreading in
the American candy trade, and if prohibition has
raised the consumption of candy, it has not been
wholly disadvantageous to the yeast plant.
Perhaps the biggest field for the commercial applica­
tion of enzymes lies elsewhere. Plants make sugar
from carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight. A few, like
the potato, store most of this in starch, or some other
form that we can digest. But the majority of them
convert it into cellulose, the main constituent of wood.
They commonly make a little sugar to attract bees or
birds, but man is the first mammal who has seriously
befriended plants, and agriculture is so recent that
only a few of the more enterprising among them have
had time to vary so as to bribe him with food. The
cow and horse can no more digest cellulose than our­
selves. No animal nearer to us than a snail can make
the enzymes requisite for even a partial digestion of it.
But an ungulate is a co-operative society. It consists
of the mammal which forms the fasade, and some
millions of millions of bacteria engaged in breaking
down cellulose. The products which they form from
it are largely digestible by the horse or cow, but would
be unpalatable, if not harmful, to man. However, one
of the intermediate stages in their production from
cellulose is an easily digestible sugar. When—not if—
we can separate the cellulose-splitting enzymes from

5°

POSSIBLE WORLDS

those which break up the sugar further, we shall be
in a position to convert wood pulp or hay quantitatively
into human food.
This is one of the facts which render dubious all
prophecies as to over-population. The upper limit
to human numbers is not set by any facts of nature,
but by human ignorance and inadaptability

1

\y'

VITAM INS

A

V ER Y large amount of nonsense is written on
the subject of vitamins, and some good purpose
Lmay be served by attempting to summarize what
is known at the moment of writing, and may be out of
date when this article is read. For a long time in the
past it had been understood that scurvy was due to a
special type of monotonous diet, and could be cured
by small amounts of certain fruits and vegetables, or
larger quantities of fresh meat. Later the same was
proved for beri-beri and suspected for rickets and other
diseases. Meanwhile the problem of the ideal diet
had been largely solved in the nineteenth century. It
was shown that one of the first necessities was a suffi­
cient fuel value in the food. When burnt it must be
able to provide the energy needed by the body. But
only a few substances, namely, ^carbohydrates, fats,
and proteins, will serve as energy sources, and nortoo
m ucirm nsr be fat. (A certain minimum of proteins,
which must be of the right quality, is needed for
repairs of the tissues. ^Elements like iron and calcium
must also be present in' small amounts.
In the early twentieth century the problem was
attacked from two points of view. First of all, a
number of workers dealt with the question of what had
to be added to an otherwise complete diet in order to
prevent a given deficiency disease. This may be called
the analytical method. The converse or synthetic

t\

61

52

POSSIBLE WORLDS

method, of which Hopkins was the most successful
exponent, asked the more ambitious question, ‘ Can
we make a complete diet out of substances of known
chemical composition, and, if not, what must we add
to it to make it satisfactory ? ’ These lines of research
have now converged. Besides the discovery of the
vitamins they have led, among other things, to a
knowledge of what chemical properties in a protein are
needed to make it a satisfactory constituent of a diet,
and to the proof that most cases of goitre are due to
iodine deficiency, while traces of zinc are almost
certainly necessary in the diet.
It now seems that besides proteins, carbohydrates,
fats and inorganic substances, at least five rather com­
plex organic bodies are needed. Hopkins called them
accessory food factors. Funk, who had obtained a
preparation containing a good deal of one of them and
believed that he had got it pure, called it vitamine; and
this name not only caught on, but was applied to the
other accessory factors.
The general method of research is as follows. Two
groups of very similar animals, usually rats, are fed
on diets which differ in only one particular, say, the
addition to one of them of a little killed yeast; and the
difference between the two groups is observed. The
group on the adequate diet may grow faster than the
others, form better bones, have more young, or what
not. It is rarely necessary to push the experiment so
far as to lead to the death of the group on a deficient
diet, and they often look quite healthy and behave
normally. Indeed, since so many pet rats receive very
unsatisfactory food the most striking thing to a casual

VITAMINS

53

observer may be the robust health of the animals on a
really adequate diet. When the original experiment has
been repeated and confirmed, and the exact amount of
the added substance needed per rat per day has been
determined, one proceeds to hunt down its essential
constituent. ‘ Can it be replaced by its ashes ? ’ we
first ask, and when the answer is ‘ No ’ we are sure that
we are not concerned with an inorganic substance, such
as iron or iodine. ‘ Is it soluble ? ’ The answer so
far has always been ‘ Y es,’ if we choose the right
solvent; in certain cases, water, in others, ether or
some other liquid which readily takes up oily substances.
We now try to purify it. For example, the substance
in cod-liver oil which cures rickets is left behind when
99 per cent, or more of the oil is converted into soap
and glycerine by heating it with alkali. We can thus
obtain a preparation many hundred times richer in the
antirachitic substance than was the original cod-liver
oil. Sometimes the purification may show that where
we thought we were dealing with a single substance we
have really got two. For example, several workers
obtained liquids very rich in the substance which
prevents the convulsive seizures due to polyneuritis
which occur in its absence. The cruder preparations
of this substance always contain a substance (vitamin
B2) whose absence causes loss ofL^yeighk But the most
active antineuntiiT^ltJpar^ons^ aSTnot prevent this
loss, so it is concluded that the antineuritic vitamin is
not vitamin B2. From such experiments we arrive at
the following provisional list of vitamins. The lettering
of A, B, and C is McCollum’s, and is generally agreed
on. That of the remainder is still under discussion.

54

POSSIBLE WORLDS

/

A is an oily substance found in many natural fats
and oils, cod-liver oil being particularly rich in it. Its
absence leads to failure of growth in the young, and in
both young and old to a tendency to inflammation of
the eyes, and increased liability to various diseases.
Night blindness is often an early symptom of its
absence. It is slowly destroyed by cooking.

I
;

Vitamin B2 is found in a variety of foods, especially
in certain portions of wheat and rice grains. Its
absence causes failure of growth or loss of weight.
Pellagra, a disease common in populations living mainly
on maize, is probably due to an inadequate supply of it.
I It is soluble in water.
?
C is widely distributed, but certain fresh vegetables
|7‘ and fruit are particularly rich in it. It is soluble in
V water, and rather easily oxidized, henoe the emphasis
on freshness. Its absence causes scurvy, but a good
many infantile troubles are also due to a shortage of it.
D is a waxy substance, long confused with A, and
associated with it in nature. Both, for example, are
found in cod-liver oil. We can make it in our own
r \ bodies, provided that we get enough ultra-violet
‘ light ’ on our skins.
As, however, not only clothes, hats, and fogs, but
even glass windows screen us from this component of
the sun’s rays, it is safer to be sure that our diet con­
tains the vitamin. Children and young animals kept
in inadequate light without it generally develop rickets,
but may not do so if the amounts and proportions of
calcium and phosphorus, the bone-forming elements,
in the diet are kept exactly right. Vitamin D is formed
by the action of ultra-violet radiation on ergosterol, a

VITAMINS

SS

substance of known composition, and is the only
vitamin yet obtained in a fairly pure state. Apparently
this is the only dietary factor that is made by radiation,
for no amount of sunlight will make up for the absence
of any of the others.
E is also of an oily character, and is present in various
foods, particularly wheat bran. In its absence rats
grow up and live healthily, but they cannot reproduce.
They can neither become fathers nor mothers. Such
at least is the statement of its American discoverers,
Evans, Bishop, Burr, and Sure, and their work has now
Been repeated irtTKis counfry^but at least one observer
in the United States has obtained a contrary result.
The existence of this vitamin cannot therefore be
regarded as absolutely proved.
The antineuritic substance which accompanies B>,
and has very similiar properties to it, is now generally
called Bj. In the absence of Bx and B 2 the very
serious tropical disease of beri-beri develops in
man, and the ‘ war dropsy ’ of Central Europe was
probably due to the same cause, but until these sub­
stances have been more satisfactorily separated it is
not quite clear which of the two is the main preven­
tative of any given complaint. There is further evidence
which makes it quite likely that the above list is not
exhaustive.
It is customary to conclude an article on this subject
with an admonition to consume more fruit, fresh vege­
tables, or raw milk. The custom would be laudable if
vitamin deficiency were the only fault to be found with
our diets. But, as a matter of fact, about half the
human race at the present moment is suffering from

5^

POSSIBLE WORLDS

partial starvation, and the first requisite for them is to
eat more of the cheapest food they can get, vitamins
or no vitamins. And among those who read this
article I suspect that for every one who is seriously the
worse for vitamin deficiency there is another suffering
from constipation due to a too digestible diet, which
leaves no residue of husks and fibres, and three or four
victims of bacteria and worms which they have absorbed
with their food.
To take a simple example, I would sooner have my
child run the risk of rickets or infantile scurvy from
over-boiled milk than of tuberculosis from drinking it
raw. I refer here to British milk—American is less
tuberculous. Again, raw vegetables, though full of
vitamin C, are an admirable vehicle for the typhoid
bacillus, which is commoner in the United States than
England. And they are so liable to contamination
with the eggs of parasitic worms that the Strasbourg
International Congress on cancer, impressed by the
proof that worms may produce that disease, issued a
perhaps unduly solemn warning against the consump­
tion of salad. While, therefore, we cannot neglect
the teachings of bio-chemistry in our choice of diet, we
shall do ourselves no good if in the attempt to be up
to date we neglect the lessons to be learnt from
parasitology and bacteriology.
But if we are sure that our food is uncontaminated,
and that there is enough of it, an adequate supply of
vitamins is the next consideration. And nowhere is
this consideration more urgent than in the case of
infants, who can ask for more, but not for better, food

t

MAN AS A SEA BEAST

K

IN G S and editors commonly speak in the first
person plural. If vve all habitually did so, and
thought so, vve should understand a good deal
more about how we work. For each of us is a com­
munity of about a hundred million million cells, whose
co-operation is our life. This co-operation is brought
about in part by the nervous system, and its beauty
and delicacy is apt to blind us to the fact that a great
many cells—in fact the majority—are not supplied
with nerve fibres. Their behaviour is determined by
two things, the mechanical and electrical forces exerted
on them by their neighbours, and the chemical com­
position of the fluid that surrounds them or is given to
them by their colleagues. How great is the import­
ance of the non-nervous influences is shown by the
fact that the other parts of an embryo develop perfectly
before any nerves grow out to them from the brain and
spinal cord, and will continue to do so nearly normally
even if the nervous system does not develop at all. If
we may use the well-known comparison of the body
and the state we may say that most of our own citizens
are not state employees but act from economic and
other motives without any direct orders from the central
government. What is more, many of the cells in the
brain, the seat of government, are alert to the smallest
changes in their chemical environment; and react to
them by transmitting orders for some such activity as

58

POSSIBLE WORLDS

an increase or decrease of the breathing, which will
bring their environment back to their normal con­
ditions.
If we observe single cells, such as the protozoa,
bacteria, or the diatoms and other microscopic plants
in sea water which are the ultimate source of almost all
the nourishment of sea beasts, we find that they are
often remarkably hard to keep alive. The tiniest
changes in the fluid around them, especially in its
alkalinity, will kill them or greatly alter their behaviour.
Indeed they are quite as dependent on the presence
of the right amount of potassium and calcium salts
around them as on that of oxygen or food. As a
matter of fact they spend a great deal of their energy
in overcoming the defects of their surroundings. For
example, water almost invariably leaks through the
skins of fresh-water protozoa, and they require a
special organ, the contractile vacuole, to expel it.
Placed in salt water they only empty this quite rarely
to get rid of waste products.
Our own cells are much more efficient than protozoa
at their particular functions, but they require an
extremely constant and artificial environment. It is
the business of various organs, such as the lungs, liver,
intestine, kidneys, and thyroid gland to keep it con­
stant. In the same way a civilized man is generally far
more efficient at his particular vocation than a savage,
but only on condition that most of his needs are met
by bakers, builders, tailors and so forth. Our internal
environment is the blood, or rather its fluid part, the
plasma in which the corpuscles are suspended. Some
of the activities concerned in its regulation escape our

MAN AS A SEA BEAST

59

consciousness. For example if the amount of sugar
in it becomes too small, the liver makes fresh sugar
from a starchlike substance called glycogen which is
stored in the liver cells. If the amount of any soluble
constituent in it becomes too great, the kidneys
eliminate the excess, and so on. Sometimes however
our consciousness and will are concerned. A shortage
of water leads to thirst, a shortage of sugar which the
liver cannot immediately remedy to hunger, a shortage
of oxygen to panting, which may be so intense as to
occupy our whole attention and will.
The blood plasma of many marine animals is almost
the same as sea water, with the addition of a little sugar
and other foodstuffs on the way from the gut to the
cells, and waste products on the way from the cells to
the excretory organs. A cockle’s heart will continue to
beat if placed in sea water, though quite a small change
in its chemical composition, say a precipitation of the
calcium (lime) salts, would render the sea water
poisonous to it. We vertebrates have a blood plasma
which has much the same composition as sea water
diluted with three times its volume of fresh water.
Such a liquid can safely be injected into the human
veins in quite large quantities. The chemical agree­
ment is far too striking to be a coincidence. Whereas
all cells contain more potassium than sodium, the
plasma contains 15 times as much sodium as potassium,
the corresponding figure for sea water being 27.
Similarly the ratio of sodium to calcium is 39 in plasma,
27 in the sea. With regard to magnesium the agree­
ment is not so good. It is suggested that just as the
plasma of modem marine invertebrates is very nearly

6o

POSSIBLE WORLDS

sea water, so our own represents the sea of a remote
period when our marine ancestors first began to develop
gills impermeable to sea water. Modem fish, even
those which live in the sea, have a plasma much like
our own in its low salt content, so presumably it was
their and our common ancestor that first effectively
shut itself off from the sea. As the sea is always
receiving salt from the rivers, and only occasionally
depositing it in drying lagoons, it becomes salter from
age to age, and our plasma tells us of a time when
it possessed less than half its present salt content.
It is not only our tissue cells that lead this aquatic
existence. Most marine animals, both vertebrate and
invertebrate, shed their eggs and spermatozoa into the
sea, and rely for fertilization on the numbers and
swimming power of the latter. We have cut down our
output of eggs to one or two a month, but we still
continue, in contrast with many insects and crust­
aceans, to produce spermatozoa which have to swim
great distances to their goal, and are therefore required
in fantastically vast numbers. Their marine ancestry
is shown by the fact that they can only live in a fluid
containing much the same salts as the plasma. And
after our development has started from the fusion of an
egg and a spermatozoon we pass our first nine months
as aquatic animals, suspended in and protected by a
salty fluid medium. We begin life as salt-water
animals.
There are two of our sense-organs which bear striking
testimony to our marine ancestry. Under the skin of
a fish are a number of tiny tubes occasionally opening
to the exterior. There is a complicated system on the

MAN AS A SEA BEAST

61

head, and one on each side of the body, often marked
by a conspicuous stripe on the skin above it, as in
trout.
These tubes contain bunches of microscopic hairs,
richly supplied with nerve fibres, and far too delicate
to be left on the outer surface of the body. The fishes’
own movements through the surrounding water, and
also local currents and vibrations in the water itself, are
communicated to the fluid in the tubes, and bend the
hairs over. Thus the fish learns of the speed and
rhythm of the water movement in the tubes, as a cat
might gauge the strength of a wind by the degree of
bending of its whiskers.
Two parts of the tube system on each side of the head
are deeply buried in the skull and highly specialized.
One is adapted to respond to fine and rapid vibrations
in the water, in fact to sounds. The other consists of
three loops at right angles, the so-called semi-circular
canals. These organs are only connected with the
sea by a long narrow tube sometimes closed in the
adult. But when the fish turns round, the water in
one or more of the semi-circular canals is left behind,
like the water in a glass which is suddenly rotated, and
presses on the hair cells in the canal. Thus while the
organs in the external system inform the fish of its
movements relative to the water round it, those in the
semi-circular canals are stimulated by its turning
movements.
We land vertebrates have lost most of the fishes’
canal system, but the two pairs of specialized organs
in the head remain as our internal ear, open to the
surrounding water in early embryonic life, but closed

62

POSSIBLE WORLDS

long before birth or hatching. The ear-drum and an
elaborate system of tiny bones transmit aerial vibration
to the water in one part of it. The corresponding
vibrations of this water act on hair cells at the end of
the auditory nerve fibres, and these in turn stimulate
those parts of the brain concerned with hearing.
When we turn our heads the swirling of the salt water
in the semi-circular canals presses on the hair cells.
An elaborate system of nerve fibres in the brain links
them up to the muscles which move our eyeballs, and
as we turn our heads our eyes turn in the opposite
direction, so that the direction of our gaze is unaltered.
This is a reflex action uncontrollable by the w ill; in
fact it is impossible to turn one’s head suddenly while
keeping ihe eyes fixed relatively to it.
The semi-circular canals can play us false. In a
rotating bowl the water gradually comes to rest with
regard to the bowl, i.e. takes up the bowl’s rate of spin.
The same happens to the fluid in our internal ears if
we rotate uniformly. Hence the stimulus to the eyemuscles ceases and we can gaze steadily at any object
rotating with us, for example the face of a partner in
the pre-war type of waltz, while surrounding objects
at rest cannot be fixed. When, however, the bowl or
the man stops rotating the fluid does not, and the eyes
execute involuntary movements which lead us to
believe that everything is spinning round us. One
can also become giddy in a vertical plane by turning
round several times with the head bent forward and
thus causing the fluid to swirl in a plane which becomes
vertical when one lifts one’s head up. The reflex now
let loose involves the muscles of the limbs and trunk,

MAN AS A SEA BEAST

63

and would be appropriate if one were falling over ;
actually however it often makes us fall in the opposite
direction.
In many ways a magnetic or gyrostatic compass
would be a better balancing organ, but life has never
used either the wheel or the magnet.
The evolution of the human body resembles that of
the British constitution. It is full of relics of the past,
as curious as the judges’ wigs or the city companies,
but for most of these vestiges a new function has been
evolved.

FOOD CONTROL IN INSECT
SOCIETIES

A N ’S habits change more rapidly than his
instincts. To-day we are bom with instincts
appropriate to our palaeolithic ancestors, and
when we follow our instincts alone we behave in
palaeolithic manner. It is probable that primitive
man, like a wild animal, ‘ knew ’ pretty well what was
good for him in the way of food. Modern man does
not, and when he does he cannot get it. Sedentary
workers consume meals appropriate to hunters.
Women of fashion attempt to supply the energy needed
for dancing by the ingestion of large amounts of
chocolate. Man, in fact, must use his reason to arrive
at an appropriate diet. But the members of insect
societies have solved a similar problem on instinctive
and physiological lines. They have brought about
the best possible division of a communal food supply
by methods which, if strange and often disgusting to
human minds, are as effective as any system of food
control invented by man.
Let us see what are the prerequisites of a rational
distribution. Apart from water, salts, and vitamins
which are only required in tiny quantities, foodstuffs
may be classified as carbohydrates, fats, and proteins.
Carbohydrates include sugar, starch, and the like, fats
embrace the chemically similar oils and waxes. Neither
contain nitrogen or sulphur, and they are mainly useful
as fu e l; that is to say in order by combining with

M

64

FOOD CONTROL IN INSECT SOCIETIES 65
oxygen to give up energy which can be used by the
animal for heating itself, or working its muscles and
other organs. The proteins, on the other hand, are
required to build up the living tissue during growth,
and repair it after injury or the wear and tear of every­
day life. If we compare the requirements of an
animal and a motor vehicle, water serves the same
function in both, of cooling and carrying away un­
wanted substances, carbohydrates and fats correspond
to petrol, proteins to spare parts, and probably vitamins
to lubricating oil. As a matter of fact proteins can act
as a source of energy, just as spare woodwork for a
train could be used as fuel, but most animals find them
unsatisfactory as the sole source.
It is clear that a growing animal needs relatively
more proteins than an adult. A baby lives on milk
which an adult would instinctively supplement with
starchy foods. But the baby requires, and finds in
the milk, some fat and carbohydrate as fuel to keep
itself warm and work its tiny muscles. The wasp
grub is cold-blooded and sluggish. It requires very
little but proteins. And the adult worker with its
short life of intense exertion needs little protein but
plenty of fuel. Hence, even though the food which
the workers give to the grubs consists very largely of
chewed-up flies, it contains more carbohydrate than
necessary. When a worker comes to feed a grub by
regurgitation from its crop the grub thanks it by secret­
ing a drop of fluid containing sugar for which it has
no use, but which is valuable fuel for an active insect.
The bees have taken things a stage further. Their
sources of food are the nectar of flowers, a nearly pure

66

POSSIBLE WORLDS

solution of sugar in water, and the pollen, which con­
sists largely of proteins. Even from the same flower
one bee never collects both nectar and pollen. And in
the hive the nectar is stored as honey, and the pollen
separately as ‘ bee-bread.’ The honey is used prim­
arily as a source of energy and heat during the winter,
the bee-bread along with some honey as food for the
grubs. What is more remarkable is the fact that a
grub gets a different mixture according to its future
career. Queens and workers come from fertilized eggs,
drones from unfertilized, but the difference between
queens and workers seems to be determined by the
type of food given to the larva. So that in the hive
food control is also birth control.
The most bizarre system of all is found among
termites. These insects live almost entirely on wood,
which most animals cannot digest. Strictly speaking
the termites cannot do so either, but their intestines
contain protozoa which can, just as the horse and cow
digest their hay with the help of bacteria. There is
evidence that these or other organisms in their bodies
can even fix atmospheric nitrogen like the bacteria
found in the roots of leguminous plants, thus dispensing
with the need for proteins in the diet of their hosts.
But this digestion is too slow a process to come to com­
pletion in the body of a single insect, so the partially
digested excreta of one are eaten by another until the
process is complete, and the final indigestible residue
is also so incapable of putrefaction that it can be used
for nest-building. This apparently repulsive process
only corresponds to the passing on of half-digested
food by one segment of our intestines to the next. A

FOOD CONTROL IN INSECT SOCIETIES 67
single termite has not a long enough intestine for the
whole process. But it is only certain of the termites
that can take part in wood digestion. Besides queens
and males the termite nest usually contains several
different castes of workers and soldiers with large jaws.
These jaws are too clumsy to allow of wood-chewing,
so the soldiers are fed by the workers with so-called
saliva, as is the queen.
Termite societies therefore rest on a basis of physio­
logical functions and of instincts, each one as complex
and highly organized as those which form the basis of
the relationship between a mammalian mother and her
children. But alas, insect societies are no more perfect
than human, and parasites can as easily find a place in
an economic system determined by instinct, as in the
products of intelligence, enlightened self-interest, or
whatever else is at the basis of human economics.
Whether the correct form of demand for food in an
ant’s or termite’s nest is a gentle stroking of the donor,
an offer of a drop of some sweet secretion, or what not,
some unprincipled insect will generally be found to
make it. Students of human society will compare
these parasites with brewers, burglars, bolsheviks,
bankers, bishops, or bookmakers according to their
tastes. Occasionally they are of some value to the
community, for instance by joining in its defence,
generally they are useless, so far as we can s e e ; and
often they devour not only food, but larval ants.
Humanity is engaged in the awkward passage from
an instinctive to a rational choice of food. ‘ A little
of w’ot yer fancy does yer good ’ is no longer a sufficient
guide for us, as it is for the insects, and we do not yet

68

POSSIBLE WORLDS

know quite enough to rush to the opposite extreme,
though the experience of the war showed that a fairly
strict rationing on scientific lines is already a possibility.
But every month we are approaching nearer to a know­
ledge of the dietaries best suited for any individual case,
a knowledge which will be as efficient as the instinct of
the insect, and infinitely more elastic.

«

OXYGEN WANT

T

HE source of almost all the energy developed
in the human body is the combination of food
with oxygen. We can replace one kind of food
by another, but oxygen cannot be replaced. The
combination occurs in all the tissues, and both food and
oxygen must be supplied to them by the blood. All
organs are sooner or later damaged by want of oxygen,
but the brain is by far the most sensitive. The first
symptoms of oxygen lack are always mental, and fivej
minutes of complete deprivation will kill the brain, l
whereas the heart will survive for as many hours.
You, reader, will die of oxygen want. Your lungs,
your heart, or that part of your brain which controls
your respiratory muscles will cease to play its part in
oxygen supply, and the energy transformations which
make up your conduct will cease.
Oxygen may be cut off suddenly from the tissues by
such means as drowning, strangling, or beheading, but
the physiologist, psychologist, and doctor will find
more to interest them in the effects of partial but
prolonged shortage. This generally arises in one of
three ways : shortage of oxygen in the air, interference
with its passage through the lung membrane into the
blood, or failure of the blood to carry it to the tissues.
The air breathed may contain too little oxygen if it is
diluted with some other gas, or if the oxygen is partially
removed from it. On ships, to take a single example,

69

70

POSSIBLE WORLDS

scores of men die every year by entering compartments
from which the oxygen has been removed by paint,
coal, or grain. On the other hand, the composition
of the air may be unaltered, but its pressure reduced ;
so that a given volume of air contains a less weight of
oxygen than at sea-level. In this case the blood can
hold less oxygen, just as soda water can hold less carbon
dioxide when we lower the pressure on it. The oxygen
in blood is mostly combined with haemoglobin, which
gives it its red colour, and the compound formed does
not break up appreciably till the pressure of oxygen in
the air has been considerably lowered ; so that a small
drop in oxygen pressure causes no noticeable effect.
The effects of a larger drop have been studied not only
in balloons and aeroplanes and on mountains, but by
the artificial production of low pressure.
In the factory of an enterprising firm of diving-dress
makers in South London is a steel cylinder about seven
feet high and five in diameter. It communicates with
the outside by a manhole, a small window of very thick
glass, and two pipes. With a companion I crawl in
through the manhole, which is closed behind us by a
formidable series of screws. An engine begins to
suck the air out through one of the pipes. The air
becomes cold and fills with mist. In five minutes we
have reached a pressure of 350 millimetres of mercury,
or less than half an atmosphere, corresponding to a
height of 22,000 feet above sea-level. I look at the
barometer, and open the inlet valve so as to keep the
pressure steady. And now I have time to observe
my own symptoms. I am breathing rapidly and deeply,
and my pulse is at n o ; but the breathing soon calms

OXYGEN WANT

7i

down, and I feel much better, though perhaps my
writing is a shade wobbly. But why cannot my
companion behave himself ? He is making silly jokes
and trying to sing. His lips are rather purple, the
colour of haemoglobin when uncombined with oxygen.
I feel quite unaffected ; in fact, I have just thought of
a very funny story. It is true I can’t stand without
some support. M y companion suggests some oxygen
from the cylinder which we have with us. To humour
him I take a few breaths. The result is startling. The
electric light becomes so much brighter that I fear the
fuse may melt. The noise of the pumping engine
increases fourfold. My note-book, which should have
contained records of my pulse-rate, turns out to be
filled with the often repeated but seldom legible state­
ment that I am feeling much better, and remarks about
my colleague, of which the least libellous is that he is
drunk. I put down the oxygen tube and relapse into
a not unpleasant state of mental confusion. An hour
later, in spite of our indignant protests, the engine is
stopped, and we return to normal pressure, no worse
off except for a slight and transitory headache.
For longer experiments a mountain is desirable ;
and to avoid the disturbing influences of fatigue on the
one hand, and athletic training on the other, it should
be ascended by rail. The only railways ascending
over 14,000 feet are in the Rockies and the Andes, and
it is here that the most complete investigations of
prolonged oxygen want have been made. After a few
hours nine people out of ten who have ascended rapidly
from near sea-level suffer from sickness and headache
and may faint. These symptoms are at once cured by

72

POSSIBLE WORLDS

a few minutes of oxygen inhalation, and have nothing
to do with the low pressure as such. Later a quarrel­
some stage generally supervenes. One of the dozen or
so permanent residents on the top of Pike’s Peak is a
sheriff, who is needed to deal with visitors. Later the
body begins to adapt itself, and the symptoms pass off
more or less completely. The bone marrow manu­
factures new red blood corpuscles until the blood can
hold 20 or 30 per cent, more oxygen than normal
when saturated, and slightly more even at a high
altitude. The kidney holds back acid which it would
normally excrete, and thus goads the respiratory centres
in the brain to increased activity. And something
seems to happen in the lungs which also occurs in
athletic training. The attempts to decide the nature
of this change, if any, constitute the most interesting
of our inter-’varsity sports. Oxford has pinned its
faith to the view that the lung learns to force oxygen
into the blood as the gut forces food. Cambridge
holds that the gas soaks in as it would through a dead
membrane. The contest has now been raging for
more than sixteen years, but in spite of American and
Danish participation, is still undecided.
As compared with many other mammals, man is very
efficient at adaptation. Cats generally die at 14,000
feet, while cows die at 15,000, and give no milk above
13,000, even in the tropics. There is, however, a limit
to human adaptability, and it is an open question
whether the summit of Mount Everest lies above or
below this limit.
The mountaineer has generally time to adapt himself
during his approach to the filial stages. The airman

OXYGEN WANT

73

only spends a few hours a week at most above 10,000
feet, and therefore cannot adapt himself. Moreover,
the mountaineer will be warned of his danger by short­
ness of breath, but the airman will be lured higher and
higher by an increasing and unreasonable conviction
that he is all right, until he suddenly loses conscious­
ness. When Sully-Prudhomme sang the courage of
Sivel and Croce-Spinelli, who died on a balloon ascent
in 1875, he was celebrating the psychological effects of
oxygen want. Even at 10,000 feet the airman’s judg­
ment wrould probably be improved by oxygen. Above
16,000 feet it is an absolute necessity, and the chief
participants in the war supplied the crews of their
high-flying aeroplanes and airships with compressed
or liquefied oxygen and more or less efficient breathing
apparatus.
In various diseases the oxygen cannot pass quickly
enough into the blood. Thus, in croup and bronchitis
the air passages to the lungs are narrowed, and in lobar
pneumonia the membrane through which oxygen
passes into the blood is thickened by inflammation.
In either case the blood leaves the lungs without its full
complement of oxygen. Oxygen has a great future in
medicine, and could probably halve the death-rate in
pneumonia. But as generally administered it has
little more therapeutic value than extreme unction, and
is much more expensive. If it is merely blown in the
direction of the patient’s mouth, he or she does not get
enough to soak through the thickened membrane. If
his head is enclosed in a box into which oxygen is
blown, he rebreathes the carbon dioxide of his expired
air and suffers severely. 9 It must be given continuously,

74

POSSIBLE WORLDS

sometimes for three days and nights on end. To give
it intermittently is like dragging a drowning man to the
surface once a minute. It should not be breathed pure,
as it is poison, though a rather slow one. Further,
the treatment should be started before, and not after,
the patient shows signs of approaching death. These
conditions are best fulfilled if the gas is administered
through a suitable mask, such as that designed for the
treatment of war-gas pneumonia. When it is properly
administered, the patient’s mental state, colour, and
other symptoms improve within five minutes.
Finally, the blood may be unable to carry enough
oxygen. In heart disease the tissues generally get
enough as long as their demand is restricted by keeping
the patient at rest. In anaemia and carbon monoxide
poisoning a given volume of blood can hold less than
its normal amount of oxygen. In the former case
the heart increases its output when at rest, but has no
reserve of power to fall back on during exercise. In
the latter the poison not only displaces some of the
oxygen from the haemoglobin, with which it itself
forms a compound, but makes the removal of what
little is carried unusually difficult, and the brain especi­
ally feels the shortage. Carbon monoxide is the
poisonous constituent of coal-gas, the gas from charcoal
and coke fires, and that produced by explosions in
collieries. The abolition of the legal restrictions on
the proportion of it in lighting gas is now making the
symptoms of poisoning by it familiar.
It might be thought that oxygen would have a good
effect on normal people. As a matter of fact, it is
poisonous if breathed either^at high pressure or for

OXYGEN WANT

75

days at a time, while the only effects of non-poisonous
doses'are to slow down the heart’s rate, and, if given for
long enough, to diminish the amount of haemoglobin
in the blood. The result of these changes is that the
tissues get as much oxygen as normally, and no more
Their supply is accurately regulated, and though the
physician can sometimes help nature to re-establish the •
normal state of affairs, he can never improve upon it.

WATER POISONING AND SALT
POISONING

T

HE cells of such an animal as a sponge or a
sea-anemone are exposed to fluids of rather
variable composition, for the water and salts of
their environment penetrate all through their bodies.
In man the cells are bathed in the plasma or fluid part
of the blood, whose composition is very constant.
They are far more efficient at their particular functions
than those of a simpler animal, but also far more
sensitive to changes in their environment. The
mammalian cell may be compared to a civilized man,
who, if properly fed, housed, and clothed, is far more
efficient than a savage ; but who can only work under
a somewhat artificial and narrowly limited set of
conditions.
Most of our bodily activities can be regarded as more
or less successful attempts to keep our milieu interieur
uniform. The lungs, under the direction of the respir­
atory centres in the brain, regulate its dissolved gases,
the kidneys its content of water and salt, the ductless
glands its precious burden of substances controlling
the rates of cellular oxidation and growth. And much
of the activity of the brain and muscles only serves to
enable the gut to maintain the normal level of sugar
and other foodstuffs.
The effects on the body of a deficiency of foodstuffs
or oxygen in the internal environment are well known
and fatal; those of an excess ( ^ in diabetes and oxygen
76

WATER POISONING AND SALT POISONING 77
poisoning), though rarer, are equally serious. And
the actions of small amounts of various foreign bodies
are well known to every student of our criminal pro­
ceedings. But it is only of late years that attention has
been drawn to the exact regulation of salts and water,
which in the main undergo no chemical changes in
the body, and to the effects of any departure from their
normal proportions.
The story of human water poisoning is as follows.
A normal man can get rid of water as fast as he drinks
it. A man with severe kidney disease rarely drinks
more water than he needs, nor is he encouraged to do
so. But the kidneys may be paralysed by other means.
An American physician had succeeded, by injecting
an extract of the pituitary gland, in temporarily sus­
pending the flow of urine, amounting to some four
gallons a day, of a man suffering from diabetes insipidus.
But the patient went on drinking water at his normal
rate. Rather suddenly he went into convulsions.
These were at once relieved by injecting 10 per cent,
salt solution into a vein. As the blood plasma in which
the corpuscles are carried contains just under . 1 per
cent, of salt, mainly of the ‘ common ’ kind, this served
to bring its water content back to the normal. E x­
periments on animals made it clear that too high a
proportion of water to salt leads to convulsions and
death as inevitably as too high a concentration of
strychnine. The most probable explanation is perhaps
that certain nerve-cells become sodden and swollen,
as do those of our skin during a prolonged bath.
Another series of cases appeared in a very different
quarter. Perhaps the ^ tte st place in England is about

78

POSSIBLE WORLDS

a mile underground in a well-known Lancashire coal-pit,
where the miners work in boots and bathing-drawers,
and empty the sweat from their boots at lunch. One man
sweated eighteen pounds in the course of a shift, and
it is probable that even this figure has been exceeded.
This sweat contained about an ounce of salt—twice
what the average man consumes in all forms per day.
The salt loss was instinctively made up above ground
by means of bacon, kippers, salted beer, and the like.
And as long as they did not drink more than a quart
of water underground, no harm came to the miners.
But a man who has sweated nearly two gallons is
thirsty, and coal-dust dries the throat, so this amount
was often exceeded, and the excess occasionally led
to appalling attacks of cramp, often in the stomach,
but sometimes in the limbs or back. The victims had
taken more water than was needed to adjust the salt
concentration in their blood, and the diversion of blood
from their kidneys to their muscles and skin was so
great that they were unable to excrete the excess.
The miners in question were offered a solution of salt
in water which was of about the composition of sweat,
and would be somewhat unappetizing to the average
man. They drank it by quarts and asked for more.
And now that it has become their regular beverage
underground there is no more cramp, and far less
fatigue. It is almost certain that the cramp of stokers,
and of iron and glass workers, which is known to be
due to excessive water-drinking, could be prevented
in the same way.
A man who takes an ounce or so of salt without
vomiting develops a violent t^ rst; and if he satisfies

WATER POISONING AND SALT POISONING 79
it so as to dilute the salt to about the composition
of plasma, gets rid of the salt and water rather slowly.
Some of the extra fluid accumulates under his skin,
and he becomes ‘ puffy 5about the eyes and ankles. In
certain types of kidney disease salt excretion becomes
very difficult; the patient drinks water to keep the
composition of his blood nearly constant, and swells up,
developing dropsy. More rarely there is little swelling,
but the circulatory system appears to suffer from
excess of salt. In either case the patient may be very
greatly benefited by adopting a diet practically free
from salt. To take a concrete instance ; a dropsical
patient lost twenty-two pounds when placed on a
salt-free regime, and regained them within a fortnight
when given the ordinary hospital diet. Such dramatic
results, obtained by certain French physicians, led to
somewhat exaggerated hopes, and all kinds of kidney
disease were treated by depriving the patients of salt,
regardless of the fact that the diseased kidney may
retain its normal capacity for salt excretion while
unable to get rid of many much more poisonous
substances. Moreover, dropsy is not always due to
salt retention.
We are not on such sure ground with regard to most
of the other salts in the blood, but it is known, for
example, that a certain type of spasms in children is
associated with a deficiency of lime salts, and can usually
be cured by administering them in sufficiently massive
doses. One of our chief difficulties in work in this
field is the extreme accuracy of the technique required.
The calcium content of the blood is one part in twenty
thousand. A competeqf: biochemist will not err more

8o

POSSIBLE WORLDS

than one per cent, in his estimation of the calcium in ten
cubic centimetres of blood, but the analysis requires
some hours, and competent biochemists are very rare.
Moreover, so many of the normal constituents of the
blood are present in altered amount in disease that it
is often almost impossible to distinguish cause from
effect. One of the most hopeful lines in modern
experimental medicine is the production of small, but
definite, chemical changes in the organism, and the
careful recording of their effects. Such experiments
bear the same relation to clinical observations as did
responsa prudentium to case law in the Roman legal
system, since they enable us to eliminate such features
of the disease as are irrelevant to the problem under
consideration. The experimental pathologist is apt to
miss the less obtrusive symptoms when working on
other animals, and in the long run he is driven to use
his own body as an instrument of research. And one
is certainly amply rewarded when a chemically simple
upset of one’s composition brings on the main subjective
symptoms (from backache to nightmare) of influenza,
or the curious facial and manual distortions of tetany.
No doubt only a small proportion of the symptoms
of disease will be found to be due to excess or defect
of the normal salt constituents of the body. Attempts
to explain the causation or effect the cure of cancer on
these lines, though often made, are hardly likely to
succeed. But the quantitatively minded biochemist
will rather interest himself in substances of known
composition and measurable concentration than attempt
to follow the behaviour of hormones and immune
bodies which are as yet neither chemically defined nor

WATER POISONING AND SALT POISONING 81
accurately measurable. And the principles both of
method and of interpretation which develop from the
study of so simple a body as common salt may well
guide the biochemist of the future in his studies of the
physiological and pathological action of substances
yet unknown.

IM M UNITY
A S I ate my gorgonzola cheese I attempted to
j \ console myself for a violent cold in the head by
■L A. meditating on some of the ills that human flesh
is not heir to.
For that cheese was very ill. It had first been
attacked by a gang of most ferocious bacteria and
finally by a green mould. But to all its diseases I was
immune. If I had eaten a slice of mutton equally full
of bacilli they would certainly have proceeded to attack
me, while a cheese of milder character would have
caught the green malady from the gorgonzola.
Fortunately however man is immune not only to
the microbes of cheese but to most of those which
attack animals. We do not get distemper from our dogs
and very rarely foot-and-mouth disease from our cattle ;
though we share with the latter a liability to tubercle,
and there is a rare and generally fatal lung disease
which old ladies occasionally get from parrots.
We know very little as yet about this natural or
inherited immunity. A thousand years hence it will
perhaps be the task of medicine to confer it upon all
future humanity against all possible diseases. We
only know that acquired immunity is not inherited.
Although almost all their parents have had measles and
thus become immune against a second attack, children
not only catch it nowadays as easily as a generation ago
but are distinctly more likely to die of it.
82

IMMUNITY

83

When we are not so lucky as to be born immune to a
disease we can acquire the immunity in two ways. We
can get a mild dose of it or some equivalent malady, or
we can take advantage of the acquired immunity of
some other man or animal.
The first method, that of active immunization,
generally leads to the production of substances in the
blood which destroy the microbes or the poisons which
they make, and has been most conspicuously successful
in the cases of small-pox and typhoid fever.
The former is one of three diseases each of which
confers immunity against the others—namely, cow-pox,
alastrim, and small-pox. Alastrim is the disease which
is now1 spreading among the unvaccinated in Northern
England. Although in its early stages indistinguish­
able from small-pox, it is not much more dangerous
than measles. It never appears to turn into small-pox,
any more than does cow-pox.
Unfortunately it is still registered and reported in the
newspapers as small-pox. The excuse given for this
is that as the two diseases cannot at first be distinguished
it is desirable to segregate sufferers from alastrim.
But it leads to a very dangerous contempt for the real
small-pox, cases of which occasionally arrive in England
from abroad and which is just as deadly as ever.
Acquired immunity to these diseases is, of course,
not absolute, but fades away in the course of time,
though never completely. M r. Bernard Shaw, for
example, developed very mild small-pox in spite of
having been vaccinated, and does not let us forget it.
The next few years will probably see a revolution in our

* 1926.

8 4

POSSIBLE WORLDS

methods of vaccination, for last year Dr. Gordon
showed that animals can be successfully vaccinated
with dead cow-pox germs, as men are with dead
typhoid bacilli.
Active immunization is quite useless when an acute
disease has once started, though it seems to be of some
value in chronic infections. It is, however, a most
successful prophylactic provided the immunity lasts, as
in the case of diphtheria, where the injection of heated
or partly neutralized toxin apparently confers life-long
protection. It will be one of the tasks of preventive
medicine in this century to determine how long such
artificial immunities last and against which diseases
it is worth while conferring them.
When the illness has once started we can sometimes
employ passive immunization, which has had its great­
est '.riumph in the case of diphtheria. Serum from an
immunized horse, if given in time, is an almost certain
cure. The same is true— on paper—of some types of
pneumonia. But while in diphtheria the sore throat
gives warning that a poison is being manufactured
which may stop the heart in a few days, in pneumonia
the lungs are generally damaged when the doctor
arrives, though serum might have been invaluable two
days before.
Many of the commonest acute diseases of children,
such as measles, scarlet fever, and whooping-cough,
do not attack animals, so we must get our immune
bodies from other human beings. Conspicuous success
has attended the injection of serum of convalescents
from these diseases in the United States, France,
and Germany. Children who had been exposed

IMMUNITY

85

to infection did not develop the diseases, and those
injected in their early stages immediately began to
convalesce.
This treatment is now being taken up in London,
and we may look forward to the day when the victims
of measles may serve to defend their schoolmates
instead of infecting them.

BLOOD TRANSFUSION

I

T was Sir Christopher Wren, at that time a pro­
fessor of astronomy, who invented not only the
intravenous injection of drugs, but the transfusion
of blood, in the year 1659. His success on dogs,
wrote Pepys in his D iary, ‘ did give occasion to many
pretty wishes, as of the blood of a Quaker to be
let into an Archbishop, and such like ; but may, if
it takes, be of mighty use to man’s health, for the
amending of bad blood by borrowing from a better
body.’
In 1667, the year after the great fire of London, the
experiment was tried before the Royal Society on Arthur
Coga, a half-mad Cambridge graduate ‘ that is poor and
a debauched man, that the College have hired for 20s.
to have some of the blood of a sheep let into his body.
Some think it may have a good effect on him as a frantic
man by cooling his blood.’ Mr. Coga survived to
write an account of his case in Latin, and claimed that
he felt a new man, but Pepys records that he continued
‘ cracked a little in the head.’
As a matter of fact it is doubtful whether he can have
received much blood from the sheep ; for subsequent
attempts to transfer blood from an animal to man, or
from one animal species to another, have generally
proved harmful, and often fatal. And though trans­
fusion was occasionally practised with conspicuous
success from one human being into another, there
80

BLOOD TRANSFUSION

87

were times when the blood even of a near relative acted
as a deadly poison.
It was not till this century that the reason for these
fatalities was investigated. It was then found that
very often the red corpuscles of the injected blood are
treated in the same way as bacteria to which a man is
immune. They are first rendered sticky, or ‘ agglutin­
ated,’ and then broken up, by substances found in the
blood serum of the recipient. Fortunately it is not
necessary to inject blood in order to test its properties.
If we mix a drop of the donor’s blood with a drop of
serum from the recipient, we can watch what happens
with a microscope or even a good hand lens.
Later Jansky and Moss showed that as regards these
properties of the blood every human being falls into
one of four groups. As a general rule the blood from
a member of group 4 can safely be transfused into
any one, from group 3 only into groups 1 and 3, from
group 2 only into groups 1 and 2 ; while the blood of
a member of group 1 is poisonous to all except his
own group. Thus the unfortunate members of group
4, to which I belong, can be called on to give blood to
any one, while the blood of most other people is
poisonous to them.
It was next shown that the group of any individual
is fixed from the moment of birth. Finally J . R.
Learmonth, a Glasgow medical student, obtained drops
of blood from out-patients and their families, and
found that membership of a group is inherited in a
very simple manner according to Mendel’s law. For
example if two parents belong to group 4 all their
children belong to it also, while a parent in group 1

88

POSSIBLE WORLDS

may have children of any group. There is no doubt
that this knowledge will be used in the future in many
cases of disputed paternity.
During the war Salonika was an ethnological museum.
Besides the native Greeks, Jews, and Turks, there were
British, French, Italians, Serbs, Russians, Arab, Negro,
Annamite, and Malagasy soldiers, and German,
Austrian, and Bulgarian prisoners. The brothers
Hirzfeld, who were Polish medical officers in the
Serbian army, obtained samples of blood from some
8000 men and tested them. They found great differ­
ences between different races, and since then tests have
been made all over the world, with most interesting
results. For example groups 1 and 3 are hardly ever
found among American Indians. In the old world
they are rarest in British and Belgians, and steadily
increase as one passes towards India or Africa. The
only coloured race whose groups are in European
proportions are the Japanese. The proportions are
not modified by environment; for example they are
the same among pure-blooded Jews in Europe as
among Arabs ; among pure-blooded Gypsies as among
the natives of India, from which their ancestors came.
So it is clear that a careful study of their distribution
wall throw new light on the origin of the human races.
While the tailed monkeys and lower animals do not
fit into the human groups, the tail-less apes such as the
orang and chimpanzee, which are our nearest animal
relations, all belong to one or the other of them.
Blood transfusion wras first practised on a large scale
during the war. Since then it has been carried out in
tens of thousands of cases. Not only can it be used to

BLOOD TRANSFUSION

89

combat loss of blood from wounds, childbirth, or
operations, but it has saved the lives of many new-born
babies suffering from internal haemorrhages, and has
at least staved off death for several years in pernicious
anaemia. In this country we are still apt to regard
blood donors as heroes, though most healthy men can
give a quart of blood and return to work next day.
But in the United States a more practical point of view
prevails, and the professional blood donors have
formed a trade union 1

G
-\

CANCER RESEARCH

T

HE cells of a normal adult divide no more than is
necessary for the replacement and repair of the
tissues. When there is a local overgrowth the
resulting structure is called a tumour. Those tumours,
from warts upwards, which show no tendency to spread
into surrounding tissues, and have a definite boundary,
are called benign, and can generally be removed com­
pletely. Malignant tumours or cancers have no such
sharp boundary, and are dangerous because they tend
to spread, and often to form colonies in distant parts
of the body. Researches on cancer fall into two
categories, those directed to ascertain its cause, and
hence its method of prevention, and those which study
its behaviour and the methods of curing or alleviating it.
Our knowledge of the causation of cancer will only
be complete when we know why tissue cells do not
divide under normal circumstances, though they will
often do so if separated from the rest of the body and
placed in a suitable nutrient fluid. Meanwhile we may
remark that there is no more one cause of cancer than
of fever. Cancer may be produced by tar, X-rays, or
parasitic worms, just as fever may be produced by a
bacillus, a head injury, or a drug. This fact makes it
rather unlikely that we shall be able to prevent all forms
of cancer by the same method. Every experimental
cancer so far produced in animals has been a result of
chronic irritation of some kind, and the same is true

90

CANCER RESEARCH

91

of the types of cancer affecting various classes of men ;
for example, chimney sweeps, tar and paraffin workers,
X-ray operators; as well as syphilitic tobacco smokers,
who are said to be specially liable to cancer of the tongue.
From this fact the generalization has been made that
cancer is always due to chronic irritation. Since
paraffin cancer may develop ten years after the patient
has ceased to work with paraffin, it is clear that the
process of induction is slow, and this slowness has been
given as the reason why cancer so rarely develops in
people under forty years of age. As against this view,
it may be remarked that most forms of chronic irritation
do not cause cancer, or cancer of the little toe and the
nasal mucous membrane would be very common,
which they are not. And heredity may account for
cancer. Maud Slye, of Chicago, who has done post­
mortems on over 40,000 mice, finds that in certain
families every mouse living over eighteen months
develops cancer; in others, kept under similar
conditions, none; whilst the disease is inherited,
approximately at least, as a Mendelian recessive, as
it undoubtedly is in certain flies. However, tar will
cause cancer in mice of any family.
Human statistics give no indubitable proof of
heredity in this case, for a slight tendency to run in
families, such as certainly exists, may be explained by
similar environment or habits. But it is likely that
susceptibility to cancer, as to other diseases, is partly
inherited. Unfortunately, as the malady generally
appears after the age of bearing or begetting children is
past, natural selection does not weed out those who are
liable to it, as it is weeding out those liable to tuber­

92

POSSIBLE WORLDS

culosis, which commonly kills its victims while they
are still potential parents, or earlier.
As cancer is far commoner in civilized than in
savage communities, it has been attributed by various
authors to most of the conditions peculiar to civilized
life. To take the latest example, Mr. Ellis Barker has
attributed it to food preservatives, vitamin deficiency,
and chronic constipation. Any or all of these may be
true causes, but there is no evidence to associate cancer
with rickets, scurvy, beri-beri, or any other vitamindeficiency disease in man, and out of the thousands of
animals which have been starved of vitamins only one,
so far as I know, has developed cancer. There is not a
jot of evidence that food preservatives cause it, while
these substances certainly stop a good deal of bacterial
infection. With regard to constipation, we still await
either statistical or experimental data to connect it
with cancer.
If I were compelled (which fortunately I am not)
to suggest a cause of cancer among the features of
civilization, I should point to the use of coal, which
when burnt yields the cancer-producing body found in
tar and soot. There is some rather inadequate stat­
istical evidence from Scotland that the use of peat in
place of coal fires is associated with immunity to the
disease. I should look askance at the indiscriminate
use of such substances as vaseline, which may very well
contain the cancer-producing body found in paraffin,
and lubricating oil, which certainly contains it. The
tar used for road-making will in all probability cause
cancer in many of those who spread it, conceivably in
those who inhale it in the form of dust. Such possi­

CANCER RESEARCH

93

bilities as to the cause of cancer have at least a solid
ground in occupational mortality statistics and in
experimental work. Speculations as to diet have not,
except as regards the action of one or two dyestuffs
which are rarely if ever found in human diet, though
they produce internal cancer in those who make them.
When we turn to the study of the cancer cell and
its habits, our most practically valuable knowledge is
as to its appearance under the microscope. This often
enables us to decide whether a given growth is malignant
or not, and hence whether it is the surgeon’s duty not
merely to remove the growth of which a microscopical
sample has been taken, but to cut away neighbouring
tissues into which its cells may have emigrated. The
large amount of work which has been done on the
microscopical structure of appropriately stained slices
of cancers has therefore saved many lives, and removed
from many more minds the ghastly suspicion that a
harmless growth might be malignant. Almost equally
useful has been the work of the pathological anatomists,
who by innumerable post-mortem examinations have
discovered the paths along which cancer cells might
migrate from certain sites. The most usual of these
paths are the lymphatics, vessels which drain a clear
fluid from the inter-cellular spaces of the tissues into
the veins. On the way to the blood-stream it passes
through lymph nodes, in which foreign bodies such as
dust particles, bacteria, and cancer cells are stopped.
Thus, if a cancer of the breast spreads, it will generally
spread along the lymphatics which pass through the
nodes of the armpit. When a breast is removed for
cancer, the lymphatics which drain it are also dissected

94

POSSIBLE WORLDS

out for some distance. If the lymph nodes of the armpit are free from cancer cells the patient has a good
chance of surviving for many years, though, unfor­
tunately, migration sometimes takes place into the
inside of the chest and belly. The same principles
apply to other sites. Nearly six years ago a friend of
mine developed cancer of the large intestine. Two
feet of that organ were removed, and a certain length of
lymphatics draining it. On each of the possible routes
of migration at least one lymph node was found free
of cancer cells. My friend is alive and well to-day.
As to the more intimate nature of the cancer cell,
we know but little. Our most important information
as to the differences between it and the ordinary cell
has come in the last few months from the laboratory of
Warburg in Berlin. There are two ways in which a
cell may use sugar as a source of energy. It can burn
it, that is to say, combine it with oxygen, or without
using up any oxygen it can split it into simpler pro­
ducts. Thus a yeast cell splits it into alcohol and
carbon dioxide, a contracting muscle fibre into lactic
acid1. If the muscle cell has a sufficient supply of
oxygen, it soon puts the split sugar together again,
burning some of it to get the required energy. About
eleven times as much energy can be got from sugar by
burning it as by splitting it into lactic acid. But the
cancer cells, even in presence of milch oxygen, will split
far more sugar than they oxidize, and in this they differ
from all other cells, except those of very early embryos.
They are, in fact, spendthrifts, relying on the normal
cells of the body for constant supplies of sugar. How
to exploit this knowledge is at present beyond us. The

CANCER RESEARCH

95

biochemist is here in the position of a detective who is
watching a suspected person, and has just observed
in him some very peculiar behaviour, not, however,
peculiar enough to bring him definitely within the
grasp of the criminal law. But there are numerous
possibilities. So many curious facts about the chemical
behaviour in the body of sugars and their likes have
turned up, especially in the course of investigations on
diabetes and on muscular exercise, that we may easily dis­
cover a method of discouraging the cancerous type of
sugar metabolism without affecting that of a normal cell.
Among the mass of published work on cancer almost
all the data necessary for prevention or cure may
already exist. The majority of this work is worthless.
For in cancer research it is legitimate to follow up a
line of investigation even if one feels that the chances
are a thousand to one against its success. • But after a
year or two’s work this detached point of view as to
one’s own importance may be succeeded by one more
resembling that of the average person. One does not
like to dismiss a year’s research in ten lines of print.
And the importance of the end in view may lead to an
emotional condition which is fatal to scientific thinking.
An objective attitude is almost as difficult as with regard
to spiritualism, alcoholism, or birth control. But in
the study of cancer, as elsewhere, the one hope of
humanity lies in the adoption of that attitude.
N ote.— Since this essay was written in January 1925
a good deal more has been found out about cancer,
particularly with regard to its transmissibility by cellfree filtrates. The facts given above appear, however,
to be unaffected by subsequent research.

THE FIG H T WITH TUBERCULOSIS
U B E R C U L O S IS does not stand first on the
list of causes of death in England, but it is the
most serious, because it kills in infancy and
prime of life, whereas cancer is a disease of the old, and
most other diseases affect them more than the young.
Although the death-rate from tuberculosis has been
halved in the last twenty-seven years, yet it has not been
reduced to the condition of a rarity like typhoid fever,
or a complaint from which one only dies by one’s own
neglect or that of one’s parents and guardians, like
small-pox.
A great number of attempts have been made of late
to cure it by some method more direct than good
feeding, fresh air, and sunlight or ultra-violet radiation.
But the tubercle bacillus is a tough creature, and it is
hard to kill it without killing its host first. Sanocrysin,
the gold compound advocated by Mollgaard, of
Copenhagen, has proved effective in some cases, but
it has caused kidney trouble and fever in others. A
great many attempts have been made to cure tubercular
disease by increasing the immunity of the patient to it in
various ways. Most of these attempts have been failures.
At the present time the Spahlinger treatment, which
belongs to this class, is under investigation. It has
not received a very thorough trial, because Dr. Spah­
linger, unlike all other workers who have investigated
the question from a scientific standpoint, has not seen

THE FIGH T WITH TUBERCULOSIS

97

fit to publish full details of his method. And the value
of any treatment can only be estimated when it has
been applied to some hundreds of cases.
It is worth remarking, however, that success on these
lines seems to be much less hopeful than in the case of
acute diseases such as scarlet fever or measles, a single
attack of which generally confers immunity in future.
The most interesting attempt to confer immunity is
one which aims at prevention and lays no claim what­
ever to cure. Professor Calmette, sub-director of the
Pasteur Institute in Paris and a Fellow of the Royal
Society, who has been engaged on the problem for
over twenty years, believes that he is able to render
most babies immune to tubercle for life.
For thirteen years tubercle bacilli were grown on
bile-soaked potatoes in his laboratory. At the end of
this time they had become domesticated, so to speak,
and although they multiplied when injected into animals
they no longer caused them illness. Over 3000 new­
born calves were injected in this way, and it was found
that they had become immune to ordinary tuberculosis.
After experiments on monkeys in West Africa the
treatment was applied to new-born babies four years
ago. Since July 1924 over 5000 French infants have
been given doses of the ‘ bacille Calmette-Gu^rin,’ as
the tame tubercle germ is called. Six hundred of these
were children of tuberculous parents, of whom one in
four usually die in their first year. Instead of 150
only 1 1 actually died. The results among the children
exposed to less intense infection were, of course, better.
Adult Europeans are generally already slightly in­
fected with tubercle, and infection with the new bacillus

98

POSSIBLE WORLDS

is useless or dangerous. Negroes, however, are little
attacked until they come to a temperate climate, where
they die of tuberculosis in great numbers. Accordingly,
in an experiment now in progress one half of a Senegal­
ese battalion in France have been inoculated, and their
health is being compared with that of the other half.
As one quarter of the deaths of French children in
their first two years are due to tubercle, and a large
proportion of the French troops are coloured, Professor
Calmette’s work, if successful, will do more for the
future security of France than any number of treaties
or pacts.
Outside France similar protection has been afforded
to thousands of coloured children in the French colonies.
In another five years it should be possible to pass a
definite judgment on its value.
But meanwhile the known possibilities of prevention
in this country might well be exploited. The greatest
single channel of infection is milk from tuberculous
cows drunk in infancy or early childhood. But the
vast majority even of well-to-do parents do not take
the trouble to obtain Grade A or Grade A certified
milk for their younger children. In many places it is,
of course, not available, but it would be if an economic
demand for it existed. And with no public opinion
behind it in the matter the Government cannot be
expected to legislate drastically in favour of pure milk.
If science has not discovered a cure or an infallible
preventive for tuberculosis, it has at least shown how
the mortality could be greatly lowered. For the price
of a cigar or a cinema a week you can protect your child
against its most dangerous enemy. Is it worth while ?

THE TIM E FACTOR IN M EDICINE

T

HE average man or woman goes to the doctor
to be cured of some disease or injury, and for
this purpose expects either surgical treatment
or something out of a bottle. And the critics of modern
medicine complain that while the surgical treatment is
often unduly violent, the medicine is usually ineffective
except as a generator of faith. They also point out that
in medical teaching enormously greater stress is laid
on diagnosis than on treatment. Fortunately for the
medical profession, its critics commonly support some
therapeutic system such as faith-healing, osteopathy, or
herbalism, which is quite demonstrably less efficient
than that of ordinary medicine. Again, the study of
immunity has fallen into some disrepute because,
although immune sera are often potent prophylactics,
they are not of much value in curing diseases other
than diphtheria.
The reason for this is a simple one. The doctor is
generally called in to cure a scar. Diphtheria and one
of the types of pneumonia are both bacterial diseases
which can be cured by injections of serum. In the
former case death is generally due to poisoning of the
heart by toxins made b; bacteria in the throat. A sore
throat is one of the earlii it symptoms of the disease, and
its typical appearance merally enables a doctor, provided he is called in in
ie, to inject antitoxin which
will save the heart.
ineupronia, on the other hand,
10J

104

POSSIBLE WORLDS

the patient generally dies because oxygen cannot enter
the blood through the inflamed and thickened lung
membrane. By the time the doctor is sure of his
diagnosis the inflammation is usually already severe,
and most of the pneumococci are already dead. It is
merely vindictive to kill the rest with an immune serum;
the problem is to keep the patient alive until his or her
lungs recover their normal permeability. Here then
is a case where therapeutics fail, not because of our lack
of therapeutic methods, but because diagnosis is not
yet sufficiently advanced. And it is quite typical.
Most cancers can be cured by a sufficiently early
operation. It is only in the case of the most obvious
sites, such as the breast and tongue, that a diagnosis is
commonly made before the new growth has spread so
far as to be ineradicable. Elsewhere the doctor is often
in doubt until it is too late. Perhaps one middle-aged
man in ten with chronic abdominal pain is developing
cancer, and his life would be greatly prolonged by
operative treatment, but one cannot open up the other
nine to make sure.
This is why a serological or chemical test for cancer
(of which several have been described, but none uni­
versally adopted) would be of more value than almost
any advance in treatment which seems immediately
probable.
But early diagnosis of disease is the business of the
general public even more than of the medical profession.
To take an obvious case, venereal diseases in their very
early stages are easily and rapidly curable, but every
day’s delay renders the case slower and less certain.
If this fact, and the early symptoms of these diseases,

THE TIM E FACTOR IN MEDICINE

i °5

were thoroughly and universally known, hundreds of
millions of years of human suffering could be immedi­
ately prevented. But it is public opinion, and certainly
not medical obscurantism, which makes a dissemination
of such knowledge impracticable at present. It could
not be done without a gross violation of the law relating
to indecency. A few local authorities have attempted
to call attention by public advertisement to the early
symptoms of cancer of the womb, but their example
has not been followed.
As a matter of fact, it would be psychologically
unsound to disseminate too wide a knowledge of disease
among a people who are ignorant of the working of
their bodies in health. The study of medicine by
laymen is said, probably with truth, to conduce to the
spread of imaginary maladies. The study of physio­
logy generally leads to a healthy and amused interest
in the normal working of one’s own body, against which
background the early symptoms of disease stand out.
Unfortunately, however, physiology is hardly taught
except to medical students. Its place is occasionally
taken in school curricula by ‘ hygiene,’ which usually
takes the form of inculcation of ‘ scientific ’ rational­
izations of the current views on cleanliness, exercise,
and abstinence. The attempts which are made in such
courses to make as many physiological phenomena as
possible point a moral, and to suppress the rest, are
reminiscent of the analogous attempts to moralize
zoology which were made by the authors of mediaeval
bestiaries. Fortunately most children find ‘ hygiene ’
very dull, so less harm is done than might be expected.
But in addition to prevention and cure, the doctor
H

io6

POSSIBLE WORLDS

has another very important duty to his patients, namely,
prognosis. Indeed, this is the main duty of doctors
working for insurance companies. And in prognosis
time is an all-important element. A man of fifty goes
to the doctor with heart trouble. He is quite aware
that he is likely to die' earlier than a healthy man. But
it makes all the difference in the world to him whether
his expectation of life is two or twenty years. And a
doctor may be able to give him this information, even
when, except for warning his patient against over­
exertion, he can do nothing to check the progress of
the disease. The rules governing such prognosis are
often rather simple, and are due to the late Sir James
Mackenzie as much as to any one man. As a general
practitioner at Blackburn he was able to observe the
progress of disease in individual patients for periods of
over thirty years, and to form a far better opinion as to
the prognostic value of given symptoms than a specialist
or hospital physician. With some types of heart disease
symptoms of a fairly well-defined intensity mark the
approximate half-way stage between onset and death.
If the patient with these symptoms had rheumatic fever
twenty years ago, he has probably another twenty years
to liv e ; but if the causative infection was of quite
recent date, he will be well advised to set his affairs in
order and live each day as if it were his last.

ON BEING ONE’S OWN RABBIT
THE STORY OF A SKIRM ISH IN THE
WAR ON DISEASE

M

O ST educated people have a rough but fairly
accurate idea of the methods employed by the
bacteriologist in fighting disease. But in many
cases we cannot deal directly with the invading organism
or they have already done irreparable damage by the
time the first symptoms appear. Often, too, the cause
of sickness is an unusual demand on the body’s re­
sources, such as pregnancy or the very rapid growth of
babies; and under such conditions constitutional weak­
ness or unsatisfactory diet may lead to serious results.
In all these cases we need a knowledge of how the
body works, and how to supplement its resources. If
the kidney has been damaged we can often put the
patient on a diet which gives it so little work that it can
still carry out its functions. If the part of the pancreas
which makes insulin has been destroyed, we give the
patient daily injections of insulin from the pancreas of
pigs. And very often, if we can only relieve the symp­
toms and keep the patient healthy, the body exercises its
marvellous capacity for recovery. The surgeon puts a
broken leg in splints. The biochemist provides, so to
say, chemical splints for damaged organs.
The story that I have to tell is of the discovery of an
improved method of treatment for a rather unimportant
disease, a discovery in which I happened to play a part.
It began, like most scientific work, with the investiga107

io8

POSSIBLE WORLDS

tion of a very abstract problem, and the original
workers had no idea whatever of how their results
would be applied to practical medicine.
I came into the story with no humanitarian motives.
I wanted to find out what happened to a man when one
made him more acid or more alkaline. The chemists
told me that my body was a system of negatively
charged colloids. They also told me that when one
makes such a system more alkaline the electrical charge
on the colloids increases, and that when one makes
it more acid it diminishes. But they had apparently
never wondered what a colloidal system felt like when
one diminished its charge.
One might, of course, have tried experiments on a
rabbit first, and some work had been done along those
lines ; but it is difficult to be sure how a rabbit feels
at any time. Indeed, many rabbits make no serious
attempt to co-operate with one. I except always a
large buck called Boanerges (which is, being interpreted,
the Son of Thunder). Boanerges had to breathe carbon
monoxide every day. He sat on the table with his nose
in a well-greased funnel. When he got bored he
stamped. That was before the war, so no doubt the
noise impressed me more than it would now, but I seem
to remember that any glass one left on the table
collapsed into rather fine dust. If one took no notice
of his first stamp he proceeded to walk off. However, he
was always willing to co-operate for such a period as he
thought reasonable; but most rabbits get frightened, and
to do the sort of things to a dog that one does to the aver­
age medical student requiresa licence signed in triplicate
by two archbishops, as far as I can remember.

ON BEING ONE’S OWN RABBIT

109

A human colleague and I therefore began experiments
on one another. Before relating what happened in
these tests, it may be as well to discuss briefly the
chemical facts with which we had to deal. Acid
substances are acid because when dissolved in water
they break up so as to yield hydrogen ions, that is to
say, atoms of hydrogen which have lost their one
electron, and thus acquired a positive charge. Pure
water contains a few hydrogen ions—to be accurate,
one part in ten thousand million by weight—and the
concentration of hydrogen ions is greater than this in
acid solutions, less in alkaline. These small concentra­
tions cannot be measured directly, but are estimated by
conductivity measurements, by the electro-motive
force developed by hydrogen going into solution from
a platinum electrode, or by means of colour changes
in certain organic substances.
The importance of hydrogen ion concentrations near
neutrality was first realized by biochemists. It was
found that the hydrogen ion concentration in the human
blood was extraordinarily steady, being just on the
alkaline side of neutrality. In fact, except for occa­
sional abnormal people, it is doubtful if any variations
at all from the usual value have been observed in
healthy human beings at rest. The most alkaline
healthy blood on record belonged to a conscientious
objector ! Each tissue seems to have its own normal
hydrogen ion concentration. As soon as the constancy
of these concentrations was discovered it became of
interest to see, firstly how they were kept steady, and
secondly what happened if they went wrong. The
two are really bound up together, because among the

no

POSSIBLE WORLDS

most striking effects of an upset are the body’s efforts
to remedy it.
It was learned that the most rapid means of regulating
neutrality was through the breathing. The lungs
supply the body with oxygen, and remove the carbon
dioxide formed by the oxidation of food. The breath­
ing is not regulated by need for oxygen, for a small
decrease in the oxygen of the air breathed does not
increase the ventilation of the lungs appreciably, nor
does any increase slow it down. This is because the
blood leaving the lungs is already almost saturated
with oxygen, and an increase in the lung ventilation
gets hardly any more in, nor does a small decrease
appreciably lower the uptake. The chief effects of a
changed rate of breathing are on the amount of carbon
dioxide (or carbonic acid) lost per minute, and it is the
amount of carbon dioxide in the blood which normally
regulates the breathing.
The kidneys also help to keep the tissues neutral by
excreting excess of acid or alkali, but their action is far
slower. It is their function to remove from the blood
which passes through them substances which are foreign
to it, or which are present in excess of certain standard
amounts. Human blood is generally a little too acid,
as the sulphur and phosphorus of our foodstuffs are
oxidized to sulphuric and phosphoric acids in the body.
All the former and about half the latter are excreted
in combination with ammonia, which is formed in the
kidneys as required to neutralize the acids.
One of the experiments designed to show that carbon
dioxide is the normal regulator of breathing was as
follows. The subject breathed as fast and deep as he

ON BEING ONE’S OWN RABBIT

Ili

could for two or three minutes. After this he had no
desire to breathe for some time, until in fact most of
the carbon dioxide blown out had accumulated again
owing to the constant steady oxidation in the tissues.
By this time he was often blue in the face with oxygen
want. These experiments were made to test the
ufethod by which breathing is regulated, and those
who carried them out were more worried than inter­
ested by certain extra effects which they noticed. After
about half a minute they got violent ‘ pins and needles ’
in the hands, feet, and face, and after three or four their
hands became curiously stiff, and sometimes their
wrists bent involuntarily.
In 1920 Collip (who afterwards co-operated with
Banting in the isolation of insulin) and Backus, in
Alberta, Canada, noticed that the symptoms produced
by forced breathing were largely those of slight tetany.
Tetany, which must not be confused with tetanus, is a
disease characterized by a cramp of the hands, feet,
face, and sometimes the windpipe. It occurs in babies
(generally in conjunction with rickets); in pregnant
women; in adults whose parathyroid glands (four bodies
in the neck, each about the size of a pea) have been
injured, removed, or diseased; in diseases characterized
by chronic vomiting, and sometimes for no obvious cause.
It is much commoner in Germany and Austria than in
this country. This was so even before the war, but
since then it has greatly increased among children in
Central Europe, owing to their unsatisfactory diet.
At about the same time Grant and Goldman, of
Washington University, breathed harder and longer
than Collip, and obtained all the symptoms of tetany.

1 12

POSSIBLE WORLDS

Poor Goldman on one occasion, after about half an
hour, uttered a shrill cry and went into a general con­
vulsion. Every muscle in his body was contracted,
his limbs stretched out stiff, and his back arched.
I have never had a general convulsion as a result of
self-experiments in over-breathing. M y star turn is
probably intense sweating, which breaks out after
about twenty minutes. I also probably hold the
endurance record of one and a half hours’ continuous
spasm of the hands and face, though on that occasion
I never breathed so hard as to cause the cramp to
spread above the elbow, as it does in severe tetany.
The chief trouble in a long experiment is that one
tends to drop asleep and stop breathing, so a ruthless
colleague is needed to prod one. Perhaps the oddest
thing about such spasms is that they leave no bad
after-effects, though it is true that certain signs of
increased irritability of the nerves may persist for a
fortnight.
In our experiments on the effects of acids and alkalis
on the human body, my colleague Dr. H. W. Davies
and I made ourselves alkaline by over-breathing and
by eating anything up to three ounces of bicarbonate
of soda. We made ourselves acid by sitting in an
airtight room with between six and seven per cent, of
carbon dioxide in the air. This makes one breathe as
if one had just completed a boat-race, and also gives
one a rather violent headache. We analysed large
amounts of blood and urine, and found out roughly
what changes were occurring in them.
But we still wanted something which would keep
one acid for days at a time. Two hours was as long as

ON BEING ONE’S OWN RABBIT

I!3

any one wanted to stay in the carbon dioxide, even if
the gas chamber at our disposal had not retained an
ineradicable odour of ‘ yellow cross gas ’ from some
wartime experiments, which made one weep gently
every time one entered it. The most obvious thing
to try was drinking hydrochloric acid. If one takes
it strong it dissolves one’s teeth and burns one’s throat,
whereas I wanted to let it diffuse gently all through my
body. The strongest I ever cared to drink it was about
one part of the commercial strong acid in a hundred of
water, but a pint of that was enough for me, as it
irritated my throat and stomach, while my calculations
showed that I needed a gallon and a half to get the
effect I wanted.
I therefore had to think of a dodge for getting the
hydrochloric acid in under false pretences. I f one
gives this acid to an animal it is not got rid of as such by
the kidneys, as it would corrode the urinary passages ;
but about two-thirds (though not all) is neutralized by
ammonia made in the body, and excreted as ammonium
chloride. The same thing occurred in my own case.
Now, in the chemical laboratory, when a reaction does
not go all the way, it generally means that it can be
reversed. For example, lime and chlorine dissolved
in water combine to make chloride of lime, but there
is always a little chlorine left over, which one can
smell, and conversely one has only to dissolve chloride
of lime in water for chlorine to be given off. So here
I argued that if one ate ammonium chloride, it would
partly break up in the body, liberating hydrochloric acid.
This proved to be correct. As a matter of fact, the
ammonium salts are poisonous when injected into the

114

POSSIBLE WORLDS

blood stream, and the liver turns ammonia into a harm­
less substance called urea before it reaches the heart
and brain on absorption from the gut. The hydro­
chloric acid is left behind and combines with sodium
bicarbonate, which exists in all the tissues, producing
sodium chloride and carbon dioxide. I have had this
gas produced in me in this way at the rate of six quarts
an hour (though not for an hour on end at that rate).
Possibly my liver, had I been able to see it, would have
resembled a Seidlitz powder, but even had I had a
window through which to watch the process I should
have been too busy breathing to pay much attention.
Not merely, however, has one to get rid of the carbon
dioxide made in the liver, but, in order to preserve the
hydrogen ion concentration of the blood as near its
normal level as possible, one has to keep the amount
of carbon dioxide in it at half or less than half the
normal amount, thus compensating for the acidity
caused by the hydrochloric acid. It is all very well
to breathe four times the normal volume of air per
minute when sitting in a chair, but this is a very
different proposition when one is walking, and such
exercise as cycling becomes quite impossible. I was
able to take ammonium chloride at the rate of about
an ounce a day for two or three days, and then remained
breathless for another two or three, by the end of which
time my kidneys had got rid of most of the liberated acid.
I was quite satisfied to have reproduced in myself
the type of shortness of breath which occurs in the
terminal stages of kidney disease and diabetes. This
had long been known to be due to acid poisoning, but
in each case the acid poisoning is complicated by other

ON BEING ONE’S OWN RABBIT

n 5

chemical abnormalities, and it had been rather un­
certain which of the symptoms were due to the acid
as such. Moreover, a number of unexpected and
interesting effects occurred. For example, my blood
lost about ten per cent, of its volume, my weight
dropped seven pounds in three days, while my liver,
perhaps as a protest against being treated as a Seidlitz
powder, refused to store sugar, which is one of its
normal functions.
The scene now shifts to Heidelberg, where Freudenberg and Gyorgy were studying tetany in babies.
They had read Grant and Goldman’s work, and given
themselves tetany. And although in most cases of
tetany the blood is no more alkaline than usual, it
occurred to them that it would be well worth trying
the effect of making the body unusually acid. For
tetany had occasionally been observed in patients who
had been treated for other complaints by very large
doses of sodium bicarbonate, or had lost large amounts
of hydrochloric acid by constant vomiting ; and if
alkalinity of the tissues will produce tetany, acidity may
be expected to cure it. Unfortunately, one could
hardly try to cure a dying baby by shutting it up in a
room full of carbonic acid, and still less would one give
it hydrochloric acid to drink ; so nothing had come of
their idea, and they were using lime salts, which are
not very easily absorbed, and which upset the digestion,
but certainly benefit many cases of tetany.
However, the moment they read my paper on the
effects of ammonium chloride, they began giving it to
babies, and were delighted to find that the tetany
cleared up in a few hours. Since then it has been used

ii6

POSSIBLE WORLDS

with effect both in England and America, both on
children and adults. It does not remove the cause,
but it brings the patient into a condition from which
he has a very fair chance of recovering. As a matter
of fact, children generally recover in the course of a
fortnight or so when treated with cod liver oil; but one
cannot wait a fortnight when the child’s face and limbs
are contorted, and its breathing interfered with. Later
on Collip returned to the problem and obtained a sub­
stance from the parathyroid glands which will cure tetany
in adults, but is said to be less effective in children.
The above episode is quite typical of modem bio­
chemical investigation. An immense number of ex­
periments are being done on human beings, especially
perhaps in the United States. For rough experiments
one uses an animal, and it is really only when accurate
observations are needed that a human being is prefer­
able. For example, the discovery of insulin, which
abolishes the symptoms of diabetes, was only possible
by experiments on animals, for the simple reason that
one cannot inject large amounts of substances of un­
known composition into men to see what will turn up.
But the elucidation of its mode of action is coming in
large part from experiments on human beings.
It might be thought that experiments such as I have
described were dangerous. This is not the case if they
are done with intelligence. Naturally one only drinks
or breathes substances whose probable effects are fairly
well understood, and which are known not to be fatal
to animals in small quantities. One works up only
gradually to the size of dose which produces really
striking symptoms. Experiments in which one stakes

' i r t' '
•

• '

, I j

I

<

#

\
•

i

*

re 1 »•
j

'

*

i<

«•

ON BEING ONE'S cS\VN RABBIT

117

one’s life on the correctness of one’s biochemistry are
far safer than those of an aeroplane designer who is
prepared to fall a thousand feet if his aerodynamics are
incorrect. They are also perhaps more likely to be
of benefit to humanity in general.
Again, biochemistry, like all science, is strikingly
international. Two Germans synthesized Grant and
Goldman’s idea with my own, and I am now working
at the neurological side of tetany in Paris during my
vacations in conjunction with a French physiologist.
And recently I read the confirmation, by a worker in
Moscow, of some of my work on inheritance in poultry.
It is on such lines as the above that medicine is
advancing most rapidly at the present moment,
Pasteur’s discovery of the microbial origin of infectious
diseases and the subsequent work on immunity to
them led to immense advances in preventive medicine.
Water-borne diseases such as typhoid and cholera have
been abolished in civilized countries. Insect-borne
diseases, such as plague, malaria, and infantile diarrhoea,
could also be abolished if people seriously wished to be
rid of them. So might venereal diseases. But when a
person is once ill, there are few complaints which can
really be dealt with successfully on Pasteur’s lines.
Chemical methods of cure have been more satisfac­
tory. Sometimes we use a definite chemical substance to
destroy the parasite without harming the patient, as in
Ehrlich’s cure of syphilis ; sometimes, as in the case
which I have described, we concentrate on relieving
the patient’s symptoms, and hope that if he is kept alive
he will overcome the microbic invasion or nutritional
upset that has caused the disease. A striking example

ii8

POSSIBLE WORLDS

of this method is the treatment of pneumonia by con­
tinuous inhalation of oxygen. Most deaths in lobar
pneumonia occur because the lung is so thickened that
oxygen cannot get through it to the blood unless there
is very much more oxygen than usual in the air
breathed. These cases do not die if they are given
air rich in oxygen for three or four days on end.
But if methods of this type are to be employed with
success in medicine, we shall have to make considerable
demands on the intelligence, accuracy, and honesty of
every one concerned—doctor, nurse, pharmacist, and
patient. For example, it is perfectly safe to take twothirds of the dose of ammonium chloride which would
kill one by liberating enough hydrochloric acid to
combine with all the alkali in one’s body. And one
gets rather little effect from anything under one-third
of the lethal dose. The same is true of oxygen. The
air breathed by the pneumonia patient should contain
at least half its volume of oxygen ; on the other hand,
pure or nearly pure oxygen will probably kill him in
forty-eight hours !
Accuracy of the kind needed is perfectly attainable.
We entrust our lives every day with complete confi­
dence to the accuracy of engineers, railway signalmen,
and omnibus drivers. When people realize that biology
is as exact a science as physics, and that medicine will
one day be as exact an art as engineering, we may hope
for some real progress in the cure of disease. But at
present a doctor knows very well that his patient is
likely to forget his medicine on Saturday and take a
double dose on Sunday. He dare not put anything in
the bottle that is likely to kill, and in consequence there

ON BEING ONE’S OWN RABBIT

1 19

is very often nothing likely to cure either. In the same
way certain substances when injected are fatal if the
patient has been injected with them before. Until the
doctor can rely on the patient neither lying about his or
herformermedicalhistorynorforgettingit,hevvillbevery
chary about using some of his most effective remedies.
Civilized life demands intelligence and education, not
in a certain class only, but in the whole community.
The medical profession have perhaps not always
done all they might in educating the public in the facts
of their science. No doubt this is partly due to a
survival of the ‘ medicine man ’ tradition, but another
reason is that a half-educated patient who tries to diag­
nose his own disease is often worse than a completely
uneducated one. Before people tell the doctor that
they are suffering from heart disease, they should
realize that a pain felt in the region of the heart is
most commonly due to irritation of the stomach !
But even so, a slight knowledge of the facts of medicine
is becoming essential, not only if patients are to co­
operate with their doctors, but if such diseases as cancer
are to be recognized and dealt with before they have
gone too far to be curable.
Finally, since the public has begun to pay for medical
research, it has a perfect right to know how its money
is being spent. During last year about one part in four
million of the national revenue was employed during
some weeks in keeping me awake during attacks of
tetany, and in analysing blood samples drawn from
me in the course of them. It has been the object of
this article to suggest that one-four-millionth of the
nation’s income was well spent.

WHAT USE IS ASTRONOMY ?

T

H ER E has been an Astronomer Royal for two
hundred and fifty years, but there is no Physicist
Royal nor Bacteriologist Royal, although during
the last fifty years physics and bacteriology have been
of greater service to the State than astronomy. And
the taxpayer may sometimes be tempted to ask what
return he gets for the money spent on Greenwich
Observatory. There cannot be the faintest doubt of
its value during its first two centuries of existence.
Navigators depended on observations of the sun, moon,
and stars to a far greater extent than now. There were
no lighthouses to give them their position, no accurate
charts, no wireless, and above all, a sailing ship was
vastly more likely than a steamer to deviate from its
intended course. Accurate astronomical tables were
not only required for the purposes which they now
serve ; but until Harrison invented the chronometer,
the only satisfactory method of obtaining the time at
sea was by observing the occultation or covering of
stars by the moon or of his satellites by Jupiter. And
so Greenwich Observatory played a very important
part in the foundation of the British Empire.
But the nautical almanac could now be kept up to
date (or rather three years ahead) by a few calculators
whose results were checked by a single telescope ; and
the large majority of astronomers now interest them­
selves not so much in the motions of the sun, moon, and
120

WHAT USE IS ASTRONOMY ?

121

planets, as in the distances, composition, and temper­
atures of the fixed stars, or in the structure of the
sun, and their observations are certainly of no use to
navigators.
But that is not to say that the Astronomer Royal is
not earning his salary. For the greatest benefits of
astronomy have been indirect and unperceived. I fear
that few racegoers as they take out their field-glasses
bless the name of Galileo, who made the first at all
powerful telescope in order to observe the stars. Nor
does the engineer or surveyor always remember that
both trigonometry and logarithms were invented by
astronomers to aid them in their calculations. Again,
common sense tells us that we see things as they are.
It was an astronomer who, by observing that the
eclipses of Jupiter’s moons were later than theory
demanded when they were farther away from the earth,
showed that we see things as they were, and that light
moves with a finite speed. When the same speed
turned up in connection with electricity, Clerk Maxwell
predicted electro-magnetic waves. Herz produced
them, and Marconi put them at the service of mankind.
Modern astronomy, among other things, has given
birth to spectroscopy. The spectroscope which
analyses a beam of light into its component colours
is the only means we have for investigating the com­
position of the stars, and it is largely for this reason
that its use was developed. And it has turned out as
practical an instrument as the telescope. It has been
used in the analysis of minerals and the detection of
poisons; indeed, it has played its part in hanging several
murderers. It is now throwing so much light on the
l

122

POSSIBLE WORLDS

structure of atoms and molecules that we may con­
fidently hope that our grandchildren will learn a
chemistry based on half a dozen simple laws instead of
being compelled, like ourselves, to memorize the idio­
syncrasies of the various elements and compounds.
But stellar spectroscopy has done much more than
merely give the chemist a new method. It enables
him to study matter under conditions of temperature
and pressure which he cannot attain in the laboratory.
If you want to know how a gas behaves at a pressure
of a hundred thousandth of an atmosphere you can
watch it in a vacuum tube in the laboratory ; if you
desire to investigate it at a hundredth of that pressure,
the astronomer will direct your telescope to a suitable
nebula. And seeing that electric-light bulbs, X-ray
tubes, the triode valves used in wireless, and the
luminous tubes of sky signs all contain gas at low
pressure, it is useless to describe the investigation
of its properties as unpractical.
Astronomy began as the handmaid of astrology when
men believed that the study of the heavenly bodies
would enable them to predict events on earth. The
old astrology is dead, but a few earthly phenomena have
been found to depend on the sun and moon. To pre­
dict the height of the tides within an inch may seem an
unnecessary refinement, but that inch may mean a
saving of a hundredth of one per cent, in the expenses
of a great port, and therefore be amply worth while.
And weather does to some slight extent depend upon
sun-spots which appear according to a definite law.
Attempts to predict the yields of crops by this method
have met with small success, but the number of rabbits

WHAT USE IS ASTRONOMY ?

123

and hares in Northern Canada depends on that of
sunspots to a remarkable degree. Every ten or eleven
years the number of hares increases enormously, and a
sudden pestilence then wipes them out. The next
year there is great hunger among the lynxes and foxes
which feed on them, and many more than usual are
caught. It is quite safe to prophesy1 that about 1926
there will be an abnormally large catch of red and cross
foxes in Canada. And if the women voters can per­
suade the Government to appoint a national fur council,
perhaps the price may come down.
1 In 1925. I do not know if this prophecy has been fulfilled.

KA N T AND SCIEN TIFIC THOUGHT

I

M M A N U E L K A N T was born at Konisgberg on
April 22, 1724. He is one of the least readable of
the great philosophers, and except in Germany
is little read by scientific men who have at least a
nodding acquaintance with a Berkeley, a Lotze, or a
Bergson. But it is the purpose of this article to suggest
that not only are his philosophical views of extreme
importance for science, but that they are more im­
portant now than when Kant arrived at them a hundred
and fifty years since.
The highest compliment which posterity can pay any
thinker is to regard his most original thoughts as the
data of common sense. In our time this has happened
to Descartes. The average man would probably agree
with him that matter had extension and mind none.
He would use Descartes’ brilliant invention of co­
ordinate geometry to illustrate an argument on
unemployment or climate. He would be willing to
regard his body as a machine guided to some extent
by an unextended mind. The main reasons for the
triumph of Cartesian philosophy have been the apparent
explanation of such properties of matter as heat, colour,
sound, and odour in terms of its configuration and
motion. The progress of physics until twenty years
ago had thoroughly justified Descartes’ apparently
arbitrary interest in the spatial properties of matter.
And similarly physiology seemed to be progressing
124

KANT AND SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT

125

steadily towards an account of the body as a mechanism
sometimes interfered with by a mind which could,
however, for most purposes be left out of considera­
tion. And whatever philosophical views one might
subscribe to on religious or intellectual grounds, one
tended to act over a large range of circumstances as if
the above views were correct.
Except for Locke’s distinction of primary and
secondary qualities, very little post-Cartesian philo­
sophy was incorporated into the assumptions of science,
and the most recent work up to 1900, demanding, as
it did, the postulation of an ether filling apparently
empty space, bore a startlingly Cartesian appearance.
In only one respect had any serious approach been
made to the Kantian position. Mathematical physi­
cists had quietly but definitely dropped the idea of
causality; because they found that forces which have
to be postulated as causes of motion do not possess
those qualities of permanence which had rendered
physical quantities such as mass, energy, and momen­
tum so attractive. Of course, there were not wanting
those who gave a more idealistic interpretation to the
available evidence, but on the whole a realistic one
seemed simplest. Then the theory of radiation broke
down. It failed to explain radiation by very rapidly!
moving or very small bodies. The first failure led to'
the theory of relativity. According to this theory!
events form a four-dimensional manifold, and the
relation between that series of events which constitutes
our bodies and other series determines which of the j
latter we shall regard as simultaneous events, and which |
as successive and stationary. On Einstein’s old theory !

126

POSSIBLE WORLDS

the four-dimensional space-time was homogeneous,
like the space and time of perception; and it was open
to a philosopher who accepted his views to regard the
action of the mind in perceiving space and time as
merely selective, and not constitutive. But according
to the general theory of relativity, which enabled
Einstein to predict, among other things, the observed
deflection of light by gravitation, space-time is not
homogeneous, but bears a relation to the ‘ flat ’ spacetime of the special theory similar to that between the
surface of an orange and a plane. If this is accepted
(and scientific men in general accept it, because it
enables them to predict certain observable phenomena
with accuracy), it is clear that the action of the mind in
perceiving homogeneous space and time is truly con­
stitutive, and it is dubious how far the space-like
character of the event-manifold is not a mere concession
to our ideas of what a ‘ real ’ world ought to be like.
Eddington would go so far as to attribute every element
in our experience of the external world, except that of
atomicity, to our own mental processes, an interesting
conclusion in view of Kant’s insistence on the plurality
of things in themselves.
The criticisms of the reality of space and time which
arise from the theory of radiation by atoms are still
more serious. The state of the atom before and after
it radiates, and the subsequent history of its radiation,
can be expressed in terms of the older physics, supple­
mented by relativity, with such accuracy that disagree­
ments of less than one part in a thousand between
theory and observation are the signal for a storm of
further experiments. The probability of the passage

KANT AND SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT

127

of an atom from one stationary state to another, which
coincides with the act of radiation or absorption, can
also be dealt with by a mathematical theory due mainly
to Planck and Bohr, and often with considerable
accuracy. But every attempt to represent the process
of radiation in terms of continuous space, time, or
space-time, has broken down in the most hopeless
manner. Bohr at least is convinced of the futility of
any attempt at a ‘ model/ He is content to develop
his beautiful, but highly formal, mathematical theory:—
‘ Und schreibt getrost; Im Anfang war die Tat.’
And so the world of physics reduces to a manifold of
transcendental events, which the mind distributes in
space and time, but by so doing creates a phenomenal
world which is ultimately self-contradictory. And this
is approximately the position reached by Kant in the
Critique of Pure Reason.
In biology we are for the moment in a curiously
Kantian position. The mechanistic interpretation has
nowhere broken down in detail. Every process in the
living organism which has been studied by physical and
chemical methods has been found to obey the laws of
physics and chemistry, as must obviously be the case
if, as Kant taught, these laws merely represent the
forms of our perception and abstract understanding.
But these processes are co-ordinated in a way character­
istic of the living organism. Thus we cannot avoid
speaking of the function of the heart, as well as its
mechanism. Some biologists cherish the pious hope
that the physico-chemical explanation will be found to
break down at some point; others the impious expecta­

128

POSSIBLE WORLDS

tion that all apparently organic order will be reduced
to physics and chemistry. There is very little in our
present knowledge of biology to justify either of
these standpoints, though evidence from other
sources may seem to favour the former. The physi­
ologist is therefore at present left in the peculiarly
exasperating position reached by Kant in the second
part of the Critique o f Judgment. However mechan­
istic his standpoint, he must use the idea of adaptation
at least as a heuristic principle. He will probably
attempt to account for it as a result of natural selection,
but natural selection is more fitted to explain the origin
of given adaptations than the existence of living beings
to which the term adaptation can be applied with a
meaning. At present, with Kant, we are compelled
to leave open the question ‘ whether in the unknown
inner ground of nature the physical and teleological con­
nection of the same things may not cohere in one prin­
ciple ; we only say that our reason cannot so unite them.’
It thus appears that the doctrines of both physics
and biology have reached stages which are more easily
reconcilable with Kant’s metaphysics than with that of
any other philosopher. I do not suggest that either a
physicist or a biologist need be a Kantian if he adopts
any metaphysics : I claim, however, that other meta­
physical systems, though they may be preferable on
other grounds, are all definitely harder to adapt to the
present data of science. If, for example, with Russell
in his Analysis o f M ind, we regard perception as
essentially a selection of certain sensa from a larger
number which exist, we arrive at a real world vastly
more complicated than that of physics, even though it

KANT AND SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT

129

finds no room for purpose. If, with J. S. Haldane, we
regard purpose as more fundamental than mechanism,
we have to look forward to a complete restatement of
physics on teleological lines in the future, without being
able to form any clear idea of how in detail this is
possible.
I should be the last to suggest that the Kantian
standpoint was any more final than the Cartesian. On
the other hand, there seems to me to be little ground for
supposing that after another two centuries of scientific
research (the conduct of politicians suggests that they
may not be continuous) the data of science, which will
then presumably include much of psychology, will
support one rather than another of several postKantian systems. And it looks, as if Kant was at least
correct when he claimed to have written the prolego­
mena to every future metaphysic.
The reason why Kant stands in this rather unique
relation to scientific thought is probably that he was the
last man to make contributions of fundamental im­
portance both to natural science and to metaphysics.
Apart from his work on meteorology and earthquakes,
he was the first to put forward the nebular hypothesis,
and to point out the importance of tidal friction in
cosmogony. He therefore understood the nature of
scientific thought in a manner which is entirely im­
possible to the mere student of science and its history,
and was able to frame a metaphysical system which is
as applicable to modem scientific developments as the
mathematical system of Gauss. Until a first-rate
scientific worker once more takes to philosophy we
shall not see another Kant.

fr *

THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY

T

HO M AS H E N R Y H U X L E Y was born at
Ealing on May 4, 1825, but he was too great
a man for his centenary to find him finally
appraised and uncontroversially labelled. It was while
in training for the medical profession that he pub­
lished his first original work at the age of twenty.
Entering the Navy as a surgeon, he was able, during
four years in the tropics, to use his leisure to such
effect as to revolutionize our views on the classification
of the invertebrates. The importance of this work
was instantly recognized, and at the age of twenty-five
he was elected to the Royal Society. Although for the
next twenty years he continued to work upon the
anatomy of living and fossil animals, he had probably
accomplished his best work in pure science by the age
of thirty.
As lecturer, and later professor, at the School of
Mines, in Jermyn Street from 1854 to 1872, and after­
wards at South Kensington, he not only exercised an
enormous personal influence on his pupils, but laid
many of the foundations of the present methods of
biological teaching throughout the world. His text­
book of comparative anatomy is now, of course, out of
date, but his Human Physiology is still perhaps the best
book in the language for beginners in that subject. But
it is on other grounds that he will be remembered out­
side scientific circles. In 1859 Darwin published the
130

THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY

131

Origin of Species, and Huxley, whom Lamarck and
Spencer had failed to convince of the doctrine of
evolution, was one of his earliest converts. He was
far more of a fighter than Darwin. ‘ I will stop at no
point,’ he wrote, ‘ as long as clear reasoning will carry
me further ’ ; and whereas Darwin in the Origin was
content to say, ‘ Much light will be thrown on the origin
of man and his history,’ and did not publish the
Descent of Man until 18 7 1, Huxley at once saw the
implications of Darwinism in regard to the origin of
humanity. It was at the Oxford meeting of the British
Association in i860 that he first entered the lists as
a champion of man’s animal origin against Bishop
Wilberforce. The Bishop had concluded an attack on
evolutionism by the question whether it was through
his grandfather or his grandmother that Huxley claimed
his descent through a monkey. ‘ I f I am asked,’
replied Huxley, ‘ whether I would choose to be de­
scended from the poor animal of low intelligence and
stooping gait, who grins and chatters as we pass, or
from a man, endowed with great ability and a splendid
position, who should use these gifts to discredit and
crush humble seekers after truth, I hesitate which
answer to make.’ If this retort made little contribu­
tion to the solution of the problem of man’s origin, it
inaugurated a definite improvement in the manners of
ecclesiastical dignitaries engaged in scientific contro­
versy.
The next few years were largely devoted to a more
serious defence of evolution, based on anatomical and
palaeontological research, and summarized in M an's
Place in Nature, published in 1863. The opposition

132

POSSIBLE WORLDS

with which he met within the churches, and still more
perhaps the experience which he gained by service on
public bodies, ranging from the Royal Commission on
Fisheries to the London School Board, seem gradually
to have convinced him of the necessity of applying
scientific standards to every field of human activity,
including religion and education. From 1870 onwards
he began to diverge from purely scientific themes into
fields of more general interest, and, like that of Voltaire,
his fame will rest largely on the production of his last
twenty years.
In particular, he conducted a sixteen years’ con­
troversy with Gladstone in the Nineteenth Century on
theological topics. If the majority of educated English­
men to-day reject the miraculous element in religion
and the infallibility of the Bible, the result is due to
Huxley more than to any other man, and in particular
to his extraordinary fairness of argument and modera­
tion of language. It is interesting to speculate on the
probable consequences had the protagonist in the fight
against religious dogma been a man of the type of
Bradlaugh. In some directions the movement might
have made more progress.
Elementary education
might have been secularized, whereas Huxley supported
the teaching of the Bible in elementary schools. One
of the great parties might have adopted an anti-clerical
programme; but in such a case a large and compact
body, instead of an insignificant minority, would to-day
be supporting the religious ideas of i860.
It was Huxley more than any one man who made
irreligion respectable in England. To describe his
position he coined the word Agnosticism, denoting a

THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY

>33

refusal to come to a decision on any question on which
he considered the evidence to be inadequate. These
questions included the existence of God and the im­
mortality of the soul. ‘ If the condition of success,’
he wrote to Charles Kingsley, ‘ in unravelling some
little difficulty of anatomy or physiology is that I should
rigorously refuse to put faith in that which does not rest
on sufficient evidence, I cannot believe that the great
mysteries of existence will be laid open to me on other
terms.’ This profound distrust of theories, however
seductive, is characteristic of the experimental rather
than the mathematical side of science, and Huxley’s
standpoint was very far indeed from the dogmatic
atheism which often characterizes the mathematician
who opposes religion. But if Huxley preserved an
open mind on the metaphysical side of religion, he came
to a definite decision with regard to its mythological
aspect. ‘ To make things clear and get rid of cant and
shows of all sorts. This was the lesson I learnt from
Carlyle’s books as a boy, and it has stuck to me all my
life.’ His polemical writing was largely directed
against all allegations of breaches in the order of
nature, from Noah’s flood to spirit photographs.
He descended occasionally into politics, but his
independence of judgment made it impossible for him
to be a party man. He was one of a committee which
urged the prosecution of Governor Eyre, of Jamaica, in
1866, for conduct somewhat (resembling that of General
Dyer in 1919, but in later life became a strong Unionist.
While President of the Royal Society he refused to take
part in politics, or ^ven in tsuch controversial move­
ments as the Sunday League.' His great gifts might

/

! /}

V

^

*34

POSSIBLE WORLDS

have carried him as far in politics as Paul Bert was
carried in France, but luckily for science he refused
the offer of a seat in Parliament, and his last scientific
paper was published only seven years before his death
in 1895.
Perhaps his greatest defect as a thinker was his lack
of sympathy with metaphysics. In this field he was
a follower of Hume, Hamilton, and Mill, and never
seems seriously to have considered the great movement
which originated with Kant. That he was aware of
the difficulties of his position is clear from his famous
Romanes Lecture on ‘ Evolution and Ethics/ in which
he contrasts the ethical process in man with the cosmic
process of nature. He was a thorough believer in the
absolute character of right and wrong, and far too
honest not to see the difficulties in which this belief
involved him. And his attacks on religion would have
as little effect against a defence of it on metaphysical
grounds as the metaphysical arguments of Dean Inge
have on the average man. He fought his opponents
with their own weapons, and proved that if religion is
to be defended it is not on a basis of signs and wonders.
Whatever additional facts may be true of humanity, it
is subject to the same laws as those which govern the
animals from which it has arisen. Until the mass of
our people are convinced of this fact and ready to act
upon it, Huxley's work will not be done.

W ILLIAM BATESON
F the Proceedings of the Brunn 1 Natural History
Society had been a little rarer I suppose that
Bateson would now be lying in Westminster Abbey.
For we have only to read between the lines of the first
report to the Evolution Committee of the Royal Society
by himself and Miss E. R. Saunders, published in 1902,
to realize that when Mendel’s paper in the Brunn
Society’s journal was discovered in 1900, Bateson had
already hit upon the atomic theory of heredity, which
goes by the name of Mendelism. It was characteristic
of him that no hint of this fact is to be found in his
published work. His classical exposition of the subject
is entitled Mendel's Principles of Heredity. Copernicus,
if he admitted Aristarchus’s priority, did not write on
‘ Aristarchus’s principles of astronomy.’ But Mendel’s
and Bateson’s discovery was as fundamental as that of
Copernicus, and of much greater practical importance.
And yet Bateson was not of a retiring disposition.
The early days of Mendelism were marked by extremely
violent controversy on both sides— I can remember the
time when Mendelism was considered grossly heretical
at Oxford—a controversy in which Bateson played a
notable part. And his public attacks on the Darwinian
theory were so phrased as inevitably to lead to the most
heated argument, and even to the extraordinary mis­
representation that he disbelieved in evolution. So far
1 Brno since the war.

I

135

136

POSSIBLE WORLDS

was this from being the case that if he had died thirty
years ago he would be remembered mainly for his work
on Balanoglossus, a worm-like marine creature which
he showed to constitute a link between vertebrates and
invertebrates.
It was the wide and, as he felt, uncritical acceptance
of the theory of evolution by natural selection which
led him to expose its weak points. But it was eminently
characteristic of him that he took up a not altogether
dissimilar attitude to his own work. He had many
disciples, but was never himself of their number. The
characters which are inherited according to Mendel’s
laws are so numerous and important, and their possible
combinations so enormous, that a lesser man would
inevitably have devoted the remainder of his days to
following out the detailed application of those laws.
Bateson did so up to about 1912, but the last years of
his life were largely given over to the investigation of
exceptions to them ; and we owe to him more than to
any other one man the demonstration not only that
they are valid over a vast range of material, but that
they occasionally break down. His last published
work deals with these exceptions, and their importance
is exaggerated rather than minimized.
His mental processes were well illustrated by his
attitude to the work of Morgan and his school in New
York, who have shown that the Mendelian factors are
carried in or by the chromosomes which can be seen in
a dividing nucleus. For eight years Bateson attacked
this theory with the utmost vigour ; not because he
considered it inherently improbable, but because he
believed that it went beyond the evidence, and because

WILLIAM BATESON

137

the natural bent of his mind and his profound know­
ledge of the history of science led him to doubt the
validity of long chains of reasoning, however convin­
cing. When, however, the possibility of ocular demon­
stration arose, he went over to America, and returned
a convert, though with certain reservations which I
believe that the future will largely justify. It is the
fact that he had retained his mental elasticity until the
time of his death that makes that death so grievous a
loss to biology.
Yet I can well believe that those who knew him but
slightly carried away a different impression. He never
attempted to conceal his contempt for second-rate
work or second-rate thought, and pursued the truth
with no more regard for other people’s opinions than
for his own. He started his career as a morphologist,
and his outlook was always morphological. He was
therefore sometimes unduly sceptical of reasoning from
a non-morphological standpoint. But I never had an
argument with him—and I had many—without the
absolute conviction that he would no more hesitate to
admit himself in the wrong if I could convince him, than
to tell me that I was talking nonsense if, as was more
usual, I failed to do so.
His scientific views inevitably led him to doubt the
possibility of far-reaching improvements in human life
by alteration of the environment. He was inclined to
the belief that the best elements in the human race
were being weeded o u t; and the mutual destruction of
them which went on during the war confirmed him in it.
But he regarded most if not all of the attempts to apply
science to this problem by creating an art of eugenics
K

138

POSSIBLE WORLDS

as premature in view of our profound ignorance of
human heredity, and resolutely refused to associate
himself with eugenical organizations. From the
pessimism which such views inevitably engendered *
he found a refuge not only in science but in a rt; and
his exquisite sense of form drew him to the art of the
far East, of which he was a well-known connoisseur.
If Bateson had merely demonstrated the truth and
importance of Mendelian heredity the world would be
his debtor. For in its essential manifestations it is
so simple that I have known a child of fourteen apply
it with complete success to practical breeding ; and yet
it furnishes the only clue that we have at present to
innumerable problems concerning the nature of the
cell, the course of evolution, the determination of sex,
and even the origin of certain human races.
But Bateson did much more than that. He has
probably prevented Mendelism from becoming a
dogma. For example, he held that it would not, as
some at least of his disciples believe, explain evolution.
It is normal for a discoverer to be obsessed by the
importance of his own discoveries, and it is a thoroughly
excusable weakness. There are times in the history
of thought when an idea must be born, and if it is a
great idea it may be expected to overwhelm and obsess
the man who gave it birth. He either becomes its
slave, or preserves a certain independence only by
continuing to hold views incompatible with it at the
expense of dividing his mind into watertight compart­
ments. William Bateson escaped these fates because
he was greater than any of his ideas.

THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY

I

N forecasting the future of scientific research there
is one quite general law to be noted. The un­
expected always happens. So one can be quite
sure that the future will make any detailed predictions
look rather silly. Yet an actual research worker can
perhaps see a little further than the most intelligent
onlooker. Even so, it may seem presumptuous for
any one man, especially one who is almost completely
ignorant of botany, to attempt to cover, however in­
adequately, the whole field of biological investigation.
Every science begins with the observation of striking
events like thunderstorms or fevers, and soon establishes
rough connections between them and other events,
such as hot weather or infection. The next stage is a
stage of exact observation and measurement, and it is
often very difficult to know what we should measure
in order best to explain the events we are investigating.
In the case of both thunderstorms and fever the clue
came from measuring the lengths of mercury columns
in glass tubes, but what prophet could have predicted
this ? Then comes a stage of innumerable graphs and
tables of figures, the despair of the student, the laugh­
ing-stock of the man in the street. And out of this
intellectual mess there suddenly crystallizes a new and
easily grasped idea, the idea of a cyclone or an electron,
a bacillus or an anti-toxin, and everybody wonders
why it had not been thought of before.

139

140

POSSIBLE WORLDS

At present much of biology is in the stage of
measuring and waiting for the idea. One man is
measuring the lengths of the feelers of 2000 beetles;
another the amount of cholesterol in 100 samples of
human blood; each in the hope, but not the certainty,
that his series of numbers will lead him to some definite
law. Another is designing a large and complicated
apparatus to measure the electrical currents produced
by a single nerve fibre when excited, and does not even
look beyond the stage of the column of figures. If I
were writing this article for biologists it would be
largely a review of present and future methods ; to a
wider public I shall try to point out some of the results
now emerging, and their possible application.
Let us begin with what used to be called natural
history ; the study of the behaviour of animals and
plants in their wild or normal condition. Apart from
animal psychology this has split up into two sciences,
ecology and animal sociology. Extraordinary progress
has recently been made in the latter. Wheeler of
Harvard has made it very probable that the behaviour
of social insects such as ants, instead of being based on
a complicated series of special instincts, rests largely
on an economic foundation not so very unlike our own.
The ant that brings back a seed to the nest gets paid
for it by a sweet juice secreted by those that stayed at
home. Others, again, have been tackling the problem
of how much one bee can tell another, and how it does
it. To-morrow it looks as if we should be overhearing
the conversation of bees, and the day after to-morrow
joining in it. We may be able to tell our bees that there
is a tin of treacle for them if they will fertilize those

THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY

141

apple trees five minutes’ fly to the south-east; Mr.
Johnson’s tree over the wall can w a it! To do this we
should presumably need a model bee to make the right
movements, and perhaps the right noise and smell. It
would probably not be a paying proposition, but there
is no reason to regard it as an impossible one. Even
now, if we take a piece of wasps’ comb and hum the
right note, the grubs put out their heads; if we then
stroke them with a very fine brush they will give us a
drop of sweet liquid just as they do to their nurses.
Why should we wait to see if there are ‘ men ’ on Mars
when we have on our own planet highly social and
perhaps fairly intelligent beings with a means of com­
munication ? Talking with bees will be a tough job,
but easier than a voyage to another planet.
In ecology, where we deal with animal and plant
communities which consist of many different species,
each eaten by others from inside and outside, each
living in amity with some of its neighbours, in competi­
tion with others, we are at present often lost in detail.
But we are constantly finding that some hitherto un­
expected but often easily modifiable factor, such as the
acidity of the soil or the presence of some single parasite
on an important species, will make a whole new fauna
and flora appear, say an oak forest with wild pigs instead
of a pine forest with ants.
We apply these principles in agriculture by using
chemical manures and insects parasitic on those that
attack our crops. But as we find the key chemical or
key organism in a given association, we may be able
vastly to increase the utility to man of forests, lakes, and
even the sea. Besides this, however, one gets the very

142

POSSIBLE WORLDS

strong impression that from the quantitative study of
animal and plant associations some laws of a very
unsuspected and fundamental character are emerging;
laws of which much that we know of human history and
economics only constitute special and rather compli­
cated cases. When we can see human history and
sociology against a background of such simpler pheno­
mena, it is hard to doubt that we shall understand
ourselves and one another more clearly.
In the domain of classificatory zoology our ideal is
to establish a family tree of plants and animals : to be
able to say definitely, let us say, that the latest common
ancestor of both man and dog was a certain definite
type of animal living, for example, in what is now the
North Atlantic 51,400,000 years ago, under the shade
of the latest common ancestor of the palm and beech
trees, while the last common ancestor of the dog and bear
lived only 5,200,000 years back. We are still thousands
of years from this ideal, but we are now attacking the
problem of relationships between living forms by a
number of new methods, especially chemical methods.
For example, we find that man agrees with the
chimpanzee and other tailless apes, and differs from
the tailed monkeys, in being unable to oxidize uric
acid to allantoin in his tissues, as well as in many
anatomical characters. This merely confirms our
view that these apes are man’s nearest relations.
But the same kind of method will be applied to
solving problems of relationship in which the ana­
tomical evidence is less clear ; for example, what group
of four-footed animals is most nearly related to the
whale. Animals have a chemical as well as a physical

THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY

143

anatomy, and it will have to be taken into account in
their classification.
But the most important evidence about evolution is
coming from the study of genetics. We take any
animal or plant, and with sufficient time and money at
our disposal should be able to answer the following
questions (though if it is a slow-breeding animal like a
cow it is more likely that our great-great-grandchildren
will have to wait for the answer):—
1. What inheritable variations or mutations arise in
it and how are they inherited ?
2. Why do they arise ?
3. Do they show any sign of being mainly in any one
direction, or of advantage to their possessor ?
4. Would natural selection acting on such, if any, as
are advantageous, account for evolution at a reasonable
speed, and for the kind of differences which are found
between species (e.£., that which causes sterility in
hybrids) ?
The first question can often be answered, the second
rarely. Occasionally we can provoke mutations, as
with radium or X-rays. There is no indubitable
evidence that they ever arise in children in sympathy
with bodily changes in their parents (the alleged trans­
mission of acquired characters), and plenty of wellestablished cases where they do not. Now, we know
how the genes, or units which determine heredity, are
arranged in the nucleus of the cell, and also about how
big they are. If we magnified a hen’s egg to the size
of the world (which would make atoms rather larger
than eggs and electrons barely visible) we could still get
a gene into a room and probably on to a small table.

144

POSSIBLE WORLDS

But such magnification being impossible, the ques­
tion how to alter a single gene without interfering
with the others becomes serious, and some men have
already spent their lives vainly on i t ; many more
will. The two most hopeful methods seem to be to
find chemical substances which will attack one gene
and not another; and to focus ultra-violet rays on a
fraction of a chromosome, the microscopic constituent
of the nucleus in which the genes are packed. One
can focus ultra-violet rays far more exactly than
ordinary light, but even under the best conditions
imaginable they would probably stimulate or destroy
several hundreds of genes at a time.
Until we can force mutations in some such way as
this we can only alter the hereditary composition of
ourselves, plants, and animals by combining in one
organism genes present in several, and so getting their
combined effect. A great deal may thus be done with
man. We know very little about human heredity as
yet, though about hardly any subject are more confident
assertions made by the half-educated ; and many of
the deeds done in America in the name of eugenics are
about as much justified by science as were the proceed­
ings of the Inquisition by the gospels.
The first thing to do in the study of human heredity
is to find characters which vary sharply so as to divide
mankind definitely into classes. Most ordinary char­
acters are no good for this purpose. We find every
gradation of height, weight, hair, and skin colour. A
few characters have been found, such as two which
determine whether it is safe to transfuse blood from
one man into another, which are definitely present or

THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY

145

absent, and admit of no doubt. These are inherited
in a very simple manner, and divide mankind into
four classes.
Now, if we had about fifty such characters, instead
of two, we could use them, by a method worked out
on flies by Morgan of New York and his associates, as
landmarks for the study of such characters as musical
ability, obesity, and bad temper. When a baby arrived
we should have a physical examination and a blood
analysis done on him, and say something like this :
‘ He has got iso-agglutinin B and tyrosinase inhibitor J
from his father, so i t ’s twenty to one that he will get
the main gene that determined his father’s mathematical
powers ; but h e ’s got Q4 from his mother, to judge
from the' bit of hair you gave me (it wasn’t really
enough), so it looks as if her father’s inability to keep
away from alcohol would crop up in him again ; you
must look out for that.’
When that day comes intelligent people will certainly
consider their future spouses’ hereditary make-up, and
the possibility of bringing off a really brilliant com­
bination in one of their future children, just as now we
consider his or her health and education, before
deciding on marriage. It is as certain that voluntary
adoption of this kind of eugenics will come, as it is
doubtful that the world will be converted into a human
stud-farm.
The third question can be answered in the negative
for certain forms at any rate. Out of over 400 muta­
tions observed in one fly, all but two seemed to be dis­
advantageous ; and they showed no definite tendency
in any one direction. But, of course, mutation may be

14 6

POSSIBLE WORLDS

biased in other species. The fourth question is largely
a matter of mathematics. No competent biologist
doubts that evolution and natural selection are taking
place, but we do not yet know whether natural selection
alone, acting on chance variations, will account for the
whole of evolution. If it will, we shall have made a
big step towards understanding the world ; if it will
no more account for all evolution than, for example,
gravitation will account for chemical affinity, as was
once believed, then biologists have a bigger job before
them than many of them think. But a decision of this
question one way or the other will greatly affect our
whole philosophy and probably our religious outlook.
To turn now to the study of the single animal or plant,
physiological researches fall into several classes accord­
ing to the methods used. Some of us measure the
production of small amounts of heat or electrical energy
with complicated apparatus, others hunt down unknown
chemical substances, or measure accurately the amount
of already known ones in the tissues. Taking the
biophysicists first, a whole new field has been opened
up by recent work on radiation. When X-rays were
first applied to living tissues, it was very difficult to
get the same result twice running. But now, thanks
to the work of our physical colleagues, we can get X-rays
of a definite wave-length and intensity, and our results
are correspondingly more intelligible. In the same
animal one tissue is more sensitive than another to rays
of a given wave-length. Moreover, cells are generally
more easily upset when engaged in division than at
other times. These facts account for our occasional
success with X-rays against cancer, and our hope for

THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY

147

greater things in the future. It is quite possible that
some combinations of invisible wave-lengths may be
found to have special properties, just as a mixture of
red and violet spectral lights gives us the sensation of
purple, which intermediate wave-lengths do not.
Similarly, sunlight, besides warming us and enabling
us to see, gives us bronzed skin, blisters us, wards off
rickets, and cures many cases of tuberculosis. But are
all these effects due to the same group of rays acting
in the same way ? We treat skin tuberculosis with ultra­
violet light. Can we increase the curative effect with­
out increasing the danger of severe sunburn ? These
questions are being answered as I write. The applica­
tion of rays will gradually be taken out of the doctor’s
hands. He will write out a prescription, and we will
go round to the radiologist’s shop next door to the
chemist’s and ask for the prescribed treatment in his
back-parlour. The next man at the counter will be
after an apparatus to radiate the buds of his rose bushes
during the winter, and kill off insect eggs which are out
of reach of chemicals, without hurting the plants.
The quack is already in the market with lamps pro­
ducing radiation to cure rheumatism and make your
hair grow. These are mostly harmless, though a few
may be of value ; but probably the sale of X-ray tubes,
which may cause cancer, will some day be as carefully
regulated as that of strychnine.
Physical methods are also being applied in the study
of the nervous system. We have by now gone most of
the way in the localization of function there, for although
a given area of the brain is always concerned in moving
the hand, yet a given point in it may cause different

148

POSSIBLE WORLDS

movements at different tim es; just as any one tele­
phonist in an exchange can only ring up certain sub­
scribers, but yet has a fairly wide choice. So we have
now got to work out the detail of the processes of
excitation and inhibition, as calling up and ringing off
are technically called. This involves very accurate
measurement of the electrical changes in nerve fibres
under different circumstances. Here we are still in
the graph and table stage, but probably only about ten
years off a fairly comprehensive theory of how the
different parts of the nervous system act on one
another. This will at once react on psychology, and
more slowly on normal life and practical medicine. A
great deal that passes as psychology is really rather bad
physiology dressed in long words, and the alleged
physiology in psychological text-books is their worst
part. We shall alter that. Until, however, we have
got a sounder neurology, scientific psychology, except
of a fragmentary character, is no more possible than
was physiology until chemistry and physics had reached
a certain point. And until psychology is a science,
scientific method cannot be applied in politics.
In chemical physiology we are after two rather
different things. The first is to trace out the chemical
processes in the cells, the nature, origin, and destiny of
each substance in them. The second, which is much
easier, is to trace the effect on cell life of various
chemical substances ; including those in which they
are normally found in the body, and unusual ones, such
as drugs and poisons. The first, if pushed to its logical
conclusion, would give us a synthetic cell, and later a
synthetic man, or ‘ robot.’ The second would give

THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY

149

us a complete system of medicine, which is more
immediately required. But, of course, the two react
on one another and are not wholly separable.
At the moment the study of cell chemistry is leading
to the most interesting results in the case of simple
organisms such as yeasts and bacteria. For example,
Neuberg of Berlin worked out a number of the steps
in the transformation of sugar into alcohol and carbon
dioxide by yeast; and was able, by appropriate chemical
methods, to side-track the process so that it yielded
other products. One of these is glycerine. During
the war the Germans were unable to import the fats
and oils from which glycerine is generally made. They
needed glycerine for their propellant explosives, which
contain nitro-glycerine. By getting yeast to make it
from sugar they were able, in spite of the blockade,
to produce all the nitro-glycerine they wanted.
This special process does not pay in peace-time, but
there are others which d o ; and every day moulds and
bacteria are playing a more important part in indus­
trial chemistry. Similarly, we are now studying the
chemical processes in bacteria as carefully as we do
those in our own bodies. There is generally a weak
link in such a chain ; for example, in human beings
the links whose breaking gives us diabetes or rickets.
If we study the tubercle bacillus carefully we may find
his weak point. The relatively direct methods which
gave us the cure for syphilis are here no use, for the
tubercle bacillus is a far tougher organism than the
spirochaete, and we cannot yet kill him without killing
his host. Similarly, we are trying to find out how the
chemical processes in normal and cancerous cells differ.

!50

POSSIBLE WORLDS

In man the study of what our body cells can and
cannot do is gradually leading us to the perfect diet.
It is becoming quite clear that faulty diet gives us some
diseases, including most of our bad teeth, and pre­
disposes us to others ; and that nothing out of a tin or
package so far comes up to natural foodstuffs. On the
other hand, as the population of large cities cannot get
these, we have got to determine what can be done to
improve a diet based largely on milled cereals and
tinned milk and meat. It is a tough problem, and for
every pound we can spend on research and publicity
put together the food-faking firms have a thousand for
advertising of ‘ scientific ’ foods.
To turn now to the chemical co-ordination of the
body, we know that various organs secrete into the
blood substances (often called hormones) which pro­
foundly affect the rest of the tissues. A number of
these have been obtained in a fairly concentrated form
—that is to say, mixed with perhaps only ten or a
hundred times their weight of other substances. Only
two have been obtained entirely pure, though presum­
ably all will be. Now, if we take one of the most widely
popularized of recent therapeutic methods, the grafting
of apes’ testicles into old or prematurely senile men,
this is just an attempt to get a hitherto unisolated
hormone into the blood stream. The operation is
expensive, the idea unpleasant, and the graft generally
dies in a few years at most. The problem is to isolate
the hormone free from other poisonous substances
found in most tissue extracts, and later to find its
chemical formula and synthesize it. One of the
corresponding substances found in the female sex

THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY

*5 *

has been obtained free from harmful companions by
Allen and Doisy in America.
When we have these substances available in the pure
state we ought to be able to deal with many departures
from the normal sexual life, ranging from gross perver­
sion to a woman’s inability to suckle her children; since
lactation, as well as the normal instincts, appears to
depend on the presence of definite substances in the
blood. We shall also probably be able, if we desire,
to stave off the sudden ending of woman’s sexual life
between the ages of forty and fifty. It is worth
pointing out that there is no serious reason to believe
that any of the rather expensive products of the sex
glands now on the market, and often prescribed by
doctors, are of any value except as faith cures.
A much more ambitious attempt to deal with old
age is being started by Carrel. Cultures from in­
dividual cells from a chicken can be kept alive in
suitable media for twenty years, and as far as we know
for ever. To live they must have certain extracts of
chicken embryo. The blood of a young fowl contains
substances (which can be separated by suitable methods)
that both stimulate and check their growth. The
former is absent in very old fowls. The problem of
perpetual youth has, therefore, been solved for one
kind of cell. But to make a pullet immortal we should
have to solve it for all the different cells of its body at
once. We do not know if this is possible, or whether
it is like trying to design a society which is ideal alike
for cowboys, automobile manufacturers, and symbolist
poets, all of whom can hardly flourish side by side.
Fifty years hence we shall probably know whether it

! S2

POSSIBLE WORLDS

is worth seriously trying to obtain perpetual youth for
man by this method. A hundred years hence our
great-grandchildren may be seeing the first results of
such attempts.
Besides these rather sensational substances which
were first detected by their effects on organs, the proper
working of the organism depends on the amount of
quite well-known bodies, such as sugar, oxygen, and
lime in the blood. We are gradually getting to know
the amounts of these required for health, but it is much
harder to estimate the amount needed of such a sub­
stance as, say, insulin. We can now kill an animal
and produce a fluid from inorganic constituents that
will keep its heart or liver alive for a day or more.
Soon it will be a matter of months or years. To keep
tissues alive for a time comparable with the life of their
owner we shall have to have about ioo substances, but
perhaps not very many more, present in the normal
amounts in the fluid perfusing them. At present we
only know the correct quantity of some twenty, if that.
Given this knowledge and the means of applying it, we
could make good the deficiency of any organ but the
nervous system. We could grow human embryos in
such a solution, for their connection with their mother
seems to be purely chemical. We could cut our beef­
steak from a tissue culture of muscle with no nervous
system to make it waste food in doing work, and a
supply of hormones to make it grow as fast as that of
an embryo calf.
In pharmacology our knowledge rests mainly on a
series of lucky accidents. A few of the complicated
substances made by plants have a striking effect on

THE FUTURE OF BIOLOGY

153

animals, but why a molecule of a given build has a
given physiological effect we are only beginning to
discover. When we know, we should be able to make
as great an advance on plant products as we did with
dyes when the relations between colour and chemical
composition were discovered. If we had a drug that
was as good a pain-killer as morphine, but one-tenth
as poisonous and not a habit former, we could use it
indiscriminately; and wipe out a good half of the
physical pain in human life at one stroke.
Such are a few of the possibilities of our science. It
is easy enough to say what we would do if we had a
method to measure A or isolate B. But it is in invent­
ing and applying these methods that our biggest pro­
blems often arise.

t

L

\

N ATIO N ALITY AND RESEARCH
C IE N C E is an international concern. Any paper
on pure science becomes the property of the
whole world the moment it is published. And
the special scientific terminology so frequently termed
jargon is, with all its faults, an international language.
One can get the gist of a scientific paper in any European
tongue, and even amid a wilderness of Japanese script
one comes across oases of mathematical expressions,
numerical tables, and chemical formulae. Moreover,
all important papers are abstracted in English and
German within a year or so of publication.
It is impossible for any one critic to assess the con­
tributions of the various nations to literature. For all
I know, the greatest living poet may write in Siamese.
Musical notation is more nearly international, but it
must be remembered that many Oriental peoples
employ a scale very different from our own. In the
domain of science one may safely be more positive,
and an attempt to apportion the contributions made by
different nations, if unlikely to be wholly impartial, is
not obviously futile.
As elsewhere, one immediately comes up against the
problem of the Jews. Are we to call Einstein, who is
a professor in Berlin (and also in the Dutch University
of Leyden) but was bom in Switzerland, and is inter­
national in outlook, a Jew, a German, or a Swiss ?
For the Jews, just as they are partly responsible for one

S

154

NATIONALITY AND RESEARCH

155

of the worst features of our civilization, the control of
industry by financiers more interested in profit than
service, have shown in other fields the most singleminded devotion to pure thought. ‘ German ’ science
in the last forty years has been largely Jewish, in spite
of the very unfavourable conditions under which the
Jews worked. Thus Ehrlich’s co-discoverer of ‘ 606 ’
was a Japanese, Hata, because so few German gentiles
were willing to work with him. Mendeleeff and
Metchnikoff, the two greatest Russian scientists of
last century, both had Jewish mothers. So far the
main Jewish contribution to science has been in
Germany and Austria, but it is beginning seriously in
Britain, America, France, and even Japan, while
the first papers from the biochemical laboratory of
Jerusalem University were published in 1925.
As modem science is of European origin, it will
perhaps be convenient to work in towards Europe as a
centre from the rest of the world. New Zealand and
Australia have made first-rate contributions to science,
but largely by exporting their scientists to other
portions of the British Empire. Rutherford, who
discovered the structure of the atom, was born in a
back block of New Zealand, and gravitated to Cam­
bridge via Montreal and Manchester.
Japan is making contributions to every branch of
science, but, as a student of Japanese art might
expect, they have, on the whole, been distinguished by
technical rather than intellectual power. For example,
in bacteriology Japan holds a very high place; in
physics it excels rather in exact measurements than in
their theoretical interpretation. However, Japanese

156

POSSIBLE WORLDS

research work is still in its first generation, and is
already ahead of that of most European countries.
In another fifty years it may excel that of Europe as
a whole.
China is starting on research, largely under American
guidance. India has begun, and that sensationally
enough. Srinavasa Ramanujan was a clerk in a Madras
office with no mathematical education beyond that
usual in secondary schools. In 1913 he sent to
Cambridge proofs of certain new theorems in higher
algebra. He was at once brought over to England,
and within a few years he was a Fellow of the Royal
Society and of Trinity College, Cambridge. Had he
lived a century earlier, when the methods which he
favoured were yielding their best results, he would
probably have been the world’s greatest mathematician.
And though he died too early to earn that title, he may
perhaps be awarded the palm for mathematical origin­
ality in the twentieth century. India has produced
no other scientist of such distinction, and her total
contribution has been less than that of Japan. But it
has been, on the whole, of a surprisingly original
character, sometimes, indeed, slightly bizarre to
European minds, and leaves no doubt whatever that
India has a very great scientific future.
South America has as yet done little, though the
Argentine Republic has not been without its dis­
tinguished biologists and palaeontologists.
The United States produce a colossal volume of
scientific work, of very unequal merit. Where endow­
ment can assure results, they lead the world. Their
astronomical observations form the bulk of international

N A TIO N A LITY AND RESEARCH

157

output, though their interpretation often comes from
England, Germany, or Holland. In the studies of
animal breeding and nutrition, the methods largely
devised in Cambridge and London are being developed
on a colossal scale. Morgan’s work on inheritance in
New York has involved the counting of over twenty
million small flies. Langmuir is provided by the
General Electrical Company with his own laboratory
and a salary which most Cabinet Ministers would envy,
on condition that he occasionally spares a day or so to
consider the problems which arise in their works.
Some of the ablest men in Europe are constantly being
attracted over by offers of salaries, and still more of
facilities of research.
In spite of these facts and the undoubted genius of
many Americans, I am inclined to think that in pure
(though not perhaps in applied) science America pro­
duces less than either Britain or Germany. The
probable reason is that great men are more important
to science than great laboratories, and a larger pro­
portion of scientifically-minded men are drawn into
the work of national development in America than in
Europe. The very wide diffusion of higher education
in the U.S.A. is compensated for by its often indifferent
quality, and by the terrific obscurantism which makes
biological teaching a farce in many parts of the country.
Though Canada has sent fewer notable men of science
to Britain than Australia, her output of published work,
culminating in the preparation of the internal secretions
of the pancreas and parathyroid by Banting and Collip,
has been greater, partly owing to a constant interchange
of ideas and personnel with the United States.

!S8

PO SSIBLE W ORLDS

The Union of Socialist Soviet Republics (I do not
say Russia, if only because of the admirable physio­
logical work proceeding in the Georgian University of
Tiflis) is still so isolated that its appraisal is difficult.
During the war and revolutions about one-third of its
scientific personnel appear to have been lost by death,
flight, and the separation of Poland and other states. I
can only think of one biologist of any eminence executed
by the present regime, and could cap his name with
that of another recently killed by Whites in the
Caucasus. As a result of the revolution, scientific
workers have been given many large houses as labora­
tories and museums. On the other hand, those in the
higher positions are worse off economically, and all of
them are largely cut off from foreign sources of litera­
ture and equipment. Hence they are concentrating
on work where elaborate apparatus is not required, for
example animal breeding, to which they appear to be
devoting more effort than any country but the United
States, and the careful study of animals and plants in
a state of nature.
In ‘ bourgeois ’ Europe two of the small nations,
Holland and Denmark, undoubtedly lead in the output
of scientific work per million inhabitants, though
Switzerland runs them very close. They are incident­
ally two of the healthiest nations in Europe, although
the population of Holland is increasing faster than that
of any other European state ; and are both quite rich,
although almost devoid of mineral wealth. This is
because they are successfully applying biology—
Denmark to her own agriculture, Holland to the
development of her empire, which sets the example to

N A TIO N A LITY AND RESEARCH

159

the world in tropical agriculture and hygiene. The
Dutch go so far in their recognition of this fact as
actually to call some of their liners after botanists,
instead of the usual soldiers, sailors, politicians, and
royalties.
In Denmark the Carlsberg brewery, which, under the
supervision of two great biochemists, has come to
produce the strongest beer on earth, is now the prin­
cipal support of a scientific academy, as though ‘ Bass '
were affiliated to the Royal Society !
The largest actual output of scientific work comes
from Britain and Germany. Fifty years ago, Germany
probably took the first place in this respect. To-day
I am personally inclined to think that the position is
about equalized, and that this was so even before the
war. The reasons are perhaps as follows. Before the
foundation of the German Empire in 18 7 1, each little
state had its university, which competed with its neigh­
bours and managed to make any of its particularly
brilliant alumni a professor extraordinarius at an early
age. He then gathered pupils round him and formed
a school. Now he probably goes to the Kaiser Wilhelm
Institut at Berlin and has to compete for pupils with
colleagues from all over Germany. Moreover, there is
reason to think that politics had come to play more part
in university appointments in the last few decades
before the war than formerly. Nevertheless, it would
be idle to deny the splendour of Germany’s achieve­
ments at the present moment, more especially in such
fields as organic chemistry and mathematics, which the
Germans have made peculiarly their own.
If Great Britain leads the world in many branches of

i6o

PO SSIB LE WORLDS

science, it is, I think, largely through two causes, the
autonomy of our universities, and the lack of national­
ism in our scientific thought. A university governing
itself may be a little deaf to the claims of working-class
education or the equality of the sexes, but it is more
likely to appoint the best man to a post than is one
governed by business men or politicians. And we are
certainly less prone than France, Germany, or America
to ignore the work of foreigners.
France has undoubtedly lost ground in the last fifty
years. She still produces men of very great originality,
but State control of higher education and ignorance of
foreign achievement handicap them enormously. Since
the war, moreover, no serious attempt has been made
either in France or Belgium to bring the real wages of
scientific workers to pre-war levels, and many of their
best men are turning to applied sciences such as
medicine and engineering.
Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, Belgium, and Finland
are all producing first-rate work, and the same applies to
Poland, Czecho-Slovakia, Austria, and Hungary, which
have shared most of the scientists of the late Austrian
Empire. Italy is now producing little experimental
science, though her mathematics are still very good
indeed, the Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di
Palermo being one of the world’s greatest mathematical
journals. Though Spain has given us a great microscopist and Greece a great mathematician, our story is
told, and it only remains to see if we can draw any
lesson from the distribution of scientific achievement.
Other things being equal, the small nations are more
scientific than the large, for reasons already discussed.

N A TIO N A LITY AND RESEA RCH

161

Probably a standard educational system is an evil, as
government officials always tend to demand quantity
rather than quality of work, and research flourishes best
in an atmosphere where leisure and even laziness are
possible. On the other hand, a government depart­
ment like the Medical Research Council in England,
which is not dominated by red tape and is willing to
subsidize work that may turn out to be valueless, on the
chance of obtaining a really great result like the recent
production in a pure form of the vitamin which pre­
vents rickets, can be of enormous use to science.
Scientific ability is not the perquisite of any one race,
but it can only show itself under conditions when
thought is free, and there are many different ways of
suppressing it. One way is to refuse research facilities
to people without academic qualifications. If Faraday
lived to-day he would not find his career much, if at all,
easier in England; and in many countries he would
have to remain a bookbinder. Scientific genius is so
rare that no single system, however well thought out,
will avail for its discovery and encouragement.

SC IEN TIFIC RESEARCH FOR
AMATEURS
N T IL the last century scientific research was
almost entirely the work of men who earned their
living by some other method, or possessed
private means. Until about fifty years ago there
no such thing as training for research, and every
researcher began his career as an amateur. To-day
large sums of public and private money are devoted to
the education of prospective research workers. This
expenditure is most valuable in certain branches of
science, but as one result of it the view has unfortunately
got abroad that research is now only possible to persons
who have gone through an elaborate and expensive
training. The same false idea is propagated by writers
who are ignorant of science and either hate or fear it,
and therefore attempt to magnify the gulf which exists
between the scientific worker and the average intelli­
gent man. It is the object of this essay to show that
any man possessed of the patience and leisure necessary
to watch a cricket or baseball match, and sufficient
intelligence to solve a crossword puzzle, can make quite
definite contributions to scientific research.
It must be admitted at once that certain branches of
science are almost closed to the amateur. In chemistry,
for example, or human anatomy, the would-be re­
searcher must not only master a great deal of knowledge,
but, what is far more serious, and indeed almost im­
possible outside the laboratory, a great deal of technique.

U

SC IEN TIFIC RESEARCH FOR A M A TEU R S

163

The reason for this is fairly simple. There are only
ninety known kinds of atom, and only two main types
of human body. Each (except half a dozen excessively
rare types of atom) has been very extensively studied.
But several hundred thousand different species of
insect and several million different stars are known ;
and very little indeed is known in detail about most of
them, while all would repay study.
It is probably in the biological field that the amateur
can do the most interesting and valuable work. If he
lives in a town his possibilities are restricted to a study
of those organisms which can live under artificial
conditions. But the number of such is quite large.
Enormous numbers of town dwellers keep animal or
plant pets, and many breed them. Now exceedingly
little is known as yet with regard to inheritance in most
plants and animals. The animal breeder would per­
haps be well advised to avoid such relatively thoroughly
studied species as mice, rats, rabbits, guinea pigs, and
poultry ; but a vast amount remains to be done with
dogs, cats, and pigeons. With regard to dogs, the
inheritance of colour within some breeds is fairly well
understood, but singularly little has been found out as
yet concerning the structural characters which dis­
tinguish the breeds from one another. Some can be
transferred as units, so to speak. A Swiss breeder
produced a Newfoundland with the legs of a Dachs­
hund 1 Others are more complex. The same is true
of pigeons. So far the ambition of pigeon breeders has
more often been to become a prominent member of the
Bald and Beard Club or the Oriental Frill Club than of
the Genetical Society. But the production of the ideal

164

PO SSIBLE WORLDS

Bald and Beard pigeon does not constitute a permanent
acquisition to humanity, as would the knowledge of
how its baldness and beard are inherited. And as a
matter of fact it is often much easier to determine the
inheritance of a character than to establish a strain of
prize-winners. Science is indebted to the fancier for
picking out and perpetuating a number of remarkable
varieties. It is now beginning to turn to him to
analyse his truly wonderful material.
Moreover, there are many animals as easy to breed
as pigeons and cats, and far less troublesome to keep,
including many insects and molluscs. One of the
Clerks to the House of Commons has devoted his spare
time for the last few years to the breeding of water
snails, which requires no apparatus more complicated
than jam pots, water and water weeds. Some of these
snails coil in the wrong direction, i.e. look like the
mirror image of an ordinary sn ail; and this character
was found to be inherited in a wholly unprecedented
manner. To establish the laws governing this new
type of inheritance over 50,000 snails had to be bred,
and the work was almost entirely done by a few
amateurs.
Any one with a garden or greenhouse, however small,
can embark on plant breeding. Apart from plants of
economic value only a very few, such as the sweet pea,
stock, snapdragon, and Primula sinensis, have been
thoroughly studied from the point of view of heredity.
The technical equipment needed consists of a brush to
carry pollen from one flower to another, a pair of fine
scissors to remove stamens, and some paper bags to
keep out unwanted pollen.

SC IEN TIFIC RESEARCH FOR A M A TEU RS

165

It might be thought that the results of such researches
could only be of trivial importance. This is not so.
Even if one does not hit upon facts which involve a new
type of inheritance or throw new light upon one already
studied, the facts discovered have a comparative value.
As we study the variations in different species of plants
and animals and the laws governing their inheritance
we begin to get a view of the raw material upon which
natural selection has worked to produce evolution.
The more ambitious student of biology, especially if
he or she combines scepticism and pertinacity, can study
inheritance in human beings. Here experiment is im­
possible, and facts often hard to obtain. Naturally
enough people will lie with regard to the inheritance of
a mental, moral, or physical defect. But experience
shows that they lie almost equally with regard to such
a harmless topic as the eye colour of their late grand­
mother ; apparently from a desire to give some kind of
an answer to a question which they are convinced is
quite unimportant. First-hand evidence is therefore
always desirable and often necessary. And so mobile
has the human race become in the last generation that
the tracing of a single family may demand railway
journeys running into thousands of miles. It is
cheaper to breed armadillos or cacti, or even, like
Professor----- , to trust largely to one’s imagination so
far as human inheritance is concerned.
In the country the amateur biologist can observe as
well as experiment. The natural history of our grand­
parents’ time, which was regarded as unscientific by our
parents, is now coming into fashion again. The col­
lector is very unlikely to discover a new species, except

166

PO SSIBLE W ORLDS

in undeveloped countries, but he may contribute to
our knowledge of the geographical distribution of an
old one, or still more effectively to an understanding of
the conditions under which it flourishes. Ecology is
the study of natural communities of plants and animals.
The ecologist studies not only the conditions of soil and
climate which determine that one community rather
than another should exist, but the relations between the
different members of the community; the most im­
portant and typical relation being that of eater and
eaten. This is a harder job than it sounds. Even in
your own garden you may know the principal caterpillar
that eats your favourite flower, and the birds that eat the
caterpillar and thus protect the flower; but probably
far more caterpillars are eaten from inside by parasitic
insects than from outside by birds. So a complete
ecological study of any area must be quantitative, and
is as different from the old-style natural history as an
economic survey from a list of trades and professions.
Nevertheless, any lover of country life who keeps his
eyes open can make some contribution to the science.
One of the most universal and remarkable of human
characteristics is a love of flowers. Nothing can be
more delightful than to pass a quarter of an hour daily
wandering round one’s garden or favourite fields and
hedgerows, noting what new flowers are to be found in
bloom. A diary in which records of blooming are kept
year after year is not only an ideal hobby, but of con­
siderable scientific value. Such diaries are collated in
England by the Phenological Society, and furnish one
of the most important means available for the study of
the influence of climate on plant life. The variations

SC IEN TIFIC RESEARCH FOR A M A TEU R S

167

in flowering time from place to place and from year to
year, combined with records of temperature, rainfall,
and sunshine, show how the various types of plant
respond to their environment. But even in England
far too few records of this kind are kept, and elsewhere
the need for them is much greater.
The naturalist who can spare more time together may
embark upon the study of animal behaviour, and more
especially insect behaviour. I do not use the word
psychology because it is not fashionable, although to
my mind quite justifiable. Here insects and spiders
with their very definite and complicated behaviour
patterns, or ' instincts/ are the ideal objects of study.
A lens, a notebook, and immense patience, are the chief
requisites, and it is worth noticing that many of the
greatest observers of insect behaviour had other
occupations. Fabre was a schoolmaster, Lord Avebury
an extremely successful banker and a politician; in
fact, until quite recently professional bioldgists had
contributed relatively little to this branch of know­
ledge, and some of them had blundered pretty badly
on leaving the laboratory for the field.
The other branches of biology, although open to the
amateur, are mostly less promising because they require
more technique ; and the same is true of chemistry
and physics. Here the amateur is more likely to invent
than to discover. Accurate measurements are almost
always needed in work that is to be of theoretical value,
whereas a combination of luck and ingenuity may easily
lead to an improvement in some well-known process
which is of great practical importance.
In geology the amateur can do a great deal in rela­

168

PO SSIBLE WORLDS

tively undeveloped countries, rather less in those which
have been thoroughly explored ; but one branch of it,
namely, human palaeontology, has been traditionally
the field of enthusiasts from other walks of life, especi­
ally of Roman Catholic clergy. Local knowledge has,
of course, been of the greatest importance, and the
exploration of the underground haunts of primitive
man has called not only for skill and perseverance, but
in many cases for considerable courage.
Among all the achievements of scientific amateurs
none is more epic than the swim of Norbert Casteret
through the cavern of Montespan. Casteret, who is one
of France’s champion swimmers, conceived the idea of
swimming up a stream which emerges from a cave in a
part of south-western France where several primitive
human races have left their bones and tools. Carrying
candles and matches in a waterproof bag he went up
the <?ave until the roof met the water, dived, and swam
on, holding his breath, until he found air once more
above him. He was now in a section of the cave which
had been sealed off from the world by water since
palaeolithic times. Walking or swimming along it
and diving under the rock where necessary, he finally
emerged into the daylight more than a mile from his
starting point. The results obtained were of the first
importance, for he discovered several rude palaeolithic
statues of unbaked clay, of a type entirely new to science
As professional students of primitive man rarely, if ever,
combine phenomenal powers of diving with superb
courage, this particular type of research is likely to
remain the prerogative of the amateur.
Spelaeology, as the science of caves is called, is a

SC IEN TIFIC RESEARCH FOR A M A TEU RS

169

sport as fascinating and arduous as mountain climbing,
and in Europe and Asia at any rate leads its devotees
into the homes of earlier human races. One may hope
that as virgin peaks decrease in number, sportsmen
with a scientific bent may begin to feel the lure of the
virgin cavern. Unfortunately those English caves
which are most interesting to the pure speleologist,
rarely contain human remains. One may hope that the
descendants of the British sportsmen who conquered
so many of the Alpine peaks will turn their attention to
the limestone caverns of Yugoslavia and north-eastern
Italy.
A great deal of meteorological observation must in­
evitably be made away from great centres of population.
Even in England the distribution of rainfall is far less
known than it should be, and in less populated countries
accurate knowledge is ludicrously inadequate. The
reason perhaps lies in the fact that only continuous and
methodical observation is of the slightest value. The
rain gauge must be read day after day at exactly the
same hour, and the wetter the day, the more urgent
the need of punctual observation ! Yet of all forms of
amateur scientific work the daily reading of a rain gauge
bears the greatest resemblance to the daily routine of
the laboratory, where many thousands of accurate ob­
servations may be required to establish a fact whose
significance is even then doubtful.
Observations on wind, sunshine, and clouds are, of
course, also needed; but whereas a daily visit to the rain
gauge is generally sufficient, a day’s anemometer records
must be carefully kept, and the clouds change from
minute to minute. Nevertheless, the lover of photoM

170

PO SSIBLE WORLDS

graphy may do worse than turn his attention to them;
either using a special cloud camera which gives a
picture of the whole sky on one plate, or a pair of
cameras some hundreds of yards apart, and giving
stereoscopic pictures.
But it is in the region of the atmosphere somewhat
above the clouds that the amateur observer reigns
supreme. ‘ Shooting stars,’ which are due to frag­
ments of matter from interstellar space flaring up
through friction as they enter our atmosphere at very
high speeds, have been known from the remotest
antiquity; but we are no better able to observe them to­
day than were the wise men of the East, or Mohammed,
who thought that they were missiles cast by angels at
devils who were attempting to overhear the secrets of
heaven. The telescope is far better suited than the
naked eye for the observation of ordinary stars, but it
greatly magnifies a very small portion of the whole
heavens, and hence the chance of a shooting star crossing
its field is small.
Some day, no doubt, an instrument superior to the
human eye will be invented for the observation of
meteors; but until this invention is made, the equipment
of an observatory will be worse than useless for this
purpose. Hence the world’s greatest meteor observer,
and probably its greatest amateur scientist, Mr. W. F.
Denning, owns no allegiance to any observatory. The
observer of meteors requires a clear sky, a thick coat, a
notebook, knowledge of the constellations, infinite
patience, and a tendency to insomnia. Our knowledge
of the upper atmosphere has already been revolution­
ized by mathematical physicists using Mr. Denning’s

SC IEN TIFIC RESEARCH FOR AM A TEU RS

17 1

observations made over a period of more than thirty
years. They show that at a height of forty miles the
air is many times denser than was formerly supposed,
and attains the quite comfortable temperature of
85° F. If this were not so, meteors would mostly
come far nearer to the earth’s surface, and would
therefore be far brighter than is actually the case.
However, in order to give a really precise basis for
calculations vastly more observations of the same kind
are required. The hot layer is probably the same as
the ionized Heaviside layer which reflects downwards
the Hertzian waves used in radio-telegraphy and
telephony. The heating and ionization are caused by
the stoppage of some of the ultra-violet components of
the sun’s radiation.
The astronomer who is able to spend the price of a
small motor car on a telescope can at once enter on work
of a character demanding less patience. A specially
suitable field is the observation of variable stars. Many
stars vary in brightness, and the variation is generally
periodic. A knowledge of the way in which their
luminosity varies with the time throws much light on
their nature. The variation may be due to a periodic
eclipse by a darker star rotating round the star observed
and occasionally cutting off its light, or to real changes
in the luminous star itself. Many variable stars appear
to pulsate like a beating heart with a period of hours or
days. The fact that this period is increasing (though
very slowly) in some variable stars, is the only direct
indication we have of real changes in the nature of the
fixed stars; and supports the view held on many
theoretical grounds, that, to use a perhaps rather in­

172

PO SSIBLE WORLDS

accurate metaphor, they are running down. Amateur
astronomy is well organized both in England and
America, and boasts of the only paper that sets cross­
word puzzles in three dimensions. There are so many
stars that a useful field of observation could be found,
not perhaps for the whole population of the world, but
certainly for some hundreds of times the present
number of astronomical amateurs.
Mathematics is the most abstract and specialized of
the sciences, and in view of the very high qualifications
required in a professional mathematician, might seem
a hopeless field for all but a very few. And certainly
the amateur cannot hope to rival the professional at his
own game. Nevertheless, there is an opening in
mathematics for the class of mind that delights in
numerical calculation for its own sake. Those who are
so gifted tend to amuse themselves with calculations
which are useless; for example, of the number of grains
of sand of a given size needed to fill the dome of
St. Paul’s ; or worse than useless, as when the date of
the outbreak of the next world war (May 1928) is
deduced from the dimensions of the great pyramid.
If more mathematically minded they might occupy
themselves somewhat unprofitably in calculating the
ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter to
a thousand places of decimals instead of a mere seven
hundred odd, its present limit of accuracy.
But they can also be of real if limited value to mathe­
matics in two ways. They can work out tables of
certain mathematical functions which are not as yet
tabulated, but which are sometimes needed by physic­
ists, engineers, and others, in their calculations.

SC IEN TIFIC RESEARCH FOR A M A TEU RS

173

And they can study the properties of whole numbers.
In mathematics as a whole theory runs ahead of
observation. But in the theory of numbers this is not
so. No one has ever been able to prove, for example,
that every even number greater than two can be ex­
pressed as the sum of two primes. Yet this is as well
established by observation as any of the laws of physics.
It is known that this and various other theorems are
true if a certain hypothesis about the Zeta function,
enunciated by Riemann nearly a century ago, is correct.
No one has been able to prove this hypothesis. It has
only been shown that all the consequences deducible if
it is true are so far verified by experience. But any day
a computer with little knowledge of pure mathematics
may disprove it. Here then is a possible triumph for
the mathematical amateur. Similarly while it has been
proved that the circle cannot be squared, the possibility
remains open that the sum of twro fifty-ninth powers
may itself turn out to be a fifty-ninth power ; just as,
for example, the sum of three squared and four squared
is itself the square of five ; although since the seven­
teenth century the opposite has appeared likely, and
has been proved for all powers less than fifty-nine.
Only a few years ago Mr. Powers, an American com­
puter, disproved a hypothesis about prime numbers
which had held the field for more than 250 years.
Here then is a relatively hopeful field for circle squarers.
And it is to amateurs that the world must look for
perhaps the greatest of all scientific achievements, the
foundation of a new science. The founder may be an
amateur in the strictest sense, as was the abbot Mendel
when he founded genetics, or a worker at some other

PO SSIBLE WORLDS
>74
science, like the physiologist Galvani, who discovered
electric currents ; but he is always an amateur in the
science that he creates.
And just because in the modern organization of
research any given worker is labelled as an astro­
physicist, an organic chemist, a palaeontologist, a
geneticist, or what not, the need for the amateur in the
border line or wholly novel subject is all the greater.
Fortunately, most of the very greatest scientists keep
the spirit of the intelligent schoolboy to the last.
Darwin occasionally indulged in what he called ‘ fool’s
experiments,’ as when he played a trumpet to a group
of climbing plants. In this case nothing happened, but
the experiment was no more intrinsically foolish than
that of Oersted when he tried the effect of an electric
current on the compass, and thus connected electricity
and magnetism.
The objection to most amateur science lies not in the
foolishness of its experiments, but in the inability of the
experimenters to be satisfied with negative results.
Most laboratory experiments are failures, and even
when an apparent success has been obtained the com­
petent researcher at once tries to catch himself out. I
am going to waste to-morrow on an experiment which
I hope and trust will be a failure, for if it were a success
it would not only be quite inexplicable, but would
destroy the theoretical results of a year’s work.
Amateur scientists commonly fail because they set out
to prove something rather than to arrive at the truth,
whatever it may be. They do not realize that a good
half of most research work consists in an attempt to
prove yourself wrong. Intellectual honesty is dis-

mmm mm

SHOULD SC IEN TIFIC RESEARCH BE
REWARDED ?
T is a commonplace that the wealth of modern
societies is in a large degree the creation of scientific
research, and it is therefore often suggested that
scientific workers should share in this wealth on a scale
more or less comparable with that in which labour and
capital are rewarded. In particular, Sir Ronald Ross
has for some years supported the idea that scientific
workers who have made important discoveries should,
as a routine, receive pecuniary rewards from the State—
of course, the State—on a scale comparable with those
of successful generals.
At first sight the justice of his contention seems clear.
In other intellectual occupations—for example, litera­
ture, music, and the fine arts—those men and women
who are most highly esteemed by their contemporaries
enjoy fairly large incomes. A scientist can practically
never hope to earn as much as £2000 per year as such,
and is generally glad if he gets half that sum, while
incomes of £300 are quite common. To make more
he must go out of the path of pure research and teaching,
and apply his talents to industry, administration,
popular writing, or some other activity for which there
is an economic demand. Very little can be made by
taking out patents. One cannot patent a new fish or a
new star, and medical etiqtiette rightly forbids the
patenting of a new medicine or a new surgical instru­
ment. The physicist and chemist cannot patent their
176

I

SHOULD RESEARCH BE REW ARDED ?

177

great discoveries, for two different reasons. In the
first place they do not know how they will be applied.
When Richardson discovered the laws governing elec­
tron emission from hot metals, he did not, presumably,
suspect that he had made wireless telephony practicable.
He could not take out a patent for all possible applica­
tions of his discovery ; and many equally fundamental
facts elicited at about the same time— for example, the
emission of electrons by radio-active bodies in the cold
—have found no paying application as yet.
Again, as a general rule, the greater the discovery the
longer the time before it is applied. It was a long time
before Faraday’s discovery of electro-magnetic induc­
tion could be applied to the manufacture of a practical
dynamo. He did not make a penny out of it, and,
fortunately, his heirs-at-law are not still being paid for
it, as are those of Nelson for the Battle of Trafalgar.
The Chinese might regard it as equitable that every user
of electric light or power should burn at least one
currency note per year before Faraday’s image ; and
even a posthumous reward is better than none.
The French, for example, do not pay their men of
science a living wage. On the other hand, they give
them statues—often very good statues—when dead,
and call streets after them. And to many scientific
men, such is our perversity, the prospect of becoming
a street name is a better incentive to effort than a rise
of salary.
The greatest difficulty of a scheme of rewards during
life is to be found in the impossibility of estimating the
importance of a discovery until the discoverer is dead
or too old to enjoy the money. Any jury will inevitably

178

PO SSIBLE WORLDS

tend to rate the discovery of a fact above the invention
of a method of research. Let us take as an example the
recent and thoroughly justifiable award of a Nobel prize
to Banting and Macleod for the preparation of insulin,
the substance by whose injection a victim of diabetes
can be restored to health The numerous extracts
prepared before success was reached had all to be tested
by injection into dogs in order to study their effect on
the amount of sugar in the blood. Now, accurate blood
sugar analysis is extremely difficult, especially when
one has only a few drops of blood to work on. It has
been brought to its present degree of efficiency by some
sixty years of very persistent and rather dull work in
hundreds of different laboratories. This work had
occupied far more time, and probably required far
more thought and patience, than the final stage at
Toronto. But its value was less obvious at the time
and its appeal to the imagination is smaller.
As a matter of fact a great scientist is very lucky if in
his own day he receives such recognition as a Nobel
prize. Willard Gibbs, the father of modern physical
chemistry, was probably the greatest American scientist
of the nineteenth century. He was so far recognized
by his contemporaries as to be made a professor, though
I cannot believe that his lectures were very intelligible.
His sister habitually compelled him to drive her round
in her buggy, on the ground that her husband was a
business man and could not spare the time.
But the fact that under a system of rewards much
merit would be unrecognized is the least argument
against such a system. No conceivable system can
forestall the judgment of posterity. It would tend to

SHOULD RESEARCH BE REWARDED ?

179

divert scientific effort towards the obtaining of sensa­
tional rather than solid results. If a prize of a million
dollars had been offered fifty years ago for a substance
whose injection would relieve diabetes (and insulin
would have been very cheap at the price), many of the
men who devised the methods of blood sugar analysis
would have been drawn into fruitless attempts to
isolate insulin.
Again, no chemical discovery is more obviously
worthy of recompense than that of a new element.
Three new elements—hafnium, masurium, and rhenium
—have been discovered in the last three years. But
in each case the discovery was made through the
application of Moseley’s law connecting the X-ray
spectrum of an element with its atomic number. This
law was arrived at as the result of a series of very careful
and laborious measurements, which furnished the
chemist with a weapon of enormous power. But I do
not suppose that it was considered worthy of a para­
graph in the popular press at the time of its discovery,
and I doubt if the public would stand the allocation of
large sums from its exchequer as a reward for work
which is unintelligible to it.
Scientific discovery should be paid for on a system of
credit rather than of cash down. At present research
in pure science is mainly performed by professors and
lecturers at universities in the intervals of the teaching
and administration for which they are paid. A little
research of this kind is paid for as such by the Medical
Research Council and other public bodies, but the vast
majority of the public money spent on research goes
out for work on various branches of applied science,

i8o

PO SSIBLE WORLDS

such as aeroplane design and practical medicine. The
Royal Society has established a few professorships
wholly devoted to research work, and one cannot but
hope that many more such will be founded. A great
discoverer can generally expound his own work, but he
may be a thoroughly bad elementary lecturer and an
extremely incompetent administrator of a laboratory.
It would be an advantage to education as well as to
research if these duties could more often be separated.
And everywhere the salaries are extremely low. It
is too late to reward Faraday, Hertz, or Pasteur. We
can at least see that their successors possess an income
large enough to allow them to bring up a family of five
children and give them a first-class education, while
allowing themselves such luxuries as a small motor car.
I can think of no professorship in Britain or France
which satisfies this criterion. Our research workers
are faced with the choice of deserting their calling on
marriage or drastically limiting their families. I can
think of some who have become expert witnesses,
journalists, civil servants, and even tobacco salesmen,
to their own economic advantage, but hardly to that of
posterity. Others content themselves with one or two
children, a questionable advantage to the public since
scientific ability is strongly inherited.
There is, perhaps, a final argument, from the point of
view of the scientist, against a system of rewards for
research, namely, that it should logically imply a system
of punishments for discoveries adjudged to be of dis­
advantage to the public. The discoverer of a new
explosive, a new poison gas, or a new principle in
aeronautics, might find himself or herself condemned

SH O ULD R E SE A R C H BE R E W A R D E D ?

18 1

to the most appalling penalties. Such discoveries are
often made by persons of the mildest character, who
have no idea that their work will serve to kill a fly, much
less a human being. And as it is equally true that dis­
coveries of immense general utility are often made by
misanthropes only interested in pure theory, and caring
not a rap for their own nor any one else’s welfare, there
is perhaps no injustice in refusing them pecuniary
rewards which few of them have ever demanded.
But it is not only unjust but contrary to the public
interest that scientific research should be, as it is, the
worst paid of all the intellectual professions.

»

SCIENCE AND POLITICS

F

ROM time to time I am asked whether I have
ever thought of taking to politics. I suppose
that question is asked of every man who can speak
consecutively for twenty minutes. Sometimes I fea
I have answered that politics are no occupation for a
honest man. If I made that answer I was wrong, for
it is my duty, and every one’s duty, to try to alter that
state of affairs if it exists. But the true answer was that
I thought I could be of more use where I was. ‘ But
why ? ’ my questioner might have asked, ‘ if you can
find a method of reducing the amount of potassium in
your own blood or altering the distribution of sugar
between the different tissues of your body, should you
not apply your mind to reducing the amount of un­
employment in the country or helping to bring about
a juster distribution of its wealth ? ’ I could not answer
that these questions do not interest me. I have not to
take many paces outside my laboratory to see the need
for political and social reform. As a skilled manual
worker and a trade unionist, I have a strong idea where
I should find my political affinities.
I might claim that my work had done something to
save life and health in the fight against disease. But if
it resulted in halving the death-rate from heart disease
(which is highly unlikely) it would not save half as many
lives as if I could be instrumental in bringing the
sanitary conditions of the unskilled urban labourer up
182

SCIENCE AND PO LITIC S

183

to those of the skilled artisan. And these conditions
depend mainly on housing and wages.
My only valid excuse seems to be along quite differ­
ent lines. I believe that social problems can only be
solved in the long run by the application of scientific
method, such as has made possible modern industry
and modem medicine. I am at once answered by two
sets of people. The first tell me that if I think on
scientific lines about politics I shall inevitably be led to
their own favourite scheme, a scientific tariff perhaps,
or a scientific organization of the means of production
by the State. The others say that my scientific method
may be adequate for dealing with machines or animals ;
but that as man is a great deal more than a machine or
an animal, it cannot be applied to politics. With these
last I have considerable sympathy.
If I thought that science in its present embryonic
state could be applied to politics I should become a
politician. But it certainly cannot. Man is no more a
mere animal than he is an economic unit. It is quite
true that biological laws apply to him as mechanical
laws do. Good intentions alone are as useless against
smallpox as against an earthquake, though they are
needed for dealing with both these calamities. But to
predict the behaviour of men in the mass we require
knowledge of a special kind of psychology. And at the
present moment the expert politician knows ten times
as much of it as the best psychologist. But there is
this big difference between the two. What little
knowledge the psychologist possesses, though it is
so abstract and meagre as to be of very little practical
value, can be put in a form accessible to other

184

PO SSIBLE W ORLDS

psychologists. The same cannot be said of the
politicians.
Mr. Ramsay MacDonald and Lord Younger disagree
on most political topics; but they would probably agree
to a large extent in estimating the ability and integrity
of a given statesman, or the probability of gaining votes
by a given speech or measure. Yet they could not put
into words the processes by which they arrive at these
estimates, although their judgment is clearly worth
more when they agree than when they differ. The
psychologists are just beginning to give an account of
these processes. In another two or three centuries
they will be beating the politicians at their own
game and usurping their power, provided that the
politicians have left a civilization in which psychology
can exist.
I say two or three centuries for the following reason.
Two hundred years ago the physicists and chemists were
beginning to study the properties of metals by exact
methods involving measurement, and the biologists
were looking down the first microscopes. But the real
knowledge of metals lay in the hands of skilled work­
men, who handed down their rule of thumb methods
and manual dexterity to their children. To-day metal­
lurgy is a branch of applied science, while biologists are
just beginning to be of some use to the practical animal
breeder, though they cannot yet beat him at his own
game. Psychology is about as much more complex
than biology as biology than physics. Hence my esti­
mate of the time it will take to develop. Let us hope
that it is too large.
Why then am I not a psychologist ? Because, with

SCIENCE AND POLITICS
185
1
all respect to psychologists, I do not think psychology
is yet a science.
Mechanics became a science when physicists had
decided what they meant by such words as weight,
velocity, and force, but not till then. The psychologists
are still trying to arrive at a satisfactory terminology for
the simplest phenomena that they have to deal with.
Until they are clearer as to the exact meaning of the
words they use, they can hardly begin to record events
on scientific lines. Moreover, I do not believe that psy­
chology will go very far without a satisfactory physiology
of the nervous system, any more than physiology could
advance until physics and chemistry had developed to a
certain point. This is not to say that physiology is a
mere branch of physics or chemistry, or the mind a mere
by-product of the brain. But it is a fact that we can
only know about life by observing the movements of
matter.
You may be the most spiritually minded man on earth,
but I can only learn that fact by seeing, hearing, or
feeling your bodily movements. * As the latter depend
on events in your brain, I may as well get some informa­
tion about those events. Moreover, the close depend­
ence of your thought on processes in your brain may
readily be shown by comparing the effects on it of a
blow on your head and a blow elsewhere. To study
psychology before we understand the physiology of the
brain is like trying to study physics without a knowledge
of mathematics. Physics is more than mathematics,
as matter is more than space, but you cannot have the
one without the other. Now at the moment the
physiology of the nervous system is being worked out
N

186

PO SSIBLE W ORLDS

with great speed, and by contributing to its progress I
suspect that I am doing more for psychology than if
I became a psychologist.
It is worth while taking an example of what I mean
by the application of psychology to politics. The
success or failure of Socialism will depend on whether
it can furnish as good an incentive to individual effort
as our present economic system, more than on any other
single fact. This is a very favourite topic with debating
societies. Similarly the question whether the first bird
came out of the first egg or the other way round was
debated ; until a study of fossils showed that birds were
descended from reptiles which laid eggs, and therefore
the egg had the priority. But a better analogy is the
case of human diet. During the war the basis of the
people’s food had to be changed, and an adequate but
not excessive ration assigned. If this had been left to
politicians it is fairly certain that while there would have
been waste in some directions, yet essential ingredients
in the diet would have been left out, and we should have
had outbreaks of scurvy, rickets, and dropsy such as
occurred on the Continent, even where there was not
actual starvation. But the politicians took the advice
of some very competent biochemists, and rationing
was a success.
A hundred years ago one of Napoleon’s armies was
put on a cheap and portable diet drawn up by the best
physiologists of that day. Some essential ingredients
were left out with disastrous results. I fear that the
results would be no better if we asked the psychologists
of to-day to draw up a scheme of non-economic in­
centives to effort for a socialized industry We should

SCIEN CE AND PO LIT IC S

187

do much better to rely on practical experience of the
fighting services, municipal enterprises, labour bat­
talions in the war, and so on. But even a hundred
years hence I think the psychologists might be quite
as valuable as the ‘ practical men.’
For the moment, then, I believe that the man with a
gift for thought on scientific lines is of more use to his
fellows in the laboratory than out of it. He can work
on clearly defined problems to which his really accurate
if rather narrow type of thought can be applied. I know
that this is little comfort to the unemployed workman or
the war widow who watches the approach of the conflict
that will claim her only son. But we have not yet got
the general principles to apply to their problems,
though we may applaud and support efforts to remedy
individual evils. To take a problem which is much
nearer solution, that of cancer, we can tell the sufferer
to go to the surgeon, who will give him a sporting
chance of recovery if the disease is not too far advanced.
(The surgeons can cure about fifty per cent, of cases of
cancer of the breast or womb if they come in time.)
But the surgeon’s methods are rough and often in­
effective, though we have every reason to think that in
fifty years we shall be able to deal with this disease as we
have with typhoid and smallpox. However, few men
who are dying of inoperable cancer will be cheered by
the news that cancerous tissues have been shown to be
capable of breaking up sugars far more rapidly than
ordinary tissues can, though this may be the clue to the
ultimate prevention or cure of cancer.
To say that the scientific mind is still best employed
outside politics, is not, of coucse, an assertion that

i88

PO SSIB LE W ORLDS

politics are only suited for fools. If I may conclude
with some remarks on a subject of which I know no
more than it is my duty as a voter to know, I would
suggest that with the extension of the State’s activities
the organizing type of mind is becoming more necessary
in politics than the emotional and sympathetic type
which has led great causes in the past. When this
country makes its first experiments in Socialism we shall
need in control of the nationalized industries the type of
mind that has from time to time successfully reorgan­
ized the fighting services in the past. It will be the
duty of the Government to entrust them to such a person
though he or she were as tongue-tied as Sir Eric Geddes,
and as adulterous as Samuel Pepys. Fortunately such
a man or woman is quite as likely to rise to power by
organizing a great trade union, as by the paths which
lead to success in the older parties. But as long as the
principles of politics are unsystematized and incom­
municable, I, for one, shall continue to regard any
political projects as interesting experiments which may
or may not promote human happiness but will certainly
furnish important data for future use.
Of the biochemical experiments which I have done
on myself, perhaps two-thirds have had the results for
which I was looking. But every one has also had
unexpected, and many of them unpleasant, effects.
Nothing can be more instructive than to read the fore­
casts which the more intelligent economists of the
eighteenth century, Adam Smith in particular, made as
to the effects of the economic system which was sub­
stantially adopted in the nineteenth. Smith foresaw
the great increase of wealth and education. He did

SCIEN CE AND PO LIT IC S

189

not predict the amazingly unequal distribution of
incomes, the periodic waves of unemployment, the
gigantic industrial conflicts.
And until politics are a branch of science we shall do
well to regard political and social reforms as experiments
rather than short cuts to the millennium. The timescale of evolution so far has been the geological timescale, in which we expect no substantial change in less
than a hundred thousand years. We may be thankful
if we have speeded up this progress a thousandfold and
at the end of a long life can leave the world noticeably
better than we found it

EUGENICS AND SOCIAL REFORM

P

ER H A PS the greatest tragedy of our age is the
misapplication of science. It is notorious that
the principal result of many increases in human
power and knowledge has been either an improvement
in methods of destroying human life and property, or an
accentuation of economic inequality. This is largely
the fault of the confused thinking of ‘ advanced ’
politicians. I refer to mental processes such as that
which led to our forgoing the use of ‘ mustard gas,’ the
most humane weapon ever invented, since of the casual­
ties it caused, 2*6 per cent, died, and £ per cent, were
permanently incapacitated. No one at Washington
even suggested abandoning H.E. and shrapnel, which
kill or maim about half their casualties. Save for the
fact that it was only preventive medicine which rendered
practicable the large concentrations of troops in the
Great War, biological progress has been little exploited
for human hurt. But the growing science of heredity
is being used in this country to support the political
opinions of the extreme right, and in America by some
of the most ferocious enemies of human liberty. And
yet it seems likely that the facts, in so far as they are
applicable to politics at all, would warrant conclusions
of an entirely different nature from those which have
so far been drawn, and which have made eugenics
abhorrent to many democrats.
The relevant facts fall into two classes, first those
100

EUGENICS AND SOCIAL REFORM

191

which relate to hereditary abnormalities or tendencies
to disease, and secondly those bearing on the inheritance
of intelligence and the different birth-rate in different
social classes. The former are comparatively unim­
portant. Some, like certain types of eye malady, are
transmitted only by affected people, and to about half
their children. It is on the whole undesirable that they
should beget their like ; but before we begin curtailing
the liberties of people already sufficiently unfortunate,
we should first try to impress on them their duty to
restrict their families, and to see that they have the
means to do so.
Other hereditary troubles, apparently including much
feeble-mindedness, are mainly transmitted by un­
affected people, and not necessarily by affected. If
every feeble-minded person were sterilized, hundreds
of generations would be needed to eliminate hereditary
feeble-mindedness. The question of whether a feeble­
minded girl should be allowed to produce an indefinite
number of bastards ought to be settled on the same
grounds as any other social problem. Such a woman
is quite as likely to harm her contemporaries by trans­
mitting venereal disease, and her children by negligence,
as to be responsible for the idiocy of future generations.
And in particular any legislation which does not purport
to apply, and is not actually applied (a very different
thing), to all social classes alike, will probably be applied
unjustly to the poor.
But hereditary deaf-mutism and feeble-mindedness,
though serious evils, are not menaces to national exist­
ence, and it is claimed that this is the case with the
differential birth-rate in different classes. We must

192

POSSIBLE WORLDS

first examine the question how far heredity rather than
environment is responsible for the mental differences
between the children of different social classes. The
question cannot be answered on a priori grounds. To
take a simple case, illiteracy in England is mainly deter­
mined by congenital weak-mindedness, in India by
parental poverty. The problem has been attacked
along many lines. For example, tests such as the
memorizing of arbitrary forms, or the time taken to sort
out cards of five different colours from a mixture, showed
as great differences between the children of members
of the professional classes and the equally well-fed and
healthy children of middle-class parents of similar
incomes, as between the latter and the children of the
poor. Again, within schools drawn from a fairly homo­
geneous population the correlation between brothers or
sisters with regard to intellectual performance was just
the same as that with regard to eye-colour, which
certainly does not depend on environment. Finally,
we have the cases of ‘ identical ’ twins, who have the
same hereditary make-up, and are almost or quite in­
distinguishable physically. Perhaps the best example
of the extraordinary similarity of their mental processes
is the well-authenticated story of the pair who were
brought before their headmaster for making the same
mistake in a mathematical examination, and were able
to prove that they had been in different rooms at the
time 1
All investigators are agreed that mental capacity is
strongly hereditary, though, as with stature, environ­
ment plays a part in its determination. Of course, two
fools may produce a genius, or two dwarfs a giant, but

EUGENICS AND SOCIAL REFORM

193

such cases are the exception. It is also agreed that
among the poorer nine-tenths of the population the
abler members on the whole tend to rise into a richer
class than their parents. This is not so among the rich,
where the more intelligent are commonly content with
incomes of ^1000-^2000; though even here the con­
verse holds, and fools and their money are soon parted.
Finally, there is no doubt that the richer classes breed
much more slowly than the poorer, and that this is
not compensated for by lower infantile mortality. A
thousand married teachers under fifty-five annually
beget1 95 children, a thousand doctors 103, carpenters
150, general labourers 267. Thus the unskilled workers
are breeding much faster than the skilled classes, and,
in view of the demands for intellectual and manual skill
in modern civilization, this is an evil. The Eugenics
Education Society have doubtless done good work in
persuading a certain number of intelligent people that
it is their duty to have more children. They have also
rightly urged lessened taxation of parents of children.
But many of their members have coupled this with a
clamour against measures designed to ameliorate the
lot of the children of the poor at the expense of the rich.
It is a curious policy to combat evils due to economic
inequality by perpetuating that inequality.
The main reasons for the differential birth-rate seem
to be three. First, persons who have money to spend
on the education of their children and a prospect of
providing them with substantial sums as legacies,
marriage settlements, and the like, restrict their
families in the interests of individual children. It
1 These are pre-war figures, now gieatly reduced.

*94

POSSIBLE WORLDS

therefore follows that any measures which tend to
disseminate heritable property among the poor, such
as the breaking up of large estates, are eugenically
desirable. So are drastic improvements in our ele­
mentary education and in our scholarship system.
The average doctor would probably beget at least
one more child if he could be sure that his children
would be satisfactorily educated at State or State-aided
schools, and that there were sufficient scholarships
available to enable any child of intelligence appre­
ciably above the average to enjoy a cheap university
education. If I attached the importance to eugenics
which certain people claim to do, I should, I think, be
bound to advocate the complete abolition of heredi­
tary property, and the free and compulsory attendance
of all children at State schools. At any rate, all legis­
lation tending in these directions must be regarded
as eugenic.
Secondly, the poor do not know how to restrict their
families by artificial means, and their overcrowding
renders marital continence and even preventive
measures very difficult. The eugenist must there­
fore approve of better housing schemes, and of all
movements designed to spread a knowledge of birthcontrol among the poor. Thirdly, a certain section
of the poor are extremely improvident, and do not
consider the consequences of their actions. This
leads to poverty on the one hand and large families
on the other. But this section probably do not
possess any great desire for children, which is, after
all, one of the most respectable and unselfish of the
elementary human desires. If a knowledge of birth-

EUGENICS AND SOCIAL REFORM

195

control were universally diffused I am inclined to
believe that they would produce considerably less
children than their more provident neighbours, who
mostly possess much stronger parental instincts.
Finally, there is a group of causes of a more subtle
nature. For example, the women of the richer classes
probably suffer unduly in childbirth from lack of
previous exercise of a suitable character, and also
tend to restrict their families on account of other com­
peting interests. In other words, rich women need
more exercise, and poor women more education.
Again, those who have risen in the economic scale
by their intelligence are often cut off by differences of
tradition from partners of the class into which they
have risen, by differences of intelligence and educa­
tion from that of their parents. Class-consciousness
is dysgenic in a society possessing a social ladder.
It will be seen, then, that the differential birth-rate
is very largely determined by social inequalities of a
type already recognized and deplored. If these were
remedied the main characters favoured by selection
would be health and strong parental instincts instead
of—as now—the type of mental equipment which
prevents a man from becoming well-to-do.
Just the same argument applies to racial problems.
It was only the emancipation of the negroes which
saved the United States from twice its present black
population. This event gave them access to alcohol,
venereal diseases, and consumption. Their rate of
increase slowed down at once, and it is only between
the last two censuses that the absolute excess of negro
births over deaths has once more equalled that in the

196

POSSIBLE WORLDS

decade before the Civil War. In the Northern States
and in all towns the negro death-rate exceeds the birth­
rate. If in the interests of racial purity all negroes
were expelled from north of the Mason-Dixon line
the proportion of blacks to whites in the whole Union
would be markedly increased within a generation.
And prohibition has probably been of far greater
benefit to blacks than whites. Those who are con­
vinced of the superiority of Europeans to Indians may
console themselves with the thought that a British
withdrawal from India would cause a very rapid
decrease by war and famine in the number of Indians,
and remove any danger of the Indianization of other
parts of the Empire.
To sum up, the rational programme for a eugenist
is as follows : Teach voluntary eugenics by all means ;
but if you desire to check the increase of any popula­
tion or section of a population, either massacre it or
force upon it the greatest practicable amount of liberty,
education, and wealth. Civilization stands in real
danger from over-production of ‘ undermen.* But if
it perishes from this cause it will be because its govern­
ing class cared more for wealth than for justice.

OCCUPATIONAL M O RTALITY

F

EW Government documents are more interesting
than the Registrar-General’s decennial report on
occupational mortality in England and Wales,
and it is safe to say that none of equal importance is
more neglected. This is partly due to the fact that
it refers to the years 19 10 -19 12, and is therefore already
out of date, partly perhaps because most of it is un­
suited for party propaganda.
The figures given contain a few pitfalls, most of
which are pointed out in the introduction. New trades,
for example, such as electricity supply and motor­
driving, attract young men, and therefore have spuri­
ously low death-rates. Sailors are absent when the
census is taken, but come home to die, and therefore
seem to be very unhealthy. Navvies apparently
describe themselves as such at the census, but their
relatives tell the Registrar of Deaths that they were
general labourers. They thus appear to be healthier
than is the case, and general labourers less so. And
hawkers, whose death-rate is nearly double the average,
are unhealthy, not so much on account of the conditions
of their work, as because the failures in other occupa­
tions drift into this calling in the last years of their life.
When allowance is made for these facts, the high
mortality in those callings where it exceeds the average
by 50 per cent, or more is due to two, and only two,
causes—alcohol and dust. The most dangerous of all
197

198

POSSIBLE WORLDS

occupations, with a death-rate almost two and a half
times the average, is that of barman. The guilt of this
death-rate is, however, about equally divided between
the manufacturers of strong drink and the advocates of
temperance. As compared with their landlords, bar­
men are less than half as likely to die of alcoholism and
its sequel, cirrhosis of the liver; but they are more than
twice as likely to perish of consumption and other lung
diseases, which, indeed, account for nearly half their
mortality. These diseases are mainly due to the over­
crowding and under-ventilation of their places of work.
Though the health of barmen is doubtless better since
their hours of work have been restricted, it will con­
tinue to be bad as long as bars are so few as to be over­
crowded, and so dark and close as to form ideal breeding-grounds for the tubercle bacillus. But any serious
attempts to bring the sanitary conditions of the best
bar up to those of the worst factory are resisted in the
interests of temperance as likely to render public-houses'
more attractive. Any Government which took health
seriously would either abolish our bars or ventilate them.
The next most unhealthy trades, with a death-rate
just double the average, are tin-miners and file-makers.
In each case the main cause of death is consumption,
due to the clogging of the lungs with dust. Fortunately,
only a few kinds of dust are harmful, and some seem
to be beneficial. Coal-miners’ lungs are perfectly black,
but their death-rate from phthisis is half that of the
general population, and the same as that of agricultural
labourers. A great deal has been done of late years
to reduce the danger to tin-miners by laying the rockdust with spray, and it may be hoped that the results

OCCUPATIONAL MORTALITY

199

of this will be apparent in the statistics of 1920-1922.
The death-rate of innkeepers is 60 per cent, above
the average.
Urban, though not rural, poverty comes third on the
killing list—first, if we consider the numbers involved.
Unskilled urban labourers have a death-rate 43 per
cent, above the average ; and their death-rate is higher
than the mean from every single cause except lead
poisoning, a disease of skilled labour which kills less
than a hundred men annually, and diabetes, which is
largely due to over-eating. If their conditions could
be brought up to the average (not a very ambitious ideal)
we could save thirty thousand lives of adult males a
year, not to mention women and children, as good a
result as if we had abolished heart disease or pneumonia.
At the other end of the scale, the healthiest occupa­
tion appears to be the manufacture of glue and manure,
an interesting commentary on the widely held theory
that bad smells cause bad health. These men, with
electricity supply workers and machine compositors
(though not ordinary printers), alone have less than
half the average death-rate ; and even if the figures can
to some extent be explained away, these trades must be
conspicuously healthy. They are followed in the scale
of health by clergymen, gardeners, farm-labourers, and
gamekeepers in that order. The other intellectual
callings, such as teachers, doctors, and lawyers, are all
healthier than the average. But it is an interesting and
rather beautiful fact that, while doctors have the highest
mortality of this group, their children have just half
the death-rate of those of any other large profession.
The next healthiest indoor trades are lithography and

200

POSSIBLE WORLDS

soap-making, though the latter may owe its position
rather to the personality of Lord Leverhulme than to
its intrinsic nature.
Apart from murder, the most interesting though not
the most important causes of death are suicide and
accident. Barmen head the suicide list, being closely
followed by chemists, hairdressers, and innkeepers,
while doctors and cutlers are among the more suicidal
callings. Alcohol and opportunity thus seem to deter­
mine suicide, but why should tin and lead miners
utterly refuse to commit this rash act ? Spes phthisica,
perhaps ? In spite of the fact that most of their violent
deaths take place on the high seas and are therefore not
registered, seamen head the accidental death list with
four times the average rate, though bargees and lighter­
men almost equal them. If these latter were all taught
to swim, their mortality from accident could probably
be reduced to that of dockers at least. A philanthropist
who wished to save life could hardly do it more cheaply
than by offering £ 5 to every bargee who could pass a
swimming test. Coal-miners have a death-rate from
accident of only a little over double the average ; and
this has probably been considerably reduced since the
use of stone dust has abolished large colliery explosions.
Even when their deaths from accident are included,
coal-miners live longer than most people; and when
deaths from disease only are considered, they are as
healthy as lawyers.
In all but a few occupations the greatest killer, and
one which is the more serious because it kills in what
should be the prime of life, is phthisis. Apart from
barmen and hawkers, all the phthisical trades are dusty

OCCUPATIONAL MORTALITY

201

Practically every man who works a machine-drill in a
tin-mine or in the Transvaal dies of consumption. Out
of 142 men in the Redruth registration district of Corn­
wall who had worked machine-drills, all but nine died
of lung disease. Tin-miners as a whole have about five
times the average mortality from phthisis ; cutlers,
barmen, file-makers, and stonemasons working in sand­
stone three times ; lead-miners and potters twice ;
while clergymen, gamekeepers, and locomotive drivers
have about a third.
In view of the large amount of guessing which goes
on as to the cause of cancer, its occupational incidence
is interesting. It varies far less from one trade to
another than that of most diseases ; so, as it is far
commoner in civilized than uncivilized countries, its
main cause must be sought in some condition common
to all walks of civilized life. It is not perhaps without
significance that barmen and brewers have the highest
cancer rates, though it must be admitted that innkeepers
are only slightly above the average. But it is consoling
to find that tobacco manufacturers have the lowest
cancer mortality of any trade, while tobacconists are
also unusually immune. Chimney-sweeps used to die
in large numbers from cancer due to irritation of the
skin by soot; but while the cancer rate for most occupa­
tions has risen, theirs has fallen considerably, apparently
through increased cleanliness.
An interesting light is thrown on chastity by the
death-rates from locomotor ataxy and general paralysis,
which are the results of syphilis. Seamen, bargees, and
waiters have more than twice the average mortality
from these complaints, while fishermen and commercial
o

202

POSSIBLE WORLDS

travellers run them close. Farmers, clergymen, and
gamekeepers are the chastest of men. The richer
classes and unskilled labourers are less chaste than the
mass of the people.
Some of the conclusions to be drawn are to my mind
sufficiently clear. It is our plain duty to deal drastic­
ally with those occupations in which harmful dust is
inhaled. We tax alcoholic drinks on the ground that
they harm certain people, although Pearl has shown
that moderate but habitual drinkers are distinctly
healthier than total abstainers. But assistance from
the State in the form of a tariff is actually obtained by
the cutlery trade, which has three times the average
death-rate from consumption. Until such trades mend
their ways, it is the clear duty of the Government to
discourage them, and private individuals can play their
part. It would appear, for example, to be a patriotic
duty to buy British food, leather, and coal in preference
to foreign, as agriculture, tanning, and coal-mining
are healthy occupations ; but if so, it is an equally clear
duty to buy foreign scissors, files, and pottery. A great
deal has been done to reduce the dust and consumption
in the cutlery trades by wet grinding and ventilation.
This is relatively easy in factories, but unfortunately
a large proportion of files, for example, are made by
workmen in their own houses and backyards. This
type of industry is dear to the hearts of our mediaevalists,
not to mention the late Prince Kropotkin, but it does
not take kindly to sanitary regulations. An enlightened
public opinion could wipe out industrial phthisis as it
has wiped out lead and phosphorus poisoning. So long,
however, as one death from avoidable accident occupies

OCCUPATIONAL MORTALITY

203

as much space in the Press, and therefore in the public
mind, as ten thousand from avoidable consumption,
such a result is hardly probable. But the Government
might at least contribute to such an end by issuing the
information on this topic at a price of less than 13s. 6d.,
and after a delay of less than ten years.

WHEN I AM D EA D 1

W

H EN I am dead I propose to be dissected;
in fact, a distinguished anatomist has already
been promised my head should he survive
me. I hope that I have been of some use to my fellow
creatures while alive, and see no reason why I should
not continue to be so when dead. I admit, however,
that if funerals gave as much pleasure to the living in
England as they do in Scotland I might change my
mind on the subject.
But shall I be there to attend my dissection or to
haunt my next-of-kin if he or she forbids it ? Indeed
will anything of me but my body, other men’s memory
of me, and the results of my life, survive my death ?
Certainly I cannot deny the possibility, but at no period
of my life— least of all during the war, when I was
nearest to death—has my personal survival seemed to
me at all a probable contingency.
I f I die as most people die, I shall gradually lose my
intellectual faculties, my senses will fail, and I shall
become unconscious. And then I am asked to believe
that I shall suddenly wake up to a vivid consciousness in
hell, heaven, purgatory, or some other state of existence.
Now, I have lost consciousness from blows on the
head, from fever, anaesthetics, want of oxygen, and other
causes; and I therefore know that my consciousness
1 This paper was one of a series on the above topic, most of

which supported a different thesis.

201

WHEN I AM DEAD

205

depends on the physical and chemical condition of my
brain, and that very small changes in that organ will
modify or destroy it.
But I am asked to believe that my mind will continue
without a brain, or will be miraculously provided with
a new one. I am asked to believe such an improbable
theory on three grounds.
The first set of arguments are religious. My
Catholic friends hope to survive death on the authority
of the Church ; some of my Protestant acquaintances
rely on the testimony of the Bible. But they do not
convince me, for the Church has taught doctrines which
I know to be false, and the Bible contains statements—
for example, concerning the earth’s past—which I also
know to be false.
Other Christians ask me to believe in immortality on
the authority of Jesus. That is a much more cogent
argument, because Jesus was not only a great man and
a great ethical teacher, but a great psychologist. But
the characteristic part of any man’s teaching is what is
novel and heretical in it, and not what he and his
audience take for granted.
Now Jesus, and the Pharisees, at any rate, among his
hearers, took the resurrection of the dead for granted.
They also took for granted that madness was due to
possession by devils.
When Jesus tells me to love my enemies he is speaking
his own mind, and I am prepared to make the attem pt;
when he tells me that I shall rise from the dead he is
only speaking for his age, and his words no more con­
vince me of immortality than of demoniacal possession.
Again, I am told that men have always believed in

206

POSSIBLE WORLDS

immortality, and that religion and morality are impos­
sible without it. The truth of this ludicrous statement
may be tested by referring to the first seven books of the
Bible. They are full of religion and ethics, but contain
no reference to human survival of death. Nor did the
Psalmist believe in it. ‘ The dead praise not Thee, 0
Lord,’ he said, ‘ neither all they that go down into
silence.’
As a matter of fact, the belief in a life beyond the
grave reached its culminating point in Egypt four or
five thousand years ago, when the rich, at any rate,
seem to have spent more money in provision for their
future life than for their present. To judge from what
has come down to us of his writings, Moses, the Man
of God, who was well versed in Egyptian religion, had
no more use for a future life than for the worship of
crocodiles.
The belief in personal immortality seems to have
spread gradually out from Egypt, along with the use of
copper, bronze, and gold, and often, especially in Poly­
nesia, accompanied by the practice of mummification.
It is an attractive doctrine, and is only now beginning
to lose its grip on the human mind. But it is losing it.
Most of the men under my command whom I got to
know during the war believed in God. But I think the
majority thought that death would probably be the end
of them, and I am absolutely certain that that is the
view of most highly educated people.
I am also asked to believe in a future life on philo­
sophical grounds. There are a number of arguments
which seem to prove that my soul is eternal and in­
destructible. Unfortunately, they also prove that it

WHEN I AM DEAD

207

has existed from all eternity. And, though I am quite
willing to believe that ten years after my death I shall
be as I was ten years before my birth, the prospect
cannot be said to thrill me.
Again, it is argued that justice demands a future
life in which sin will be punished, virtue rewarded,
and undeserved suffering compensated. Such a view
would, of course, involve a future life for animals, in
which the hunted hare would demand of its pursuers
for what crime it was torn to pieces.
But it assumes that the universe is governed accord­
ing to human ideas of justice. The sample of it which
we know is certainly not so governed ; and I see no
reason to suppose that its inequalities are redressed else­
where. No doubt I should like to see them redressed,
but then I should like to see England a land fit for
heroes to live in, though I do not suppose that I will.
As a matter of fact, conditions in the present world
have been improved largely by recognizing that the
laws governing it are not the laws of justice but the laws
of physics. As long as people thought that cholera
epidemics were a punishment for the people’s sins they
continued. When it was found that they were due to
a microbe they were stopped.
We do ourselves no good in the long run by telling
ourselves pleasant fairy tales about this world or the
next. If we devoted the energy that we waste in pre­
paring for a future life to preventing war, poverty, and
disease, we could at least make our present lives very
satisfactory for most people, and if we were happy in
this world we should not feel the need of happiness
hereafter.

208

POSSIBLE WORLDS

It is worth remembering how very few people in the
past have believed in the justice of the universe. Most
Christians have believed that unbelievers and un­
baptized children were doomed to spend eternity in
hell, while Buddhists believe that all existence is an
evil. It is only our own perhaps unduly optimistic age
that has assumed that a future life is to be desired.
The arguments of the spiritualists, theosophists, and
their like claim to be based on evidence of a kind which
appeals to the scientific mind, and a dozen or so dis­
tinguished men of science have been spiritualists.
Some of this evidence is based on fraud. The bulk of
it proves nothing. I have often taken part in the receipt
of messages alleged to come from spirits, but they have
never given any verifiable information unknown to any
members of the circle.
Even, however, if we accepted the view of the spiritu­
alists that a medium can somehow get into communica­
tion with the mind of a dead man, what would this prove ?
I f we accept spiritualism we must certainly accept
telepathy. Now, I can see little more difficulty in two
minds communicating across time than across space.
I f I can transmit thoughts to a friend in Australia
to-day, that does not prove that my mind is in Australia.
I f I give information to a medium in the year 1990, ten
years after my death, that will not prove that my mind
will still be in existence in 1990.
T o prove the survival of the mind or soul as some­
thing living and active we should need evidence that
it is still developing, thinking, and willing ; spiritualism
does not give us this evidence. Shelley is said to have
dictated a poem to a medium. It was a very bad poem.

WHEN I AM DEAD

209

Nor do the post-mortem productions of Oscar Wilde
reach the standard which he attained when alive.
The accounts given by spirits of a future life vary
from land to land and from age to age. Mediaeval
ghosts generally come from purgatory, like Hamlet’s
father ; more rarely from heaven or hell. Hindu and
Buddhist ghosts are awaiting their next incarnation.
Modem European spirits usually profess a rather
diluted Christianity. In fact, the evidence as to the
nature of a future life is so contradictory that we must
in any case reject most of it.
Personally, I think that all accounts of a future life are
mere reflections of the medium’s own opinions on the
subject, which are of no more value than any one else’s.
(The possible interpretation of spiritualistic phenomena
which I have given is one which has commended itself
to some of their most careful investigators, but has
obtained little publicity as it has no emotional appeal.)
But if death will probably be the end of me as a finite
individual mind, that does not mean that it will be the
end of me altogether. It seems to me immensely
unlikely that mind is a mere by-product of matter.
For if my mental processes are determined wholly by
the motions of atoms in my brain I have no reason to
suppose that my beliefs are true. They may be sound
chemically, but that does not make them sound logically.
And hence I have no reason for supposing my brain to
be composed of atoms.
In order to escape from this necessity of sawing away
the branch on which I am sitting, so to speak, I am
compelled to believe that mind is not wholly con­
ditioned by matter. But as regards my own very finite

210

POSSIBLE WORLDS

and imperfect mind, I can see, by studying the effects
on it of drugs, alcohol, disease, and so on, that its
limitations are largely at least due to my body.
Without that body it may perish altogether, but it
seems to me quite as probable that it will lose its limita­
tions and be merged into an infinite mind or something
analogous to a mind which I have reason to suspect
probably exists behind nature. How this might be
accomplished I have no idea.
But I notice that when I think logically and scientific­
ally or act morally my thoughts and actions cease to be
characteristic of myself, and are those of any intelligent
or moral being in the same position ; in fact, I am
already identifying my mind with an absolute or un­
conditioned mind.
Only in so far as I do this can I see any probability of
my survival, and the more I do so the less I am inter­
ested in my private affairs and the less desire do I feel
for personal immortality. The belief in my own
eternity seems to me indeed to be a piece of unwarranted
self-glorification, and the desire for it a gross concession
to selfishness.
In so far as I set my heart on things that will not
perish with me, I automatically remove the sting from
my death. I am far more interested in the problems
of biochemistry than in the question of what, if any­
thing, will happen to me when I am dead.
Until this attitude is more general the latter question
will remain too charged with emotion to make a scientific
investigation of it possible. And until such an in­
vestigation is possible a man who is honest with himself
can only answer, ‘ I do not know.*

THE DUTY OF DOUBT

W

E are taught that faith is a virtue. This is
obviously true in some cases, and to my mind
equally false in others. There are occasions
when the need for it must be emphasized. Neverthe­
less, at the present time I believe that mankind is suffer­
ing from too much, rather than too little faith, and it is
doubt rather than faith that must be preached. I am
not thinking wholly or even mainly of faith in the
Christian or any other religion, but simply of the habit
of taking things for granted. Nor am I praising a
blind and haphazard doubt, which is as unintelligent
as blind faith, and far less fruitful. Greece and Rome
produced a sect of sceptic philosophers who gave valid
reasons for doubting anything whatever, and finally left
themselves with no motives except the gratification of
their instincts. Christianity swept away scepticism
along with many nobler philosophies. And any system
in which the suspense of judgment leads to the suspense
of action will inevitably perish at the hands of men who
are prepared to act, however utterly nonsensical be the
motives that lead them.
Modem science began with great acts of doubt.
Copernicus doubted that the sun went round the earth,
Galileo that heavy bodies fall faster than light ones,
Harvey that the blood flowed into the tissues through
the veins. They had each a theory to replace the old
one, and their observations and experiments were

212

POSSIBLE WORLDS

largely designed to support that theory. But as time
went on these theories, too, were found wanting. The
planets do not go round the sun in circles as Copernicus
thought; gravitation is a more complex affair than
Galileo or even Newton believed. And nowadays,
though many experiments are made to support old or
new theories, large numbers merely go to prove them
false without putting anything in their place. One can
hardly open a scientific journal without finding a paper
with some such title as ‘ On an Anomalous Type of
Inheritance in Potatoes,’ or, ‘ Deviations from the Law
of Mass Action in Concentrated Sugar Solutions.’
The statement of any general principle is enough to
raise active doubt in many minds. Moreover, the
authors very often make no attempt to put forward an
improved theory ; and if they do so it is generally in a
very tentative form. ‘ The results so far obtained are
consistent with the view that . . . * has taken the place
of ‘ Thus saith the Lord . . . ’ as an introduction to a
new theory. Moses apparently regarded ‘An eye for
an eye and a tooth for a tooth ’ as an absolute principle
of right conduct; Einstein would certainly not regard
any of his laws as final accounts of the behaviour of
matter.
Now, the method of science, which involves doubt,
has been conspicuously successful over a certain field.
But there are many who affirm that that field is strictly
limited. * In the realm of religion and ethics,’ they
assert, ‘ we have reached finality. You may not be
certain about the principles of physics, but I and every
right-minded man and woman are certain about the
principles of right and wrong; and those who question

THE DUTY OF DOUBT

213

them deserve to be treated as criminals.’ This attitude
is rather commoner in the United States than in most
civilized countries, not because Americans are more
stupid or less educated than other nations, but because
they live amid a more homogeneous moral tradition.
The Englishman who thinks it wrong to live with a
mistress has only to cross to France to find people doing
so without exciting serious disapproval. The Russian
who regards making a fortune as a disgusting vice has
only to enter Finland (if his Government will let him)
to find quite decent and useful individuals practising it.
But the American has a long way to travel before he or
she will find otherwise respectable women smoking
cigars without exciting unfavourable comment, or gov­
erning classes who regard the self-made millionaire as
inevitably vulgar and unpleasant.
Now, there are conditions under which it is an ad­
vantage that moral principles should be unquestioned.
It is roughly true that our laws are the law's which would
have been suitable for our grandparents, and our moral
code that which would have sufficed for our greatgreat-grandparents. It takes about two generations of
effort to effect a great legal change, say Prohibition or
Irish Home Rule, and a good deal more to dethrone a
generally accepted principle of moral conduct, such as
the different moral standards of the sexes or the wicked­
ness of sport on Sundays. In a society which is not
altering much in other respects this stability is an
excellent thing, though of course the desirable moral
code will vary from place to place. Thus the South
Pacific islanders almost universally practised infanticide
or abortion, and very often cannibalism or head-hunting.

214

POSSIBLE WORLDS

The islands were as thickly populated as was possible
with the methods of agriculture and fishing available,
and if the population had not been kept down by these
methods famines would have occurred. The mission­
aries have taught them that these practices are wrong;
and so they are now, since European diseases and drinks
have replaced them as checks on over-population.
Now, the moral code of Europe, North America,
Australia, and New Zealand is to a large extent the code
which was found to work in mediaeval Europe. Of
course, it has altered since the Middle Ages, but it is far
more similar to its ancestor of six hundred years back
than to the codes, say, of China, Arabia, New Guinea,
or Central Africa to-day. The mediaeval code was
evolved in a society mainly engaged in small-scale
agriculture and small-scale industry, dominated by a
small educated class of priests, and a still smaller
military nobility. And the oddest traces of this survive
even in the United States. University professors are
no longer in holy orders, but they are expected to con­
form to a standard of conduct much stricter than that
demanded of business men or soldiers. The head of
the state no longer wears a sword and chain-mail on
public occasions. (I am not talking about kings, who
still occasionally wear swords, and who, when explosives
have been superseded by other methods of killing, will
probably carry dummy bombs.) But he still behaves
to the heads of other states in a manner appropriate to a
mediaeval knight. We are delighted (at least if we are
shareholders) when company presidents and directors
effect a combination with another corporation in the
same line of business, but we expect our premiers and

THE DUTY OF DOUBT

215

presidents to maintain our national independence to
the last drop of our blood.
And the same applies to property. It was obviously
right that a mediaeval workman should own his own
tools and workshop. It is obviously impracticable for
a modern factory worker to own half a lathe and twenty
square yards of floor space It is only gradually being
realized that the idea of absolute personal ownership so
suitable when applied to a spade or a chisel leads to
inconveniences when applied to a share certificate.
And those who realize it most fully are convinced—why,
I am not very clear—that those inconveniences would
vanish if only the ownership were transferred to the
State. The truth is more probably that the idea of
absolute ownership is ceasing to work and will have to
be replaced, as the idea of absolute position has been
in physics or that of fixed species in biology. The
believer in absolute ownership will at once ask me what
I have to put in its place, and will raise a triumphant
shout when I say that I do not know.
Now, supposing I go to a physiologist and convince
him that his otherwise admirable theory of conduction
in nerves will not explain, let us say, the action of
cocaine in blocking them, he will not immediately ask
me to produce a theory better than his own. Nor will
he abandon his former view ; he will try out modifica­
tions of it and see whether they work. He will quite
probably spend a couple of months in experiments sug­
gested by a theory which he regards as likely to be false.
And when he arrives at a scheme of ideas which will
fit all the facts so far known he will hardly dignify it by
the name of theory, but call it a working hypothesis.

2l6

POSSIBLE WORLDS

‘ Y es,’ my opponent will s a y ; ‘ and do you expect
men to die for a working hypothesis as they will die
for a faith ? ’
Well, men have died for odder things. On the
occasion of Napoleon in .’s coup d'etat in 18 5 1, Baudin,
a deputy of the Second Republic, was trying to rally
opposition in the streets of Paris, though with little
hope of success. A workman shouted, ‘ Why should
we risk our lives for your twenty-five francs ? ’ referring
to his daily salary as a deputy. ‘ Stay here,’ said
Baudin, ‘ and you shall see how a man dies for twentyfive francs.’ He died.
And every day men do risk their lives for working
hypotheses. Half the art of war consists of doing so.
The dispositions of the enemy during a modem battle
are more or less unknown. On the available evidence
the commander-in-chief forms a hypothesis on which
he must then act with the utmost vigour. The great
general is the man who stakes everything on his hypo­
thesis while realizing that it is only a hypothesis and
must be modified from moment to moment.
Just the same is true of scientific work. A good
many biologists experiment on themselves. Of course,
it is occasionally necessary to make experiments which
one knows are dangerous, for example in determining
how a disease is transmitted. A number of people
have died in this way, and it is to my mind the ideal way
of dying. Others make experiments which are appar­
ently risky, but really perfectly safe provided the theory
on which they are based is sound. I have occasionally
made experiments of this kind, and if I had died in the
course of one I should, while dying, have regarded

THE DUTYt&F DOUBT

217

myself not as a martyr but as a fool. For all that, I have
no doubt that the theories to which I entrusted my life
were more or less incorrect. One at least has already
been proved so, and the history of science makes it
clear enough that many of the others will be. But
though they had their flaws, they were good enough to
enable me to predict the safety of those particular
experiments, and I hope that I never regarded them as
much more than working hypotheses.
My objection to the thought of many people on all
subjects, and of all people (including myself) on some
subjects, is that it is in a pre-scientific stage. They
seem to be incapable of acting on certain momentous
topics unless they are certain of their premises. Now,
all I should be prepared to say in favour of democracy
is that it is, in my opinion, the least objectionable form
of government so far devised for men and women of
certain sections of the human race. But acting on that
opinion I should be willing to risk my life on its behalf
in defending it against government by a military auto­
crat like the Kaiser or a secret society like the K u Klux
Rian. Yet I hope that I have not closed my mind to
the claims of other forms of government, for example
the rule of such a voluntary aristocracy as the governing
group of Italy or Russia.
Similarly, in the field of religion it seems to me very
probable that in certain respects the structure of the
universe resembles that of my own mind. This
opinion leads, I think, to implications as to moral con­
duct different from those of materialism. But if we
try to clothe this idea in the terminology of religion we
can do it in many different ways. Some of these may

2 l8

POSSIBLE WORLDS

serve to make man more like God ; they also have the
converse effect in bringing God, in our ideas at least,
down to the level of man.
It is characteristic of a good scientific theory that it
makes no more assumptions than are needed to explain
the facts under consideration and predict a few more.
For example, it is quite likely that the inverse square law
describing the force between two electrically charged
bodies ceases to hold when they are very close or very
far apart. In half an hour I could write down a dozen
laws of a more complicated kind which would agree
equally well with all the observed facts. But no one
nowadays would be interested in such a law. Scientific
men agree to suspend judgment when they do not know.
On the whole, however, the opposite has been the case
in the history of religion. Where there was obvious
room for different opinions, for example as to the nature
of Jesus’ relationship with God, a highly complex
theory was gradually built up and was accepted by
most Christian churches. The Unitarians regard
themselves as more reasonable than the Trinitarians
and have adopted a quite different theory. To my
mind a far more rational view than either would be as
follows : ‘ I believe in God and try to obey and imitate
Jesus, but I do not know exactly what is their relation­
ship.’ That is certainly the view of millions of Chris­
tians, but no important religious body dares to adopt it.
They prefer to go on thinking along pre-scientific lines.
And it is this pre-scientific outlook of religion, rather
than anything specific in its tenets, which brings it into
conflict with science. ‘ A creed in harmony with the
thought of to-day ’ is no better than the Athanasian

THE DUTY OF DOUBT

219

Creed if it is taken as a creed and not a working hypothesis, for the simple reason that it will not be in har­
mony with the thought of to-morrow.
As a matter of fact, the Christian attitude to faith
probably rests on a misunderstanding. Diseases of the
nervous system and chronic diseases of the skin are
particularly amenable to cure by suggestion and other
psychological methods. Jesus’ recorded healing work
was mainly confined to these complaints, and required
faith in the patients. But this faith was a belief that
they would be cured, and not an assent to historical
or metaphysical propositions. Christian Science is so
often therapeutically successful because it lays stress on
the patient’s believing in his or her own health rather
than in Noah’s Ark or the Ascension. But the Chris­
tian churches have tended to accumulate more and
more dogmas in their schedules as time went on, so that
faith has become more and more intellectual and more
and more of a strain on the intellect.
It is just the same with politics. Political creeds
fall into two classes. There are the conservative
beliefs that institutions which have worked fairly well
in the past will go on working under new conditions.
Opposed to them are the radical beliefs that policies
which have not been tried at all, such as universal
disarmament, or have been tried far away or long ago,
for example Prohibition in Arabia, are the only solu­
tions for our problems. The good party men honestly
hold these beliefs ; the politicians say that they hold
them. Fortunately, this is rarely the case, though
occasionally an honest man like Robespierre or W. J.
Bryan rises to power and acts as if he believed in his

220

POSSIBLE WORLDS

own speeches. As long as the average voter’s thought
is pre-scientific, a politican dare not say : ‘ I am in­
clined to think the tariff on imported glass should be
raised. I am not sure if this is a sound policy ; how­
ever, I am going to try it. After two years, if I do not
find its results satisfactory, I shall certainly press for its
reduction or even removal.’
Nevertheless, the successful politician often acts in
very much that way, and quite calmly goes back on his
policy of a year ago. His enemies accuse him of broken
pledges ; his friends describe him as an inspired
opportunist. In England and the United States the
two-party system permits a government to remedy the
grosser mistakes of its predecessors, while continuing
their successful policies without too great a show of
enthusiasm. The tacit agreement to this effect be­
tween the party leaders gives our politics a certain air
of unreality, and many of those who seek for truth in the
mouths of politicians turn with relief to Russia. The
government of the Soviet Union not only admits but
boasts that its policy is experimental. Many items in
its early programme were failures, and some of these
have been withdrawn. Others equally daring in their
conception have proved successful. Hence the evolu­
tion of the new social order has been amazingly rapid.
The Communist party has been in power for less than
ten years, but it has contrived to evolve a fairly stable
system combining some of the advantages of capitalism
and socialism. No doubt the Russian people has
proved an ideal subject for large-scale experiments.
But the growing distrust of constitutional government in
Europe suggests that there, too, the present generation

THE DUTY OF DOUBT

221

is more prepared to be experimented on than were its
fathers. And if we are to escape the despotism which
will follow a revolution either to the Left or the Right,
our present rulers and those who support them will be
well advised explicitly to imitate the extremely capable
Bolshevik leaders, and adopt an experimental method.
In the sphere of ethics the same principles must, I
believe, be applied. The circumstances postulated by
the older ethical codes have ceased to exist. In a more
primitive community our most obvious duty was quite
literally to our neighbour. In a village we knew our
neighbour’s affairs pretty well, and if we did not always
succeed in loving him as ourself we could pretty often
be of assistance to him. In a great city one may have
a department-store on the left and a man one never
meets on the right. An occasional gift to charity or
even an evening a week spent on welfare work in a
poorer quarter is not the psychological equivalent of
taking in Mrs. Johnson’s children during her illness and
going to the assistance of Mrs. Kelly when her husband
comes home drunk. All through the civilized world
experiments are being made as to how best to help one’s
fellow-creatures without falling into hard officialism on
the one hand or indiscriminate gifts to the undeserving
on the other. The mere multiplicity of these experi­
ments goes to show how few of them have been com­
pletely successful.
Again, the invention of contraceptive methods and
the economic emancipation of women have created new
problems in sexual morality. I f a given action has
different consequences now from those which would
have followed fifty years ago, it is from the ethical point

222

POSSIBLE WORLDS

of view a different action. Contraception is leading to
experiments on rather a large scale in Europe ; and
most of them, like most laboratory experiments, are un­
successful. Married women are discovering that no
children or a single child seldom leads to happiness ;
unmarried women who try the experiment rarely find
satisfaction in a multitude of lovers. On the other
hand, a spacing out of child-births is generally found to
be advantageous for all concerned, and there is a small
but perhaps a growing body of experience favouring an
experimental honeymoon before marriage in lands
where divorce is difficult, and an experimental period
of marriage where it can easily be dissolved. The
public discussion of such topics generally leads to the
promulgation by both sides of dogmatically held opin­
ions and a failure to realize that the questions at issue
can only be decided by experience. This failure is un­
fortunate for two reasons. It means that many more
experiments in behaviour, often of a disastrous type,
will be needed before the question is cleared up, than
would be the case if a serious attempt were being made
to collate the results of those going on to-day. And
it is extraordinarily difficult to love one’s neighbour
when he or she differs from one fundamentally on moral
issues, though quite possible to do so if one believes
that he or she has made an unfortunate mistake in
conduct because of uncertainty as to what, under the
new conditions, was right or wrong.
Such then is the case, or rather a fragment of the case,
for doubt. It is very nearly the same as the case for
freedom of speech. Plato described thought as the
dialogue of the soul with itself, and doubt is just a

THE DUTY OF DOUBT

223

refusal to deprive either side of a hearing. Just as
freedom of speech facilitates right action by the State,
provided the speakers and those who listen to them
have a share in deciding policy, so doubt is a virtue if,
and only if, it is the prelude to action. A merely
negative doubt is like freedom of speech divorced from
political responsibility. This was the condition of
affairs in India in the ten years before 1919, when the
Indian politicians were permitted to talk indefinitely,
but possessed no effective share in the government.
India is barely beginning to recover from the type of
political thinking which flourished during that un­
fortunate epoch.
There are some who will admit that doubt may be
a necessity in a scientific era, but hold that art and
literature flourish best in an age of faith when they
become the interpreters of a great religious or philo­
sophical system rather than the symptoms of intellectual
unrest. While such opponents bring forward Dante
and the architects of the European cathedrals, forgetting
Milton and Phidias, I shall do no more than cite the
opinion of John Keats in a letter to his brother : ‘ Dilke
is a man who cannot feel he has a personal identity
unless he has made up his mind about everything. The
only means of strengthening one’s intellect is to make
' up one’s mind about nothing—to let the mind be a
thoroughfare for all thoughts, not a select party.’
Keats certainly did not strengthen his intellect at the
expense of his aesthetic powers, and his Hyperion is
little more than an account of the supersession of good
ideas by better, a process which, as he showed, so far
from stifling art, may inspire it.

224

POSSIBLE WORLDS

Finally, I shall perhaps be told that I am preaching
pragmatism. But where the pragmatist says that a
belief is true because it works, I have attempted to
suggest that it is often false although it works, and that
belief is not, as James preached, a necessary preliminary
to effective action. And where the pragmatist exalts
the will to believe, I have attacked it. The desire for
intellectual certitude is laudable in the young, as a
stimulus to thought and learning ; in the adult it easily
becomes a vice. History, when it is taught as the his­
tory of human thought, makes it abundantly clear that
most of the intellectual certitudes of our forefathers
were illusory, though often of temporary value. One
intellectual certitude has from time to time been re­
placed by another at the expense of a sufficient number
of martyrs. So long as our education aims as inculcat­
ing dogmas, religious, political, ethical, or scientific,
fresh relays of martyrs will be necessary for every step
of human progress. And while I do not suggest that
humanity will ever be able to dispense with its martyrs,
I cannot avoid the suspicion that with a little more
thought and a little less belief their number may be
substantially reduced.
T o sum up, science has owed its wonderful progress
very largely to the habit of doubting all theories, even
those on which one’s action is founded. The motto of
the Royal Society, ‘ Nullius in verba,’ which may be
paraphrased ‘ We take nobody’s word for it,’ is a sound
rule in the other departments of life. The example of
science shows that it is no check on action. Its general
adoption would immeasurably hasten human progress.

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY AS
ART FORMS

R

E LIG IO N and science are human activities
with both practical and theoretical sides. There
ris at present a certain degree of conflict between
them, and this will undoubtedly continue for some
generations. During this conflict the disputants have
tended to emphasize the differences between them.
But their resemblances are equally interesting, and
perhaps throw a good deal of light on the differences.
It is only very recently that they have had a chance of
diverging. Readers of the Pentateuch, or of the con­
temporaneous or earlier religious literature of Egypt or
Mesopotamia, will find it very difficult to disentangle
the science from the religion. The Pentateuch con­
tains some very good applied science in the sanitary
laws of Moses The palaeontology of Genesis is also
correct in many points ; particularly in describing a
period of the earth’s history before the origin of life,
followed by the appearance of animals in the seas, and
only later on land, man being the last creation. It is of
course wrong in putting the origin of plants before that
of stars, of birds before that of creeping things, and
in several other respects.
Unfortunately, however, since Moses’ time science
and religion have diverged, not without a certain loss
to both. The reason for this divergence can best be
seen when we study some typical scientific and religious
minds at work. Each starts from a certain experience,

225

226

POSSIBLE WORLDS

and builds up a system of thought to bring it into line
with the remainder of experience. The organic
chemist says, ‘ The substance I have just made is a
liquid with a characteristic smell, melting at 31 ° C.,
boiling at 162° C., and whose compound with phenylhydrazine melts at 970 C. I have probably synthesized
furfural in a new way.’ The saint says, ‘ I have had
an experience very wonderful and rather difficult to
describe in detail, but I interpret it to mean that God
desires me to devote myself to preaching rather than
to shut myself up from the world.’
The scientific man then starts from experiences in
themselves emotionally flat, though to him perhaps
interesting enough. He may end by producing a
theory as exciting as Darwinism, or a practical inven­
tion as important as antiseptics or high explosives.
The mind of the religious man on the other hand works
on a descending scale of emotions. The dogma,
prophecy, or good works which he may produce are
inevitably less thrilling than his religious experience.
It is more interesting to most minds to read or specu­
late about the distances of the stars than to measure the
positions of their images on a photographic plate. But
it is less interesting to read a work on justification by
faith or on St. Thomas’s theory of transubstantiation
than to take part in a well-conducted church service.
Now, the rather dull raw material of scientific thought
consists of facts which can be verified with sufficient
patience and skill. The theories to which they have
given rise are far less certain. They change from
generation to generation, even from year to year. And
the religious opponents of science tend to scoff at this

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY AS ART FORMS 227
perpetual change. In scientific thought we adopt the
simplest theory which will explain all the facts under
consideration and enable us to predict new facts of the
same kind. The catch in this criterion lies in the word
‘ simplest.’ It is really an aesthetic canon such as we
find implicit in our criticisms of poetry or painting.

0JC

0"

U

dy2

The layman finds such a law as — =tc—- much less

J

simple than ‘ it oozes,’ of which it is the mathematical
statement. The physicist reverses this judgment, and
his statement is certainly the more fruitful of the two, so
far as prediction is concerned. It is, however, a state­
ment about something very unfamiliar to the plain man,
namely, the rate of change of a rate of change. Now,
scientific aesthetic prefers simple but precise statements
about unfamiliar things to vaguer statements about
well-known things. And this preference is justified by
practical success. It is more satisfactory scientifically
to say : ‘ The blood-vessels in John Smith’s skin are
dilated by a soluble toxin produced by a haemolytic
streptococcus growing in his pharynx,’ than to say that
he has scarlet fever. It suggests methods of curing and
preventing the disease. But only a few people have
seen a streptococcus, and no one has seen a toxin in the
pure state. In physics, the most developed of the
sciences, things have gone so far that many physicists
frankly say that they are describing atom models and
not atoms. Atoms themselves have the same sort of
reality as chairs and tables, because single atoms can be
seen if going fast enough. But when we come to their
internal structure we can only say that they behave, in
some important respects, as if electrons were going

228

POSSIBLE WORLDS

round in them with such and such velocities in such and
such orbits. If that is the real structure we can cal­
culate the velocities with a great deal more accuracy than
that with which a speedometer gives the speed of an
automobile ; and verifiable predictions based on these
calculated speeds come out with very great accuracy.
But the speeds are not observable, and physicists are
becoming less and less careful as to what hypothetical
events they postulate to explain observable phenomena,
provided the hypotheses enable them to predict
accurately.
Einstein showed that we could explain and predict
slightly better if he substituted other conceptions for
those of space and time, and his own substitutes will
doubtless be replaced in their turn. Now, if Einstein
is right, or even partly right, no physicists before his
time knew quite what they were talking about when they
used the ideas of distance and time, and practically
every statement that they made which purported to be
accurate was false. So presumably is every such state­
ment of a modern physicist. Similarly, chemists
supposed that the weight of a chlorine atom was 35*46
units until Aston showed that chlorine atoms were a
mixture of two kinds whose weights are 35 and 37.
Almost all the deductions from the premise were right,
but the premise itself was wrong. I have no doubt
that biological theory is equally riddled with falsehoods.
In fact, the experience of the past makes it clear that
many of our most cherished scientific theories contain
so much falsehood as to deserve the title of myths.
Their claims to belief are that they contradict fewer
known facts than their predecessors, and that they are

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY AS ART FORMS 229
of practical use. But there is one very significant
feature of the most fully developed scientific theories.
They tell us nothing whatever about the inner nature
of the units with which they deal. Electrons may be
spiritually inert, they may be something like sensations,
they may be good spirits or evil spirits. The physicist,
however, can only tell us that they repel one another
according to a certain law, are attracted by positive
charges according to another law, and so on. He can
say nothing about their real being, and knows that he
cannot.
It is, I suppose, the fact that there is no great stability
to be found in scientific theories which leads the
opponents of science to talk of the intellectual bank­
ruptcy of our age; generally as a preliminary to adopting
beliefs current in mediaeval Europe, India, or Bedlam.
We must therefore proceed to examine the claims of the
theological beliefs which are offered as substitutes or
supplements for science. Religious and moral experi­
ence are facts. Most people can obtain a certain
amount of religious experience by a very moderate
effort. It would be ridiculous not to interpret it. But
its interpretation is still in a pre-scientific stage. There
is something true in theology, because it leads to right
action in some cases, and serves to explain certain
otherwise difficultly explicable facts about the human
soul. There is something untrue, because it often
leads to wrong actions and leaves a great deal which
is within its province, for example the origin of evil,
unexplained.
In India and in pre-Christian Europe theology
developed gradually. Gods or devils could be postu­

230

POSSIBLE WORLDS

lated as required. This, however, led to a polytheism
incompatible either with the unity of nature or the
unity of duty. Since about a . d . 400, however, Chris­
tian theology has altered very little. But the moral
consciousness of Christians has altered a great deal.
For example, it now condemns slavery and cruelty to
animals. St. Paul condoned the one and ignored the
other. But it is alleged by theologians that our moral
consciousness is one source of our knowledge of God.
If the one develops, so should the other. Now, in the
early or growing stages of a religion a large number of
myths are produced which interpret the moral and
religious consciousness of the time. Jesus habitually
used vivid imagery. Sometimes he was obviously
speaking in parables. Sometimes a doubt exists, as
with regard to the words used at the Last Supper. If
taken as a statement of fact, they lead to a belief in transubstantiation. If not, they are merely an expression
of solidarity like ‘ I am the vine, ye are the branches.’
Some of his other statements are taken literally by
all Christian churches, and it is claimed that a belief in
them is a more or less essential pre-requisite to a
Christian life. This appears to be doubtful.
But where Jesus used parables as far as possible, his
followers stated innumerable doubtful propositions as
facts, and attached more importance to a belief in them
than the followers of the non-Christian religions have
attached to similar statements. Some of these pro­
positions were about the structure of the universe, e.g.
‘ The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the
Son,’ others about events, e.g. ‘ Jesus descended into
Hell.’ Scientific men clearly cannot complain of the

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY AS ART FORMS 231
theologians for making myths. They do it themselves.
Sometimes they take them very seriously. Occasion­
ally the public does so. The ether is a highly mythical
substance filling empty space, for which relativistic
mechanics have little use. But broadcasting has made
it a popular myth. To-day probably more men in
England believe in it than in Jesus’ bodily ascension
to heaven.
The main objection to religious myths is that, once
made, they are so difficult to destroy. Chemistry is not
haunted by the phlogiston theory as Christianity is
haunted by the theory of a God with a craving for
bloody sacrifices. But it is also a fact that while serious
attempts are constantly being made to verify scientific
myths, religious myths, at least under Christianity and
Islam, have become matters of faith which it is more
or less impious to doubt, and which we must not attempt
to verify by empirical means. Chemists believe that
when a chemical reaction occurs, the weight of the
reactants is unchanged. If this is not very nearly true,
most of chemical theory is nonsense. But experiments
are constantly being made to disprove it. It obviously
cannot be proved, for, however accurately we weigh,
the error may still be too small for us to observe.
Chemists welcome such experiments and do not regard
them as impious or even futile.
Christians almost all believe that prayer is sometimes
answered. Now, all prayers are not answered, and
desired events often occur for which no one has prayed.
Hence individual instances of answered prayers are
useless. We mu9t have statistical evidence. It has
been proposed from time to time that a group of

232

POSSIBLE WORLDS

believers should pray for the recovery of the patients
in one wing of a hospital over a period of some months,
and the number of deaths in it be compared with that
in the other wing. The experiment has always been
refused, partly on the ground that ‘ Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy G od,’ partly through lack of faith.
Until it has been made, I do not propose to ask for the
prayers of any congregation on my behalf.
In the absence of experimental evidence Galton
attempted a statistical investigation. He considered
that of all classes of society in England those most
prayed for were the sovereigns and the children of the
clergy. I f prayer is effective they should live appreci­
ably longer than other persons exposed to similar risks
of death. So kings were compared with lords, and
the children of the clergy with those of other profes­
sional men. The conclusion to which his numbers led
was that these much-prayed-for persons had slightly
shorter lives than those with whom he compared them.
The difference was not, however, great enough to make
it probable that prayers have any harmful effect.
On the other hand, there can be little doubt that
either one’s own prayers or the knowledge that others
are praying for one may serve as a safeguard against
temptation, or effect the complete or partial cure of
functional diseases of the nervous system. There is
therefore, at any rate, a certain truth in the efficacy
of prayer ; but this efficacy may be explained on
psychological grounds, and does not necessarily imply
a divine interference in the order of nature.
Nevertheless, religious experience is a reality. It
cannot be communicated directly, but those who ex­

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY AS ART FORMS 233
perience it can induce it in others by myth and ritual.
This fact is most fully recognized by Hindus. The
simpler of them believe in a vast and complex system
of myths, and attempt to gain their personal ends by
placating various deities. The more intellectual do not
pretend that the myths are true, or that the ritual has
any effect other than a psychological influence on the
participants. A well-known Hindu mathematician,
who would sooner have died than eaten beef, once asked
a British colleague whether it would cause real surprise
in England if the Archbishop of Canterbury were to
deny the existence of God in the House of Lords. In
India, it appears, the corresponding event would excite
no more comment than does a denial of the existence of
the soul by a professor of psychology, or of the reality of
matter by a professor of physics, in England or America.
This essay is emphatically not a defence of Hinduism,
which has excused every kind of evil, from murder and
the prostitution of young girls to self-mutilation and
refusal to wash. It is, moreover, the chief prop of a
system of hereditary class distinctions based in part on
differences of colour; by contrast with which Louis xiv.
appears an equalitarian and Pizarro a champion of
racial equality. And I find many of its myths dis­
gusting. But the fact remains that it has lasted a great
deal longer than Christianity and shows far fewer signs
of decay. It has more than half as many adherents, and
on the whole affects their lives to a greater extent.
One of the gravest errors into which the Christian
religion has fallen is the view that a myth or dogma
cannot influence you unless you believe it. Christians
in general believe in the existence of St. Bartholomew
Q

234

«

POSSIBLE WORLDS

and St. James the Less, but they are much less influential
people at the present day than Cordelia and Father
Christmas, in whom very few adults believe. If the
Christian churches continue to make belief the test of
religion, it appears to me that one of three things will
happen.
If they maintain their influence they will sterilize
scientific thought, and either slow down human pro­
gress or render their adherents as defenceless against
non-Christian races armed with science as were the
Asiatics against the Christian races during the nine­
teenth century. The Caliph Mutawakkil, who, perhaps
more than any other man, assured the triumph of
orthodoxy and the suppression of independent thought
in the Mohammedan world, was responsible for its
conquest by the Christians, when these latter were
allowed to think for themselves about the nature of
matter and hence to produce steam engines and high
explosives. The Christian churches are preventing
people from thinking for themselves about life. In the
interests of theological orthodoxy Christian children
may not be taught about evolution. In those of
morality and decency they may not be taught how their
bodies work. If any Asiatic people begins as a whole
to think biologically before those of European origin do
so, it will dominate the world, if the lessons of the past
are any guide to the future.
It is perhaps more probable that under such circum­
stances religion will decline and become unimportant
in human life. This would, perhaps, be a misfortune,
for it is probably the essence of religion that a man
should realize that his own happiness and that of his

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY AS ART FORMS 235
neighbours are not his only concerns. If we abandon
religion completely we shall probably deify ourselves
and behave in a wholly selfish manner, or deify the
State and behave as the more violently patriotic
Germans did in the late war. (And as the war con­
tinued the other nations conformed more and more to
the German model.)
It may be that religion as we know it will some day be
superseded altogether, for many people nowadays lead
good lives without it. It is possible to become con­
vinced on philosophical grounds of the supreme reality
and importance of the spiritual, without postulating
another world or even a personal God. And such
convictions may be supported by mystical experience.
However, it is improbable that most people are capable
of the abstraction necessary if such a point of view is
to be adopted. It is even harder, though of course
possible, to worship one’s own moral convictions, as
Mr. Bertrand Russell does, while believing that they
are an unimportant by-product of a universe which, as
a whole, is indifferent to them. One of these views of
the world may well be true, but I do not believe that
most people can attain to it for some centuries. And
self-worship and State-worship are within the reach
of all.
A third possibility is the rise on the ruins of Chris­
tianity of a religion with a creed in harmony with
modem thought, or more probably the thought of a
generation ago. Traces of such a creed may be found
in the utterances of prominent spiritualists, in the
economic dogmas of the communist party, in the
writings of believers in creative evolution, and else­

236

POSSIBLE WORLDS

where. A new religion would crystallize the scientific
theories of its own age. The old religions are full of
outworn science, including the astronomical theory of a
solid heaven, the chemical theory that water, bread,
books, and other objects can be rendered holy by special
processes, and the physiological theory that a substance
called a soul leaves the body at the moment of death. I
remember hearing a former headmaster of Eton in­
forming the school from the pulpit that the body lost
weight (or gained it, I forget which) at the moment of
death. This materialistic view of the nature of the soul
is quite prevalent in Christian circles. A new religion
would probably include in its creed the reality of the
ether, the habitability of Mars, the duty of man to co­
operate in the process of evolution, the existence of
innate psychological difference between the human races,
and the wickedness of either capitalism or socialism.
Now, Christianity has ceased to obstruct astronomy
and geology with such texts as ‘ He hath established the
world so fast that it cannot be moved,’ and ‘ The waters
under the earth.’ It will find it a harder task to admit
that it has been as wrong about the nature of the soul
as about the nature of heaven. Nevertheless, such an
admission will have to be made if Christianity is to
survive as the religion of any appreciable fraction of
educated men and women. The experience of the past
shows that such an admission is not impossible. In the
words of Renan, ‘ Si le parti radical, parmi nous, £tait
moins Stranger k l’histoire religieuse, il saurait que les
religions sont des femmes dont il est tr£s facile de
tout obtenir, si on sait les prendre, impossible de rien
obtenir, si on veut proceder k haute lutte.’

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY AS ART FORMS 237
On the other hand, the dogmas of a new religion
would include enough of contemporary science to be
fairly plausible, and enough of contemporary ethics to
be fairly practicable. It would thus constitute a far
more serious obstacle than Christianity to scientific
and ethical progress in the future, even if it led
to a momentary advance in scientific and ethical
education.
I therefore suggest the following standpoint for con­
sideration. Religious experience is a reality. Hence
it affords a certain insight into the nature of the universe,
and must be considered in any account of it. But any
account given of religious experience must be regarded
with the gravest suspicion. Some of the greatest
mystics described their experience in language which is
frankly and admittedly self-contradictory. Such ex­
pressions as ‘ a delicious desert,’ ‘ a dazzling darkness,’
‘ ein lauter Nichts,’ ‘ it neither moves nor rests,’ are
common in their writings. Others have admitted their
ignorance of details. ‘ Nescio, nescio, quae jubilatio,
lux tibi qualis ’ (‘ I know not, I know not, what is thy
joy and thy light ’), said Bernard of Cluny. Where a
more definite statement is made, it is even less reliable
than the crude interpretation of our sense data. Our
ordinary perceptions tell us that the sun, a body of in­
determinate size, but certainly not as large as a country,
let alone the whole world, rises every morning from a
level below our own and descends again at evening. I
suggest that the data of religious experience as to the
nature of God and his relation to man are no more
reliable than those of crude perception concerning the
sun and its relation to the earth. In fact, they are less

238

POSSIBLE WORLDS

so, for different mystics disagree with one another.
Nevertheless, mystical experience may be as capable of
scientific investigation and explanation as sensuous
experience, though the process would be more difficult
because the experience is rarer. Such an interpretation,
provided its results did not contradict those of other
branches of knowledge, would constitute for the first
time a theology worthy of the name of a science.
Whether its conclusion would be theistic or not it is
impossible to judge.
The theology, or rather theologies, of to-day are
something quite different. Religious experience has so
far been described mainly in symbols drawn from every­
day life. Some such symbolic expression seems to be
inevitable. Unfortunately, the vast majority of mystics,
or at least their disciples, have come to take the symbols
seriously. Some modem religious literature, however,
furnishes a most gratifying exception to this rule. The
writings of L . P. Jacks, for example, which undoubtedly
sprung from a considerable body of religious experience,
are mainly cast in the form of fiction. His account of a
future life in A ll Men are Ghosts is the most attractive
that I have so far come across, but it does not purport
to be accurate. The similar accounts given by the
saints are also mostly, if not all, based on genuine
religious experience, but they are not for that reason to
be believed. Theology or mythology is an art form
used to express religious experience. Both theology
and scientific theory may be valuable guides to
conduct, as well as beautiful in themselves, but that
does not make them true. The theory that heat is
a substance, not a mode of motion, enabled Watt to

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY AS ART FORMS 239
make the calculations on which the design of his
steam-engines was based. The calculations were right,
but the theory was wrong. The Christian saints
believed God to be a person (though the Buddhists did
not). Their lives were often, though not always,
admirable ; and their religious experience on the whole
conformed with their beliefs. But it does not follow
that their beliefs were correct.
If such a point of view is adopted, the literature of
Christianity will come to be regarded as of mainly
symbolical value; but yet as showing forth a real ex­
perience which could perhaps have been expressed in
no other way, at the time when it was composed. An
ever larger proportion of the sayings of Jesus will be
regarded as parables and therefore to be interpreted ;
rather than dogmas to be believed, and then fitted, not
without strain, to the rest of experience. Christians
will learn to take many of the churches’ prohibitions
no more seriously than St. Paul’s veto on things
strangled. They will regard their institutions rather as
tokens of solidarity with the past and the future than
as means of salvation. And they will rank theology
with poetry, music, rituals, architecture, sculpture,
and painting, as an expression of religion, but not its
essence.
Perhaps a summary of the ideal relationship of
religion and science would be somewhat as follows :—
Religion is a way of life and an attitude to the universe.
It brings men into closer touch with the inner nature
of reality. Statements of fact made in its name are
untrue in detail, but often contain some truth at their
core. Science is also a way of life and an attitude to the

240

POSSIBLE WORLDS

universe. It is concerned with everything but the
nature of reality. Statements of fact made in its name
are generally right in detail, but can only reveal the
form, and not the real nature, of existence. The wise
man regulates his conduct by the theories both of
religion and science. But he regards these theories not
as statements of ultimate fact but as art forms.

MEROZ
* Curse ye Meroz,’ said the angel of the Lord ; * curse
ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came
not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty.’— J u d g e s v . 2 3 .

I

N recent years defenders of organized religion have
shifted their ground. Noah is relegated to the
children’s section of the Daily News. The resur­
rection of the body is believed in in a Pickwickian
sense. But we are told that the churches, or one of
them, witness to the presence on earth of the Holy
Spirit, and that when every allowance has been made
for antiquated dogma they still represent something
worthy of our adoration. If we cannot go so far as that,
we are asked at least not to oppose their activities, on
the ground that they do more good than harm. That
they do some good is, of course, undeniable, and for a
number of years this latter argument carried weight in
my own case. I will try to explain why it has ceased
to do so.
I should be the last to suggest that the late war was a
good thing, but there is no doubt that it furnished a
rough test of character. It will therefore be interesting
to analyse the conduct of ministers of religion during
its course. Their theological views may be incorrect,
but if they conduce to nobility of character they are
excusable. ‘ By their fruits ye shall know them.’ In
this analysis religious bodies fall fairly sharply into three
groups, the national churches, the pacifist churches, and

241

242

POSSIBLE WORLDS

the Roman Catholic Church. The former include not
only officially recognized bodies such as the Orthodox
Church of Russia and the Church of England, but those
whose conduct was substantially similar ; for example,
most of the British nonconformist bodies. Their
priests and ministers as a whole enthusiastically backed
their respective countries. I do not blame them for
that. They were subject to the same emotions as the
rest of us. But whereas those emotions led large
numbers of laymen to death and mutilation, their
effects on the alleged servants of Jesus were generally
less drastic. I can only speak of the clergy of the
British Empire with any first-hand knowledge. Things
were, I gather, much the same in Germany and the
United States of America. In Servia, for example,
they may well have been different.
A large number of the younger clergy became
army chaplains. In this way they at once obtained
the very satisfactory status of commissioned officers.
With other officers that status was on the whole a fair
return for the very grave dangers which they ran. The
army chaplains generally ran the irreducible minimum
of risk. Most of them kept very well behind the line.
In my war experience I never saw a chaplain display
courage. I once saw a doctor display cowardice, but
this was after he had been shelled for twelve hours on
end, and then blown up. There were, of course, excep­
tions among the clergy ; I am proud to number two of
them among my acquaintance. The standard of cour­
age was, I believe, much higher among the Catholics
than among the Protestants. The former repeatedly
heard confessions under machine-gun fire in the open.

M ER O Z

243

The latter very rarely took the opportunities offered
them to promote the cause of religion by risking their
lives. For one dead padre created a great deal more
impression than a dozen living. I am quite aware that
several chaplains won the V.C. These men are typical
of the thoroughly sincere and idealistic men who still
enter the Church, though in diminishing numbers.
They were no more representative of their profession
as a whole than the chaplain who was found rifling the
pockets of British and Bulgarian dead at Yenikeui in
September 1916.
It may be contended that I was unfortunate in my
acquaintance among army chaplains, and biassed in my
interpretation of their conduct. It is therefore impor­
tant to examine the behaviour of the clergy as a body.
When conscription was introduced in Britain the clergy
of all denominations showed a unanimity without
parallel since the Reformation. Conscription was not
for them, and so great was clerical influence among the
governing classes that their exemption was taken as a
matter of course. Now, from a Christian point of view,
it is perhaps arguable that ministers of religion should
not fight. But there is absolutely no reason why the
self-styled disciples of Jesus should not, as privates of
the R.A.M .C., have tended the sick and wounded under
conditions of moderate discomfort if relatively little
danger.
The attitude of a person who stays at home while
encouraging others to go to war is reminiscent to the lay
mind of that of the Duke of Plaza T o ro ; but it might
arouse less disgust if it were assumed, not merely during
a popular war, but during an unpopular one, provided

244

POSSIBLE WORLDS

it were equally justifiable from the Christian point of
view. The test came in 1922, when a strange event
occurred. M r. Lloyd George took an honourable but
inexpedient course. He proposed, as he was in honour
bound, to support the defeated Greeks against the
Turks. His Conservative colleagues, who, with a smile
or a sigh, had forfeited any title to be called Unionists
during the preceding three years, turned upon him and
brought him down. A war against Turkey would not
have paid. But we were as much bound by honour to
support Greece in 1922 as France in 1914, though our
case for supporting Belgium was no doubt better. And
this support would probably have saved hundreds of
thousands of Christians from death and rape, and
certainly have rendered Eastern Thrace a Christian
instead of a Mohammedan country. Two or three
clergymen above the military age, including the present
headmaster of Eton, took the view that such considera­
tions possessed a certain importance. The remainder
appear to have convinced themselves that they could
serve both God and Lord Rothermere. An ‘ AngloCatholic ’ acquaintance informed me at the time that he
attended several requiem masses for the souls of the
Christians killed at Smyrna. But it has been the usual
Christian custom to pray to, and not for, martyrs. And
since the process has been reversed, I have ceased to
attend the services of a church which no longer takes
itself seriously. As I do not prefer the Eastern form of
Christianity to Islam, I am personally very glad that
we did not fight the Turks.
It is interesting to compare the clerical attitude to the
Turks with their reaction to the Bolsheviks. The

MEROZ

245

former have killed many more Christians and many
more clergy than the latter, and have successfully
abolished Christianity over large areas. It cannot even
be claimed that the Turks, being good Muslims, are
preferable to the infidel Bolsheviks. The present rulers
of Turkey do not conform to most of the precepts of
Islam, and Mustapha Kemal’s treatment of the Caliph,
and of the revenues of Mohammedan institutions, would
have gladdened the heart of Peter the Hermit. But
the Turks have not adopted Communism, and our
clergy have less personal danger to fear from the
followers of Kemal than from those of Lenin.
The pacifist churches have a better record. The
Society of Friends is the only religious body which has
come out of the war with an enhanced reputation. A
pacifism which often took the form of mine-sweeping,
or driving ambulances under fire, earned the respect
of the soldiers. But the Quakers are almost alone
among Christian churches in possessing no clergy. A
few obscure American sects adopted a pacifist attitude
on the ground that the world was about to end, and the
battle of Armageddon would be more satisfactory for
lookers-on than for participants. They were ruthlessly
and successfully persecuted, and their leaders im­
prisoned. The survival of our planet removes their
claims to consideration.
We finally come to the Roman Catholic Church, for
\yhich, as a political institution, I feel the greatest
admiration. The authorities of the Church had to fear
a Russian victory and the break-up of Austria. The
latter event has lost them millions of adherents in
Czecho-Slovakia; the former would have lost them

246

POSSIBLE WORLDS

millions in Poland, which has celebrated its independ­
ence by rooting out the Orthodox Church. (It was the
Catholic Poles, not Lenin or Calles, who demolished
the Greek Orthodox Cathedral at Warsaw without any
serious protest from other Christians.) On the other
hand, open support of the Central Powers would have
alienated many of the Catholics opposed to them. The
Church’s problem was therefore how to remain officially
neutral while giving the maximum support to its allies.
A few facts came out from time to time which might
have shaken a faith that was not supernatural. The
Vatican was in close touch with Austria in July 1914,
and on July 26th the Bavarian Minister at the Vatican
telegraphed to Munich that the Pope approved of
energetic action against Servia.
During the war Mgr. Gerlach, the Papal Master of
the Robes, used his sheltered position in the Vatican
to plan the blowing up of two Italian battleships. In
Ireland, Canada, and Australia the Catholic clergy
organized the resistance of conscription with varying
degrees of success. They did not do so in Alsace, nor
in German and Austrian Poland, and at the present day
the anti-French movement in Alsace is largely organ­
ized by the Catholic clergy. It is quite natural that
this should be the case, since the French treat them
worse than did the Germans, on the simple ground that,
in the words of Pope Leo xm ., ‘ I f the laws of the State
. . . violate the authority of Jesus Christ, vested in the
Sovereign Pontiff, it is a positive duty to resist, a crime
to obey.’ And the French, who have made their own
laws for the last fifty-six years, wish them to be obeyed.
Some hope might have been placed in Judaism, the

MEROZ

247

other great international religion. A world-wide
financial operation in July 1914 might have prevented
or at least hampered the outbreak of war. But wher­
ever they were allowed to do so, that is everywhere
outside Russia, the Jews showed as much patriotism as
any one else, though perhaps they wearied a little
sooner. And the British rabbis shared all the im­
munities of their Christian colleagues.
In this crucial test, then, the only religious organiza­
tion which emerged with credit was the priestless
Society of Friends, and the clergy consistently displayed
a far lower standard of morality than their flocks.
There is nothing surprising in this. The Catholic
(and Anglo-Catholic) clergy claim a spiritual descent
from the Jewish priesthood, whose best-known members
were Annas and Caiaphas.
Priests have always used their power to evade the
moral obligations of the ordinary man ; and threatened
him with fire here or hereafter, or with social or eco­
nomic penalties, if he referred to the fact. What is
new in the situation is that the public is beginning to
recognize the moral and intellectual inferiority of the
clergy. Their income is diminishing, and it is not at
all likely to increase. For whereas the clergy of sixty
years and over are on the whole men of fair intelligence,
those of to-day are being recruited from the dregs of the
universities, whilst many have no higher education
at all. Under these circumstances they are hardly
likely to tap fresh sources of revenue.
If Protestant Christianity is to be saved, it will not be
by its clergy, but by men who, like St. Paul, will preach
the Gospel in the intervals of earning their living and

248

POSSIBLE WORLDS

risking their lives like ordinary mortals. They would
not be compelled by economic considerations to profess
dogmas which become daily less credible. And they
might salve what is valuable in Christianity from the
present wreckage. But the longer the fortunes of that
religion are entrusted to the clergy, the more remote
does that contingency become.

SOME ENEMIES OF SCIENCE

1

A ST week my wife successfully poisoned a number
of rats. They were eating the food of our
-'chickens, and would have eaten the smaller of
the birds if they had got the chance. Owing to the
failure of a more humane poison she found herself
compelled to use phosphorus ; which is a slow and,
to judge from the experience of human beings who
commit suicide by eating matches, often rather painful
means of death.
During the same period I lulled two rats in the course
of experimental work intended to advance medical
science. One of them, if we can judge from human
experience (and we have no more direct means of
evaluating the consciousness of animals), died after a
period of rather pleasant delirium like that of alcoholic
intoxication. The other had convulsions, and may
have been in pain for three or four minutes. I should
be very thankful if I knew that I should suffer no more
than it did before my death It therefore seems to me
somewhat ridiculous that, whereas my wife is encour­
aged by the Government and the Press, I should be
compelled to apply to the President of the Royal
Society and another eminent man of science for signa­
tures to an application to the already overworked
Home Secretary, before I can even kill a mouse in a
slightly novel manner.
It is probably right that some control should be kept
R
2«

250

POSSIBLE WORLDS

over experiments likely to involve severe and prolonged
pain to animals; but it is monstrous that with regard to
wholly or nearly painless procedures the scientific man
should be worse treated than any other member of the
community.
Under the present law, or, at any rate, under the law
as at present interpreted, a licence is required for a large
number of absolutely painless experiments, and, what
is more serious, they can only be performed in a limited
number of laboratories. In consequence, the isolated
amateur worker, who has played so great a part in the
development of British science, is debarred from wide
fields of physiology. The sportsman may go out and
shoot as many rabbits as he pleases ; and if some
of them are wounded and escape to die a linger­
ing death in their holes, no blame attaches to him.
But if he anaesthetizes one of his own rabbits at
home, and opens its abdomen to observe the effect
of a drug on its intestines, killing it before it re­
covers consciousness, he will be lucky if he escapes
with a fine.
Nor may the doctor, after his day’s shooting of
unanaesthetized partridges, acquire surgical skill by an
operation on an anaesthetized animal, even in a licensed
laboratory. He has to practise on human patients.
There are, of course, a few operations of human surgery
for which animals would furnish relatively little guid­
ance. In the majority of cases, however, they would
be of very real value, and have been proved to be so
in America. Not only is medical science already
greatly hampered by the law, but a constant fight has
to be kept up to preserve what possibilities are left it.

SOME ENEMIES OF SCIENCE

251

It is worth while enquiring into the reasons which have
led to this state of affairs.
There are a few honest anti-vivisectionists. They
are, of course, vegetarians ; for the painless killing of
animals for physiology is no more reprehensible than
their killing for meat. They wear canvas shoes, cotton
or woollen gloves, and artificial pearls if any. They
refuse to sit on leather-covered chairs, or to wear horn­
rimmed spectacles They do not spray their roses, nor
employ Keating’s powder even under the gravest
provocation. I have not met any of them, but I am
quite prepared to believe that they exist. No one who
does not come up to this rather exacting standard can
logically demand the total abolition of vivisection. But
logic is not the strongest point of the enemies of science.
All others who demand the prohibition of experi­
ments on anaesthetized animals are quite definitely
hypocrites, engaged in the familiar pursuit of
* Compounding sins they are inclined to
By damning those they have no mind to.’
There are few more disgusting spectacles in our public
life than that of the two or three sporting peers who
habitually introduce or support Bills to prohibit such
experiments. Each of them has caused more pain to
animals in a single day’s sport than the average physi­
ologist inflicts in a lifetime, and usually for no end
except his personal pleasure. For it seems to me that
from the ethical point of view a fairly sharp distinction
can be drawn between the killing of animals bred for
this purpose at a considerable expense, which would pro­
duce far more food if applied to agriculture; and that

252

POSSIBLE WORLDS

of rabbits, hares, and pigeons which must be kept down
in the interest of crops and livestock. Personally, since
I have realized from my own experience with shell
splinters that it is no fun to carry bits of metal about
one’s person, I would no more shoot a rabbit than kill
my bacon for breakfast. But I certainly do not con­
demn those who do so.
We must next consider the relatively small number
of anti-vivisectionists who would merely prohibit all
painful or possibly painful experiments. Now, the
world is so constituted that we cannot avoid inflicting
pain on others I cannot dig in my garden without
bisecting a number of earthworms, or drive a car for any
time without running over a few of the various animals
whose flattened corpses decorate our country roads.
But it is our duty, as far as possible, to diminish the
amount of pain in the world. The question therefore
is whether medical research does this or not.
Now, anti-vivisectionist literature distorts both sides
of the account. It states that a great deal of severe
suffering is inflicted on animals in the name of science,
and that there is little or no return for this in the
diminution of human and animal suffering. With
regard to the first of these assertions I can speak with a
certain degree of experience. I have seen numerous
experiments on animals, but I have never seen an
animal undergoing pain which I would not have been
willing to undergo myself for the same object. Why,
then, it may be asked, should not all painful experi­
ments be done on human volunteers ?
There are several reasons why not. One is the very
simple fact that many of these experiments possibly or

SOME ENEMIES OF SCIENCE

253

necessarily involve the death of the animal. For
example, rats are frequently inoculated under the skin
of their sides with transplantable cancers. These are
not painful, for the rat does not wince or squeak when
the lump is pressed. If it were allowed to die of cancer
it would often suffer; for the original tumour or its metastases elsewhere would press on nerves, and one of them
would probably start to ulcerate. But before either of
these events occurs, all such rats in the laboratory in
which I work are killed, and the tumours used for
chemical study or inoculation. A man, even if he
could legally be used for such a purpose and chloro­
formed before pain began, would presumably suffer
from the anticipation of an early death.
Just the same applies to deformity. A rickety child
suffers mainly because it cannot take part in the
activities of its comrades and is made to realize that
it is deformed. A rickety rat has none of these dis­
advantages, not only because it is probably not selfconscious, but because under laboratory conditions all
its acquaintances are rickety too. Finally, there is the
question of expense. Human beings cost a lot in
board and lodging, and must be compensated for loss
of time. If, as in experiments on the effects of small
changes in the diet, hundreds of individuals and years
of time are needed, this consideration is generally final.
However, if *we are to believe anti-vivisectionists,
animals constantly undergo tortures which no human
being would voluntarily endure. I recently received
an illustrated pamphlet, which I should think is fairly
typical, describing the sufferings of laboratory animals.
There was a picture of an oven in which dogs were

254

POSSIBLE WORLDS

slowly heated till they died, while a physiologist
watched their agonies through a window. The thought
of such cruelty would have made my blood boil, if it
had not already been partially boiled in such a chamber
on several occasions. Under such circumstances one
becomes dizzy long before there is any definite pain,
and death, if it occurs, is from heat stroke, not from
burning. Personally, I prefer being overheated in a
bath. Immersion of all but the head in water kept hot
enough just not to be painful, causes loss of conscious­
ness, after a good deal of panting, in about twenty
minutes. Hence there is reason to think that a lobster,
if put into cold water and heated fairly slowly, feels no
pain, which it must certainly do if dropped into boiling
water. Probably, however, it would suffer still less if
about z\ per cent, of salt were added to the cold water.
Then came a picture of a dog’s mouth held open by a
somewhat brutal-looking contrivance. This was said
to be taken from a scientific periodical called the
Transactions of the Physiological Society.’ There is,
unfortunately, no such journal, nor could I fipd the
picture in the Proceedings of that body for the date
given. Perhaps, therefore, it was the anti-vivisectionist’s idea of what an instrument of scientific torture
ought to look like. But if I had been a maiden lady
with a pet dog and no knowledge either of the facts or
the literature of physiology, I might have sent a cheque
to one of the ladies and gentlemen who make a living
by compiling documents of this kind.
In some cases experiments are supposed to be painful
out of ignorance rather than malice. A group of
experiments by Sir John Bradford, in which parts of

SOME ENEMIES OF SCIENCE

255

the kidneys of dogs were removed under an anaesthetic,
are constantly described in Parliament as torture.
Some of these dogs recovered completely, others died
with the symptoms of chronic kidney disease, which in
human beings seldom causes any pain worse than a
headache. Stone in the kidney can, of course, be very
painful, but the dogs were not so treated as to cause
them pain of this type, nor did they show any signs of
suffering it. As a matter of fact, too, doge can stand
a good deal of wounding without much suffering, so far
as one can judge. I know this, not from laboratory
experience, but because I have owned a dog whose
courage and love affairs constantly led him into fights
with larger dogs.
A large part of the unhappiness of dogs in English
laboratories is directly due to the anti-vivisectionists.
In the laboratory where I work there are a number of
dogs,each of which,for two or three monthsin the year,
eats certain organic compounds which it transforms in
its body. The newly formed compounds are excreted
in the urine. To facilitate the collection of urine an
operation has been performed on them analogous to
circumcision, and not nearly so severe as tail-docking.
Of course, an anaesthetic was used. But because the
operation has been performed in the cause of science
rather than fashion, these dogs are forbidden by law
to leave the laboratory. They are exercised in the
grounds twice daily, but may not go into the street, and
must lead a rather dull life. This regulation is typical
of the present law, which is designed quite as much to
hamper research as to protect animals.
While the large majority of experiments performed

256

POSSIBLE WORLDS

annually are nearly painless, a few dozen, which
attempt to reproduce a painful human disease, and thus
to discover its cause or cure, are as painful as the disease
which they imitate, except that when the animal’s
condition is clearly hopeless it can be killed.
I do not think it will be necessary to convince any
reader of this book of the value of medical research. It
has been the principal cause which renders the worst
slum of to-day healthier than the palace of a century
ago. If that result had been reached by the infliction
of appalling torture on millions of animals the ethical
justification of this torture would certainly be a matter
for discussion. Actually the fate of experimental rats,
for example, is no worse than that of pet rats, which
generally die from deficient diet or epidemic disease.
It remains to consider the psychology of antivivisectionists. I think that their most important
motive is a hatred of science, which they attack at its
weakest point. They hate science partly because they
do not understand it, and will not take the trouble to ;
partly because it is ethically neutral. Many of them
feel that disease must be a punishment for sin, and that
it could be avoided if we lived according to their own
particular prejudices. This view has been taken by
most religions, though, of course, Jesus did not share it
(John, chap. 9, v. 3). Almost all believe that there is
some short cut to health. So a great many simplelifers, vegetarians, faith-healers, Christian scientists,
and so forth, are opposed to medical research, and say
that its results are worthless.
In some cases anti-vivisection goes with pacifism.
The fallacy involved in this association is rather inter­

SOME ENEMIES OF SCIENCE

257

esting. Non-resistance of human evil is sometimes
effective. A certain percentage of human smiters are
seriously disconcerted if one turns the other cheek to
them. But this kind of method does not work on
bacteria, which have no finer feelings. We cannot
find out how they behave, and thus acquire power
over them, except by experiments on men or animals.
This is a very unfortunate fact, but then the universe
differs in a great many ways from what we should wish
it to be. Medicine continued on non-experimental lines
(with a very few exceptions) from the dawn of history
till the seventeenth century. And in consequence it
remained stationary during thousands of years. If its
enemies get their way it will begin to stagnate again.
But there is a less respectable side to the antivivisectionist mind. During the recent agitation
against experiments on dogs I made an offer of £10 0
(published in the Daily M ail) to the National Canine
Defence League, if they would produce any evidence for
certain libels on the medical profession which they
were circulating in order to obtain signatures for a
petition. I got no answer from the League, but a
number of abusive and most instructive letters.
One of them, from E. Hough, of Hammersmith,
objected to experiments ‘ on the dear, faithful, doggies
for the benefit of worthless human beings.* ‘ I like to
think,’ she wrote (for I picture the writer as an elderly
and soured spinster) ‘ that God will torture physio­
logists in a future life. I would not lift a finger to save
one of them if he were writhing in agony.’ There is,
then, a group of anti-vivisectionists who like to think
about torture. As they can no longer attend the bum-

258

POSSIBLE WORLDS

ing of atheists and witches, they gloat over imaginary
stories of animal torture till their blood boils ; and then
cool it with the thought of physiologists in hell fire.
Thanks largely to the psychological mutilation to which
our society subjects adults, and more particularly
children, the world is over-full of
‘ Ceux dont le reve obscur salit tout ce qu’il touche,*
and I suspect that a fair number of them become antivivisectionists.
Those who have benefited by the results of medical
research and wish it to continue might do worse than
support the Research Defence Society, which carries
on a lonely fight against a vast flood of lies. And they
should urge the following alterations in the law, none
of which would increase animal suffering in the faintest
degree. Stray dogs impounded by the police should
be used for experiment. This would abolish dog­
stealing for laboratories, and save the lives of some
thousand dogs per year. No licence should be re­
quired for experiments on fully anaesthetized animals
which are killed under the anaesthetic. Surgeons
should be allowed to practise their art under the same
conditions. Animals should not be condemned to
imprisonment for life because an experiment has been
done on them. And in the interests of national
economy the number of officials and of Government
forms used in the supervision of research should be
cut down.
At present biological and medical research workers
are enormously handicapped by the law and by public
opinion. Several hospitals, out of deference to sub­

SOME ENEMIES OF SCIENCE

259

scribers, do not allow animal experiments. They
thus render the rapid diagnosis of various diseases
impossible, and kill a certain number of patients
annually. And medical teaching is seriously handi­
capped in the same way. These are some of the
reasons why England is less healthy than a number
of other European countries. Anti-vivisectionists are
responsible for far more deaths per year in England
than motor vehicles, smallpox, or typhoid fever.

PO SSIBLE W O RLD S
T is not clear that professionalism is any more
desirable in philosophy than in football or religion.
The professional philosopher tends to use mental
processes of a type which has proved rather a failure in
scientific thought. If I want to find out how my body
works I alter it in some well-defined physical or chem­
ical way, eg . heat it through three degrees, or drink
two gallons of water. I f the mathematician doubts the
validity of an argument which proves the convergence
of an infinite series satisfying a given criterion, he con­
structs a series which obeys the criterion but does not
converge. Such tests are conclusive, and have shown
up the inaccuracy of some trains of reasoning which
were at first sight very convincing. The same method
can be applied in metaphysics. Renan, in the preface
to his Dialogues Philosophiques, said that he intended to
write a book called ‘ Hypotheses ’ in which seven or
eight world systems would be sketched, each lacking an
essential principle. In this way he would demonstrate
the importance of the missing principle more clearly
than was possible by mere argument.
Unfortunately, he never carried out his admirable
project. A certain amount has been done in the way of
parables and myths, but posterity insists on taking them
seriously. Witness the story of Dives and Lazarus,
excellent as a parable, in which form it was delivered,
but lamentable when taken seriously, as it has been

I

POSSIBLE WORLDS

261

during nearly nineteen centuries, as a concrete picture
of the future life. Generally, philosophers who con­
struct a funny world come to believe that it is the real
world. They find few to agree with them, and it is
unfortunate that the whole life of a philosopher should
be devoted to a single intellectual experiment. Even a
rabbit can often be used for several, provided it is not
irreversibly damaged. But philosophers damage their
minds by coming to believe in their own hypotheses.
This is a more or less irreversible process like ankylos­
ing in one position a joint which should be flexible.
I propose therefore to see what light, if any, can
be thrown on some of our assumptions by con­
sidering whether a plausible world or a coherent
experience might not exist in which they are not
fulfilled.
It is usual to begin with time and space. I remember
convincing myself of the arbitrary character of Euclid’s
or any equivalent parallel postulate by imagining myself
into a ‘ Riemann’s ’ or elliptical space, in which all
coplanar lines meet once. I was standing on a trans­
parent plane. I could see it as I looked down. I f I
looked up I saw the other side of it, and through it the
soles of my boots, pointing backwards. By looking
round I could see every point on the plane, and most of
them from both sides. I soon began to get intuitive
proofs of many of the more elementary propositions
in that rather bizarre geometry. I therefore ceased to
trust ‘ proofs ’ of that type in Euclidian geometry. Of
course, any mathematician with a visual imagination
can do this, and Einstein has left common-sense space
in a badly damaged condition. So we will consider

262

POSSIBLE WORLDS

some possibilities about time. Time is more interest­
ing and inaccessible than space because it is given in our
inner experience as well as our experience of the world.
I am now aware of a ‘ specious present ’ of experience
about two seconds in length at most, in which I see
moving objects and hear sound sequences. I cannot,
however, be directly conscious at the same time of a
series of events lasting for more than two seconds. A
long life consists of about a thousand million specious
presents or ‘ nows.’ Of course they overlap, but it is
convenient to take them as units. M y consciousness
at the present moment is in a special relationship to that
at other moments in my past. It remembers a few of
them, and is influenced by many of them. It has not
got this relation to events in my future, or in your past
or future. The fact that relations of this type exist
determines my personal identity and also my knowledge
of time. The perception of change, e.g. motion,
within a specious present might still exist with a differ­
ent type of relation between specious presents. There
is nothing inconceivable in my looking out of the railway
window in 1924 at objects which I am passing, being
conscious of the motion, and remembering performing
the same journey in 1923 and 1925. In this present
world unless gifted with second sight I can only re­
member the former. If therefore we can imagine a
different type of relation between * nows,’ there is no
need to postulate a very different content of each from
the normal in order to find ourselves in a different world.
I begin with two possibilities which are quite probably
realized, though not by normal men; namely, that Smith
remembers that twenty years ago he was Jones and also

POSSIBLE WORLDS

263

Robinson, while Macgregor and Stuart each remember
that twenty years ago they were Johnston.
Either a very large number of animals have no
memory whatever, or something of this kind happens.
If we divide a flatworm in two, both halves may live
happily ever after. If each gets a fair share of the
nervous system, presumably they get a certain amount
of memory from their common parent. And the con­
verse holds when two protozoa fuse. The case of
dissociated personality in men is hardly apposite, as two
different personalities rarely if ever seem to be fully
conscious at the same time. Human consciousnesses
do not usually split or unite in this way because human
bodies do not. If, on the other hand, as is very widely
supposed, consciousness may continue without a body,
I see no reason why such restriction should hold. But
I leave it as a problem for a person sincerely desirous
of immortality whether he would prefer that 100 years
hence fifteen distinct spirits each remembered having
been he, or that one spirit remembered being he and
also fourteen other people. For clearly if 100 years
hence some one remembers having been I, I have not
died, even though he is less like me than I am now
like myself at four years old. Renan suggested that
science would progress so far that our successors would
be able to reconstruct the past in complete detail, and
finally get their consciousness into a relation of memory
with our own, thus achieving the resurrection of the
just.
Chains of specious presents constituting spiritual
beings like ourselves or those we have so far con­
sidered are one-dimensional, and are naturally repre­

264

POSSIBLE WORLDS

sented by lines which may fork or unite. They
might also form a closed curve, experience repeating
itself endlessly after the passage of a certain period.
There is also, so far as I can see, nothing incon­
ceivable in two specious presents each remembering
the other. Much more interesting, however, is the
question of two-dimensional time. There are many
possible types of spiritual being enjoying two-dimen­
sional time, just as there are many types of twodimensional space, but I shall only describe one type.
It consists of specious presents like our own, and
such that if A remembers B, B never remembers A.
On the other hand, B may not remember or be in any
way affected by C, and conversely, though both are
remembered by A, and can remember D. I f we re­
present instants on a plane, one specious present
remembers another only if the latter is neither north
nor east of it. Such a being is at any moment aware
of a two-dimensional ‘ creative advance,’ which can no
more be imagined sensu stricto than four-dimensional
space. On the other hand, like four-dimensional space,
it is easy to reason about it, and one does so whenever
one discusses a function of two independent variables.
Such a spiritual being would have the great advantage
over ourselves of being able to eat his cake, have it,
and compare the two experiences. Now, it is clear that
as the events which we call the material universe have
only one temporal dimension, there is not, so to speak,
room for a being of this type among them. On the other
hand, there is no reason why my present consciousness
should not constitute one edge of a two-dimensional
spirit. The chief reason against the indefinite pro­

POSSIBLE WORLDS

265

longation of the series of specious presents which
constitute my mind is not so much that they apparently
end abruptly (for they might recommence elsewhere)
as that if I survive beyond the age of 60 or so they will
show a progressive deterioration. This deterioration
is quite obviously related to that of my body. If, on
the other hand, the one-dimensional character of time
is due to the nature of the ‘ material * world rather than
that of the mind, our desire for immortality is more
likely to be satisfied in some other time-series than in
that associated with our bodies.
But let us return to minds of which we know some­
thing. How does the world appear to a being with
different senses and instincts from our own; and if such
beings postulated a reality behind these appearances,
what would they regard as real ? We will begin with
an animal like the dog, which possesses all our senses,
although smell is vastly more important for him than
for us, and whose instincts are sufficiently like our own
to create a bond of real sympathy between us. Of
course, we shall have to imagine a dog far more in­
tellectual than any which exists, a dog with a brain as
well organized as our own, though organized on rather
different lines. And we must give him a language, for
even in Laputa thinking without symbols was not very
successful.
Now, perhaps man’s greatest intellectual achievement
is the idea of a thing, by which I mean a portion of
experience conceived of as public and ethically neutral.
Public because you and Brown experience it as well as I ;
ethically neutral because it is not good like a man,
timid like a rabbit, painful like a headache, appetizing

s

266

POSSIBLE WORLDS

like a taste. We do not regard a pin as being painful
in itself or sugar pleasant. We say that the one causes
us pain when it enters our foot, the other pleasure when
it enters our mouth. This is because w e1 regard its size,
shape, hardness, and perhaps colour, as the most real
things about the pin. Size is, on the whole, an ethically
neutral quality, though when very large it inspires awe.
Shape is nearly neutral except by association. Sounds
are far less so. An ugly discord is far more disturbing
than an ugly pattern. But smells are near the other
end of the scale. In the language of physiology, smells
normally, sights and sounds very rarely, arouse un­
conditioned reflexes. Men on the whole divide them
into good and bad, though from the emotional point of
view ambivalent smells, such as that of trimethylamine,
are the most interesting. Psycho-analysts, anticipated
by Montaigne, have commented sufficiently on the text
‘ cuiusque stercus sibi bene olet,’ though this is truer
of man than dog. It is impossible to observe a dog
sniffing about without concluding that much at least
of what he smells has a direct emotional effect on him.
Clearly association plays a part, but certain smells, as
such, appear to waken, for example, hunting and social
instincts. Now, an object’s most interesting quality to
a dog, and that about which he could say most, is its
smell. But just for this reason most objects inevitably
and spontaneously call up their appropriate emotion,
and would always appear with a tertiary quality. The
dog’s world must be much more like that of the poet
Wordsworth, or of a primitive animistic savage, than
1 I am talking of the average man, not the physicist or meta­
physician.

POSSIBLE WORLDS

267

our own. He would be as unable to think impartially
and coldly about many ordinary objects as we about our
neighbours. I doubt if a dog would ever arrive at
our idea of a thing, at least for objects with interesting
smells. He would find our religion much more in­
telligible than our science. For one of the essential
features of religion is the investing of certain objects
(or in later forms the whole universe) with qualities
which the scientific point of view ignores. Books,
buildings, foods, drinks, rivers, or stones are holy.
They not only arouse a special emotion in the be­
liever, but are thought to have these qualities apart
from their relation to him, often as the result of cere­
monies performed on them. This is just what the
dog must feel. If dogs had a religion they would
certainly flood their holy buildings with that ‘ doggy ’
smell which is the material basis of their herd instinct.
But the affective quality of smells would make it very
hard to compare them with regard to their non-affective
qualities, a procedure which is the basis of science.
Although it is true that many of man’s intellectual and
moral ideas originated in the emotional atmosphere
associated with magic and religion, and even within
religious organizations, yet where they have developed
it has always been in an environment where clear
thinking and frank criticism were possible.
But let us suppose our dog to have overcome these
difficulties to some extent, and to be in a position to
classify things according to their smells, as we do accord­
ing to their sizes when we measure them. He will clearly
distinguish degrees of intensity of a given smell. But
he will also be able to order smells according to their

268

POSSIBLE WORLDS

quality, as we do when we classify musical notes accord­
ing to their frequency or colours by their degree of
saturation. For example, a dog is enormously sensitive
to the odours of the volatile fatty acids. Buytendijk
found that dogs could distinguish between solutions
of one part in a million of caproic and caprylic acids
by sniffing at them. He would probably be able
to place the acids with an even number of carbon
atoms in the order of their molecular weights by their
smells, just as a man could place a number of piano
wires in the order of their lengths by means of their
notes. Having got the smells of a number of objects
in their right order, as we do with points in a line,
how would he proceed to establish relations between
them such as we arrive at when we say that the points
A and C are equi-distant from B ? He might do it by
a method of mixtures. I f smells A and C when mixed
are indistinguishable from B, he would be justified in
believing in a relation of this kind. But now suppose
that smells A, B, C, and D, due to the vapours of the
substances a, fi, 7 , and 5, form a series of this nature ;
and it is found that the vapour of a subtance e, which is
itself inodorous, gives the smell D when mixed with
the vapour of 7 . Remember that to a dog a thing’s
smell is its most real quality. He uses the term
‘ smellable ’ or ‘ odorous ’ to denote ‘ reality,’ just as
we use ‘ tangible ’ or ‘ visible.’ I think he will say that
the vapour of e has a virtual or imperceptible smell E,
continuing the series A, B, C, D. The idea of a virtual
smell will become clearer if we consider another process
used by our scientific dog, analogous to transposition
in acoustics and magnification in optics.

POSSIBLE WORLDS

269

The dog performs some process on himself such as
fatigue of the sense of smell, which causes the substance
£ to have the smell A, 7 the smell B, &the smell C, and
e the smell D. (I have shown elsewhere that a process
not unlike this is possible in man.) He will clearly
say that the operation has made the smell E, which was
previously imperceptible, appear to be D. When we
look at a previously invisible object with a microscope
we use the same argument. ‘ Here,’ we say, ‘ is a
microscope which makes this fly look a thousand times
its real size. Hence, corresponding to this other oblong
image which I see, there must be a small and intangible
object of one-thousandth its size. I will call it a
bacillus.’ We do not dream of questioning the reality
of such invisible and intangible objects, and down to
the size of bacteria our assumptions work very well.
But we cannot magnify objects much smaller than a
wave-length of light; and yet we go on supposing that
space has still just the same properties as the space in
which we find that the evidences of our vision and touch
agree with one another. It is not until we get down to
the dimensions of an atom that space and time cease to
have the properties familiar to us.
If we are surprised at this we must return to the dog.
He was so impressed with the reality of smells that he
took every opportunity to postulate smells, even when
they were unsmellable. If he had talked of inodorous
vapours he would have been nearer the truth. We
men are at the moment so impressed with the reality of
size, shape, and motion, that we postulate objects which
we can either touch or see, but which have size, shape,
and motion, but no colour, sound, smell, or taste. If

270

POSSIBLE WORLDS

we insist on doing this we find that the objects so
postulated have to obey quantum mechanics, which
begin where the Red Queen in Through the LookingGlass left off. Similarly, if we insist that the optical
and mechanical properties of large or rapidly moving
bodies should agree, as do those of the small and slow
bodies of ordinary life, we are landed in relativist
mechanics, which the Red Queen partially anticipated.
We do not yet know what our descendants will regard
as more real than objects with definite sizes, shapes, and
positions. The theory of relativity suggests that they
may think happily about space-time with peculiar local
properties, while quantum mechanics might lead one
to suppose that they will believe in atoms of action
or of angular momentum. But the sceptical dog who
doubted the theory that everything had a smell would
have equal difficulty in knowing what to put in its place.
But the dog is too near to us. Let us go to the insect.
J. S. Huxley, in Essays of a Biologist, has elaborated one
of their troubles in world-building at some length; but
perhaps it is Lord Dunsany, in The Flight of the Queen,
who has given the most vivid imaginative picture of
insect psychology in our language. Our own religious
feelings at their most intense are perhaps only a feeble
shadow of the normal emotional life of a social insect.
We mammals are torn between selfish and social
desires. There is very little evidence of any such
conflict in the life of a normal worker bee, though it is
true that some bees are lazier than others. It is largely
out of this conflict that reflective thought has arisen in
man. In the Bible the origin and nature of the world
are dismissed in the first one-and-a-half chapters. The

PO SSIB L E W O R L D S

271

rest is mainly occupied with the results of the conflict
between different human instincts. Even the account
of the creation only sets the scene for the origin of that
conflict in the garden of Eden. And where afterwards
historical events are recorded they are the mere back­
ground for the moral conflicts of individuals, and for the
story of how the tribal god of Israel, who had personified
the consciousness of solidarity in one small tribe,
gradually developed into the judge of all the earth, the
father who is postulated to explain the brotherhood of
man. If man had followed a single set of instincts he
would never have come to reflect on moral problems,
and it is out of this reflection that the great religious
systems at any rate have sprung. Animism and poly­
theism were succeeded by monotheism in Israel on
moral and political grounds. Baal was not rejected
because the orderly character of nature suggested a
single governor of the universe, but because the Lord
was regarded as a jealous god. The unity of God is
rather the sign of man’s attempt to unify his own moral
life by following one law, than an explanation of the
reign of law in the world. It is true that the Greeks
were arriving at the idea of the world unity from a
somewhat different direction. But their conception of
fate or dvdy/cr) (necessity) seems also to have risen
historically from a consideration of moral rather than
physical problems. And a moral problem can only
arise from the conflict of instincts.
Out of the mythology of the early religious systems
arose the attempts to explain nature. The views of the
Ionian philosophers belong to the same order of thought
as those of the mythologists, and in the systems of such

272

POSSIBLE WORLDS

thinkers as Plato and Pythagoras it is impossible to
separate theological and physical hypotheses. But the
bee has no need for a religious system. Its behaviour
on most occasions is prescribed for it by instinct. If
it could tell us of the world I think it would speak of a
system of duties rather than a system of things. Its
language would be one of verbs rather than nouns.
The reality of a flower would be the sucking of honey
or the gathering of pollen, rather than the flower’s form,
colour, or odour. It is only because for us most things
may have more purposes than one that we do not think
of them in this way. Things are specially simplified
for the bee because in any situation all the workers of a
given age have the same duty, except in so far as they
specialize on one flower rather than another. The
average worker would not aspire to imagine herself in
the position of a queen, while she would regard drones
as duty-blind and execrable creatures.
An expression in human terms of the superior reality
of duties, as compared with things or even souls, may
be found in the Mohammedan (or rather Sunni) dogma
of the uncreated Koran. Before there were men and
women their reciprocal rights and duties existed, we
are told, and the prohibition of wine-bibbing preceded
the creation of the grape.
Within our own species those who are conscientiously
and successfully engaged in simple and primitive forms
of activity would seem to come nearest to living in such
a world as the bee. A successful and hard-working
mother of a large family is apt, even to an irritating
extent, to know the right thing to do in every circum­
stance. As far as she herself is concerned she very often

PO SSIB L E W O R L D S

273

does; but she tends to be equally certain of the duty
of other people, and hence to a certain narrowness
in her moral ideas. Primitive men generally seem to
know the right thing to do in most of the circumstances
of their normal life. Detailed moral tradition occupies
the place in their lives that instinct does in that of an
animal. And as we discard these dummy instincts we
feel a moral nakedness, as it were, which we try to cover
in various ways, often strange and inadequate.
I do not see why we should deny the bee the reality
of her duty world. Duties are, I suspect, as real as
material things, which is not perhaps saying very much.
Unfortunately, such an admission is generally taken to
imply a belief in the infallibility of the utterances of the
moral consciousness. Conscience appears to me to be
no more infallible than perception. I see and feel a
lump of iron. It appears quite solid, and its parts seem
to have no motion relative to one another. I investigate
its properties and find that it consists almost wholly of
‘ empty space,’ with a number of tiny particles moving
about in it at enormous speeds. Still, there is some
meaning in what I perceived, and my perception of the
solidity of the metal can be interpreted in terms which
are nearer to the truth. Similarly, I perceive a duty,
say to aid my distressed neighbour by giving him a
new pair of boots. Very likely my duty in detail is just
as different as the real iron from my perception of it.
I ought perhaps to leave my neighbour with holes in
his boots, and give the price of a new pair to the charity
organization society or the communist party. Yet
that is not to say that there is no reality corresponding
to what at first sight I regard as a solid lump of metal or

274

POSSIBLE WORLDS

a duty to clothe my neighbour. But one may fall into
just as great errors by taking the one too seriously as
the other. In the long run we may welcome these
difficulties because they make us think, but there are
times when I at least am disposed to envy the bee,
which has but little occasion for this kind of thought.
We shall probably in time reduce duty to something
else, as we have reduced matter to electricity, but that
will not explain it away.
We can perhaps obtain some notion of the contin­
gency of our ethical and aesthetical values by imagining
the condition of affairs if the human race, like many
animals, possessed an annual breeding season of short
duration. Every year, in the course of a few weeks,
we should undergo the profound changes in almost
every department of our own mental life which are
actually spread over several years of adolescence. Not
only would the sexual instinct awake, but our tastes in
art, literature, clothing, politics, and religion would
suddenly alter. As we impose our adult tastes in these
matters on children, we can only dimly guess at the
values of a humanity without sexual instincts.
No doubt the sexes would be segregated during the
breeding season as they are throughout the year in
Mohammedan countries. Love, which is a synthesis
of sexual passion with friendship arising out of common
interests, would be almost impossible, and human life
would be a poorer thing in many ways. But in par­
ticular it is hard to see how any stable system of moral,
political, aesthetic, or religious ideas could come into
being. And even if the absolute character of the ideas
and values appertaining to such branches of human

P O S S IB L E W O R L D S

275

activity be denied, some form of intellectual construc­
tion is almost undeniably preferable to raw emotion
as a basis for behaviour in these spheres. An animal
with a breeding season would find little permanent but
material objects, and its philosophy would probably
be a crude materialism, its conduct regulated by a
system of harsh and arbitrary laws rather than by any
internal criterion.
Clearly sexual activity outside the breeding season
would be treated as we treat incest or homosexuality.
One need not attempt to picture in any great detail the
fate of an Australian who reached England in autumn
and behaved as Australians did in spring. What is
important to realize is the fact that we can know an
orderly world only because the waking activities of our
mind are fairly similar from one day to another, and
we have agreed to lay little stress upon our dream life.
In the social animals there is at least some chance of
a thought-provoking conflict between social and in­
dividualistic instincts; but in a non-social animal this
is not so, as Trotter in Instincts of the Herd in Peace and
War has pointed out, and its world must be still
farther removed from ou rs; so that any picture one can
draw of it will be more frankly fabulous than those so
far attempted. Let us try to imagine the world of a
sessile and barely social animal endowed with sense
organs. We will allow it some tentacles like a seaanemone, or jointed appendages like a barnacle or
crinoid, some eyes like a scallop, and of course organs of
smell or taste. Naturally its most improbable endow­
ment is a brain, for brains are only of value to mobile
animals which have a reasonable number of choices of

276

POSSIBLE WORLDS

action before them. Hence in reality, since a brainless
animal can hardly be aware of the world, the number
of world-views possible to organisms on this planet is
limited to a small fraction of those possible in the
abstract. But a brief sketch of the world as it might
appear under barely realizable or unrealizable circum­
stances may be as valuable as the mathematical study
of the less realizable types of geometry.
We return then to our philosophical barnacle. It is
true that in its youth it was a free-swimming micro­
scopic larva, but it will probably no more remember
lliis than we can remember the time when we were
sessile and absorbed our nourishment through a stalk.
When we know more about the factors controlling the
growth of our own nervous system, we may be in a
position to cause it to develop sufficiently before birth
for babies to be bom with a fully fledged consciousness,
and carry over into separate life some memory of their
pre-natal state. But we will spare our barnacle this
complication. By the mobility of its arms and stalk
it can explore a sharply limited volume of space.
Beyond that it can see, but it will have little more idea
of distance than our unaided senses give us of the
distances of the heavenly bodies. It will have a notion
of direction, though even that will be as crude as our
own localization of internal sensations without the data
derived from exploration with our hands. With the
perfection of local anaesthesia many of our descendants
will probably be familiar with the feel and look of their
own internal organs. They will take advantage of
surgical operations to know themselves in this sense.
The barnacle, then, finds as great a difficulty in

POSSIBLE WORLDS

277

unifying its visual and tactile space as an astronomer
in calculating the distances of the stars. In fact, the
average sensual barnacle regards the attempt to do so
as ludicrous and presumptuous. ‘ The world,’ it says,
‘ is what we can sweep with our arms. Things come
into it, and my visions are of some use to me in telling
me of things that will come into being in it, but they
are notoriously deceptive. I know that when a vision
becomes very large it is time for me to shut my shell,
though sometimes even a very large vision does not
portend any real event. But that rule of conduct was
revealed to us by the Great Barnacle ages ago, and was
not discovered by the philosophers. I also know that
when I have a vision in a certain direction, a real thing
will sometimes come into being within range of my
fourth left arm, and so on. But it seldom does, or I
should be fatter than l a m ! I do not think that we are
helped in any way by calling visions “ near ” if they
precede the advent of a real thing, and “ far ” if they do
not. Visions are visions and realities are realities, and
no good will come of mixing them up. A philosopher
on the next rock was telling his neighbours that a large
vision was “ far ” and not dangerous, when a thing came
into being and nipped six of his arms off. His neigh­
bours had all shut up, and he got little pity from them 1 ’
Nevertheless, a number of earnest barnacles have formed
a society for the investigation of visions. They find
that though they generally agree in seeing a vision at
the same time, they often differ about its shape and
direction. The sceptics say that this proves that
visions are nonsense. The members of the S.V .R .
(Society for Visionary Research) have recorded many

278

POSSIBLE WORLDS

series of partial correspondences between visions of
different individuals, and believe that they are on the
track of some law governing them. Unfortunately, they
are handicapped by two causes besides scepticism. A
number of barnacles hold that after a barnacle has died
it becomes a vision; while others, inspired by a love of
gain or notoriety, make claims which can hardly be
substantiated to seeing visions. So on the whole the
sensible barnacle considers that there is nothing real
out of range of his own or his neighbour’s arms. Some
of them would qualify this by a statement that bad
barnacles when they die go to a rock where it is always
low tide, while the virtuous are planted near the opening
of an immense sewer, where food is carried to their
mouths without any effort on their part. But the idea
that so fixed and respectable an animal should be trans­
formed into a vision, which is not only unsubstantial,
but mobile, they regard as merely disgusting.
Such is the intellectual condition of the English
barnacle. Those living on the coast of Madagascar
(Lepas sapiens) have worked out the theory of the
parallax of visions. They have shown that if the direc­
tion of a vision from any two barnacles is known, that
from a third can be calculated, and they have developed
a satisfactory mathematical theory of visions of which
I am privileged to give a brief sketch. A vision as
perceived exists in two-dimensional space, the co­
ordinates generally employed being front and back,
right and left. A given barnacle fixes the position of
a vision in its own visual space. It then receives
messages from its friends as to where they see the
corresponding vision, and by a rapid calculation (or

POSSIBLE WORLDS

279

by means of tables) evaluates a third or imaginary
co-ordinate for the vision. This is often called the
distance. When it becomes zero (or very small) the
vision is associated with a real object. So much is
conceded by all students of the higher mathematics.
But some have gone so far as to suggest that the
imaginary co-ordinate has the same reality as the per­
ceptible ones, and that, in fact, visions exist in a threedimensional world. It is admitted that such a world
cannot be imagined, and no barnacle takes it seriously,
though a few of them pretend to. It certainly leads
to somewhat incredible consequences. For example,
when the distance became negative the vision would be
located on the other side of the surface of the rock.
This is an obvious contradiction in terms, for it is well
known that space cannot exist in the absence of water,
and the surface of the rock is the end of space. (I owe
this valuable idea to M r. George Bernard Shaw, who
in the course of a conversation doubted whether the sun
was more than a few hundred miles away. The socalled interstellar space, he stated under cross-examina­
tion, has not the properties of ordinary space. It will
not conduct sound, nor can a human being move
through it. It is therefore illegitimate to measure it
in miles.)
Man is after all only a little freer than a barnacle.
Our bodily and mental activities are fairly rigidly con­
fined to those which have had survival value to our
ancestors during the last few million generations. Our
own appraisement of these activities is dictated to some
extent by other considerations than their survival value,
but their nature is limited by our past. We have

280

POSSIBLE WORLDS

learned to think on two different lines—one which
enables us to deal with situations in which we find our­
selves in relation to our fellow-men, another for
corresponding situations with regard to inanimate
objects. We are pretty nearly incapable of any other
types of thought. And so we regard an electron as a
thing, and God as a person,1 and are surprised to find
ourselves entangled in quantum mechanics and the
Athanasian Creed. We are just getting at the rudiments
of other ways of thinking. A few mystics manage to
conceive of God as such, and not as a person or a sub­
stance. They have no grammar or even vocabulary
to express their experience, and are generally regarded
as talking nonsense, as indeed they often do. We
biologists, or some of us, are managing to think about
an organism neither as a mere physico-chemical system,
nor as something directed by a mind. We also tend to
contradict ourselves when we try to put our ideas into
words. On the other hand, our way of thinking has led
some of us to a very shrewd idea of how an organism
will behave in given circumstances, and to making
experiments which throw a good deal of light on the
nature of an organism. But I do not feel that any of us
know enough about the possible kinds of being and
thought, to make it worth while taking any of our meta­
physical systems very much more seriously than those
at which a thinking barnacle might arrive. Such
systems seem to be helps to the imagination rather than
accounts of reality. Yet it is of fundamental import­
1 It is only fair to Christianity to point out that belief in a
personal God is heretical, the Almighty being a Trinity, and in
some ways more like the perfect state than the perfect person.

POSSIBLE WORLDS

28 1

ance that metaphysical speculation should continue.
The only alternative to this appears to be the adoption
of some rather crude metaphysical system, such as
Thomism or materialism, and regarding it as common
sense.
But let us return to our fables. So far we have con­
sidered animals with an idea of space comparable
with ours, an idea derived from vision or from that
combination of reaching and locomotion which is
possible in the blind,1 and leads to an idea of space not
very different from our own. But there are senses of
great delicacy and scope which no more than hint at
space. Our sense of hearing is one, and with its aid
a system of music has been built up so vast and detailed
as almost to constitute a world. Unfortunately, it is
not the world in which our bodies live, and hence the
bodies of musicians tend to starve in garrets and to
place their associated minds in even less dignified
situations. But how would the real world appear to a
being with a complete series of senses which perceived
periodic disturbances as qualitatively different, like our
own senses of tone and colour ? We will give it a range
of seventy octaves, which would make it aware of the
whole range of vibrations from one per second up to the
unimaginably but not incalculably high frequency of
7 rays from radio-active elements. And within each
octave we will endow it with what we possess in our
tone sense but not in our colour sense, a capacity for
analysing mixed vibrations into their components, as a
spectroscope does. Like a musician, too, it will be
able to place the various types of radiation in a scale like
1 Villey, Le Monde des Aveugles.
T

282

POSSIBLE WORLDS

that of musical notes. It is a curious fact that we men
can place musical notes in their natural order by
intuition, while it required the genius of Newton to do
the same for colour. What is more, we know that an
octave in one part of the scale is equivalent to an octave
in another, and hence our musical scale is quantitative.
Indeed, in the chromatic scale the notes are so arranged
that to each interval between two of them corresponds
the same difference in the logarithms of their fre­
quencies. The piano keyboard is really a rather in­
accurate table of logarithms, a fact which I believe is
equally ignored in the teaching of mathematics and
of music.
But to return to our hypothetical organism, one can
point at once to some of its powers. It could distin­
guish any chemical substance from any other by the
difference in their capacities for absorbing radiation.
We men can distinguish a few by their capacities for
absorbing visible rays, which give them their different
colours, though our colour sense is so inadequate that
we have to fall back on the spectroscope. Our organ­
ism could also tell the temperature of any object by
analysing the radiation from it. So that from the
qualitative point of view it would know far more than
we about objects within the range of its senses. But it
would only arrive at their shapes, sizes, positions, and
motions by a most complicated process of deductions,
the reverse of the process which we use to discover the
nature of the periodic disturbances in molecules. With
no other sense than that described above, its task of
world-making would be more hopeless than that of a
blind and deaf man. We must allow it a rudimentary

POSSIBLE WORLDS

283

appreciation of space and motion, just as we have a
rudimentary appreciation of radiation in our colour
sense. It must have at least one movable organ, and
be conscious of moving it. It will, however, take
colours, if we may so describe the data of its vibration
sense, for granted, and build up everything else on this
basis. It will, of course, analyse all kinds of motion into
periodic components, just as we analyse them into
movements in various directions. But it will also, at
first, at any rate, regard matter as merely a kind of
vibration, or colour, and only very gradually, if ever,
reach a point of view like our own.
Now, the oddest thing about its endeavours is that
they are of the greatest importance for physicists to-day,
and probably of the greatest practical importance to our
grandchildren. A century ago physicists began to
give up the corpuscular theory of light, which had
satisfied them for two thousand years, in favour of a
wave theory. Among the practical consequences flow­
ing from this theory were wireless telegraphy and
telephony. And in the last two years a much more
surprising step has been taken. The wave theory
of matter, enunciated by de Broglie, and developed
by Schrodinger, has already rendered the mechanics
of the atom relatively intelligible. It has further
enabled mathematical physicists to predict several
extremely surprising results which have been verified.
In consequence some of the ablest men in the world
are at present in the position of the mythical creatures
which I have tried to describe. They take as their
data the frequencies of the radiation emitted or
absorbed by various kinds of matter, and very naturally

284

POSSIBLE WORLDS

come to regard the matter itself as merely a special type
of undulatory disturbance.
So far as an outsider can judge, even Schrodinger’s
world, fantastic as it is, contains many relics of ordinary
thought which the creatures that I have imagined would
hardly have taken for granted. However, Heisenberg
and Bom in Germany, and Dirac in Cambridge, are
busily clearing away these vestiges of common sense.
In the world of their imagining even the ordinary rules
of arithmetic no longer hold good. The attempt to
build up a world-view from the end which common
sense regards as wrong, is, at any rate, being made, and
with very fair success. I suspect that it is of far greater
importance for metaphysics than the entire efforts of the
philosophers who, from Kant onwards, have attempted
to build on the ground cleared by Hume. If it were
successful it might lead to philosophical systems in
which the real elements in the external world were the
secondary qualities of colour, tone, and so forth, rather
than the primary qualities of the materialist’s world.
One may perhaps speculate that in colour vision we
have a real perception of light quanta, though the
analogy with hearing renders such a theory dubious.
A natural philosophy of such a kind would be a step
in the direction of idealism. The idealists have held
that the spiritual alone is the real. They have failed
to account in detail for the phenomenal world on this
basis, the most magnificent of such failures being
Hegel’s. (I call to mind an admirable picture by a
deceased friend entitled ‘ An Hegelian setting the
Dialectic in motion.’ A small, bald, and myopic
philosopher is turning the handle of a vast and com­

POSSIBLE WORLDS

285

plicated machine, fed from sacks labelled ‘ Ideen.’ It
has numerous doors at different levels. That which
happens to be open is disgorging rabbits of various
colours. That below would have presumably pro­
duced plants, that above ‘ subjective minds.’) But the
failure of these philosophers in detail does not prove
that they were not correct in a general way. Secondary
qualities, such as colour, are generally regarded as
having less claim to independence of the mind than
primary qualities, such as size and shape, and a working
theory of the universe which started from them would
certainly be a long way nearer to idealism than is
present-day science. If, as Leibniz held, the universe
consists wholly of minds, the transition to such a
physics would only be a step in the right direction, but
possibly subsequent steps might be easier. Perhaps
an understanding of the psychology of social insects
might help us to make them.
I greatly doubt if they will be made by professional
philosophers. And though to-day the theoretical
physicist is and ought to be the principal type of worldbuilder, the biologist will one day come to his own in
this respect. And one day man will be able to do in
reality what in this essay I have done in jest, namely, to
look at existence from the point of view of non-human
minds. Bergson has of course made this attempt, but
not, as it seems to me, very successfully. Success is,
indeed, impossible in view of our present ignorance of
animal psychology, and that is why a purely speculative
essay like the present can claim some degree of justifica­
tion at this moment. Our only hope of understanding
the universe is to look at it from as many different points

286

POSSIBLE WORLDS

of view as possible. This is one of the reasons why the
data of the mystical consciousness can usefully supple­
ment those of the mind in its normal state. Now, my
own suspicion is that the universe is not only queerer
than we suppose, but queerer than we can suppose. I
have read and heard many attempts at a systematic
account of it, from materialism and theosophy to the
Christian system or that of Kant, and I have always felt
that they were much too simple. I suspect that there
are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamed
of, or can be dreamed of, in any philosophy. That is
the reason why I have no philosophy myself, and must
be my excuse for dreaming.

T H E L A S T JU D G M E N T
* Denique montibus altior omnibus ultimus ignis
Surget, inertibus ima tenentibus, astra benignis,
Flammaque libera surget ad aera, surget ad astra,
Diruet atria, moenia, regna, suburbia, castra.’
B ern ard

of

C lu n y,

De Contemptu mundi, Lib. I.

T

HE star on which we live had a beginning and
will doubtless have an end. A great many
people have predicted that end, with varying
degrees of picturesqueness. The Christian account
contains much that is admirable, but suffers from two
cardinal defects. In the first place, it is written from
the point of view of the angels and a small minority of
the human race. The impartial historian of the future
could legitimately demand a view of the communiques
of the Beast of the Book of Revelation and his adherents.
For, after all, the Beast and his false prophet could
work miracles of a kind, and were admittedly able
propagandists. So perhaps ‘ Another air raid on
Babylon beaten off. Seventeen archangels brought
down in flames ’ might record some of the earlier stages
in the war, while ‘ More enemy atrocities. Prophet cast
into burning sulphur ’ would chronicle the peace terms.
But the more serious objection is perhaps to the scale
of magnitudes employed. The misbehaviours of the
human race might induce their creator to wipe out their
planet, but hardly the entire stellar system. We may
be bad, but I cannot believe that we are as bad as all
is?

288

POSSIBLE WORLDS

that. At worst our earth is only a very small septic
area in the universe, which could be sterilized without
very great trouble, and conceivably is not even worth
sterilizing.
I prefer Ragnarok, the Doom of the Reigners, which
closes the present chapter in world history according
to Norse mythology. Here mankind perish as an
episode in a vaster conflict. It is true that they mis­
behaved first.
‘ Hart es i heimi, hordomr mikkil,
Skeggi-aold, skalm-aold, skildir klofnir,
Vind-aold, varg-aold, a5r vaerold steipisk 1
(‘ Hard upon earth then, many a whoredom,
Sword-age, axe-age, shields are cloven,
Wind-age, wolf-age, ere world perish ’),
says the Norse Sybil in the Volospa. But human
events are a symptom rather than a cause. The gods
are to be destroyed by the powers of darkness. Fenri,
the wolf, will eat Odin, and actually get the world
between his teeth, though he will fail to swallow it.
There is a happy ending, probably due to Christian
influence. Balder returns from the dead, and rules
over the descendants of two survivors of the human
race. But one episode is of considerable interest. In
the middle of the fight the sun becomes a mother, and
both she and her daughter survive it. In Scandinavia,
of course, the sun, who is kindly but rather ineffective,
is a female, a conception impossible to the inhabitants
of hotter climates.
Now, fission is one of the vices to which suns are
1 The letter <5was pronounced like th in then, > like th in thin.

THE LAST JUDGMENT

289

subject. Indeed, something like half the ‘ fixed ’ stars
known to us are double or multiple. Apparently the
reason for splitting is as follows :— A star always has a
certain amount of angular momentum, or spin, due to
its rotation on its axis. As it loses heat it gets smaller,
but keeps the same amount of spin. So it has to go
round faster, and finally splits in two, like a bursting
flywheel, owing to its excessive speed. The sun
certainly does not seem likely to do this, for it turns
round its axis only once in about four weeks ; whereas
in order to split, it would have to do so once in less than
an hour. But we can see only its outside, and last year
Dr. Jeans, the president of the Royal Astronomical
Society, suggested that the sun’s inside might be rotat­
ing much faster, and that no one could say that it would
not divide to-morrow. Naturally, such an event is
rather unlikely. The sun has gone on for several
thousand million years without doing so. But it is
apparently possible.
The results for the earth would be disastrous. Even
if the sun’s heat did not increase so greatly as to roast
mankind forthwith, the earth would cease to revolve in
a definite orbit, and year by year would approach the
pair of suns nearer at one season, retreat from them
further at another, while they themselves would gradu­
ally separate, and therefore approach nearer to the
earth. Long before a collision occurred we should
have come so close to one of them that, under the
radiation from a sun covering perhaps a tenth of the
sky, the sea would have boiled over and mankind
perished.
The sun might perhaps do several other things. It

290

POSSIBLE WORLDS

might cool down, and a generation ago it seemed very
plausible that it would do so within a few million years.
But as we now know that for the thousand million years
or so since the first ice-age recorded by geology it has
not got much cooler, there is no reason to suppose that
it will begin to do so for a very long time indeed.
Modern physics suggests, indeed, that it will shine for
at least a million million years. But before that time
comes, something very strange, as we shall presently
see, will have happened to our own planet.
Stars occasionally burst, expanding enormously,
giving out a vast amount of heat, and then dying down
again. No one knows why this occurs, but it does
seem to happen to stars not at all unlike the sun. If it
happened to the sun, the earth would stand as much
chance of survival as a butterfly in a furnace. But
these explosions are also rare. No star at all near to us
has exploded during human history. If Sirius, let us
say, exploded in this manner, he would send nearly as
much light to the earth as does the moon, and would be
visible by day. We cannot say whether this kind of
ending for our world is likely or not until we know more
as to why it happens to other suns than our own.
Others have suggested a comet or some stray
heavenly body as a destroyer. Against this we have
the fact that on all the continents nothing more than a
few miles in diameter can have fallen in the last few
hundred million years. The great meteor imbedded
in the desert in Arizona may have formed part of a
comet, and some of the scars on the moon may be due
to collisions with wandering matter. But the improb­
ability of a collision which would desolate any large part

THE LAST JUDGMENT

291

of the earth’s surface is enormous, even though the
Arizona meteorite would have made a considerable
mess of London or New York. It has been suggested
that a heavy body passing near the earth might drag it
out of its orbit. The orderly and nearly circular char­
acter of the orbits of all the planets round the sun shows
that they have not been greatly perturbed for a very
long time, and probably since their formation. One
cannot say that they will never be so perturbed, but one
can assert that the odds against any such event in the
next million years are more than a thousand to one.
All the possibilities that I have catalogued are essenti­
ally accidents. Some of them may happen, just as I
may be killed in a railway accident; but just as my
body will not go on working for ever, apart from any
accidents, so the earth carries with it through space
what will certainly alter its conditions profoundly, and
very possibly destroy it as an abode of life. I refer to
the moon.
Our Scandinavian ancestors did not neglect our
satellite in their account of the twilight of the gods.
‘ Austr byr in aldnar i IamviSi
Ok foeSir )>ar Fenris kindir,
VerSr af }>eim aollom einar nokkar
Tungls tiugari, i trollz hami.’
(‘ Eastward in Ironwood sits the old witch
And breeds Fenri’s children,
' Of them all one shall be born
Shaped like an ogre, who shall pitch the moon down.*)
Now, here the sybil who described the future to Odin
was substantially in agreement with modem astronomy.

292

POSSIBLE WORLDS

The moon will one day approach the earth so close as
to be broken up, and very possibly to destroy the earth’s
surface features. Certain Mohammedan theologians
have interpreted the first verse of the Sura called ‘ The
Moon,’ ‘ The hour is come and the moon is split,’ as
referring to the end of the world. But outside Scan­
dinavia the prophets of doom have generally described
the stars as falling out of heaven, which is an impossi­
bility, for the same reason that a million elephants
cannot fall on one fly. They are too large.
In what follows I shall attempt to describe the most
probable end of our planet as it might appear to spec­
tators on another. I have been compelled to place the
catastrophe within a period of the future accessible to
my imagination. For I can imagine what the human
race will be like in forty million years, since forty
million years ago our ancestors were certainly mam­
mals, and probably quite definitely recognizable as
monkeys. But I cannot throw my imagination forward
for ten times that period. Four hundred million years
ago our ancestors were fish of a very primitive type.
I cannot imagine a corresponding change in our
descendants.
So I have suggested the only means which, so far as
I can see, would be able to speed up the catastrophe.
The account given here will be broadcast to infants
on the planet Venus some forty million years hence.
It has been rendered very freely into English, as many
of the elementary ideas of our descendants will be
beyond our grasp :—
* It is now certain that human life on the earth’s
surface is extinct, and quite probable that no living

THE LAST JUDGMENT

293

thing whatever remains there. The following is a
brief record of the events which led up to the destruc­
tion of the ancient home of our species.
‘ Eighteen hundred and seventy-four million years ago
the sun passed very close to the giant star 318.47.19543.
The tidal wave raised by it in our sun broke into an
incandescent spray. The drops of this spray formed
the planets, of all of which the earth rotated by far the
most rapidly. The earth’s year was then only very
slightly shorter than now; but there were 1800 days in
it, each lasting only a fifth of the time taken by a day
when men appeared on earth The liquid earth spun
round for a few years as a spheroid greatly expanded at
the equator and flattened at the poles by its excessive
rotation. Then the tidal waves raised in it by the sun
became larger and larger. Finally the crest of one of
these waves flew off as the moon. At first the moon was
very close to the earth, and the month was only a little
longer than the day.
‘ As the moon raised large tides in the still liquid earth
the latter was slowed down by their braking action, for
all the work of raising the tides is done at the expense
of the earth’s rotation. But by acting as a brake on the
earth, the moon was pushed forward along its course,
as any brake is pushed by the wheel that it slows down.
As it acquired more speed it rose gradually farther and
farther away from the earth, which had now a solid
crust, and the month, like the day, became longer.
When life began on the earth the moon was already
distant, and during the sixteen hundred million years
before man appeared it had only moved away to a
moderate degree farther.

294

POSSIBLE WORLDS

‘ When these distances were first measured by men
the moon revolved in twenty-nine days, and the braking
action of the tides amounted to twenty thousand million
horse-power on the average. It is said that the effect
of tidal friction in slowing down the earth’s rotation, and
therefore lengthening the day, was first discovered by
George Darwin, a son of Charles Darwin, who gave the
earliest satisfactory account of evolution. However,
there is reason to believe that both these personages are
among the mythical culture-heroes of early human
history, like Moses, Lao-Tze, Jesus, and Newton.
* At this time the effect of tidal friction was to make
each century, measured in days, just under a second
shorter than the last. The friction occurred mainly in
the Bering Sea between northern Asia and America.
As soon as the use of heat engines was discovered, man
began to oxidize the fossil vegetables to be found under
the earth’s surface. After a few centuries they gave
out, and other sources of energy were employed. The
power available from fresh water was small, from winds
intermittent, and that from the sun’s heat only available
with ease in the tropics. The tides were therefore
employed, and gradually became the main source of
energy. The invention of synthetic food led to a great
increase in the world’s population, and after the federa­
tion of the world it settled down at about twelve thou­
sand million. As tide engines were developed, an everincreasing use was made of their power; and before the
human race had been in existence for a million years, the
tide-power utilized aggregated a million million horse­
power. The braking action of the tides was increased
fiftyfold, and the day began to lengthen appreciably.

THE LAST JUDGMENT

295

‘ At its natural rate of slowing fifty thousand million
years would have elapsed before the day became as long
as the month, but it was characteristic of the dwellers
on earth that they never looked more than a million
years ahead, and the amount of energy available was
ridiculously squandered. By the year five million the
human race had reached equilibrium ; it was perfectly
adjusted to its environment, the life of the individual
was about three thousand years ; and the individuals
were “ happy,” that is to say, they lived in accordance
with instincts which were gratified. The tidal energy
available was now fifty million million horse-power.
Large parts of the planet were artificially heated. The
continents were remodelled, but human effort was
chiefly devoted to the development of personal relation­
ships and to art and music, that is to say, the production
of objects, sounds, and patterns of events gratifying to
the individual.
‘ Human evolution had ceased. Natural selection had
been abolished, and the slow changes due to other causes
were traced to their sources and prevented before very
great effects had been produced. It is true that some
organs found in primitive man, such as the teeth (hard,
bone-like structures in the mouth), had disappeared.
But largely on aesthetic grounds the human form was
not allowed to vary greatly. The instinctive and
traditional preferences of the individual, which were
still allowed to influence mating, caused a certain
standard body form to be preserved. The almost
complete abolition of the pain sense which was carried
out before the year five million was the most striking
piece of artificial evolution accomplished. For us, who

296

POSSIBLE WORLDS

do not regard the individual as an end in itself, the value
of this step is questionable.
‘ Scientific discovery was largely a thing of the past,
and men of a scientific bent devoted themselves to the
more intricate problems of mathematics, organic chem­
istry, or the biology of animals and plants, with little or
no regard for practical results. Science and art were
blended in the practice of horticulture, and the effort
expended on the evolution of beautiful flowers would
have served to alter the human race profoundly. But
evolution is a process more pleasant to direct than to
undergo.
‘ By the year eight million the length of the day had
doubled, the moon’s distance had increased by twenty
per cent., and the month was a third longer than it had
been when first measured. It was realized that the
earth’s rotation would now diminish rapidly, and a few
men began to look ahead, and to suggest the coloniza­
tion of other planets. The older expeditions had all
been failures. The projectiles sent out from the earth
had mostly been destroyed by air friction, or by meteor­
ites in interstellar space, and those which had reached
the moon intact had generally been smashed by their
impact on landing. Two expeditions had landed there
with oxygen supplies, successfully mapped the face of
it which is turned away from the earth, and signalled
their results back. But return was impossible, and their
members had died on the moon. The projectiles used
in the earlier expeditions were metal cylinders ten
metres or less in diameter and fifty or more in length.
They were dispatched from vertical metal tubes several
kilometres in length, of which the lower part was

THE LAST JUDGMENT

297

imbedded below the earth, while the upper projected.
In order to avoid atmospheric resistance these tubes
were generally built in high mountains, so that when the
projectile emerged it had relatively little air to go
through. The air in the tube itself was evacuated and
a lid on the top removed as the projectile arrived. It
was started off by a series of mild explosions which
served to give it a muzzle velocity of about five kilo­
metres per second without causing too great a shock.
When it had left the lower atmosphere it progressed on
the rocket principle, being impelled forward by the
explosion of charges in its tail. The empty sections of
the tail were also blown backward as required. It
could be turned from inside by rotating a motor, or
by the crew walking round.
‘ On arriving in the gravitational field of another planet
its fall could be slowed by the discharge downward of
more of its explosive cargo, and to check the final part
of its fall various types of resistance were employed,
and collapsible metal rods were extruded to break the
shock of landing. Nevertheless, landing was generally
fatal. As is well known, different principles are now
employed. In particular, on leaving the atmosphere,
wings of metallic foil of a square kilometre or more in
area are spread out to catch the sun’s radiation pressure,
and voyages are thus made on principles analogous to
those employed in the ancient sailing-ships.
‘ The desire for individual happiness, and the fact
that it was achieved on earth, made membership of such
expeditions unpopular. The volunteers, who were
practically committing suicide, were almost all persons
whose mates had died prematurely, or whose psychology

u

298

POSSIBLE WORLDS

was for some reason so abnormal as to render them
incapable of happiness. An expedition reached Mars
successfully in the year 9,723,841, but reported that
colonization was impracticable. The species dominant
on that planet, which conducts its irrigation, are blind
to those radiations which we perceive as light, and
probably unaware of the existence of other planets; but
they appear to possess senses unlike our own, and were
able to annihilate this expedition and the only other
which reached Mars successfully.
‘ Half a million years later the first successful landing
was effected on Venus, but its members ultimately
perished owing to the unfavourable temperature con­
ditions and the shortage of oxygen in its atmosphere.
After this such expeditions became rarer.
‘ In the year 17,846,151 the tide machines had done
the first half of their destructive work. The day and
the month were now of the same length. For millions
of centuries the moon had always turned the same face
to the earth, and now the earth dwellers could only see
the moon from one of their hemispheres. It hung
permanently in the sky above the remains of the old
continent of America. The day now lasted for fortyeight of the old days, so that there were only seven and
a half days in the year. As the day lengthened the
climate altered enormously. The long nights were in­
tensely cold, and the cold was generally balanced by high
temperatures during the day. But there were exceptions.
‘ Mankind had appeared on earth during a period
characterized by high mountains and recurrent ice-ages.
Mountain-building had indeed almost ceased, though
some ranges and many volcanoes appeared during man’s

THE LAST JUDGMENT

299

early life. But four ice-ages occurred shortly before
history began, and a fifth had devastated parts of the
northern continents during the second hundred thou­
sand years of history. The ice had, however, been kept
within relatively narrow limits by human endeavour.
After the end of this period a huge co-operative effort
of the human species had destroyed the remaining ice­
fields. About the year 220,000 the ice-cap of Green­
land had been gradually melted by the application of
tidal energy, and soon after this the Arctic Ocean had
become permanently ice-free. Later the Antarctic
Continent had been similarly treated. Through most
of the first half of human history there was therefore
no permanent ice or snow save on a few mountains.
The climate throughout the earth became relatively
mild and uniform, as it had been through most of the
time recorded by geology.
‘ But as the earth’s rotation slowed down, its equator
contracted, causing earthquakes and mountain-building
on a large scale. A good deal of land emerged from
the oceans, especially the central Pacific. And with the
lengthening of the nights snow began to be deposited on
the uplands in fairly large amounts ; near the poles the
sun occasionally failed to melt it during the day, and
even where it was melted the subsoil was often per­
manently frozen. In spite of considerable efforts, ice­
fields and giant glaciers had already appeared when the
moon ceased to rise and set. Above them permanent
anti-cyclones once more produced storms in the
temperate regions, and rainless deserts in the tropics.
‘ The animals and plants only partially adapted them­
selves to the huge fluctuations of temperature. Prac*

300

POSSIBLE WORLDS

tically all the undomesticated mammals, birds, and
reptiles became extinct. Many of the smaller plants
went through their whole life-cycle in a day, surviving
only as seeds during the night. But most of the trees
became extinct except when kept warm artificially.
‘ The human race somewhat diminished in numbers,
but there was still an immense demand for power for
heating and cooling purposes. The tides raised by the
sun, although they only occurred fifteen times per year,
were used for these ends, and the day was thus still
further lengthened.
‘ The moon now began once more to move relative to
the earth, but in the opposite direction, rising in the
west and setting in the east. Very gradually at first,
but then with ever-increasing speed, it began to ap­
proach the earth again, and appear larger. By the year
25,000,000 it had returned to the distance at which it
was when man had first evolved, and it was realized that
its end, and possibly the earth’s, were only a few million
years ahead. But the vast majority of mankind con­
templated the death of their species with less aversion
than their own, and no effective measures were taken
to forestall the approaching doom.
‘ For the human race on earth was never greatly in­
fluenced by an envisaged future. After physiology was
discovered primitive men long continued to eat and
drink substances which they knew would shorten and
spoil their lives. Mineral fuels were also oxidized
without much forethought. The less pigmented of the
primitive races exhausted the fuel under the continents
on which they lived with such speed that for some
centuries the planet was dominated by the yellow

THE LAST JUDGMENT

301

variety resident in eastern Asia, where mining had
developed more slowly; until they too had exhausted
their fuel resources. The unpigmented men appear to
have foreseen this event, but did little or nothing to
prevent it, even when it was clearly only a few genera­
tions ahead. Yet they had before them the history of
an island in the North Atlantic on which Newton and
Darwin are said to have lived, and whose inhabitants
were the first to extract mineral fuel and the first to
exhaust it, after which they disappeared from the stage
of history, although at one time they had controlled
large portions of the earth’s land surface.
* On the contrary, the earth’s inhabitants were often
influenced in a curious way by events in the past. The
early religions all attached great significance to such
occurrences. If our own minds dwell more readily on
the future,it is due largely to education and daily propa­
ganda, but partly to the presence in our nuclei of genes
such as H 149 and P 783 c, which determine certain
features of cerebral organization that had no analogy
on earth. For this reason we have undertaken the
immense labour necessary to tap the central heat of our
planet, rather than diminish its rotation. Even now
this process involves a certain annual loss of life, and
this was very much greater at first, so much so as to
forbid its imitation on the earth, whose inhabitants
generally valued their own lives and one another’s.
‘ But if most men failed to look ahead, a minority felt
otherwise, and expeditions to Venus became commoner.
After 284 consecutive failures a landing was established,
and before its members died they were able to furnish
the first really precise reports as to conditions on that

302

POSSIBLE WORLDS

planet. Owing to the opaque character of our atmo­
sphere, the light signals of the earlier expeditions had
been difficult to pick up. Infra-red radiation which can
penetrate our clouds was now employed.
‘ A few hundred thousand of the human race, from
some of whom we are descended, determined that
though men died, man should live for ever. It was only
possible for humanity to establish itself on Venus if it
were able to withstand the heat and want of oxygen
there prevailing, and this could only be done by a
deliberate evolution in that direction first accomplished
on earth. Enough was known of the causes responsible
for evolution to render the experiment possible. The
human material was selected in each generation. All
who were not willing were able to resign from participa­
tion, and among those whose descendants were destined
for the conquest of Venus a tradition and an inheritable
psychological disposition grew up such as had not been
known on earth for twenty-five million years. The
psychological types which had been common among the
saints and soldiers of early history were revived. Con­
fronted once more with an ideal as high as that of
religion, but more rational, a task as concrete as and
infinitely greater than that of the patriot, man became
once more capable of self-transcendence. Those
members of mankind who were once more evolving
were not happy. They were out of harmony with their
surroundings. Disease and crime reappeared among
them. For disease is only a failure of bodily function
to adjust itself to the environment, and crime a similar
failure in behaviour. But disease and crime, as much
as heroism and martyrdom, are part of the price which

THE LAST JUDGMENT

303

must be paid for evolution. The price is paid by the
individual, and the gain is to the race. Among our­
selves an individual may not consider his own interests
a dozen times in his life. To our ancestors, fresh from
the pursuit of individual happiness, the price must often
have seemed too great, and in every generation many
who have now left no descendants refused to pay it.
‘ The modes of behaviour which our ancestors gradu­
ally overcame, and which only recur as the rarest
aberrations among ourselves, included not only such
self-regarding sentiments as pride and a personal pre­
ference concerning mating. They embraced emotions
such as pity (an unpleasant feeling aroused by the
suffering of other individuals). In a life completely
dedicated to membership of a super-organism the one
is as superfluous as the other, though altruism found its
place in the emotional basis of the far looser type of
society prevalent on earth.
‘ In the course of ten thousand years a race had been
evolved capable of life at one-tenth of the oxygen
pressure prevalent on earth, and the body temperature
had been raised by six degrees. The rise to a still
higher temperature, correlated as it was with profound
chemical and structural changes in the body, was a
much slower process. Projectiles of a far larger size
were dispatched to Venus. Of 1734, only n made
satisfactory landings. The crews of the first two of
these ultimately perished ; those of the next eight were
our ancestors. The organisms found on Venus were
built of molecules which were mostly mirror images of
those found in terrestrial bodies. Except as sources of
fat they were therefore useless for food, and some of

304

POSSIBLE WORLDS

them were a serious menace. The third projectile to
arrive included bacteria which had been synthesized
on earth to attack 1-glucose and certain other com­
ponents of the organisms on Venus. Ten thousand
years of laboratory work had gone to their making. With
their aid the previous life on that planet was destroyed,
and it became available for the use of man and the sixty
terrestrial species which he had brought with him.
‘ The history of our planet need not be given here.
After the immense efforts of the first colonizers, we
have settled down as members of a super-organism
with no limits to its possible progress. The evolution
of the individual has been brought under complete
social control, and besides enormously enhanced in­
tellectual powers we possess two new senses. The one
enables us to apprehend radiation of wave-lengths
between 100 and 1200 metres, and thus places every
individual at all moments of life, both asleep and awake,
under the influence of the voice of the community. It
is difficult to see how else we could have achieved as
complete a solidarity as has been possible. We can
never close our consciousness to those wave-lengths on
which we are told of our nature as components of a
super-organism or deity, possibly the only one in spacetime, and of its past, present, and future. It appears
that on earth the psychological equivalent of what is
transmitted on these wave-lengths included the higher
forms of art, music, and literature, the individual moral
consciousness, and, in the early days of mankind,
religion and patriotism. The other wave-lengths
inform us of matters which are not the concern of all at
all times, and we can shut them out if we so desire.

THE LAST JUDGMENT

305

Their function is not essentially different from that of
instrumental radio-communication on earth. The new
magnetic sense is of less importance, but is of value in
flying and otherwise in view of the very opaque char­
acter of our atmosphere. It would have been almost
superfluous on earth. We have also recovered the pain
sense, which had become vestigial on earth, but is of
value for the survival of the individual under adverse
circumstances, and hence to the race. So rapid was
our evolution that the crew of the last projectile to reach
Venus were incapable of fertile unions with our in­
habitants, and they were therefore used for experi­
mental purposes.
‘ During the last few million years the moon ap­
proached the earth rather rapidly. When it became
clear that the final catastrophe could not be long delayed
the use of tide-power was largely discontinued, accord­
ing to the signals which reached us from the earth, and
wind and other sources of power were substituted. But
the earth-dwellers were sceptical as to whether the
approaching rupture of the moon would entail their
destruction, and the spin of the earth-moon system was
still used to someextent as a source of power. In the
year 36,000,000 the moon was at only a fifth of its
distance from the earth when history had begun. It
appeared twenty-five times as large as the sun, and
raised the sea-level by some 200 metres about four
times a year. The effects of the tidal strain raised in it
by the earth began to tell. Giant landslips were
observed in the lunar mountains, and cracks occasionally opened in its surface. Earthquakes also became
rather frequent on the earth.

306

POSSIBLE WORLDS

1 Finally the moon began to disintegrate. It was so
near to the earth as to cover about a twentieth of the
visible heavens when the first fragments of rock actually
left its surface. The portion nearest to the earth,
already extensively cracked, began to fly away in the
form of meteorites up to a kilometre in diameter, which
revolved round the earth in independent orbits. For
about a thousand years this process continued gradually,
and finally ceased to arouse interest on the earth. The
end came quite suddenly. It was watched from Venus,
but the earlier stages were also signalled from the earth.
The depression in the moon’s surface facing the earth
suddenly opened and emitted a torrent of white-hot
lava. As the moon passed round the earth it raised the
temperature in the tropics to such an extent that rivers
and lakes were dried up and vegetation destroyed.
‘ The colour changes on earth due to the flowering of
the plants which were grown on it for the pleasure of
the human race, and which were quite visible from our
planet, no longer occurred. Dense clouds were formed
and gave some protection to the earth. But above
them the sea of flame on the moon increased in magni­
tude, and erupted in immense filaments under the
earth’s gravitation. Within three days the satellite had
broken up into a ring of white-hot lava and dust. The
last message received from the earth stated that the
entire human race had retired underground, except on
the Antarctic Continent, where however the ice-cap had
already melted and the air temperature was 350 C.
Within a day from the moon’s break-up the first
large fragment of it had fallen on the earth. The
particles formed from it were continually jostling, and

THE LAST JUDGMENT

307

many more were subsequently driven down. Through
the clouds of steam and volcanic smoke which shrouded
the earth our astronomers could see but little, but later on
it became clear that its tropical regions had been buried
many kilometres deep under lunar fragments, and the
remainder, though some traces of the former continents
remain, had been submerged in the boiling ocean. It
is not considered possible that any vestige of human
life remains, nor can our spectroscopes detect any
absorption bands of chlorophyll which would indicate
the survival of plants.
‘ The majority of the lunar matter has formed a ring
round the earth, like those of Saturn, but far denser.
It is not yet in equilibrium, and fragments will continue
to fall on the earth for about another thirty-five thou­
sand years. At the end of that period the earth, which
now possesses a belt of enormous mountains in its
tropical regions, separated from the poles by two rings
of sea, will be ready for recolonization. Preparations
are being made for this event. We have largely sorted
out the useful elements in the outer five kilometres or
so of our planet, and it is proposed, when the earth is
reoccupied, to erect artificial mountains on both
planets which will extend above the Heaviside layer
and enable continuous radio-communication instead
of light signals to be used between the two.
‘ The old human race successfully cultivated individual
happiness and has been destroyed by fire from heaven.
This is not a cause for great regret, since happiness does
not summate. The happiness of ten million individuals
is not a millionfold the happiness of ten. But the
unanimous co-operation of ten million individuals is

308

POSSIBLE WORLDS

something beyond their individual behaviour. It is the
life of a super-organism. If, as many of the earthdwellers hoped, the moon had broken up quietly, their
species might have lasted a thousand million years
instead of thirty-nine million, but their achievement
would have been no greater.
‘ From the earth it is proposed to colonize Jupiter.
It is not certain that the attempt will succeed, for the
surface temperature of that planet is 130 degrees C.,
gravitation is three times as intense as that on Venus,
and over twice that on earth, while the atmosphere
contains appreciable quantities of thoron, a radio­
active gas. The intense gravitation would of course
destroy bodies as large as our own, but life on Jupiter
will be possible for organisms built on a much smaller
scale. A dwarf form of the human race about a tenth
of our height, and with short stumpy legs but very thick
bones, is therefore being bred. Their internal organs
will also be very solidly built. They are selected by
spinning them round in centrifuges which supply an
artificial gravitational field, and destroy the less suitable
members of each generation. Adaptation to such
intense cold as that on Jupiter is impracticable, but it
is proposed to send projectiles of a kilometre in length,
which will contain sufficient stores of energy to last their
inhabitants for some centuries, during which they may
be able to develop the sources available on that planet.
It is hoped that as many as one in a thousand of these
projectiles may arrive safely. If Jupiter is successfully
occupied the outer planets will then be attempted.
‘ About 250 million years hence our solar system will
pass into a region of space in which stars are far denser

THE LAST JUDGMENT

309

than in our present neighbourhood. Although not
more than one in ten thousand is likely to possess
planets suitable for colonization.it is considered possible
that we may pass near enough to one so equipped to
allow an attempt at landing. I f by that time the entire
matter of the planets of our system is under conscious
control, the attempt will stand some chance of success.
Whereas the best time between the earth and Venus
was one-tenth of a terrestrial year, the time taken to
reach another stellar system would be measured in
hundreds or thousands of years, and only a very few
projectiles per million would arrive safely. But in such
a case waste of life is as inevitable as in the seeding of a
plant or the discharge of spermatozoa or pollen. More­
over, it is possible that under the conditions of life in
the outer planets the human brain may alter in such a
way as to open up possibilities inconceivable to our own
minds. Our galaxy has a probable life of at least eighty
million million years. Before that time has elapsed
it is our ideal that all the matter in it available for life
should be within the power of the heirs of the species
whose original home has just been destroyed. I f that
ideal is even approximately fulfilled, the end of the
world which we have just witnessed was an episode of
entirely negligible importance. And there are other
galaxies.’
E P IL O G U E
T h e r e are certain criteria which

every attempt, how­
ever fantastic, to forecast the future should satisfy.
In the first place, the future will not be as we should
wish it. The Pilgrim Fathers were much happier in

3 10

POSSIBLE WORLDS

England under King James i. than they would be
in America under President Coolidge. Most of the
great ideals of any given age are ignored by the men
of later periods. They only interest posterity in so
far as they have been embodied in art or literature.
I have pictured a human race on the earth absorbed in
the pursuit of individual happiness ; on Venus mere
components of a monstrous ant-heap. M y own ideal
is naturally somewhere in between, and so is that of
almost every other human being alive to-day. But I
see no reason why my ideals should be realized. In
the language of religion, G od’s ways are not our ways ;
in that of science, human ideals are the products of
natural processes which do not conform to them.
Secondly, we must use a proper time-scale. The
earth has lasted between one and eight thousand million
years. Recorded human history is a matter of about
six thousand. This period bears the same ratio to the
earth’s life as does a space of tw’o or three days to the
whole of human history. I have no doubt that in
reality the future will be vastly more surprising than
anything I can imagine. But when we once realize the
periods of time which our thought can and should
envisage we shall come to see that the use, however
haltingly, of our imaginations upon the possibilities of
the future is a valuable spiritual exercise.
For one of the essential elements of religion is an
emotional attitude towards the universe as a whole. As
we come to realize the tiny scale, both temporal and
spatial, of the older mythologies, and the unimaginable
vastness of the possibilities of time and space, we must
attempt to conjecture what purposes may be developed

THE LAST JUDGMENT

311

in the universe that we are beginning to apprehend.
Our private, national, and even international aims are
restricted to a time measured in human life-spans.
‘ And yonder all before us lie
Deserts of vast eternity.'
If it is true, as the higher religions teach, that the
individual can only achieve a good life by conforming to
a plan greater than his owm, it is our duty to realize the
possible magnitude of such a plan, whether it be G od’s
or man's. Only so can we come to see that most good
actions merely serve to stave off the constant inroads
of chaos on the human race. They are necessary, but
not sufficient. They cannot be regarded as active co­
operation in the Plan. The man who creates a new'
idea, whether expressed in language, art, or invention,
may at least be co-operating actively. The average
man cannot do this, but he must learn that the highest
of his duties is to assist those who are creating, and the
worst of his sins to hinder them.
I do not see how any one who has accepted the view'
of the universe presented by astronomy and geology
can suppose that its main purpose is the preparation of
a certain percentage of human souls for so much of
perfection and happiness as is possible for them. This
may be one of its purposes, but it can hardly be the
most important. Events are taking place ‘ for other
great and glorious ends ’ which we can only dimly con­
jecture. Professor Alexander, for example, in Space,
Time, and D eity, suggests that the end towards which
* the whole creation groaneth and travaileth ’ is the
emergence of a new kind of being which will bear the

POSSIBLE WORLDS
same relation to mind as do mind to life and life to
matter. It is the urge towards this which finds its
expression in the higher forms of religion. Without
necessarily accepting such a view, one can express some
of its implications in a myth. The numerical side of
the myth is, I believe, correct, though whether tidal
power could be utilized to the extent that I have
suggested is a question for the engineers of the future.
M an’s little world will end. The human mind can
already envisage that end. I f humanity can enlarge the
scope of its will as it has enlarged the reach of its
intellect, it will escape that end. If not, the judgment
will have gone out against it, and man and all his works
will perish eternally. Either the human race will prove
that its destiny is in eternity and infinity, and that the
value of the individual is negligible in comparison with
that destiny, or the time will come
* When the great markets by the sea shut fast
All that calm Sunday that goes on and on;
When even lovers find their peace at last,
And earth is but a star, that once had shone.’

Printed in Great Britain by T. and A. C o n s t a b l e L td ,
at the University Press, Edinburgh

F I R S T P L A Y S by A . A . M i l n e .
This volume contains ‘Wurzcl-Flummcry,’ ‘The Lucky
One,’ ‘The Bov Comes Home,’ ‘Belinda,’ and ‘The Red
Feathers.’
11. C R O M E Y E L L O W by A l d o u s H u x l e y .
Mr. Huxley’s first novel, perhaps his gayest. On its
appearance it was hailed by The Spectator as ‘a delightful
book.’
10.

12. A R T

by C l i v e B e l l .
In this book Mr. Clive Bell first propounded his theory
of significant form. Art still remains the best short treatise
in the English language on the aesthetics of visual art, as
well as the best introduction to the study of the PostImpressionist painters.

JV i3. D I S E N C H A N T M E N T
by C . E . M o n t a g u e .
Mr. Montague’s famous diagnosis of the moral results of
the War. ‘ I have seen no book about the War so tem­
perate and so human.’ John Masefield in The Manchester
-

Guardian.

J 14. T H O S E B A R R E N L E A V E S
by A l d o u s H u x l e y .
A long novel. ‘It is impossible to exhaust it at a first
reading, and it should be kept and dipped into again and
again.’ The Empire Review.
15. V I S IO N A N D D E S I G N by R o g e r F r y .
Essays on art and artists by a master critic. Among the
subjects are: Art and Life, The Artist’s Vision, Negro
Sculpture, The French Post-Impressionists, etc. ‘It is a
long time since we have come across a book so stimu­
lating.’ The Daily Chronicle.

16. E S S A Y S O F A B I O L O G I S T
by J u l i a n H u x l e y .
By the Professor of Zoology at King’s College, the Uni­
versity of London. ‘A brilliant book of serious purpose,
and with a happy -style; and it is by a maker of new bio­
logical knowledge who is also a scholar and a poet.’ Prof.
J . Arthur Thomson in The Observer.

17. PLAYS by R i c h a r d H u g h e s .
Previously issued by another publisher. Revised and reset.
The contents are: ‘The Sisters Tragedy,’ ‘A Comedy of
Good and Evil’ (on which Mr. Bernard Shaw wrote a
special article which concluded ‘Anyone who can’t enjoy
all this must be an idiot’), ‘The Man Born to be Hanged’
and ‘Danger.’
1

8. LIMBO -by A l d o u s H u x l e y .
Six stories (‘Farcical History of Richard Greenow,’
‘Happily Ever After,’ ‘Eupompus Gave Splendour to Art
by Numbers,’ ‘Cynthia,’ ‘The Bookshop,’ and ‘The Death
of Lully’) and a one-act play, ‘Happy Families.’ ‘A book
not easily forgotten.’ The New Statesman.

19.

SECOND PLAYS by A. A. M i l n e .
Containing ‘Mr. Pirn Passes By’; ‘The Romantic Age’;
‘Make Believe’; ‘The Camberley Triangle’ and ‘The
Stepmother.’

20.

T H E R IG H T PLACE by C. E. M o n t a g u e .
A book on holiday travel, of which The Sunday Times
said: ‘A tonic to the mind and spirit of man, his book
cannot be overpraised.’

21. T H E SAILOR’S RETU RN
by D a v i d G a r n e t t .
Mr. Garnett’s third story, longer than cither Lady Into
Fox or A Man in the Loo, which was hailed by The
Empire Review as a ‘masterpiece.’ ‘Cette oeuvre n’est pas
inferieure a la “ Femme Changce en Rcnard.” ’ Langues

Modemes.
22.

MORTAL COILS by A l d o u s H u x l e y .
Short stories, containing ‘The Gioconda Smile,’ ‘ Permu­
tations among the Nightingales,’ ‘The Tilloston Banquet,’
‘Green Tunnels,’ and ‘Nuns at Luncheon.’ ‘As a short
story writer he is in the first rank.’ The Daily Chronicle.

2^• M R . W E S T O N ’S G O O D W I N E
by T. F. P o w y s .
T h e first u n lim it e d e d itio n o f M r . P o w v s ’ s lo n g e s t a n d
g r e a te s t s t o r y , o f w h ic h

The Bookman s a id t h a t it w a s

‘ w o r t h y a t o n c e to ta k e its p la c e a m o n g th e g r e a t a lle g o r ie s
o f E n g lis h lit e r a t u r e .’

24.

L O L L Y W IL L O W E S
by S y l v i a T o w n s e n d W a r n e r .
T h e w it c h - s t o r y h a ile d b y

The Times Literary Supple­

ment as ‘ a n o b je c t lesso n in th e p r o p e r w a y o f b r in g in g
S a ta n in to m o d e r n fic t io n .’

25. O N T H E M A R G I N by A l d o u s H u x l e y .
N o t e s a n d e ssa y s on su c h s u b je c t s as ‘ C e n t e n a r ie s ,’ ‘ T h e
S u b je c t - M a t t e r o f P o e t r y ,’ ‘ B i b l i o p h i l y ,’ ‘ N a t io n a l it y in
L o v e , ’ ‘ C h a u c e r ,’ e t c .

‘ O n e o f th e m o st in t e r e s t in g a n d

p r o v o c a t iv e o f th e y o u n g e r g e n e r a t io n o f E n g li s h m e n o f
le t t e r s .’

The Daily Telegraph.

26. T H E G R I M S M I L E O F T H E F I V E
TOW NS
by A r n o l d B e n n e t t .
All who have read and enjoyed Mr. Bennett’s stories of
the Five Towns will be glad of a reprint of this book.
Here, as in all his Five Town stories, Mr. Bennett’s
humour and buoyancy arc unfailing.
27. T A R R

by W y n d h a m L e w i s .
Mr. Wyndham Lewis’s novel, long out of print, is here
completely revised. From reviews of the first edition:
—‘This admirable novel.. . . A book of great importance
. . . because it will become a date in literature .. . because
here we have the forerunner of the prose and probably
of the manner that is to come.’ The N ew Witness.
‘A thunderbolt.’ The W eekly Dispatch.

28. L I T T L E

M E X I C A N by A l d o u s H u x l e y .
Short stories, containing: ‘ Uncle Spencer,’ ‘Little
Mexican,’ ‘Hubert and Minnie,’ ‘Fard,’ ‘The Portrait,’
and ‘Young Archimedes.’ ‘The opulence of Mr. Huxley’s
talent speaks in every page.’ The O bserver,

29. L O V E & F R E I N D S H I P by J ane A usten .
And other Early Works now first published, with an In­
troduction bv c. k. c h e s t e r t o n , who writes: ‘A thin®
to laugh over again and again.’
30.

T H R E E P L A Y S by A . A . M i l n e .
Containing ‘The Great Broxopp’; ‘The Dover Road’;
‘The Truth about Blayds.’

31. T H E H O U S E W I T H T H E E C H O
by T . F . P o w y s .
‘Connoisseurs o f the short story should not miss this little
book, for Mr. Powys has a rare mastery of the art.’
The Evening Standard.

32. S W A N N ’S W A Y , vol. i,b y M a r c e l P r o u s t .
Translated by c. k. scott m o n c r i e f f . ‘M. Proust is a
genius; and Mr. Scott Moncrieff" has treated him like
one.’ The Nation.
33.

S W A N N ’S W A Y , vo1. 2 , ^ M arcel P roust .
Translated by c. k. scott m o n c r i e f f . ‘The translator.. .
faced a task of prodigious difficulty with extraordinary
success. Until it was done, it was unbelievable that it
could be done so well.’ The London Mercury.

34. E S S A Y S IN P O P U L A R S C I E N C E
by J u l i a n H u x l e y .
‘One of the few scientific books that is popular and scien­
tific without patronising the reader.’ The Cambridge
Review.

35. A

SH O RT

H IS T O R Y O F E N G L A N D
by G . K. C hesterton .
‘He is at once the most concise and fullest historian this
country has yet found.’ The Observer.

36. T W O O R T H R E E G R A C E S
by A l d o u s H u x l e y .
Four stories. ‘It is a joy to read . . . I have no hesita­
tion in saying that of the younger men writing to-day,
Mr. Huxley is in a class of himself.’ Ralph Straus in
The Bystander.

37. H A D R I A N V I I by F r . R o l f e
(‘ Baron C o rv o .’)
A fine novel which has been some time out of print. ‘ It
sparkles with wit and gleams with satire; and the writer
displays a really remarkable knowledge . . . of Roman
Catholic proceedings at the headquarters of the faith.’
The D a ily Graphic.
38. T H E

G EN TLE A RT OF CO O KERY
by M r s . C . F . L e y e l and M is s O l g a

H artley.

A really original cookery book which ‘no properly in­
stituted home should be without.’ The M orning Post.
39.

R O U G H J U S T I C E by C . E . M o n t a g u e .
A novel. ‘A beautiful and a terrible book. . . . A master­
piece of fiction.’ S ir P h ilip G ibbs in The Catholic
Times.

40.

F O U R P L A Y S by A . A . M i l n e .
Containing ‘ To Have the Honour ’ ; ‘ Ariadne, or
Business First’; ‘Portrait of a Gentleman in Slippers’;
and ‘Success.’

41.

S IN C E C E Z A N N E £ y t C u v E B e l l .
‘All who have ever asked the question, “ What is Art?”
should read this collection of essays.’ The Manchester
Guardian.

5 Fo r October, 1929
42.

IN T H E B E G IN N IN G

by N o r m a n D o u g l a s .

A romance. ‘The nearest approach in our language
to the manner of Anatole France.’ The Spectator.

43. W IT H IN A B U D D IN G G RO V E, vol. i

by M a r c e l P r o u s t .

‘That unapproachable triumph of the translator, m r .
sco tt m o n c r i e f f ’ s translation of Proust’s A I ’Ombre des
Jeurtes F ille s en Fleurs .’ The Nezo Statesman.

44. W IT H IN A B U D D IN G G RO V E, vol. 2

by M a r c e l P r o u s t .

‘ m r . sco tt m o n c r i e f f ’ s translation continues as well as

it began.’ The Observer.

5 Fo r November, 1929
45.

P R O P E R S T U D IE S
Essays.

by A l d o u s H u x l e y .

‘Brilliantly illuminating.’

A rnold Bennett in

The Evening Standard.
46.

M R . T A S K E R ’S GODS by T. F. P o w y s .
A story. ‘A little epic of the divine at w'ar with the
human.’ The Outlook.

47.

DON T A R Q U IN IO

by F r . R

o lfe

(‘ Baron Corvo’)
‘It has the irresponsible high spirits of the youth of
the world.’ The D a ily M a il.
48 .

T W E N T IE T H

CENTURY

PO ETRY

an anthology by H a r o l d M o n r o .

A first-class anthology of contemporary verse, chosen on
new lines. Also available at 5s. net, leather.
*
CHATTO y WINDUS
97 & 99 St. Martin’s Lane, London, W.C. 2

.t A p

c

<K

V

SRINAGAR

Co

LIBRARY

Class No.____
Book No.____
Accession No.

CP
ft'

'

a
A
{

o atc^

f

i.

\

c

H

‘ S' p
/\
1 k?

'*,f/ A ;O .

*4

? 4pt

V *

Vi/

v C>
<2* VV

£ , V>
-JJ. ^
V*
%ro /
*>
^
<
\ va <J>
4- 9v^ . C*<k V\o _
<£

8;

V %\ '«* V

S %, ■> % \s Co

V<? V

■• * *c

\ '* X *

%. * % % , "
* V ° 4
v \ * ^ *,
&AO
v
\ \**
V *.
%*

■

*

