<modernized_text>
THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the First]

GUGLIELMO BORSIERE REBUKES THE STINGINESS OF MESSER ERMINO DE' GRIMALDI WITH SOME CLEVER WORDS

Next, Lauretta spoke, having heard Bergamino's impressive speech and realizing it was her turn to tell a story. Without waiting for any instruction, she cheerfully began:

"The previous tale, dear friends, reminds me of how an honest minstrel also rebuked the greed of a very wealthy merchant, in a way that, though similar to the last story, should still delight you, as it ultimately had a positive outcome.

There was, long ago in Genoa, a gentleman named Messer Ermino de' Grimaldi, who (by general consensus) far surpassed the wealth of any other citizen in Italy, both in lands and money. And just as he exceeded all other Italians in wealth, so too did he outdo every other miser and cheapskate in the world in avarice and sordidness. For not only did he maintain a tight purse when it came to hospitality, but, unlike the typical extravagance of the Genoese, he deprived himself of even the necessities of life, in food and drink, rather than incur any expense. Because of this, he had lost the surname de' Grimaldi, and was rightly called by all simply 'Messer Ermino the Miser.'

It happened that, as he multiplied his wealth through frugality, a worthy minstrel named Guglielmo Borsiere, who was well-bred and eloquent, came to Genoa. He was nothing like the minstrels of the present day, who (to the great shame of the corrupt and blameworthy customs of those who now aspire to be considered gentlemen and lords) are better described as brutes, bred in the basest depravity of mankind, rather than cultivated at the courts of kings and princes. In those times, a minstrel's duty and custom was to exert his efforts in negotiating peace where feuds or resentments had arisen between noblemen, or in arranging marriages, alliances and friendships, in soothing the minds of the weary and entertaining courts with clever and amusing sayings, and even delivering fatherly rebukes for the misdeeds of the wayward - all for modest reward. But nowadays, they devote their time to spreading harmful gossip, sowing discord, uttering vulgarity and obscenity, and even prompting dishonorable noblemen with treacherous temptations to base and shameful actions; and the most cherished, honored, and generously entertained and rewarded are those who say and do the most abominable words and deeds, a grave and shameful reproach to the present age and clear proof that virtue has departed this world, leaving us wretched mortals to wallow in the swamp of vice.

But returning to my story, which a justified indignation has led me somewhat farther astray than I intended - I say that the aforementioned Guglielmo was honored and gladly received by all the gentlemen of Genoa. Having stayed in the city for some time and heard many tales of Messer Ermino's avarice and sordidness, he desired to meet him. Messer Ermino, having already heard how worthy a man Guglielmo Borsiere was, and possessing a touch of gentility even in his miserly ways, welcomed him warmly and engaged him in much conversation. As they talked, he took Guglielmo, along with some other Genoese in his company, to a fine new house he had recently built, and after showing it all to him, said, 'Messer Guglielmo, you who have seen and heard many things, can you tell me of something that was never yet seen, which I may have depicted in the salon of this house of mine?' Guglielmo, hearing this absurd question, replied, 'Sir, I doubt I can tell you of anything that has never been seen, except perhaps sneezing or the like. But if you wish, I will tell you of something that I don't believe you have ever beheld.' Messer Ermino, not expecting such a response, said, 'I ask you to tell me what that is.' To which Guglielmo promptly replied, 'Have Generosity depicted here.'

When Messer Ermino heard these words, he was immediately overcome with such shame that it seemed to change his entire disposition to the opposite of what it had been. He said, 'Messer Guglielmo, I will have it depicted here in such a way that neither you nor anyone else will ever again have cause to tell me that I have never seen or known it.' And from that time on (such was the power of Guglielmo's words), he became the most generous and hospitable gentleman of his day in Genoa, treating both strangers and citizens with great kindness."
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
In modernizing this chapter, I made the following key changes:

- Replaced archaic words and phrases with their modern equivalents (e.g. "doth" becomes "does", "methinks" becomes "I think", "certes" becomes "certainly").
- Simplified complex sentence structures by breaking down lengthy, ornate passages into shorter, more straightforward constructions.
- Updated outdated cultural/historical references, such as providing context for the role and reputation of minstrels in that era.
- Maintained Boccaccio's unique narrative voice and style as much as possible, preserving his use of vivid imagery, subtle humor, and moralizing tone.
- Adjusted punctuation and formatting to improve readability for a modern high school audience.
</explanation>