<modernized_text>
The Tenth Story 
[Day the First]

MASTER ALBERTO OF BOLOGNA POLITELY PUTS A LADY IN HER PLACE WHO THOUGHT TO SHAME HIM FOR BEING IN LOVE WITH HER

Elisa now having finished her tale, the final story-telling duty fell to the queen, who, speaking with graceful poise, said, "Noble ladies, just as the stars adorn the sky on clear nights and flowers decorate the green meadows in springtime, so too are good manners and pleasant conversation enhanced by witty remarks. These remarks, being brief, are even more fitting for women than for men, as lengthy speech, when it can be avoided, is more strictly forbidden to women than to men. However, these days there are few, if any, women left who can understand a clever saying or, if they do understand it, know how to respond in kind - a shameful state of affairs for us and all women alive. 

The virtue that once filled the minds of women in ages past, they of our day have diverted to the adornment of their bodies. She who wears the most colorful and ornately decorated garments, with the greatest abundance of fringes, embroidery, and trimmings, considers herself worthy of far greater esteem and honor than her peers. Yet she fails to recognize that, if it were a matter of who could be laden with the most finery, a donkey could carry far more than any of them and would not thereby be honored any more than the donkey.

I blush to admit it, but I cannot speak against other women without speaking against myself. These laced, painted, and multicolored women either remain mute and senseless like marble statues, or, when questioned, respond in such a way that it would be better had they stayed silent. They would have you believe that their inability to converse with accomplished ladies and gentlemen stems from purity of mind, and they give the name of modesty to their foolishness, as if only the woman who talks with her chambermaid, laundress, or baker's assistant is truly modest. If that were Nature's intent, she surely would have limited their prattle accordingly.

It is true that in this, as in other things, one must consider the time, place, and company. For it sometimes happens that women or men, thinking to embarrass another with some witty remark but not properly measuring their own abilities against the other's, find the confusion they meant to cast upon another rebounding upon themselves. Therefore, so that you may know how to conduct yourselves and not serve as an example for the proverb that is widespread, namely, that women always choose the worst course, I wish for you to learn a lesson from the final story of today, which falls to me to tell. This is so that, just as you are distinguished from other women by nobility of mind, you may likewise show yourselves no less removed from them by excellence of manners.

It is not many years since there lived - and perhaps still lives - in Bologna a very great and famous physician, known by widespread renown to nearly the entire world. His name was Master Alberto, and such was the vivacity of his spirit that, although he was an old man of almost seventy years and had nearly lost all his natural heat, he did not hesitate to expose himself to the flames of love. For having seen at an event a very beautiful widow, called by some Madam Malgherida de' Ghisolieri, and being greatly taken with her, he received into his mature bosom, no differently than if he had been a young gallant, the amorous fire, so that it seemed he could not rest well at night unless he had gazed upon the delicate and lovely countenance of the fair lady the day before. 

Wherefore, he took to passing continually before her house, sometimes on foot and sometimes on horseback as the occasion suited him, until she and many other ladies got wind of the reason for his constant comings and goings and often made merry among themselves at the sight of a man so ripe in years and wisdom being in love, as if they thought that the most pleasant passion of love took root and flourished only in the foolish minds of the young and nowhere else.

While he continued to pass back and forth, it happened one holiday that the lady was seated with many others before her door, and spotting Master Alberto approaching from afar, they all took counsel together to entertain him, pay him honor, and then tease him about his passion. Accordingly, they all rose to receive him and, inviting him to enter, led him into a shady courtyard, where they had the finest wines and sweets brought out. They then politely and pleasantly asked him how it came to be that he had fallen in love with that fair lady, knowing her to be beloved by many handsome, young, and lively gentlemen.

The physician, finding himself thus courteously attacked, put on a cheerful countenance and replied, "Madam, that I should love should be no marvel to any person of understanding, and especially that I should love yourself, for you deserve it. And although old men are by nature deprived of the vigor required for amorous pursuits, they are not thereby deprived of the will nor the wit to appreciate that which is worthy of love; indeed, this latter is naturally the better valued by them, since they have more knowledge and experience than the young. As for the hope that moves me, an old man, to love you who are courted by many young gallants, it is on this wise: I have often been where I have seen ladies eat lupins and leeks. Now, although no part of the leek is good, the head thereof is less harmful and more agreeable to the taste; but you ladies, moved by a perverse appetite, commonly hold the head in your hand and chew the leaves, which are not only worthless, but also foul-smelling. How do I know, madam, but that you do the like in your choice of lovers? In which case, I should be the one selected by you, and the others would be cast aside."

The gentlewoman and her companions were somewhat abashed and said, "Doctor, you have chastised our presumptuous venture very well and courteously; nonetheless, your love is dear to me, as it should be that of a man of worth and learning. Therefore, you may in all assurance command me, as your creation, in any way you please, save only in matters concerning my honor." The physician, rising with his companions, thanked the lady and, taking leave of her with laughter and merriment, departed from there. Thus, the lady, not considering whom she was teasing and thinking to embarrass another, was herself embarrassed; from which, if you are wise, you will carefully guard yourselves.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
In modernizing this chapter, I focused on the following key changes:

1. Replacing archaic vocabulary and phrasing:
   - Updating words like "doth," "certes," and "whenas" with their modern equivalents
   - Simplifying complex sentence structures, such as breaking down lengthy, convoluted sentences into shorter, clearer constructions

2. Updating outdated references and cultural concepts:
   - Providing brief explanations for references to things like "lupins and leeks" and the "head of the leek" that may not be familiar to modern readers

3. Maintaining the author's unique narrative voice and tone:
   - Preserving Boccaccio's use of humor, irony, and descriptive language as much as possible
   - Avoiding overly colloquial or contemporary language that could diminish the literary quality

4. Ensuring consistency in modernized vocabulary:
   - Applying the same modernization approach to similar terms and concepts throughout the text
   - Referencing the glossary of modernized terminology developed in the translation strategy
</explanation>