<modernized_text>
THE FIFTH STORY

[Day the Third]

RICCIARDO, KNOWN AS IL ZIMA, GIVES MESSER FRANCESCO VERGELLESI A FINE HORSE AND IN RETURN REQUESTS TO SPEAK WITH HIS WIFE. THOUGH SHE REMAINS SILENT, RICCIARDO REPLIES TO HIMSELF ON HER BEHALF, AND THE EVENTS UNFOLD AS HIS RESPONSE DICTATES.

After Pamfilo finished his story, which brought laughter from the ladies, the queen commanded Elisa to continue. She began to speak, not out of malice but from old habit, with a slightly sharp tone:

"Many people, knowing much themselves, assume that others know nothing. And so, often when they think to outwit others, they find that they have been outsmarted in the end. Therefore, I consider it great folly for someone to test the wit of another without good reason. But since not everyone may share my opinion, I shall, in keeping with the order of our discourse, relate to you what befell a gentleman of Pistoia.

In Pistoia, there was a wealthy and wise gentleman named Messer Francesco Vergellesi, who was part of the Vergellesi family. He was well-informed in all matters, save for one: he was exceedingly covetous. As he was appointed the Provost of Milan, he had procured everything necessary for his honorable journey there, except for a fine enough palfrey (a type of saddle horse) to suit him. Try as he might, he could not find one to his liking, and this troubled him greatly.

There was at that time in the same town a young man called Ricciardo, also known as Il Zima, who came from a humble family but was very wealthy. Il Zima was known for his fashionable and dashing attire, and he had long desired and pursued the affections of Messer Francesco's wife, who was exceptionally beautiful and virtuous. Il Zima happened to own one of the finest palfreys in all of Tuscany, and it was widely known that he cherished this horse for its beauty and that he was in love with Messer Francesco's wife. Some informed Messer Francesco that if he were to request the horse, Il Zima would gladly give it to him, out of his love for the lady.

Driven by greed, Messer Francesco summoned Il Zima and asked to buy the palfrey, hoping Il Zima would offer it as a gift. The young man was pleased and replied, "Sir, even if you offered me all you possess in the world, you could not have my palfrey by way of sale. However, you may have it as a gift, on the condition that before you take it, I may speak some words with your lady in your presence, but far enough away that no one else may hear."

The gentleman, consumed by avarice and thinking to outwit the other, agreed. He then went to his wife's chamber and, telling her how easily he might acquire the palfrey, summoned her to listen to Il Zima, but instructed her to be careful not to respond in any way to what he said. The lady was reluctant, but, needing to obey her husband's wishes, she followed him to the hall.

There, Il Zima renewed his agreement with the gentleman and seated himself with the lady in a far corner of the hall, away from everyone else. He then began to speak thus: "Noble lady, I am certain that your great wisdom has long since perceived the profound love I bear you, inspired by your beauty, which far surpasses that of any other woman I have ever beheld, not to mention your captivating manners and your unparalleled virtues, which could enrapture the loftiest of spirits. Therefore, it is unnecessary for me to declare in words that this love is the greatest and most ardent a man has ever held for a woman; and I shall continue to love you as such for as long as my wretched life sustains these limbs, nay, even beyond. For if in the afterlife people love as they do here below, I shall love you for all eternity.

"You may therefore be assured that you possess nothing, be it great or small, that you can call more truly your own or on which you can more surely rely than myself, such as I am, and all that is mine. And to give you proof of this, I tell you that I would count myself more blessed if you were to command me to do something that would please you than if, my commands being obeyed, all the world should most promptly obey me. Since, then, I am yours as you have heard, it is not without reason that I dare to offer my prayers to your noble self, from whom alone can all peace, all health, and all well-being derive for me, and from no other source. Yes, as your most humble servant, I beseech you, my dearest hope and only light of my soul, which, amidst the flames of love, feeds upon its hope in you—that your kindness may be so great, and the past rigor you have shown me, who am yours, so softened, that, comforted by your mercy, I may say that, as by your beauty I was stricken with love, so by your pity have I found life, which latter, should your haughty spirit not incline to my prayers, will assuredly come to naught, and I shall perish, and you may be called my murderer. Leaving aside that my death will bring you no honor, I doubt not that, your conscience at times pricking you therefor, you will regret having wrought it, and at times, being better disposed, will say to yourself, 'Alas, how ill I did not to have had compassion on my poor Zima!' And this repentance, being of no avail, will cause you great distress.

"Wherefore, that this may not come to pass, now that it lies in your power to succor me, bethink you, and, ere I die, be moved to pity me, for upon you alone it rests to make me the happiest or the most miserable of men. I trust your courtesy will be such that you will not suffer me to receive death in return for so great a love, but will, with a glad and favorable response, revive my fainting spirits, which flutter, all dismayed, in your presence."

With that, Il Zima fell silent, heaving the deepest of sighs and shedding tears. The lady, whom the many courtly gestures, jousts, and serenades he had performed for love of her had not moved, was now stirred by the passionate speech of this ardent lover and began to feel something she had never experienced before—the nature of love. Though, in keeping with her husband's command, she remained silent, she could not help but let some gentle sighs escape her, revealing the response she would have gladly made to Il Zima.

Il Zima, having waited a while and seeing that no reply came, was puzzled, but soon divined the husband's ruse. Yet, looking the lady in the face and observing the flashes of her eyes towards him and the sighs she could not fully restrain, he regained hope and took a new approach, answering himself on her behalf, as she listened:

"My dear Zima, I have truly perceived your love for me to be great and true for a long time, and now your words have made me know it even better, and I am well pleased by it, as indeed I should be. But if I have seemed harsh and cruel to you, do not believe that I have been so in my heart; rather, I have always loved you and held you dearer than any other man. But I have had to act thus, both for fear of others and to preserve my fair reputation. But now the time has come when I may clearly show you that I love you and reward the love you have borne and bear me.

"Take heart, then, and be of good hope, for Messer Francesco is soon to go to Milan as Provost, as you know, and it is for love of me that you have given him your fine palfrey. And when he is gone, I promise you, on my faith and by the true love I bear you, that within a few days you shall without fail be reunited with me, and we shall joyfully and fully satisfy our love. And that I may not have to speak to you of this matter again, I tell you now that when you see two napkins displayed at the window of my chamber, which looks out onto our garden, that very evening at nightfall, take care to come to me by the garden door, and you will find me awaiting you, and we shall delight in each other's company all night long to our heart's content."

Having thus spoken for the lady, Il Zima then replied in his own person, saying, "Dearest lady, my every sense is so transported with excessive joy at your gracious response that I can scarcely make reply, much less render you due thanks. Indeed, were I able to speak as I desire, there is no length of time that would suffice to thank you as I would wish and as I ought. Therefore, I leave it to your wise consideration to imagine that which, for all my will, I am unable to express in words. This much only I tell you: I will without fail do as you have instructed me, and then, perhaps better assured of the great grace you have granted me, I shall, to the best of my ability, strive to render you the fullest thanks in my power. For now, there is no more to say; wherefore, dearest lady of mine, may God give you the joy and prosperity you most desire, and to Him I commend you."

Throughout this, the lady uttered not a word. Thereupon, Il Zima arose and turned to the husband, who, seeing him stand, came up to him and said, laughing, "How think you? Have I not well performed my promise to you?" "Nay, sir," answered Il Zima, "for you promised to let me speak with your lady, and you have caused me to speak with a marble statue." These words were highly pleasing to the husband, who, though he had a good opinion of the lady, now conceived of her even better, and said, "Now is your palfrey truly mine." "Ay, sir, it is," replied Il Zima, "but had I thought to reap from this favor you granted me such fruit as I have gotten, I had given you the palfrey without asking it of you; and would to God I had done so, for now you have bought the palfrey, and I have not sold it."

The husband laughed at this and, now provided with a palfrey, set out for Milan a few days later to take up his Provostship. The lady, left alone in her house, recalled Il Zima's words and the love he bore her, as well as the palfrey given for her sake, and seeing him pass by the house often, said to herself, "What am I doing? Why am I wasting my youth? Yonder man is gone to Milan and will not return for six months. When will he ever restore them to me again? When I am old? Moreover, when shall I ever find such a lover as Il Zima? I am alone and have no one to fear. I know not why I should not take this good opportunity while I may; I shall not always have such leisure as I presently have. No one will know, and even were it to be known, it is better to do and regret than to abstain and regret."

Having thus resolved, she one day set two napkins in the window of the garden, as Il Zima had said. When he saw them, he was greatly overjoyed, and as soon as night fell, he made his way, alone and in secret, to the gate of the lady's garden, finding it open. He proceeded to another door that opened into the house, where he found his mistress awaiting him. Seeing him come, she rose to meet him and received him with the utmost joy. He embraced and kissed her a hundred thousand times, and they ascended the stairs to her chamber, where, without delay, they gave themselves over to the fullest delights of love. And this was not the first time, for while the gentleman was in Milan, and even after his return, Il Zima visited there many more times, to the great satisfaction of both parties.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
Key modernizations in this chapter:

- Replaced archaic vocabulary and phrasing, such as "quoth," "methinks," "certes," and complex sentence structures, with more contemporary equivalents.
- Simplified lengthy, ornate sentences into shorter, more readable constructions without losing the original meaning.
- Provided brief explanations for historical/cultural references, such as the "palfrey" and the role of the "Provost," to aid understanding for modern readers.
- Maintained the overall tone, narrative voice, and stylistic elements of the original text as much as possible to preserve the author's literary style.
- Ensured the modernized version adheres to the target high school reading level.
</explanation>