<modernized_text>
THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the Fourth]

GIROLAMO LOVES SALVESTRA, AND BEING FORCED BY HIS MOTHER'S PLEAS TO GO TO PARIS, RETURNS TO FIND HIS LOVER MARRIED; WHEREUPON HE SECRETLY ENTERS HER HOME AND DIES BY HER SIDE, AND SHE THEN DIES BESIDE HIM

When Emilia's story ended, Neifile, at the king's command, began: "There are some, noble ladies, who think they know more than others, even though they actually know less, and who presume to judge not only the advice of men, but even the very nature of things. Grave troubles have often resulted from this presumption, and no good has ever come of it. And since of all natural things, love is the one that least endures opposition or contrary counsel, and whose nature is such that it is more easily consumed of itself than extinguished by advice, it has come to my mind to tell you a story of a lady who, seeking to be wiser than was appropriate or than she was, and indeed wiser than the matter in which she tried to show her wit, thought to tear from an enamored heart a love that had likely been placed there by the stars, and in so doing, succeeded in expelling both love and life from her son's body.

There was, then, in our city, according to the accounts of the ancients, a very wealthy and prominent merchant whose name was Lionardo Sighieri, and who had by his wife a son called Girolamo. After the boy's birth, having duly set his affairs in order, the merchant departed this life. The guardians of the boy, together with his mother, well and faithfully managed his affairs, and as he grew up alongside the children of his neighbors, he became more familiar with a girl of his own age, the daughter of a tailor, than with any other in the quarter. As he matured, this familiarity turned to a love so great and ardent that he was never at ease except when he saw her, and she loved him no less than he loved her. The boy's mother, observing this, often scolded and rebuked him for it, and then, seeing that Girolamo would not desist, complained to his guardians, saying to them, as if she thought, thanks to her son's great wealth, to make an orange tree from a bramble, 'This boy of ours, though he is scarcely fourteen years old, is so enamored of the daughter of a tailor who is our neighbor, named Salvestra, that unless we remove her from his sight, he will perhaps one day take her as his wife without anyone's knowledge, and I shall never again be happy; or else he will pine away from her if he sees her married to another. Therefore, it seems to me that to avoid this, you would do best to send him somewhere far from here, on business for the warehouse; for if he is removed from seeing her, she will fade from his mind, and we may afterwards arrange for him to marry some well-born lady.'

The guardians answered that the lady spoke well, and that they would do this to the best of their power. So, calling the boy into the warehouse, one of them began very kindly to speak to him thus, 'My son, you are now somewhat grown in years, and it would be well for you to start looking after your own affairs. Therefore, it would greatly please us if you were to go and stay for a while in Paris, where you will see how much of your wealth is employed, and where you will also become far more cultured and capable than you could here, given the presence there of many lords, barons, and gentlemen, and the opportunity to learn their ways.' The young man listened attentively and replied curtly that he had no desire to do this, for he believed himself able to fare as well in Florence as anyone else. The worthy men, hearing this, tried him again with various arguments, but, failing to get any other answer from him, told his mother, who, greatly provoked, gave him a stern scolding, not because of his unwillingness to go to Paris, but because of his love. After this, she began to cajole him with kind words, coaxing and softly pleading with him to be pleased to do as his guardians wished; in short, she so persuaded him that he consented to go to France and stay there for a year, and no more.

Accordingly, ardently in love as he was, he went to Paris, and there, being continually put off from one day to the next, he was kept for two years. At the end of this time, returning more in love than ever, he found his Salvestra married to an honest youth, a tent-maker. At this, he was beyond measure grieved; but, seeing no remedy, he studied to console himself, and having discovered where she lived, began, as is the wont of lovelorn youths, to pass before her, hoping that she had not forgotten him any more than he had her. But the case was otherwise; she had no more remembrance of him than if she had never seen him; or, if indeed she remembered aught of him, she pretended the contrary. And of this, in a very short time, Girolamo became aware, to his great sorrow. Nevertheless, he did all he could to bring himself back to her mind; but, seeming to himself to accomplish nothing, he resolved to speak with her face to face, though he should die for it.

Accordingly, having learned from a neighbor where her house was situated, one evening when she and her husband were gone to keep watch with their neighbors, he stealthily entered the dwelling and hid himself behind some tent cloths that were spread there, waiting until, the two having returned and gone to bed, he knew the husband to be asleep. Then he came to where he had seen Salvestra lie down, and putting his hand upon her breast, said softly, 'Do you yet sleep, my soul?' The girl, who was awake, would have cried out, but he quickly said, 'For God's sake, do not cry, for I am your Girolamo.' She, hearing this, said, all trembling, 'Alas, for God's sake, Girolamo, go away; the time is past when it was not forbidden to our childish affection to be lovers. I am, as you see, married, and it no longer befits me to have regard for any man other than my husband. Therefore, I beseech you, by the One God, to depart, for if my husband were to hear you, even if no other harm were to ensue, it would mean that I could never again live with him in peace and quiet, whereas now I am beloved by him and dwell with him in happiness and tranquility.'

The youth, hearing these words, was deeply grieved, and recalled to her the time past and his love no whit grown less for absence, mingling many prayers and great promises, but obtained nothing. Wherefore, desiring to die, he at last prayed her that, in return for so much love, she would suffer him to lie down beside her, that he might warm himself somewhat, for he was grown chilled in waiting for her, promising her that he would neither say anything to her nor touch her, and would depart as soon as he was a little warmed. Salvestra, having some little compassion on him, granted him this he asked, on the conditions stated, and he accordingly lay down beside her, without touching her. Then, gathering into one thought the long love he had borne her and her present cruelty and his lost hope, he resolved to live no longer; wherefore, restricting within himself his vital spirits, he clasped his hands and died by her side, without word or motion.

After a while, the young woman, marveling at his continence and fearing lest her husband should awake, began to say, 'Alas, Girolamo, why do you not depart?' Hearing no answer, she concluded that he had fallen asleep, and putting out her hand to awaken him, found him as cold as ice to the touch, at which she marveled greatly. Then, nudging him more sharply and finding that he stirred not, she felt him again and knew that he was dead; whereat she was beyond measure grieved and remained a great while, not knowing what she should do. At last, she bethought herself to test, in the person of another, what her husband would say should be done in such a case. Wherefore, awakening him, she told him, as if it had happened to someone else, what had just befallen her, and then asked him what counsel she should take thereof, if it should happen to herself. The good man replied that it seemed to him the dead man should be quietly carried to his own house and there left, without bearing any ill will thereof to the woman, who, it appeared to him, had in no way done amiss. Then said Salvestra, 'And so it behoveth us do'; and taking his hand, made him touch the dead youth. Whereupon, all confounded, he arose, without entering into further discussion with his wife, and kindled a light; then, clothing the dead body in its own garments, he took it, without any delay, on his shoulders and carried it, his innocence aiding him, to the door of Girolamo's house, where he set it down and left it.

When day came and Girolamo was found dead before his own door, there was great outcry, especially on the part of his mother, and the physicians having examined him and searched his body everywhere, but finding no wound nor bruise whatsoever on him, it was generally concluded that he had died of grief, as was indeed the case. Then was the body carried into a church, and the sad mother, repairing thither with many other ladies, kinsfolk and neighbors, began to weep without stint and make sore lamentation over him, according to our custom. What while the lamentation was at its height, the good man in whose house he had died said to Salvestra, 'Listen, put some cloak or other over your head and go to the church whither Girolamo has been carried, and mingle with the women and hear what is said of the matter; and I will do the like among the men, so we may learn if aught be said against us.' The thing pleased the girl, who was too late grown pitiful and would fain look upon him, dead, whom, living, she had not willed to pleasure with one poor kiss, and she went thither. A marvelous thing it is to think how hard to search out are the ways of love! That heart, which Girolamo's fair fortune had not availed to open, his ill-hap opened, and the old flames reviving all therein, when she saw the dead face, it melted of a sudden into such compassion that she pressed between the women, veiled as she was in the cloak, and stayed not till she won to the body, and there, giving a terrible great shriek, she cast herself, face downward, on the dead youth, whom she bathed not with many tears, for that no sooner did she touch him than grief bereaved her of life, even as it had bereft him.

The women would have comforted her and bidden her arise, not yet knowing her; but after they had spoken to her in vain, they sought to lift her and, finding her motionless, raised her up and knew her at once for Salvestra and for dead; whereupon all who were there, overcome with double pity, set up a yet greater clamor of lamentation. The news soon spread abroad among the men without the church and came presently to the ears of her husband, who was amongst them and who, without lending ear to consolation or comfort from any, wept a great while; after which he recounted to many of those who were there the story of that which had befallen that night between the dead youth and his wife; and so was the cause of each one's death made everywhere manifest, the which was grievous unto all. Then, taking up the dead girl and decking her, as they use to deck the dead, they laid her beside Girolamo on the same bier and there long bewept her; after which the twain were buried in one same tomb, and so these, whom love had not availed to conjoin in life, death conjoined with an inseparable union.
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
The key changes made in this modernized version include:

- Replacing archaic vocabulary and phrasing with more contemporary language (e.g., "methinks" becomes "I think", "an it like you" becomes "if it pleases you", etc.)
- Simplifying complex sentence structures by breaking down longer, more convoluted sentences into shorter, clearer statements
- Updating or providing brief explanations for outdated references and cultural concepts (e.g., explaining the role of Girolamo's guardians, providing context for the social status differences between Girolamo and Salvestra)
- Maintaining the narrative tone and voice of the original work while making it more accessible to a modern high school-level audience
- Preserving key elements of the story, such as the tragic love between Girolamo and Salvestra, the mother's interference, and the ultimate fate of the two lovers
</explanation>