Chapter XIII: Government of the Democracy in America -- Part II


Instability of the Administration in the United States

In America, the public acts of a community frequently leave fewer traces than a family's private affairs. Newspapers as the only historical record. How administrative instability harms the art of government.

The tenure of public officials in America is so brief, and they vanish so quickly into the country's ever-shifting population, that a community's public actions often leave fewer traces than the events of a private family. The public administration is, so to speak, oral and handed down by word of mouth. Very little is committed to writing, and what little there is gets blown away forever, like the Sibyl's prophetic leaves, by the slightest breeze.

The only historical records in the United States are newspapers. But if a single issue goes missing, the chain of time is broken, and the present is cut off from the past. I'm convinced that in fifty years it will be harder to collect reliable documents about the social conditions of Americans today than it is to find records from the administration of France during the Middle Ages. And if the United States were ever invaded by a foreign power, you'd have to consult the histories of other nations to learn anything about the people who once lived there.

This administrative instability has seeped into the habits of the people. It even seems to suit their general taste, and no one cares about what happened before their time. No systematic methods are followed, no archives are maintained, and no documents are assembled -- even when it would be easy to do so. Where records do exist, little value is placed on them. I have among my own papers several original public documents that were simply given to me when I made inquiries about them. American society seems to live hand to mouth, like an army in the field.

And yet, administration is undeniably a science, and no science can advance if the discoveries and observations of successive generations aren't connected in the order they occurred. One person notices a fact; another develops an idea; one invents a method of execution; another turns a truth into a fixed principle. Humanity gathers the fruits of individual experience along the way and gradually builds the sciences. But the people who run the administration in America can rarely teach each other anything. When they take charge of public affairs, they bring only the general knowledge that's common throughout the community -- nothing from their own experience in office. Democracy, pushed to its furthest limits, therefore damages the art of government. For this reason, it's better suited to a people already experienced in administration than to a nation that's new to public affairs.

This observation isn't limited to the science of administration. Although democratic government rests on a very simple and natural principle, it always presupposes a high degree of cultural development and education in society. At first glance, it might seem to belong to the earliest stages of civilization. But on closer examination, you realize it could only come last in the succession of human history.


Taxes and Public Spending Under American Democracy

In every community, citizens can be divided into three classes. The habits of each class when it controls public finances. Why public spending tends to increase when the people governs. Why democratic extravagance is less dangerous in America. Public spending under a democracy.

Before we can determine whether a democratic government is economical or not, we need a proper standard of comparison. The question would be easy if we were simply comparing a democratic republic to an absolute monarchy. Public spending would obviously be higher under democracy than under absolute rule -- as it is in all free states compared to unfree ones. Authoritarianism ruins people by preventing them from producing wealth far more than by taking the wealth they've already produced. It dries up the source of riches while usually leaving existing property alone. Freedom, by contrast, generates far more benefits than it destroys. Nations with free institutions invariably find that their resources grow even faster than their taxes.

But my goal here is to compare free nations to each other, and to examine democracy's influence on a nation's finances.

Every community can be mentally divided into three distinct classes. The first consists of the wealthy. The second includes those in comfortable circumstances. The third is made up of those with little or no property, who live mainly by the work they perform for the two classes above them. The proportions of these three groups vary depending on the state of society, but the groups themselves can never be erased.

Each class will obviously influence public finances in its own characteristic way. If the wealthy exclusively control the legislature, they probably won't be tight-fisted with public funds. Taxes on a large fortune only reduce the surplus available for luxuries, and in practice they're barely felt. If the middle class makes the laws, it will certainly not be lavish with taxes, because nothing is more painful than a heavy tax levied on a modest income. Middle-class government strikes me as the most economical form of free government -- though perhaps not the most enlightened, and certainly not the most generous.

Now suppose the legislative power is placed in the hands of the poorest class. Two powerful reasons suggest that spending will increase, not decrease. Since the great majority of those who make the laws own no property that can be taxed, all the money spent by the community appears to be spent for their benefit, at no cost to themselves. And those who do own a little property find ways to structure the taxes so they burden the rich and benefit the poor -- although the rich can't take the same advantage when they control the government.

In countries where the poor hold exclusive power over lawmaking, don't expect great economy in public spending. That spending will always be large -- either because the taxes don't fall on the people who levy them, or because they're structured to avoid falling on those people. (I should note that "poor" here is a relative term. Poor people in America would often look rich compared to the poor of Europe. But they can fairly be called poor in comparison to their more affluent fellow Americans.) In other words, democracy is the only form of government in which the power that imposes taxes escapes paying them.

You might object that the people's true interest is inseparably connected with the interest of the wealthier classes, since everyone suffers from harsh measures. But isn't it also in a king's true interest to make his subjects happy? And in the true interest of nobles to welcome worthy newcomers into their ranks? If long-term advantages could always overcome the passions and demands of the moment, there would never be such a thing as a tyrannical ruler or an exclusionary aristocracy.

You might also object that the poor are never the sole lawmakers. But I'd reply that wherever universal suffrage exists, the majority unquestionably controls the legislature. And if the poor always constitute the majority -- which they do -- then in countries with universal suffrage, they effectively hold sole legislative power. It's certain that in every nation in the world, the largest group has always consisted of those with no property or not enough property to free them from the need to work. Universal suffrage, therefore, in effect places the government of society in the hands of the poor.

The destructive influence that popular power can exercise on public finances was clearly visible in some of the democratic republics of the ancient world, where the public treasury was drained to support the poor or to fund games and theatrical spectacles for the masses. Admittedly, representative government was barely known back then, and today, popular passions play less of a direct role in public affairs. But it's reasonable to expect that elected representatives will eventually conform to their constituents' preferences, favoring their impulses as much as their interests.

Democratic extravagance is less dangerous, however, when the people as a whole owns some property. In that case, the contributions of the rich are less necessary, and it's harder to impose taxes that don't also hit the lower classes. Universal suffrage would therefore be less risky in France than in England, because in England, taxable property is concentrated in fewer hands. America, where the great majority of citizens have some wealth, is in an even more favorable position than France.

But there are additional reasons why public spending tends to rise in democratic countries. When an aristocracy governs, the people who run things are insulated by their social position from every kind of hardship. They're content with their lot -- power and prestige are what they're after. Because they stand so far above the mass of citizens, they don't always clearly see how improving ordinary people's lives would redound to their own honor. They're not indifferent to the sufferings of the poor, but they can't feel those hardships as sharply as if they were experiencing them personally. As long as the people appear to accept their lot, the rulers are satisfied, and they ask nothing more from the government. An aristocracy is more focused on maintaining its influence than on improving its conditions.

When the people themselves hold supreme authority, it's a different story. Their constant awareness of their own hardships drives those in charge to seek endless improvements. A thousand different things are targeted for reform. The most trivial details are examined for possible upgrades. And the changes that cost the most money are the ones most eagerly pursued, since the goal is to improve the condition of the poor, who can't pay for these improvements themselves.

On top of this, all democratic communities are agitated by a vague restlessness and a kind of feverish impatience that produces a flood of innovations -- almost all of which cost money.

In monarchies and aristocracies, the rulers' natural taste for power and prestige is amplified by ambition, which frequently drives them into very expensive projects. In democracies, where the rulers know real hardship, they can only be courted with measures that improve their material well-being -- and those improvements require money. When a people begins to take stock of its own situation, it discovers a multitude of unmet needs it had never noticed before. Meeting those needs requires dipping into the public treasury. The result is that public spending increases as civilization advances, and taxes go up as the population becomes better informed.

The final reason democratic government tends to be more expensive than any other is that democracies don't always manage to control their spending, because they haven't mastered the art of economy. Since their plans change frequently and their agents change even more frequently, their projects are often poorly executed or left unfinished. In the first case, the state spends sums wildly out of proportion to the goal. In the second, the money is simply wasted.


Democratic Tendencies Regarding the Salaries of Public Officials

In democracies, those who set high salaries have no chance of benefiting from them. The tendency of American democracy to increase the salaries of lower-ranking officials and reduce those of higher-ranking ones. The reason for this. Comparison of public salaries in the United States and France.

There's a powerful reason why democracies tend to economize on the salaries of public officials. Since the number of citizens who pay these salaries is extremely large in democratic countries, and the number who can hope to collect them is comparatively small, cost-cutting has broad appeal. In aristocratic countries, by contrast, those who set high salaries almost always have a vague hope of benefiting from them. These positions look like an investment they're creating for themselves, or at least a resource for their children.

But a democratic state is most tight-fisted with its top officials. In America, the lower-level officers are paid much better, and the senior leaders of the administration much worse, than they are anywhere else.

These opposite effects come from the same cause: the people sets the salaries of public officials in both cases, and the pay scale is determined by the people's own sense of what's appropriate. They think it's fair that public servants should enjoy the same comfortable circumstances as the public itself. But when it comes to the salaries of the nation's top leaders, this principle breaks down, and only guesswork guides the popular decision. The poor have no real understanding of the needs that the upper classes feel. An amount that seems paltry to the rich appears enormous to someone whose wants don't extend beyond the necessities of life. In their estimation, the governor of a state, earning twelve or fifteen hundred dollars a year, is a very fortunate and enviable person. (The state of Ohio, with a million inhabitants, paid its governor only $1,200 a year.) Try to convince an ordinary person that the representative of a great nation ought to maintain some degree of splendor in the eyes of foreign countries, and he might agree with your reasoning. But when he thinks of his own modest home and the hard-earned fruits of his exhausting labor, he imagines all the things he could do with the salary you're calling insufficient, and he's startled -- almost frightened -- by such extraordinary wealth. Besides, lower-level public officials are essentially on the same footing as ordinary people, while the top officials are raised above them. The former may earn the public's sympathy; the latter begin to provoke its envy.

This pattern is clearly visible in the United States, where salaries seem to shrink as the authority of the officeholder grows.

Under aristocratic rule, the opposite frequently happens: top officials receive lavish salaries while the lower-ranking ones barely earn enough to live on. The reason is closely related to what I've just described. If a democracy can't imagine the pleasures of the rich or witness them without envy, an aristocracy is slow to understand -- or more accurately, is completely unfamiliar with -- the hardships of the poor. The poor person is not, properly speaking, the rich person's peer. In the aristocratic mind, the poor are practically a different species. An aristocracy therefore tends to care very little about the fate of its lower-ranking agents, and their salaries only go up when they refuse to work for such meager pay.

It's the stinginess of democracy toward its top officials that has encouraged the false impression that democratic government is more economical than it really is. Democracies barely give their leaders enough to live on comfortably. But enormous sums are spent to meet the needs and improve the lives of ordinary people. Tax money may be put to better use, but it isn't saved. In general, democracy gives generously to the community and sparingly to those who govern it. Aristocracies do the reverse: the state's money is spent for the benefit of the people at the top.


The Difficulty of Pinpointing What Makes American Government Economical

We're prone to frequent errors when researching the forces that shape the fate of nations, because nothing is harder than accurately assessing their true influence. One people is naturally impulsive and enthusiastic; another is sober and calculating. These differences originate in their physical makeup or in deeper causes we don't understand.

Some nations love parades and public festivities, and don't mind paying for an hour of expensive celebration. Others prefer quieter pleasures and seem almost embarrassed to be seen enjoying themselves. In some countries, the highest value is placed on the beauty of public buildings; in others, the products of art are treated with indifference, and anything unproductive is despised. In some nations, fame is the ruling passion; in others, money.

Independently of the laws, all these factors exert a powerful influence on a nation's finances. If Americans never spend public money on pageantry, it's not just because the people controls taxation -- it's because the people takes no pleasure in public celebrations. If they reject ornament from their architecture and value only the practical and the useful, it's not just because they live under democratic institutions -- it's because they're a commercial people. The habits of private life carry over into public life. We should be careful to distinguish the economy that comes from their institutions from the economy that comes naturally from their customs and culture.


Can We Compare American and French Public Spending?

Two things must be established to measure a nation's tax burden: the national wealth and the rate of taxation. The wealth and spending of France are not precisely known. Why the wealth and spending of the Union can't be precisely known either. The author's research into Pennsylvania's tax rates. General indicators that can reveal whether a nation's tax burden is appropriate. The results of this investigation for the Union.

Many recent attempts have been made in France to compare public spending in the two countries. All have failed, and a few words will explain why.

To measure a nation's tax burden, you need two pieces of information: first, how wealthy the nation is; and second, what portion of that wealth goes to the state. Showing the amount of taxation without showing the resources available to pay for it is a pointless exercise. It's not the spending itself that matters but its relationship to the revenue.

The same tax rate that a wealthy person can easily bear will reduce a poor person to misery. A nation's wealth consists of several elements: population is the first, real property the second, and personal property the third. Population can be determined without much difficulty. Among developed nations, it's easy to get an accurate census. But the other two elements are much harder to pin down. It's difficult to make an exact inventory of all the cultivated land in a country, along with its natural and improved value. It's even more impossible to estimate a nation's total personal property, which evades the most rigorous analysis through the sheer diversity and number of forms it can take. And in fact, even the most established nations of Europe, including those with the most centralized administrations, have never succeeded in determining the exact state of their wealth.

In America, no one has even tried. And how could they? Society hasn't yet settled into regular, stable habits. The national government doesn't have legions of agents it can deploy toward a single objective. Statistics aren't studied because no one can collect the necessary data or find time to analyze it. So the basic elements needed for the calculations that have been attempted in France simply don't exist in America. Neither country's relative wealth is known. France's property hasn't been accurately measured, and no means exist for computing America's.

For the sake of argument, then, I'll abandon this necessary part of the comparison and limit myself to calculating the actual amount of taxation, without investigating the relationship between taxation and revenue. But the reader will see that this doesn't make my task any easier.

It's beyond question that the central administration of France, with all its public officers at its disposal, could determine exactly how much in direct and indirect taxes is levied on citizens. But this investigation -- which no private individual can undertake -- hadn't been completed by the French government at that time, or at least its results hadn't been made public. We know the total cost of national government and the amount of departmental spending, but spending by local communities hasn't been calculated. The total public expenditure of France is therefore unknown.

If we turn to America, the difficulties multiply. The Union publishes an exact accounting of its spending. The twenty-four states provide similar reports on their revenues. But the spending of counties and townships is unknown.

The federal government can't force the state governments to provide this information, and even if the states wanted to cooperate, they probably wouldn't have the means. County and town officials aren't appointed by the state government and aren't under its control. It's entirely reasonable to assume that even if a state tried to collect these figures, its efforts would be undermined by the negligence of the local officials it would have to rely on. In fact, it's useless to ask what Americans might do to advance this inquiry, since they've done absolutely nothing so far. At this moment, there isn't a single person in America or Europe who can tell us what each citizen of the Union contributes annually to the public treasury.

We're forced to conclude, then, that it's no easier to compare the public spending of France and America than it is to compare their relative wealth. I'd go further and say that attempting such a comparison would be positively dangerous. When statistics aren't based on strictly accurate data, they mislead rather than guide. The mind is easily deceived by the false precision that prevails even in bad science, and it confidently embraces errors dressed up in the forms of mathematical truth.

Let's abandon the numerical approach, then, and look for a different kind of evidence. Without hard data, we can still form an opinion about whether a nation's tax burden is proportional to its real prosperity by looking at certain signs: whether the country appears to be flourishing; whether, after paying their taxes, the poor still have enough to live on and the rich still have enough to enjoy life; and whether both classes are content with their position -- while still constantly working to improve it -- so that industry never lacks capital and capital never sits idle. An observer who draws conclusions from these signs will undoubtedly be led to this conclusion: the average American contributes a much smaller share of his income to the state than the average French citizen. And the result could hardly be otherwise.

Part of France's national debt is the consequence of two foreign invasions -- a catastrophe the Union has no reason to fear. A nation on the European continent is forced to maintain a large standing army; America's isolated position allows it to get by with only 6,000 soldiers. France has a fleet of 300 ships; the Americans have 52. How, then, can the people of the Union be asked to contribute as heavily as the people of France? No fair comparison can be drawn between the finances of two countries in such different situations.

We learn more by examining what actually happens inside the Union than by comparing it to France. Looking at the various republics that make up the confederation, I notice that their governments lack follow-through in their projects and exercise no steady oversight of the people they employ. From this I naturally conclude that they must often waste the people's money, or spend more of it than necessary. Great efforts are made, consistent with the democratic spirit of the society, to address the needs of ordinary people, to open pathways to power for their ambitions, and to spread knowledge and comfort among them. The poor are supported, enormous sums are devoted to public education each year, every form of service is paid for, and even the lowest-ranking officials are generously compensated. This kind of government strikes me as useful and rational, but I'm forced to admit that it's expensive.

Wherever the poor direct public affairs and control national resources, it seems inevitable that they'll increase public spending, since they benefit from it.

I therefore conclude -- without resorting to unreliable calculations or hazardous comparisons -- that the democratic government of the Americans is not a cheap government, as is sometimes claimed. And I have no hesitation in predicting that if the American people ever faces serious difficulties, its taxes will quickly rise to match those of most European aristocracies and monarchies. Events since Tocqueville's time have confirmed exactly this prediction.
