Chapter XVII: Principal Causes Maintaining the Democratic Republic -- Part IV


Laws Matter More Than Geography -- but Customs Matter Most of All

Every nation in the Americas has a democratic social order, yet only the Anglo-Americans have sustained democratic institutions. The Spanish of South America, blessed with the same geographic advantages, have been unable to maintain a democratic republic. Mexico adopted the United States Constitution and ended up in the same predicament. Even the Anglo-Americans of the West are less able to sustain democracy than those of the East. Here is why.

I've argued that three factors sustain democratic institutions in the United States: the country's physical circumstances, its laws, and its customs. Most Europeans are only familiar with the first of these, and they tend to give it far more weight than it deserves.

It's true that the Anglo-Saxons who settled the New World arrived in a state of social equality. There were no commoners or nobles among them, and professional snobbery was as unknown as the prejudices of birth. Since social conditions were already democratic, democracy took root without difficulty. But this wasn't unique to the United States -- nearly every colony in the Americas was founded by people who were equals, or who became equals once they arrived. Nowhere in the New World did Europeans manage to create an aristocracy. And yet democratic institutions flourish only in the United States.

The American Union has no enemies to worry about. It sits in the wilderness like an island in the ocean. But the Spanish of South America were just as isolated by nature, and that hasn't saved them from needing standing armies. They wage war on each other when they have no foreign enemies to fight. The Anglo-American democracy, until the Civil War, was the only one that managed to maintain itself in peace.

The territory of the Union offers a boundless field for human ambition and inexhaustible resources for industry and labor. The passion for wealth replaces political ambition, and the intensity of partisan conflict is tempered by a general sense of prosperity. But where on earth will you find more fertile plains, mightier rivers, or more unexplored riches than in South America? Yet South America has been unable to sustain democratic institutions. If national prosperity depended on nothing more than geographic isolation and vast open land, the Spanish of South America would have nothing to complain about. Even if they were less prosperous than the United States, their situation should still have been the envy of many European nations. Instead, no nations on earth are more miserable than those of South America.

So geography alone is not only unable to produce results comparable to those in North America -- it can't even raise the populations of South America above the level of European countries where geography works against them. Physical circumstances, therefore, don't shape the destiny of nations nearly as much as people have assumed.

I met New Englanders who were about to leave a region where they could have lived in comfort, heading off to seek their fortune in the wilderness. Not far away, I found a French population in Canada, packed tightly onto a narrow strip of land, even though the same vast wilderness lay at their doorstep. The American emigrant bought a huge estate with the earnings of a few years' work. The Canadian paid as much for land as he would have in France. Nature offers the empty spaces of the New World to Europeans, but they don't always know how to take advantage of the gift. Other peoples of the Americas enjoy the same geographic blessings as the Anglo-Americans, but without their laws and customs -- and those peoples are wretched. The laws and customs of the Anglo-Americans are therefore the real cause of their greatness, and that's what this whole inquiry is about.

I'm far from claiming that American laws are perfect in themselves. I don't think they'd work for all democracies, and several of them seem dangerous even in the United States. Still, you can't deny that American legislation, taken as a whole, is remarkably well suited to the character of the people and the nature of the country it governs. American laws are good, and a large share of democracy's success in America should be credited to them. But I don't believe the laws are the main reason for that success. If they seem to me to matter more than geography, there's still good reason to think their effect is less powerful than that of the people's customs and habits.

The federal laws are undoubtedly the most important part of American legislation. Mexico, which enjoys geographic advantages no less impressive than the Anglo-American Union's, adopted the same laws -- but has been unable to make democracy work. Some other force must be at work, independent of geography and legal structure, that enables democracy to function in the United States.

Here's an even more striking proof. Nearly all the inhabitants of the Union are descended from the same stock. They speak the same language, worship God in the same way, are shaped by the same physical environment, and obey the same laws. So where do their differences come from? Why does republican government in the eastern states display vigor, regularity, and mature deliberation? Where does it get the wisdom and durability that mark its decisions? Meanwhile, in the western states, society seems ruled by chance. Public affairs are conducted with an irregularity and a feverish, passionate intensity that doesn't suggest anything built to last.

I'm no longer comparing Anglo-Americans to foreign nations here. I'm comparing them to each other, trying to figure out why they're so different. The usual explanations -- geography and legislation -- are off the table, since those are essentially the same. The only remaining explanation is the customs of the people.

It's in the eastern states that Anglo-Americans have been practicing democracy the longest and have developed the habits and ideas most favorable to sustaining it. Democracy has gradually seeped into their customs, their opinions, and their forms of social life. You can find it in all the details of daily existence, just as you can find it in the laws. In the eastern states, education and practical experience are the most advanced, and religion has been most thoroughly blended with freedom. These habits, opinions, customs, and convictions are exactly what I mean by "customs" -- the moral and intellectual character of a people.

In the western states, by contrast, many of these advantages are still missing. A large number of westerners grew up in the woods, mixing the ideas and habits of frontier life with the civilization of their parents. Their passions are more intense, their religious values carry less weight, and their convictions are less settled. People exercise little control over their neighbors, because they barely know each other. The western states display, to a certain extent, the inexperience and rough habits of a society in its youth -- even though their population is made up of old elements, their communities are newly formed.

The customs of the American people, then, are the real reason the United States is the only nation in the Americas that can sustain a democratic government. It's the influence of customs that produces the different levels of order and prosperity you can see across the various Anglo-American democracies. In short, the importance of geography in sustaining democracy is exaggerated in Europe. Too much credit is given to laws, and too little to customs. These three great forces -- geography, laws, and customs -- all help shape and direct American democracy. But if I had to rank them, I would say that geography matters less than laws, and laws matter far less than customs. I'm convinced that the best geographic position and the best possible laws can't sustain a political system if the customs of the people work against it -- while strong customs can make the most unfavorable geography and the worst laws work to some advantage. The importance of customs is one of those truths that study and experience point to again and again. It's the central finding of all political observation, the place where every line of inquiry converges. I take this point so seriously that if I've failed to convince you that the practical experience, habits, opinions -- in short, the customs -- of the Americans are the main reason their institutions survive, then I've failed at the principal goal of this entire book.


Can Laws and Customs Sustain Democracy Outside of America?

If Anglo-Americans were transplanted to Europe, they'd have to significantly alter their laws. We must distinguish between democratic institutions in general and specifically American institutions. It's possible to imagine democratic laws that are better than -- or at least different from -- the ones America has adopted. The American example only proves that it's possible to manage democracy with the help of customs and laws.

I've argued that the success of American democracy is tied more closely to the country's laws and customs than to its geography. But does it follow that the same laws and customs would produce the same results elsewhere? If geography can't substitute for laws and customs, can laws and customs substitute for geography? Obviously, we don't have all the data we'd need for a complete answer. Other peoples in the New World share America's physical environment and can be compared to the Anglo-Americans. But outside the Americas, there are no nations that have adopted similar laws and customs while lacking America's geographic advantages. So we don't have a perfect test case and can only offer our best judgment.

First, it seems to me we need to carefully distinguish between the institutions of the United States specifically and democratic institutions in general. When I think about the state of Europe -- its mighty nations, its huge cities, its formidable armies, and the complexity of its politics -- I can't imagine that even Anglo-Americans, with their ideas, religion, and customs, could survive there without substantially changing their laws. But we can imagine a democratic nation organized differently from the American model. It's not impossible to conceive of a government genuinely based on majority rule where the majority, restraining its natural drive toward equality, would agree to invest a family or an individual with all the powers of the executive branch, for the sake of stability and order. You could have a democratic society where the nation's power is more centralized than in the United States, where the people exercise less direct influence over public affairs, and yet every citizen still holds certain rights and participates, within their own sphere, in governing. What I observed among the Anglo-Americans leads me to believe that democratic institutions of this kind, introduced gradually and carefully woven into the habits and beliefs of the people, could work in countries besides America. If America's laws were the only possible democratic laws, or the most perfect ones imaginable, then America's success would tell us nothing about whether democracy can work elsewhere. But since American laws seem to me flawed in several ways, and since I can easily imagine different democratic laws that might work just as well, America's particular geographic advantages don't prove that democracy can't succeed in less favored countries with better laws.

If human nature were different in America than elsewhere, or if the American social condition produced habits and ideas unlike those found in similar conditions in the Old World, American democracy would tell us nothing about what might happen in other democracies. But Americans display the same tendencies as every other democratic people. If their lawmakers had simply relied on geography and lucky circumstances to keep those tendencies in check, the prosperity of the United States would be attributable entirely to physical causes and would offer no encouragement to nations that want to follow their example without sharing their natural advantages. Neither of these scenarios is true.

In America, I found the same passions you find in Europe -- some rooted in human nature, others in the democratic social condition itself. I found the restlessness that is natural to people when all ranks are nearly equal and everyone has the same chances of rising. I found the democratic feeling of envy expressed in a thousand different ways. I noticed that the people frequently displayed, in public affairs, a potent mix of ignorance and presumption. I concluded that Americans are just as susceptible to the same flaws and absurdities as we are. But when I looked more closely, I quickly discovered that Americans had made enormous and successful efforts to counteract these imperfections and correct the natural defects of democracy. Their various local laws seemed designed to restrain citizens' ambition within a narrow sphere and to channel passions that might have wrecked the state into productive work for the township or the parish. American lawmakers have managed, to a considerable extent, to pit the concept of individual rights against the feeling of envy; the permanence of the religious world against the constant shifting of politics; the practical experience of the people against their theoretical ignorance; and their hands-on knowledge of business against the impatience of their desires.

The Americans, then, haven't relied on geography to counterbalance the dangers built into their constitution and political laws. They've applied remedies to the problems common to all democracies -- remedies no one else had thought of before. They were the first to try the experiment, and they've succeeded.

The specific laws and customs of the Americans aren't the only ones that could work for a democratic people. But the Americans have shown that it would be wrong to despair of governing democracy with the help of customs and laws. If other nations were to borrow this broad and powerful idea from the Americans -- without necessarily copying the specific way they've applied it -- and if they set about preparing themselves for the democratic social order that Providence seems determined to impose on this generation, in order to escape both authoritarianism and anarchy, what reason is there to think they would fail? The organization and establishment of democracy in the modern world is the great political problem of our time. The Americans haven't solved this problem, but they've provided invaluable data for those who want to try.


What All of This Means for Europe

It should be clear by now what I've been driving at. The question I've been exploring matters not just to the United States but to the entire world -- not to one nation but to all of humanity. If democratic peoples could only remain free as long as they live in the wilderness, we'd have to despair of the human future, because democracy is spreading rapidly and the wilderness is filling up. If it were true that laws and customs weren't enough to sustain democratic institutions, what refuge would remain for nations other than the rule of a single dictator? I know there are well-meaning people today who aren't alarmed by that prospect -- people so exhausted by freedom that they'd welcome the calm of authoritarianism, far from the storms that freedom brings. But these people don't understand where they're headed. They're deluded by nostalgia, judging absolute power by what it used to be rather than by what it could become today.

If absolute power were reestablished in the democratic nations of Europe, I'm convinced it would take a new form and display features unknown to our ancestors. There was a time in Europe when the laws and the consent of the people gave princes nearly unlimited authority -- but they rarely used it. I'm not talking about the formal checks on power: the privileges of the nobility, the authority of the courts, the rights of chartered corporations, or the independence of provinces. All of these served to blunt the blows of royal authority and keep alive the spirit of resistance. But quite apart from these political institutions -- which, even when they conflicted with personal freedom, still kept the love of freedom alive in the public mind -- the customs and beliefs of the nation confined royal power within barriers that were less visible but no less powerful. Religion, the affection of the people, the goodwill of the prince, the sense of honor, family pride, local traditions, custom, and public opinion -- all of these limited the power of kings and kept their authority inside an invisible circle. In those days, the constitution of nations was authoritarian, but their customs were free. Princes had the right to do whatever they pleased, but they lacked both the means and the desire to do it.

What's left of those barriers now? Since religion has lost its hold over people's souls, the clearest boundary between good and evil has been erased. The very foundations of the moral world have become uncertain. Rulers and citizens alike are guided by chance, and no one can say where the demands of power end and the boundaries of freedom begin. Long revolutions have destroyed the respect that once surrounded heads of state. Stripped of public esteem, rulers now surrender without hesitation to the temptations of unchecked power.

When kings know their subjects love them, they can afford to be generous, because they're confident of their strength. They treasure the affection of their people because that affection is the foundation of the throne. A mutual exchange of goodwill between ruler and people resembles the warmth of a family. Subjects may grumble about the king's decisions, but they're sorry to displease him. And the king disciplines his subjects with the light hand of a parent.

But once the spell of monarchy is broken in the chaos of revolution -- once a series of rulers have crossed the throne, alternately revealing the weakness of their claim and the harshness of their rule -- the ruler is no longer seen as a father of the nation. He is feared as its master. If he is weak, he is despised. If he is strong, he is hated. He himself is full of hostility and fear. He feels like a stranger in his own country and treats his subjects like a conquered people.

When provinces and towns were like separate nations within a common country, each had its own identity and will, and this diversity resisted the general spirit of submission. But now that every part of the same empire -- having lost its special privileges, customs, traditions, and even its name -- is subject to the same laws and accustomed to the same authority, it's no harder to oppress them all at once than it used to be to oppress them one at a time.

While the nobility held power, and even long after they'd lost it, the code of aristocratic honor gave individuals an extraordinary strength in opposing authority. You could find people who, despite their personal weakness, still thought highly enough of themselves to stand alone against the force of the state. But today, when all classes are increasingly blended together, when the individual disappears into the crowd and is easily lost in the common anonymity, when the prestige of monarchy is almost gone without being replaced by public virtue, and when nothing enables a person to rise above the mass -- who can say where the demands of power and the submission of weakness will stop?

As long as family bonds held strong, the person who resisted oppression was never alone. He could look around and find his dependents, his hereditary friends, and his relatives. If they were gone, his ancestors sustained him and his descendants gave him purpose. But when family estates are broken up and a few years are enough to erase the distinctions of a lineage, where can family loyalty be found? What force can custom have in a country that keeps changing and never stops changing -- where every act of tyranny has a precedent and every crime has an example, where nothing is so old that its age can protect it and nothing so unprecedented that its novelty can prevent it? What resistance can be offered by social norms so flexible that they've already bent countless times? What strength can public opinion have when no twenty people are connected by a shared bond -- when not a single individual, family, chartered organization, class, or free institution has the power to represent or express that opinion -- when every citizen, equally weak, equally poor, and equally dependent, has nothing but his personal powerlessness to oppose the organized force of the government?

There's nothing in French history comparable to the condition the country might reach. But we can find parallels in ancient Rome -- those hideous eras of Roman oppression when the people's morals were corrupted, their traditions destroyed, their habits shattered, and their beliefs shaken; when freedom, expelled from the laws, could find no refuge anywhere in the land; when nothing protected the citizens and the citizens no longer protected themselves; when human nature was a plaything and rulers exhausted the patience of heaven before they exhausted the patience of their subjects. Anyone who hopes to restore the monarchy of Henry IV or Louis XIV is, in my view, afflicted with political blindness. Considering the current trajectory of several European nations -- a trajectory all the others seem to be following -- I believe they will soon face a stark choice: democratic freedom or the tyranny of the Caesars. A prediction that Tocqueville wrote in 1832, which was realized to the letter when Napoleon III seized power in France in 1852.

And it's worth considering: if people must be either completely free or completely enslaved -- if their rights must be made equal or taken away entirely -- wouldn't that resolve many people's doubts, ease many consciences, and prepare society to make great sacrifices with less difficulty? In that case, the gradual growth of democratic customs and institutions shouldn't be seen as the best option, but as the only way to preserve freedom. You might not love democratic government, but it might be the most practical and the fairest remedy available for the ills of the present.

It's hard to get a people involved in the work of governing. It's even harder to give them the experience and instill the values they need to govern well. I admit that democracy's impulses are erratic, its tools are crude, and its laws are imperfect. But if it's true that soon there will be no middle ground between majority rule and one-man rule, shouldn't we lean toward the former rather than submit willingly to the latter? And if complete equality is our destiny, isn't it better to be leveled by free institutions than by authoritarian power?

Anyone who reads this book and thinks my purpose was to recommend American laws and customs for every democratic nation to copy would be making a serious mistake. They'd be paying more attention to the form of my ideas than to their substance. My goal has been to show, through the example of America, that laws -- and especially customs -- can allow a democratic people to remain free. But I'm very far from thinking we should copy the American model and use the same methods to reach the same ends. I'm well aware of how much a country's geography and political history shape its institutions. I would consider it a great misfortune for humanity if freedom existed everywhere in exactly the same form.

But I do believe this: if we don't succeed in gradually establishing democratic institutions in France, and if we give up on teaching citizens the ideas and values that first prepare them for freedom and then allow them to enjoy it, there will be no independence for anyone -- not for the middle class, not for the nobility, not for the poor, not for the rich -- but an equal tyranny over all. And I foresee that if the peaceful rule of the majority isn't established among us in time, we will sooner or later arrive at the unlimited power of a single despot.
