Chapter XII: Why Americans Build Some Monuments So Small and Others So Enormous

I just noted that in democratic societies, works of art tend to become more numerous but less impressive. Now let me point out the exception to that rule.

In a democracy, individual citizens are relatively powerless -- but the government that represents them all, and holds them all in its grip, is enormously powerful. Nowhere do individual citizens seem so small as in a democratic nation; and nowhere does the nation itself seem so grand, or is it so easy for the mind to take in the whole sweeping picture at once. In democracies, the imagination shrinks when people think about themselves. It expands without limit when they think about the state. This is why the same people who live modestly in cramped apartments will dream of gigantic splendor when it comes to their public buildings.

The Americans laid out the boundaries of an immense city on the spot they chose for their capital -- a place that, at the time, was barely more populated than a small French town, though they claimed it would one day hold a million people. They had already cleared trees for ten miles in every direction, just so those trees wouldn't get in the way of the future residents of this imaginary metropolis. They built a magnificent palace for Congress at the center of the city and gave it the grand name "the Capitol." Meanwhile, every state in the Union is constantly planning and constructing massive projects that would astonish the engineers of the great European nations.

So democracy doesn't just lead people to produce vast quantities of mediocre work -- it also drives them to build some things on the most colossal scale. But between these two extremes, there's nothing. A few scattered remains of enormous buildings, then, can't actually tell us much about the social conditions or institutions of the people who built them. And I'd add -- even though this takes me slightly off topic -- that they don't tell us much about that society's greatness, civilization, or real prosperity either. Whenever any power is capable of making an entire population cooperate on a single project, that power -- with a little knowledge and a lot of time -- will produce something enormous from all that combined effort. But that doesn't mean the people were especially happy, enlightened, or even strong.

The Spanish found Mexico City full of magnificent temples and vast palaces -- but that didn't stop Cortes from conquering the entire Mexican Empire with six hundred soldiers and sixteen horses. If the Romans had better understood hydraulics, they wouldn't have built all those aqueducts that now surround the ruins of their cities -- they would have put their power and wealth to better use. If they had invented the steam engine, they might never have extended those long artificial highways we call Roman roads to the far edges of their empire. These monuments are simultaneously splendid memorials to both their ignorance and their greatness. A civilization that left behind nothing but a few lead pipes underground and some iron rails on the surface might have been far more the master of nature than the Romans ever were.
