Blind Cuts

The blind cut is a natural sequence to the blind shuffle or riffle. As the cards are cut in almost all games, there would be little advantage derived from clever shuffling, were the order to be subsequently disturbed in cutting. The able card handler with a player on his right to blind cut, has the game well in hand. Yet though the advantages are greatly increased by the assistance of an ally, the reader will learn how it is quite possible to play alone and still have a very tolerable percentage of the chances in one's favor. Both hands are invariably used to make a blind cut. The first described is an excellent one for retaining either the top or bottom stock and is in common use among professional players.

I. To Retain Bottom Stock. Top Losing One Card

Seize the deck with left hand at sides, near end, between second finger and thumb, the first finger tip pressing on top. Seize the upper portion of deck with the right hand, at sides, near end, between the second finger and thumb. Raise the deck slightly with both hands and pull out the upper portion with the right hand, but retain the top card in the left hand by pressing on it with the left first finger tip. (See Fig. 11.) Immediately drop the left-hand packet on the table and bring the right-hand packet down on top with a slight swing, and square up.

The action is very simple and easy to execute, the movements are perfectly natural and regular, and, if performed gracefully, is very deceiving. The process displaces the top card. sending it to the middle, and if this blind is used when the top stock is to be retained, an extra card is placed there during the shuffle.

[Figure ak: Fig. 11. — Blind cut No. I: the right hand pulls out the upper portion at the sides between second finger and thumb, while the left first finger tip presses on the top card and keeps it back.]

II. To Retain the Complete Stock

The following is a very bold and bare-faced blind, but if cleverly executed it appears natural:

Seize the deck at sides near the ends between the second finger and thumb of each hand, but the left hand seizing the under portion, and the right hand the top portion. Draw out the under portion rapidly with the left hand and place it quickly over towards the dealer, the right hand following slowly and with an upward swing, drops the top portion again on top.

The movements are natural and the blind can be accomplished very neatly. If the plan of drawing off the top portion with the left hand is tried, and then the right following more slowly with the under packet, it will be seen that the identical movements are made in the true cut. It is the movement towards the dealer that makes the blind possible.

III. To Retain the Top Stock

The next two methods of blind cuts are among the most subtle and indetectible manoeuvers in card handling. The design and use of the break originated with us, and by its aid blind run cuts can be alternated with the blind riffle, until the most critical skeptic will admit that any prearrangement or knowledge of the cards must be hopelessly lost in bewildering confusion.

[Figure al: Fig. 12. — Forming the break in blind cut No. III, seen from the performer's side: the right-hand packet has come down on top, and the thumbs hold a narrow space between the two packets at one end.]

Seize the deck with both hands, at sides, near the ends, between the thumbs and second fingers; raise it a little from the table and draw off the top stock with the thumb and second finger of the left hand, dropping the left-hand packet on the table, and bring the right-hand packet down on top of it, but retain firm hold with the right hand, and form the break with the right thumb while squaring up the deck. (See Fig. 12.) The left thumb helps to form the break, by holding the space between the two packets while the right thumb is getting the new hold on the whole deck. Then raise the whole deck again with the right hand, and with the left, draw off the upper portion in small packets between the thumb and second finger until the break is reached, dropping the small packets on the table, one on the other (see Fig. 13); and then throw the balance on top with the right hand. This leaves the top stock intact.

Properly performed, it is impossible to detect the ruse. The break is formed on the inside, and at one end only, and is effectually concealed at the end by the right-hand fingers. To see the break the observer would have to be stationed directly behind the operator. The performer himself cannot see the break, unless his hands are well advanced on the table. When drawing off the small packets, the break is found by the left thumb solely by the sense of touch. The action should not be hurried, and this method of cutting is quite commonly used by many players for the very opposite purpose.

[Figure am: Fig. 13. — The run cut to the break: the right hand holds the deck up while the left thumb and second finger draw off the upper portion in small packets, which lie dropped one on another beneath.]

IV. To Retain the Bottom Stock

Seize deck at sides, near the ends between the thumb and second finger of each hand, raise a little from the table and draw out the bottom stock with the thumb and finger of the right hand and let the left-hand packet fall on the table. Bring the right-hand packet down on top, retaining the hold until the break is formed by the left thumb, which is held at the edge of the under packet in readiness. Square up the deck and raise it again from the table with both hands; draw off top packet to the break with the left hand and drop it on the table. Then continue the left-hand action, drawing off small packets, dropping them one on the other, and throw the last packet on top with the right hand. This leaves the bottom stock intact. The action is much the same as the preceding blind, the difference being in the position of the break.

It is very important to adopt the proper positions for the fingers in these cuts. The deck should be as much exposed as possible, and the open manner of the whole process makes the blind so much more effective. The cards are handled solely by the second fingers and thumbs. The third fingers are curled up against the ends of the deck and assist in squaring up, and keeping the cards even. The first fingers are curled up on top so as to be out of the way and not obstruct the view.

To form the break, keep the left hand in the position it occupies as it drops the packet on the table, the finger and thumb held open apparently to seize the deck again when the right-hand packet is placed on top. This enables the left thumb to aid in forming the break the instant the two packets are brought together. The right hand packet is placed on top with a sidling movement instead of straight down, which greatly facilitates the forming of the break, and also prevents the sound from indicating that a space is held. There is nothing difficult about the performance of these blinds. With a perfect understanding, they can be fairly well executed on the first attempt.

This method of blind cutting is particularly adapted for working in with the blind riffle. It appears to assist in mixing the cards, and inspires the most positive conviction of good faith in the performance. The following combination of the riffle and cut will illustrate the point:
