Shifts

*Single Handed Shift.*—This is known to conjurers as the "Charlies Pass," and we presume was invented by the famous magician of that name.

Hold the deck in the left hand face down, between the thumb tip at one side and first joints of second and third fingers at opposite side, first joint of little finger at end, and first finger extended at bottom. To make the shift release the lower portion of the deck with the thumb, letting it fall into the palm (see Fig. 65), then push up the finger side of the fallen portion, with the first finger tip, until it reaches the thumb which is still supporting the upper portion. Now extend the second and third fingers slightly so that the thumb side of the upper portion will pass the upturned side of the lower portion (see Fig. 66), then straighten out the first finger allowing the upper portion to drop down into the palm and the lower portion on top of it.

[Figure cm: Fig. 65. — The left hand holds the deck face down with the thumb along one side; the lower portion has been released and lies tilted in the palm while the thumb still supports the upper portion.]

[Figure cn: Fig. 66. — The first finger has pushed the fallen portion up against the left thumb, and the upper portion is tilting past its upturned side, ready to drop into the palm beneath it.]

The little finger held at the middle of the end is of great assistance in this shift, giving better control of both portions, and enabling the performer to hold the deck much nearer a vertical position. The shift is invariably made with a slight swing, or up and down motion of the hand. It can be executed very rapidly, and is the favorite one handed shift with most experts. It is usually employed to receive and bring a selected card to the top. As the performer extends the deck to have the selected card returned, he raises the upper portion with the tip of the thumb, and the selected card is naturally placed in the opening. In this position the shift is half made, the condition being the same as when the first movement of dropping the lower portion into the palm takes place. The performer now with an up or down motion, or swing towards the person, tilts up the lower portion with the first finger and the shift is made, bringing the selected card to the top to be disposed of as desired.

*The Longitudinal Shift.*—This shift, for which we have to thank no one, is given a very long name, but the reader who is interested sufficiently to practice the process, will find it a very short shift and comparatively an easy one.

Hold the deck in the left hand, face down, first joint of thumb at middle of one side, first joint of second finger, and second joint of third finger, at opposite side, and the lower corner of the deck fitting in between the third and little fingers, at the base of little finger, the first finger curled up against the bottom. Now bring the right hand over; second, third and little fingers at outer end, first finger curled up on top, thumb at inner end. Separate the deck with the right thumb, at the inner end only, about half an inch, and press the third joint of the little finger in between the corners of the two packets to be shuffled. (See Fig. 67.) Now the deck is ready for the shift, but the right hand may be withdrawn without disclosing the break at the inner corner, or the fact that the little finger runs between the packets. The left thumb and finger hold the packets firmly together and the deck could not have a more innocent appearance.

To make the shift, bring the right thumb against the side of the first finger, straighten out the first finger, press the end of the lower packet in against the left little finger and down against the curled up first finger, with the four right hand fingers; and with the left little finger and thumb draw off the upper packet towards the person (See Fig. 68), and as the lower packet springs into the right palm bring the upper packet back underneath.

[Figure co: Fig. 67. — The Longitudinal Shift prepared: the right hand covers the deck from above at the ends, while the left little finger is pressed in between the corners of the two packets at the inner end.]

The right thumb takes no part in the shift, and a favorable feature of the operation is that it may be performed without the right hand appearing to be used at all. The right fingers may be held almost straight, and the palm well away from the deck, the hand being slightly closed as the lower packet springs up. It can be made with practically no noise, and the action is well covered.

If desired this shift can be made with almost the whole deck exposed, by employing right second and third fingers only at end, and keeping first finger curled up on top. In this case the right thumb tip catches the end of the lower packet as it springs up.

[Figure cp: Fig. 68. — The shift in action: the right fingers press the lower packet in and down against the left fingers, while the left little finger and thumb draw the upper packet away toward the performer.]

*The Open Shift*.—This is another outcome of our constant but ever failing efforts to devise a perfect shift, and incidentally one that is not readily anticipated by the manner of holding the deck. The particular feature of this method is the open position in which the cards are held, the entire deck being exposed to view.

Hold the deck in the left hand, the first joint of the thumb at one side, first joints of second, third, and little fingers at opposite side, the little finger holding a break between the two packets near the corner, and the little and third fingers being separated about one inch. The first finger is curled up against the bottom. Bring the right hand over, and seize the ends of deck close to right side corners, with the second finger and thumb tips, the thumb seizing only the lower packet below the break, the first finger curled up on top. (See Fig. 69.) The left third and little fingers take no part in the action and are held idly out of the way.

To make the shift, curl the right first finger back over the side of the deck, between the left little and third fingers, until the root of the finger nail rests against the edge of the top card. Now press the upper packet against the left thumb and downwards by straightening out the right first finger, at the same time drawing the lower packet to the right and upwards with the right thumb and second finger (See Fig. 70), and as the sides clear each other tilt the left side of the lower or right hand packet up on top. The upper packet should not fall into the left hand. It must be caught by the curled up first finger and first joints of the other left fingers, as it clears the side of the under packet. The left thumb never leaves its position against the side of the upper packet, and the tip should be held sufficiently above it to receive the lower packet as it is brought on top. The left little finger is not inserted between the two packets, but merely holds the break.

[Figure cq: Fig. 69. — The Open Shift prepared: the left hand holds the deck by its sides, the little finger holding the break, while the right second finger and thumb seize the ends near the right corners.]

The shift can be made like a flash, and with the cards in perfect order. When executed perfectly, the only sound is the slipping of one packet over the other. There is no snap or crack, and it is in every way worthy of the practice necessary to acquire it. With the face of the deck turned upward it produces a "transformation" that ranks with the best of them.

[Figure cr: Fig. 70. — The right thumb and second finger draw the lower packet to the right and upwards while the right first finger presses the upper packet down against the left thumb.]

The same shift may be made with the deck held flat in the palm, the left thumb lying idly across the top, and the first finger at the side with the others, but we much prefer the former position though it is a great deal more difficult. The latter position is an excellent one when it is necessary to make a shift that is apparently a simple cut, in which event the right hand does not tilt its packet on top. The hands immediately separate and the under packet is placed on top when desired.

*The S. W. E. Shift*.—We have not dubbed the following process with our initials because we wish to appear "big on the bills," but merely to give it a name. Still, we must confess to some satisfaction in having originated what we believe to be the most rapid, and, for certain purposes, the most perfect shift ever devised. The method is practically the same as the "Longitudinal," but as the deck is held crosswise it is much more rapid. The position is open and natural, and the shift possesses many advantages for conjuring purposes.

Hold the deck in the left hand, face down, first joint of the thumb against middle of one end, second, third and little fingers against the opposite or lower end, little finger holding a break between the two packets at end, by the corner of the lower packet being between the little and third fingers, the little finger lying partially across the corner of the under packet. (See Fig. 71.) This position, like that of the "Longitudinal," allows the tips of the second, third and little fingers to appear over the top of the deck, and the fact that there is a break is not apparent to a spectator. The first finger is curled up against the bottom. The break is held only at the lower end, and at the inside, the other fingers and thumb holding the packet firmly together.

[Figure cs: Fig. 71. — The S. W. E. Shift position: the deck lies crosswise in the left hand, thumb at one end, and the little finger holds a break at the lower end, unseen from the front.]

Now bring the right hand over the lower or right-hand end of the deck, and seize the sides close as possible to the lower corners, between the second and third finger tips and thumb, the first finger curled up on top out of the way. This leaves at least two-thirds of the deck in view. (See Fig. 72.) To make the shift raise the right thumb to the edge of the side, draw the top packet in and down with the left thumb and little finger, and press the lower packet out and down, between the right second and third finger tips and the left first finger which is curled up underneath; the left second finger at the end helps to control the lower packet as it is pressed out. This action will tilt the opposite sides of both packets upwards, and as they clear each other the right thumb tip catches the under packet, and the left third finger catches the upper packet and it is brought back underneath. (See Fig. 73.)

[Figure ct: Fig. 72. — The right hand seizes the sides of the deck close to the lower corners with the second and third fingertips and thumb, leaving most of the deck in view.]

When the shift is mastered the entire action is accomplished by a pressure in opposite directions on the lower packet, and the packets reverse like a flash, but of course it must be practiced slowly until the knack is obtained. The positions of the hands may be taken with easy deliberation, as there is no indication that a shift is meditated. It may be made with the hands stationary without exposing the action. With the deck face up it makes an instantaneous "transformation," and the position of the deck permits the operator to get a glimpse of the index without being observed.

[Figure cu: Fig. 73. — The packets reversing: the right hand holds the lower end of the deck, thumb along the side, while fingertips show at either end as the two packets tilt apart.]

The shift may be made with the right hand almost entirely covering the deck, but this alters the whole character and aim of the process, the main endeavor is to make it as open and free from concealment as possible.

*The Diagonal Palm-Shift*.—The plan of having one or several selected cards inserted in the deck, then forcing them through slightly diagonally, and twisting them out to the top or bottom, is well known to most conjurers, and by some is treated as a blind shuffle. That the process is not satisfactory is seen by the fact that it is seldom or never employed, and but rarely even mentioned in any list of card slights. Our efforts to improve, or rather to combine the first part of this manoeuvre with a process for palming the inserted cards, instead of placing them on top or bottom of the deck, is shown in the following description. The action is silent, rapid, undetectable if well performed, and takes place under the ordinary movement of passing the deck to be shuffled.

Hold the deck in the left hand, by sides, between the first joints of thumb, and second, third and little fingers, first finger curled up at bottom. Allow spectator to insert selected card in outer end of deck, pushing it in until about half an inch only protrudes. Now bring the right hand over deck with the little finger at side corner of protruding card, second and third fingers at middle of end, and first finger close to end corner, and the thumb close to the inner end corner of the deck. Apparently push the card straight home, but really push the protruding end with the right little finger, about quarter of an inch to the left, so that the right first finger can push the tilted corner down the side of the deck, the card moving slightly diagonally, and the opposite corner just grazing the right thumb, and protruding about three-quarters of an inch. The left third and little fingers are released sufficiently to allow the card to protrude at the side. The left thumb now takes the place of the right first finger, pushing the corner flush with side of deck. (See Fig. 74.)

[Figure cv: Fig. 74. — The right hand lies over the deck while the left hand holds it by the sides; the selected card has been slid diagonally and its corner protrudes at the side of the deck.]

The diagonal position of the selected card is now perfectly concealed, and the deck is held in a natural and regular manner. A little practice at the diagonal slide enables one to get the card in that position instantaneously. The next action is to palm the selected card in the left hand, as the right passes the deck to be shuffled.

[Figure cw: Fig. 75. — The palm-shift: the left hand turns over and inwards with the selected card palmed in it, while the right hand slides the deck out and away to the right.]

With the left little finger against the side of card, swing or turn it inwards, using the right thumb as a pivot, straighten out left first, second, and third fingers, catching the outer end as it turns, and at the same time sliding pack outwards and to the right, the left hand turning over and inwards with the palmed card (see Fig. 75) and the little finger slipped to the end.

There should be no force or twist employed, the card running out as freely as though drawn. The card and the deck must continue on the same plane until quite free of each other. The left little finger may press the side of the card very slightly upwards, so that as it is palmed it will bend into instead of away from the left hand. As the card is being turned by the little finger the left thumb is raised, letting the right thumb with the corner of deck pass under it, so that the card can lie parallel with, but still above, the left palm. As the deck is slid out, the right thumb slides along the side of the card, and it is not actually palmed until the hands are almost free of each other.

The whole action may be made quick as a flash and without a sound, yet when performed quite slowly is still a perfect blind. The left hand may seize the deck by the corner, between the first finger and thumb, as the card is palmed, leaving the right hand free (see Fig. 76); but the beauty of the shift is in the natural and simple manner of palming the selected card, by the ordinary movement the right hand makes in passing the deck to be shuffled.

[Figure cx: Fig. 76. — Alternatively the left hand, with the card palmed, takes the deck by its corner between the first finger and thumb, and the right hand is left free.]

We wish to particularly impress our readers with the merits of this palm-shift. It is not difficult if a proper understanding of the action is obtained, and it is of very great assistance in card tricks. It dispenses to a great extent with the regular shifts and blind shuffles, and it can be accomplished under the very nose of a shrewd spectator without an inkling of what is taking place. The usual procedure of card-handlers is to insert the little finger over the selected card, shift the two packets and palm the card from the top in the right hand. This process takes more time, the shift must be concealed by a partial turn, swing or drop of the hands; and to palm, the deck must be covered at least for an instant. In the palm-shift described the card is placed in its diagonal position with apparently the customary movement of squaring up, and the rest is accomplished, as it were, by handing the deck to be shuffled.

Several cards may be palmed together, when inserted at different points, or from one point, or from top, or bottom. If the top card is to be shifted, it is slipped into the same diagonal position and held in place by the right little finger being curled up on top. The action is the same. When the single card palm-shift is acquired, the rest will come easily.
