Transformations. One Hand

*First Method*.—Hold the deck in the left hand, the thumb well extended across the face, first finger at end, second and little fingers at side and third finger curled in as far as possible underneath. Grip the top card with the thumb and draw it back, tilting up the deck with the third finger until the top card clears the side (see Fig. 89.), then press the top card down between the curled-up finger and deck by bringing the thumb again to its original position across top. (See Fig. 90.) The third and little fingerends steady the pack as it is tilted upward, but the first finger takes no part in the action. The top card must be gripped well into the root of the thumb and drawn back as far as possible as the deck is being tilted up.

[Figure dk: Fig. 89. — The First Method, one hand: the deck is held face up and the left thumb grips the top card, a diamond, drawing it back while the third finger tilts the deck up beneath it.]

[Figure dl: Fig. 90. — The thumb has returned across the top, pressing the diamond card down beneath the deck; a club now shows on the face.]

The action should be covered by a swing, and as it is extremely difficult to execute without some noise the company might be informed that if they cannot see the "transformation" they will be permitted to hear it. The rapidity of the action is proportionate to the skill of the performer, and it may be made with the hand in any position.

*Second Method.*—The following process is another of our innovations, and it will be found easy, extremely rapid and without the least noise, a rare combination in one-handed manoeuvers.

[Figure dm: Fig. 91. — The Second Method: the left hand holds the deck on its side, and the thumb tip reaches over to push up the bottom card, the four of hearts, whose face shows toward the viewer.]

Hold the deck in the left hand, one side resting on second joints of second and third fingers, tip of thumb on top side, first and little fingers at opposite ends. Slip the thumb over the side so that its tip rests against the bottom card, and push it up and over on top, the card turning over in transit, so that if it were face down at bottom it will be face up on top. (See Figs. 91 and 92.) The ends of the second, third and little fingers hold the deck in position as the card is pushed over, and the four finger ends unite in getting it squarely in place when on top.

[Figure dn: Fig. 92. — The bottom card turning over in transit as the left thumb pushes it up and over onto the top of the deck, the finger ends holding the deck steady.]

The action should take place under cover of a short-arm movement. Raise the hand up and in toward the person, and shift the position of the thumb just as the hand is about to make the down and outward movement, under which the action takes place. If one card is faced before it is exposed the deck will appear to be held face up, and the transferring of cards from the bottom may be continued to any desired extent. Though the process is very easy and can be performed with a motion too rapid to see, some little practice must be put in to acquire the knack of getting out the bottom card.

Both these One-Hand Transformations are much easier performed with about two-thirds of the deck.
