# leaf 0023

⟨cont⟩ performer’s gestures, when perhaps these words, those gestures and that mystery are not adapted to his particular personality and he therefore looks ludicrous and out of place.

We all loved Will Rogers. He was a unique character—a distinctive individual. In his homely Oklahoman way he could say things that most of us would not dare to say. His heart was right and folks trusted him.

But imagine anyone trying to imitate Will and getting away with it in public! The imitation would fall flat. Will was himself. He imitated no one. He was just Will Rogers and people loved his naturalness.

Just so, the world wants you to be yourself.

Alexander Herrmann, a Frenchman, wore a large mustache and goatee. They were well suited to him, enhanced his appearance and gave him individuality during the era in which he lived. Many thought Herrmann’s success lay in his mustache and goatee, so great was the craze to wear mustaches and goatees even though they made their wearers appear ridiculous. Even false ones were pasted on. Sometimes big black ones which did not match the hair or complexion.

The mustache is becoming to some people if properly trimmed and in keeping with the individual. Laurant, Blackstone and Cardini wear small mustaches with effect.

Instead of imitating others—it is better to have them imitate you. A parrot may be taught to say the Declaration of Independence but it is still a parrot. Let us be artists and not parrots.

A parrot can put on an opera hat, monocle, dress suit and a cape, but he isn’t Cardini. The parrot forgets that Cardini is an Englishman and his particular dress is suitable to the Englishman.

Thousands may copy the painting Mona Lisa, but they are only copies. It is the original that has the value. Originality brings freshness of thought. It is like the coming of springtime.

I discovered years ago that people wanted me to be as natural as Will Rogers. They liked my natural way of working, my natural style of humor and my sincerity. People looked upon me as a friend to whom they could come with their problems. They looked upon me not only as a magician but as a mystic who understood life’s problems.

Imitation has its good points in the beginning until we master a trick or a sleight, but soon we must do it in our own way, the way we can do it best and most naturally.

Your success comes from your real self—your true inner self.
