# leaf 0025

Instead of *selling* things to people—we help them to *buy*. Few people want to be sold, or want to talk to salesmen but they do like to talk to service men. Everybody likes to buy things.

And most people want something for nothing. They want much for little. Each wants to be a king or queen with others waiting upon them. Bargains, premiums, free offers, all cater to the human desire to get something for nothing.

The law of inertia is something to cope with. People dislike climbing stairs. They like to trade on the shady side of the street. They like to follow the crowd. They want a whole lot for little effort.

There is also a class of people that believe that the more expensive a thing is, the better it is. That an article brought from foreign climes is better than the article at home. “Distance lends enchantment.” They would pay $500 for a show quicker than $10. But they expect $500 worth of entertainment.

What hurts the magic profession is the incompetent performer who steps out of a $10 class into a $500 class and still gives a $10 show. How many times have I heard program chairmen say “We had a magician, paid him $150 or $200, and was he terrible! We never want another magician.” That performer stepped out of his class. He took money for something he could not deliver. He took money under false pretenses. He did not give value. He hurt his profession and made it difficult for a competent magician to follow. One of the hardest problems that the competent professional magician has is the competition of the fellow who steps out of his class into a field or plane that he does not understand. One poor performer, in order to get a temporary hundred dollars, can ruin thousands of dollars worth of business for others.

There is one rule on the road to success that is well to remember, *always give more than what you are paid for.* Woe unto the man who gives less.

I am often reminded of a story that my friend Guy Marchand tells. Marchand has taught thousands of people how to turn their abilities into cash. A candy store was failing and Marchand was called in to analyze the situation. It didn’t take him long to detect the reason.

A man came into the store to buy a pound of chocolate candy. The saleslady took a scoop and put about two pounds of candy onto the scale. Then she began unloading and taking away. Finally she reached up and took out a couple of pieces in order to make the scales balance. She gave the man a full pound of candy but she lost a customer. When the man went out he turned to Marchand and said “This is a h—l of a place. They take everything away from you here.”

But Marchand made the candy store a successful business. How? When a customer comes in to buy a pound of candy the girl puts only one- ⟨cont⟩
