# leaf 0037

⟨cont⟩ salesman who understands showmanship is the one most likely to get the orders. He knows just what to say and how to say it, what to do and how to do it. Note how advertising men display articles that they sell. A commonplace article is presented in such an attractive form that people want to buy it.

Let us take a common article like a can of baked beans. To the ordinary mind baked beans are just baked beans, but not so to the advertising man. He will win wars on beans, save starving nations, build strong bodies. I remember years ago when Van Camp started to advertise their canned baked beans nationally. “Cooked for 24 hours to make them digestible.” What housewife could cook her beans 24 hours? “We use luscious Texas tomatoes in our beans.” Sounds good, those Texas tomatoes.

They sold beans and gave their competitors a run for their money. Now the truth is that most baked bean canners cook their beans about 24 hours and use Texas tomatoes. But it took Van Camp’s advertising man to tell the people about it and so definitely that people got the idea that Van Camp were exclusive in doing so.

In 1924 I was lecturing in Tampa, Florida. One evening as I was sitting in the lobby of De Soto Hotel I noticed a very dejected looking man sitting near me. I struck up a conversation and found he was a condensed milk salesman. He had come down to Florida to sell a certain brand of condensed milk, but he couldn’t sell it in competition with other brands, so he was broke, and was trying some way to move his family up North again.

“What’s the matter! You can’t sell your milk? It is a standard brand and well known,” I said.

“Yes,” he replied, “but our milk does not pour evenly. The fatty globules separate from the main body of the milk, and at one time the milk is too thick in the pouring and another time too thin. Other companies process their milk so as to keep the fatty globules in suspension and the milk is uniform in every part of the can.”

“Why doesn’t your company do the same thing?”

“Because our president isn’t modern enough. He thinks our method is better for nourishment.”

Now here was a salesman who had plenty of money and sales in his lap but he didn’t know it. He believed the negative thoughts of buyers. He forgot the psychology of women who buy milk. So I took him up to my room, got out a sheet of cardboard and my show card colors and started in on a poster to sell his milk.

“Look here,” I said, “what, is almost every woman interested in when she buys milk? Is it the potassium, calcium or chemistry of the milk, or is ⟨cont⟩
