# leaf 0038

⟨cont⟩ she primarily interested in one thing? How much cream does it have? She judges the value of the milk by the amount and thickness of the cream. Would she be happy to see her morning bottle of milk all of one consistency, without any cream demarkation? She would not. She radiates when she sees the rich cream on top of the milk.”

So, on the poster I drew a bottle of milk with the cream on top of the milk and beside it a cross section of a can of this man’s milk product. Across the top of the poster I put these headlines:

(BLANK’S) MILK IS GOOD MILK. EVEN THE CREAM RISES IN THE CANS.

Then in smaller letters I told the housewife if she wanted to use the cream to just pour it out from the top of the can and if she wanted whole milk to merely shake the can as she would a bottle of milk. Needless to say, the salesman was happy—he sold plenty of milk. I happened to be a showman—he was not. But he responded to showmanship.

I could write a book on the salesmen to whom I taught showmanship and who became successful while I was on this lecture tour through Florida.

Showmanship is greatly dependent on the perspective in which we see things. Do you remember the story of the three men who were cutting stone? When each was asked what he was doing, one said, “I am cutting stone.”

Another said, “I am earning five dollars per day.”

But the third man answered, “I am building a cathedral.”

The third man was a showman at heart. So remember we are not just doing tricks, earning so much money, but we are building a “cathedral” of magic.

What magical showmanship can do was brought home to me forcibly when a party of twelve magicians including myself went to see the play “The Charlatan” in which Frederic Tiden was playing the leading role of Cagliostro, the magician. We sat delighted at the magic and illusions that he presented from time to time in the play. When he produced a rosebush from a seed which he planted into a bit of sand in a clear glass flower-pot, we were completely mystified. Here truly was a great magician whom we had hitherto missed. After the show we went backstage, met Tiden and invited him out to dinner. The Cagliostro on the stage and the Tiden off the stage were like two different individuals. In the play he was rather large, dignified, elderly, well poised and masterful. Off stage he was smaller, thinner—just Tiden.

As is customary at dinners some of the boys perform a few mysteries. This was no exception. When Tiden was called on to perform he said, ⟨cont⟩
