# leaf 0040

Katterfeldo, the Conjurer with the Black Cat, was a picturesque figure in the literature of magic. He claimed to be aided, like the wizards and witches of old, by a familiar spirit in the form of a black cat which appeared at his performances. From time to time during a program he pretended to consult with the cat.

Torrini, whose real name was Count Edmond de Grisy, was a clever magician of early days. He tutored Robert-Houdin in magic. He was quick to take advantage of situations and was a very keen student of human nature and showmanship. His background of medicine, for he was a physician, helped him in his programs. He saved Houdin’s life once when young Robert had eaten tainted food.

Torrini was requested to perform before Pope Pius VII of Rome. Here was a chance to use real showmanship but what could he do to create a sensation before the Pope?

On the day before his show he was in the shop of a prominent watchmaker, when a man came in to ask if Cardinal ........’s watch was repaired. The watchmaker replied that it would not be ready until evening and that he personally would take it to the Cardinal.

Torrini asked the watchmaker about the watch. He was told that it was valued at more than ten thousand francs and was made by the noted Breguet. However, only two days before, a young man had offered for a thousand francs a similar watch, made by the same artist.

Instantly a scheme ran through Torrini’s mind to perform an amazing piece of magic. He, had the watchmaker buy the duplicate watch and engrave the Cardinal’s coat of arms on it so it would be a replica of the Cardinal’s watch. Held together it was difficult to tell which was which.

The next day at the pontifical palace, a most distinguished audience greated Torrini. But let Henry Ridgely Evans, whose “History of Conjuring and Magic” should be read by every magician, describe the occasion:

“The Pope sat on a raised dais; near him were the Cardinals in their brilliant robes of crimson.

“After performing a series of magical feats, de Grisy (Torrini) came to his *pièce de resistance.* The difficulty was to obtain the loan of the Cardinal’s watch, and that without asking him directly for it. To succeed, the conjurer had recourse to a ruse. At his request several watches were offered him, but he returned them as not suited to the experiment.

“‘I desire a timepiece that will be easily identified. I should prefer one of rather large size,’ remarked de Grisy.

“‘Cardinal ........,’ said His Holiness, ‘oblige me by lending your watch to M. de Grisy.’ ⟨cont⟩
