# leaf 0041

⟨cont⟩ “With great reluctance the Cardinal handed his precious chronometer to the conjurer. It seems he set great value on its exaggerated size, alleging with a considerable show of reason, that works acted better in a larger case.

“In order to prove the solidity and excellence of the chronometer, de Grisy let it fall to the ground. A cry of alarm arose on all sides. The Cardinal, pale with rage, bounded from his chair exclaiming; ‘This is a sorry jest, sir!’

“‘Do not be alarmed,’ said de Grisy, ‘the watch will escape scatheless from many trials.’ He handed the broken timepiece to the Cardinal.

“‘Do you recognize this as your watch?’”

The prelate gazed anxiously at the coat-of-arms engraved inside of the case, and replied, with a profound sigh:

“‘Yes, that is my watch.’

“‘You are certain of it?’

“‘Quite certain! But I seriously doubt your power to restore it.’

“‘We shall see!’ exclaimed the conjurer.

“De Grisy’s assistant now brought in a brass mortar and pestle. The watch was cast into the mortar and pounded to atoms. Some magic powder was poured into the receptacle and a torch applied, whereupon there was a detonation, followed by a cloud of smoke. The spectators were invited to examine the ingot of gold—all that remained of the precious chronometer. Pius VII peered curiously into the mortar. De Grisy, seizing the opportunity, adroitly popped the duplicate timepiece into a pocket of the Pope’s robe. At the proper moment he pretended to pass the ingot into the Pontiff’s pocket, which resulted in the discovery of the Cardinal’s watch, made whole again. The clever feat of escamotage created a great sensation in Rome, and drew crowds to de Grisy’s performance.”

At the end of the nineteenth century when magicians were repeating King Solomon’s statement, “There is nothing new under the sun,” and a weary public yawned, there suddenly sprung up a clever Frenchman by the name of Buatier de Kolta. De Kolta said, “There is something new under the sun,” and proceeded to prove it to enthusiastic audiences.

De Kolta brought forth unique principles in magic which are popular with magicians today. It was de Kolta who introduced the Vanishing Bird Cage, the Multiplying Billiard Balls, the Soup Plate and Handkerchiefs, Flowers From a Paper Cone, the Handkerchief Pull, Decanters and Flying Handkerchiefs, Production of a Large Flag on a Staff, the Vanishing Lady and many others. Together with Maskelyne he introduced Black Art Illusions.

Great showmen take advantage of situations. In 1798, Robertson, a ⟨cont⟩
