# leaf 0042

⟨cont⟩ Belgian optician and illusionist, created a sensation in Paris by presenting odd phantasmagoria in an abandoned church, near the Place Vendome. Tombs and mortuary tablets surrounded this ancient place of worship. It was a gruesome spot for a spectral exhibition.

The inside of the chapel was shrouded in black. A brazier filled with burning coals was placed on an altar in the center of the place. A sepulchral lamp emitted a ghastly flame above.

After a lecture on witches, sorcery, spirits and ghosts the lamp was extinguished and various essences were thrown upon the fires causing clouds of smoke to arise.

In the smoke Robertson appeared to evoke the spirit forms of Rousseau, Robespierre, Danton, Marat, Mirabeau, Voltaire. The phantom of Robespierre seemed to come out of a tomb. Suddenly there was a flash of lightning and there appeared a skeleton with a scythe. It grew to large proportions and then disappeared.

Most people possessing a magic lantern would simply throw the pictures on a cloth screen, but not Robertson. He was too much of a showman. He produced his pictures on a screen of white smoke and his pictures became phantoms. That’s the power of an imaginative mind.

It was showmanship that helped to make Alexander Herrmann one of the greatest magicians in the history of magic. He was quick to take advantage of situations. Both on and off the stage he was a magician to his very fingertips. He would buy apples and find five dollar bills in the apples. He found twenty dollar gold pieces in eggs in Chinatown which caused a Chinese merchant to break up all his eggs looking for money. Strange! but he found a twenty dollar gold piece in the last egg, to pay him for his eggs.

Herrmann had the appearance of Mephisto. He was skilled in magic with people all around him, a remarkable exponent of close-up magic and unexpected situations. In society, while playing cards, he might suddenly hand a lady opponent her slipper over the table, for he had secretly secured it under the table without her knowledge.

Adelaide Herrmann, his wife, was a remarkable assistant, wife and helpmate. She not only added great beauty to his theatrical appearances, but she could play up to publicity stunts. Madame Herrmann and I used to talk and laugh by the hour about some of the funny experiences she had. She enjoyed telling about the time she attended a society affair with a tame mouse on a gold chain, which she carried on her shoulder and bosom.

Harry Kellar was another great showman. He had an amazing knowledge of human nature and was equal to emergencies. He traveled the world over among all kinds of people. In February, 1875, Kellar was received by the commanding officer at Punta Arenas, situated almost at the ⟨cont⟩
