# leaf 0044

Harry Houdini was a supershowman. His name still lives in the public mind even though he passed on in 1926. Houdini was the man who people thought “could escape from anything.” “No jail, no chain, no straight jacket, no safe could hold Houdini.” Houdini attempted the unusual, the sensational. He would jump off bridges into the waters below while heavily manacled and rise to the surface, free of handcuffs and chains.

He was tied to the large wheel of a railroad engine and escaped while the engine was in motion. He escaped from jail cells and bank safes. He shook hands with Death many times only to make his escape.

He gained much publicity through his exposure of fake spirit mediums. He disliked fakers who preyed on the public and robbed innocent people of their money under false pretenses.

Houdini in his desire to lift magic upon a high plane and to set an example to boys and girls, would not smoke or drink intoxicating liquors. Houdini had an ideal. He never forgot the youth of the world. Houdini sitting in his dressing room on his cot said to me, “Tarbell, I will never do anything that I would not want the youth of America to do. I never want it said that any boy or girl went wrong because they could say, ‘Well, Houdini did that.’ Every magician owes it to the youth of the world to live a life that youth can follow with success. Youth loves adventure, the unusual, the exciting, and that is what I try to give to the world, but in a constructive manner.”

Kings, Queens, Potentates the world over welcomed Houdini. Ministers preached about him from their pulpits, and the public looked to him to produce the unusual. Houdini vanished an elephant at the New York Hippodrome. Audiences expected Houdini to vanish an elephant as easily as some magicians would a rabbit. Regardless of how he got rid of the elephant, people do not remember the stage set-up but they do remember that he vanished an elephant.

Years ago William E. Robinson was stage manager and mechanic for Alexander Herrmann. When Herrmann died, he became stage manager to Leon Herrmann for several seasons. Not satisfied with this he started out as a magician himself but with little success. Then Ching Ling Foo came to America from China with an interesting array of Chinese, and drew great crowds to the theatre. Robinson, fascinated by Foo’s performance decided to put on a similar show disguised as a Chinaman. He hired a Chinese acrobat, and, accompanied by his wife, he opened at the Empire Theatre in London. He not only presented some of Foo’s best tricks but added many of his own original ones. His success was instant. The theatre public of London went wild over Chung Ling Soo, for this is the name Robinson took. Money flowed in. Few people knew that Chung Ling Soo was an American and not a Chinese. So clever was his make-up and his impersonation of a Chinaman that he even granted newspaper interviews ⟨cont⟩
