# leaf 0132

“*Hold it tightly while I get some sealing wax.*”

Reach into left coat pocket with left hand and drop palmed ball therein as you bring out stick of sealing wax.

“*Take the sealing wax and touch the back of your hand three times, then open your hand. What has happened? Nothing? Strange! Suppose you open the parcel and show it to the audience. After all, you know we must let them see part of the trick.*”

Take the wax from assistant and replace in left coat pocket. Assistant unfolds paper and finds a large envelope instead of the half sheet of newspaper which he expects.

“*The mystery deepens. What have we? An envelope, securely sealed with wax. I think the wax is still warm. Please open the envelope.*”

Assistant opens the envelope and takes out the second envelope.

“*Another sealed envelope! Take it out. By the way, this is the very latest fashion in envelopes—made of newspaper. Open the second envelope.*”

Assistant opens it and takes out the third envelope.

“*Well, a third one. Open it, please, and you will perhaps find the half dollar.*”

Assistant opens third envelope and takes out half dollar.

“*To show you that this is the same paper we started with, just examine the half dollar. You see it is the same.*”

Half dollar has marks on it and appears to be the same as the borrowed coin.

At this stage the audience thinks the trick is done and will, no doubt, applaud you. Anyway, while assistant is identifying coin and audience is in that frame of mind, you can secretly prepare for the next stage of the trick.

Reach into right trousers pocket and squeeze the envelopes into a ball. Remove the ball Finger Palmed in your right hand. Grasp your right coat lapel with right hand to conceal ball.

“*Will you please take the coin down to the gentleman from whom we borrowed it? Or just a minute—before you return the coin. Will you remember what I did so that you can do it when you get home? First I borrowed a half dollar, had it marked so that the owner would know it when he saw it again and then had it wrapped in a piece of newspaper.*”

Reach over with left hand and pick up newspaper. Turn your right side towards audience. Transfer paper to right hand so that it is held as ⟨cont⟩
