# leaf 0133

⟨cont⟩ in the beginning of the experiment with the ball behind it. Now turn to right so that your left side is a little towards the audience.

In performing this repeated version quicken your movements. You are repeating and pretending to explain. As you know, it is not wise to repeat an experiment in magic. In this case, however, it is all right, for you leave the audience just as puzzled as they were after the first showing. Do it with plenty of snap, nevertheless.

“*Place the coin on the paper again. That’s it. Now you remember I rolled the paper into a ball and gave it to you.*”

Roll up paper into ball, exchange it for ball of envelopes in right hand, and give envelope ball to assistant. Palm the other ball in left hand as illustrated in Fig. 21.

“*And then I told you to touch it with a piece of sealing wax.*”

Reach into left coat pocket for wax and leave ball of paper there. Give wax to assistant, requesting him to touch the ball three times. Take back the wax.

“*Now, all you have to do is to open the parcel and there are our envelopes. Open the first. Now the second. Now take the third one down to the owner of the coin and let him open the envelope and remove his half dollar.*”

Assistant takes envelope down to the lender of the coin.

“*Just as soon as the owner has removed his coin, will you please bring the envelope right back to me again?*”

This prevents assistant from examining the coin too closely. While assistant is returning to stage, say to owner of coin,

“*That is your coin, is it not? It is. Thank you.*”

You must impress on your audience the fact that the coin is the one which you borrowed, otherwise much of the effect is lost. While all this is going on, it is easy for you to reach into your left coat pocket and palm out the ball of paper from it. Grasp the lapel of your coat again.

Now gather up the envelopes from the table and place the ball of paper behind them. Say to assistant,

“*Perhaps you would like to have all these envelopes as a souvenir of this little occasion. With the envelopes in your possession, you are sure to know how to do the experiment.*”

Take envelope from assistant and place with the rest. Show them freely, then roll them all up into a ball. Press the palmed ball against it and show both as one.

“*Yours with pleasure.*”
