# leaf 0155

Turn to right and face audience. Hat is now held with left hand concealing cigarettes under brim. Show hat empty, then turn it over to show outside with nothing concealed, bringing bundle of cigarettes inside of hat. Turn hat with opening up again and let bundle fall into crown. Reach in with right hand and quickly break thread or remove rubber band from bundle.

Adjust Cigarette Clip on back of second finger of right hand as you do this. Cigarette lies along back of finger, Fig. 88.

[FIG 88]

[FIG 89]

[FIG 90]

Sometimes performer carries prepared cigarette on Clip in his right coat or trouser pocket. While talking to audience, he reaches into his pocket and adjusts Clip on finger.

Remove hand from pocket or hat and be sure to keep back of it away from audience to conceal Clip with cigarette. Turn left side to audience (hat is in left hand), and show empty palm of right hand, Fig. 89.

Now reach into air with right hand. Bend second finger quickly. This brings cigarette into position shown in Fig. 90.

Other fingers are held straight, and the effect is that you reached into the air with fingers wide apart and suddenly produced a cigarette.

Pretend to throw this cigarette into hat. Your hand goes into hat, second finger straightens out to conceal cigarette. You bring hand out apparently empty. Remember the cigarette does not come off the Clip and does not fall into the hat. Your middle finger simply bends to give the effect.

Reach into air again and produce another cigarette in same manner as first one. Pretend to toss this one into hat also. Continue this until eleven cigarettes have been produced and apparently thrown into hat. Audience is not aware that you are producing the same cigarette every time. They believe you have produced eleven different ones. Productions may be varied by taking cigarettes from behind the knee, etc.

Keep palm of right hand to audience to conceal cigarette. Show cigarettes in hat to audience. Pour them out on table. Then reach into air once more with right hand and produce a twelfth cigarette. Remove it ⟨cont⟩
