# leaf 0216

*receiver and do the trick with the other. Like most card tricks this one requires that you select a card, and I think the fairest way probably would be for you to think of some number, let us say between 5 and 25, and then count down and look at the card in that position. Would that be a fair choice? Very well, let’s do that. Wait a minute—perhaps if I succeeded in telling you the name of the card you might think that because of some sort of psychological probability most persons think of the same number between 5 and 25. In order to eliminate even that possibility, suppose we leave the choice of the card entirely to chance.*

“*I suppose you would give a Jack a value of 11, a Queen 12, and a King 13. Then, instead of thinking of a number, suppose you glance at the “bottom” card of the deck which you have just shuffled, and we will allow its denomination to represent the number. Don’t remember the card because we are merely trying to arrive at a number that it would be impossible for me to determine by any psychological means.*

“*Now place the deck face down and count off, one by one, into a small heap beside the deck, a number of cards equal to the number you are thinking of.*”

Friend counts down cards onto table.

“*Have you done that? Then I want you to turn over the last card dealt onto the small heap and remember it.*

“*Leave it face down on this small packet and place the rest of the deck on top of the cards just dealt. So you will not forget the name of the card, suppose you jot it down on a piece of paper.*”

Give him time to make the memorandum.

“*Have you done that? From now on you must be very careful because I want you to turn over the cards one by one from the “top” of the deck, naming each one as you do so, and I shall try to tell you the name of the card you have chosen. You must be careful not to use any different tone when naming your card from that used in naming the others. You may call them as slowly or as rapidly as you please. So start now, turning over the first card and keep on calling until I stop you.*”

As soon as the person names the first card, you stop him by saying,

“*Wait a minute, I may have overlooked something.*”

At the same time you jot down the name of this “top” card on a piece of paper or pad, as it must serve as the *key* card. Let us say this card is the King of Diamonds.

It will be seen that the procedure followed up to this time has placed the chosen card among the thirteen “bottom” cards of the deck and immediately above the chosen card is a card with a denomination exactly equal to the position of the chosen card from the “bottom” of the deck.
