# leaf 0217

For instance, if a ten spot has been on the “bottom” of the deck at the beginning, the person for whom the trick is being performed would have counted ten cards from the “top” of the deck and then placed the rest of the deck on top of these which would have placed the ten spot on top of the chosen card. The ten spot at this point would be the eleventh card from the “bottom.” Consequently, you could find the chosen card by first locating the card that was originally on the “bottom.”

“*You first glanced at the ‘bottom’ card which represented only a number. You then counted that many cards in a heap beside the deck, and you remembered the last card dealt. You then placed the rest of the deck on top of that small heap. After that, did you cut the deck? Oh, I was afraid I had forgotten to tell you to do that. Replace any cards you just turned over and give the deck a fair cut so that your selected card will be lost somewhere in the center of the pack.*”

The cutting of the deck makes the trick very effective as it apparently destroys all means of location. Such a cut can be permitted only if the performer can obtain knowledge of the “top” card of the deck before the cut. This is accomplished by the ruse of pretending to have overlooked the matter of cutting the deck after hearing the “top” card called. Now, since you have jotted down the name of the “top” card, which becomes your key card, you can permit the deck to be cut because after the cut you know that the chosen card will be somewhere among the thirteen cards immediately above this key card which has just been jotted down.

“*Now go ahead and call them to me one by one.*”

As cards are called you must write down the name of each card which can be done rapidly by using a figure or letter for the denomination and the letters C, D, H and S to represent the four suits.

As your write you listen carefully until you hear the name of the key card. Any time thereafter you may stop the person who is calling the cards, with the question,

“*Have you passed your card yet?*”

You know the card has been passed and all that remains to be done is for you to determine which of the thirteen cards, which were called immediately preceding the key card, is the chosen one.

“*I was afraid you had, and since it is so difficult for you to concentrate on one card while looking at so many, will you please separate your chosen card from those others and turn all the rest of the cards face down?*”
