# leaf 0289

“And the egg shall disappear, and I doubt if there will be anyone here who can find where the egg goes.”

Reach into bag again, remove the egg and show it. . . “Watch!”

Place egg back into bag and slip it into the inner opening in bag, Fig. 21, which allows egg to go into hidden pocket. Then with eyes on bag take out hand which goes into right hand trousers pocket for a moment, as though you had slipped egg into your pocket. Bring hand up to bag and strike it as before.

“I strike the egg and it disappears.” Turn bag inside out and show. “It has completely vanished. John, even you can reach inside the bag and find nothing.”

Allow boy to reach inside of bag for a moment. By this time audience is yelling “It’s in your pocket.” If there are children and young people present they will make it known that they know the egg is in your pocket. An older audience will know you have put the egg in your pocket but are too polite to speak out, so you say; “I know what you are thinking.”

Or if audience is noisy, you may say, “There seems to be some sort of a disturbance out here in the audience. What's that? You say I put the egg in my pocket. Oh, no!”

Reach into left trousers pocket and bring it out showing it to be empty. Replace pocket. “Nothing in my pocket.”

Audience now usually says “No, your other pocket.” So you turn with your back towards audience and take out the same left pocket again.

“Oh, you mean the pocket on this other side.” Replace the pocket again and turn towards audience. “Well, what pocket do you mean? Do you mean John’s pocket?” Finally point to your right hand trousers pocket.

“You don’t mean this pocket? Oh, no, there’s nothing in this pocket. This is my right hand trousers pocket. I belong to the society of magicians and in order to belong to the society you cannot vanish an egg in your right hand trousers pocket. So that settles that. Now—”

By this time the audience is in a state of excitement. “Of course, there are a lot of people who do not believe me, in which case I turn my pocket inside out.” With right hand, reach into trousers pocket and turn it out to show it contains nothing.

“By the way, John, would you mind reaching inside the bag . . . . and taking out the egg?” Open bag, allowing egg to slip out of opening of inner pocket down into bag proper. John reaches into bag and takes out the egg.
