# leaf 0290

This gives a good climax, for you have gotten out of a predicament from which the audience did not think you could escape.

“Would you like to learn how to do this egg mystery?” Naturally, the audience wants to learn how it is done.

“I have been asked so many times if I wouldn’t explain how to do a trick and I think I will teach you this one. Now, first of all you must get an egg—a hen’s egg, duck’s egg, goose egg, ostrich egg, dinosaur’s egg, a china egg, or a door knob; and a cloth bag the size of this one. The only peculiarity about the bag is that it must have an inside as well as an outside. Otherwise it is just a bag.”

You can turn bag inside out as you talk about bag. Now, hold bag as in Fig. 21, with left hand. Show egg.

“First, you place the egg up into the corner of the bag.” Place egg inside bag up into the upper left hand corner. Then remove hand from bag, with egg palmed in right hand, but thumb is over the egg.

“And then you take it out again—so you can show the bag empty.” Turn palm of hand towards audience so people can see the egg in your hand.

“Now, if I placed an egg against the palm of my hand it would fall off, but if I put my thumb over it I can hold the egg and keep it from dropping.”

You demonstrate this, by first placing egg against right palm while right thumb is held upward. Then you place thumb over egg in a somewhat exaggerated manner and show how egg can be held without dropping.

“This is what you do. You put the egg up inside the bag, and then you take your hand out again.” Put egg up in bag and then remove hand with egg, the back of your hand towards the audience.

“Of course, you keep the back of your hand towards the audience and never let them see the other side.” Turn hand so that palm is towards audience, then bring palm to rear again.

“Strange, with an audience, they think a magician vanishes things up his sleeve or in his pocket, so when I put my hand in my pocket, they naturally suppose I placed the egg in my pocket. The audience is right; I did put the egg in my pocket—but, I did not keep it there. I took it out again. . . . and put the egg up under my arm.”
