I

Variation Under Domestication


Causes of Variability

When we compare individuals of the same variety or sub-variety of our long-cultivated plants and animals, one of the first things that strikes us is that they generally differ from each other more than individuals of any one species or variety in the wild. And if we consider the vast diversity of the plants and animals that have been cultivated and domesticated — varying across all ages, under the most different climates and treatments — we're driven to conclude that this great variability comes from our domestic organisms having been raised under conditions of life less uniform than, and somewhat different from, those their parent species experienced in nature. There is also some support for the view proposed by Andrew Knight that this variability may be partly connected with an excess of food. It seems clear that organisms must be exposed for several generations to new conditions before any great amount of variation appears, and that once an organism has begun to vary, it generally continues varying for many generations. No case is on record of a variable organism ceasing to vary under cultivation. Our oldest cultivated plants, such as wheat, still produce new varieties. Our oldest domesticated animals are still capable of rapid improvement or modification.

As far as I can judge, after long attention to this subject, the conditions of life appear to act in two ways — directly on the whole organism or on certain parts alone, and indirectly by affecting the reproductive system. Regarding the direct effects, we must keep in mind that in every case, as Professor Weismann has recently insisted, and as I have incidentally shown in my work on *Variation Under Domestication*, there are two factors at play: the nature of the organism and the nature of the conditions. The organism itself seems to be much more important. Nearly similar variations sometimes arise under what appear to be quite different conditions, and on the other hand, very different variations arise under conditions that seem nearly uniform. The effects on offspring are either definite or indefinite. They may be considered definite when all or nearly all the offspring of individuals exposed to certain conditions over several generations are modified in the same way. It is extremely difficult to determine the extent of changes that have been produced in this definite manner. There can, however, be little doubt about many slight changes — such as size from the amount of food, color from the type of food, thickness of skin and hair from climate, and so on. Each of the endless variations we see in the plumage of our domestic fowls must have had some effective cause. And if the same cause were to act uniformly over a long series of generations on many individuals, all of them would probably be modified in the same way. Consider how a tiny drop of poison injected by a gall-producing insect can trigger complex and extraordinary growths — this shows us what remarkable modifications might result in plants from a chemical change in the nature of their sap.

Indefinite variability is a much more common result of changed conditions than definite variability, and has probably played a more important role in the formation of our domestic breeds. We see indefinite variability in the endless slight differences that distinguish individuals of the same species — differences that can't be traced to inheritance from either parent or from some more remote ancestor. Even strongly marked differences occasionally appear among the young of the same litter, or in seedlings from the same seed capsule. At long intervals of time, out of millions of individuals raised in the same country and fed on nearly the same food, deviations of structure so strongly pronounced as to deserve being called monstrosities arise. But monstrosities can't be separated by any clear line from slighter variations. All such changes of structure, whether extremely slight or strongly marked, which appear among many individuals living together, may be considered the indefinite effects of the conditions of life on each individual organism — in much the same way that a chill affects different people in an indefinite manner, according to their state of health or constitution, causing coughs or colds, rheumatism, or inflammation of various organs.

As for what I have called the indirect action of changed conditions — namely, through the reproductive system being affected — we can infer that variability is produced this way, partly from the fact that this system is extremely sensitive to any change in conditions, and partly from the similarity, as Kolreuter and others have noted, between the variability that follows from crossing distinct species and the variability seen when plants and animals are raised under new or unnatural conditions. Many facts clearly show just how remarkably sensitive the reproductive system is to very slight changes in its surroundings. Nothing is easier than taming an animal, and few things are harder than getting it to breed freely in captivity, even when male and female do mate. How many animals refuse to breed, even when kept in an almost free state in their native country! This is generally, but mistakenly, blamed on corrupted instincts. Many cultivated plants grow with the greatest vigor and yet rarely or never set seed! In some few cases, it has been discovered that a very minor change — such as a little more or less water at some particular stage of growth — determines whether or not a plant will produce seeds. I can't go into all the details I've collected and published elsewhere on this curious subject. But to show how strange the laws are that govern reproduction in captive animals, I'll mention that carnivorous mammals, even those from the tropics, breed pretty freely in this country under confinement — with the exception of the plantigrades, or bear family, which seldom produce young. Carnivorous birds, on the other hand, with the rarest exceptions, hardly ever lay fertile eggs. Many exotic plants produce utterly worthless pollen, in the same condition as the most sterile hybrids. When, on one hand, we see domesticated animals and plants, though often weak and sickly, breeding freely under confinement, and when, on the other hand, we see individuals taken young from the wild, perfectly tamed, long-lived, and healthy (of which I could give numerous examples), yet having their reproductive system so seriously affected by unnoticed causes that it fails entirely — we shouldn't be surprised that this system, when it does function in captivity, acts irregularly and produces offspring somewhat unlike their parents. I might add that since some organisms breed freely under the most unnatural conditions — for instance, rabbits and ferrets kept in hutches — showing that their reproductive organs aren't easily affected, so too will some animals and plants withstand domestication or cultivation and vary very little, perhaps hardly more than in the wild.

Some naturalists have argued that all variations are connected with the act of sexual reproduction. But this is certainly wrong, for I have given in another work a long list of what gardeners call "sporting plants" — that is, plants that have suddenly produced a single bud with a new and sometimes very different character from that of the other buds on the same plant. These bud variations, as they may be called, can be propagated by grafts, offsets, and similar means, and sometimes by seed. They occur rarely in nature but are far from rare under cultivation. Since a single bud out of the many thousands produced year after year on the same tree under uniform conditions has been known suddenly to take on a new character — and since buds on different trees, growing under different conditions, have sometimes yielded nearly the same variety (for instance, buds on peach trees producing nectarines, and buds on common roses producing moss roses) — we can clearly see that the nature of the conditions is of secondary importance compared with the nature of the organism itself in determining each particular form of variation. The conditions may be no more important than the nature of the spark that ignites a mass of combustible material is in determining the nature of the flames.


Effects of Habit and of the Use or Disuse of Parts; Correlated Variation; Inheritance

Changed habits produce inherited effects, as when the flowering time of plants shifts after they are transported from one climate to another. In animals, the increased use or disuse of parts has had a more marked influence. For example, I find that in the domestic duck, the bones of the wing weigh less and the bones of the leg more, in proportion to the whole skeleton, than the same bones in the wild duck. This change can safely be attributed to the domestic duck flying much less and walking more than its wild ancestors. The greatly developed udders in cows and goats in countries where they are habitually milked, compared with these organs in other countries, is probably another example of the effects of use. Not one of our domestic animals can be named that hasn't developed drooping ears in some country. The suggestion that the drooping is due to disuse of the ear muscles — from the animals being seldom alarmed — seems a reasonable one.

Many laws regulate variation, a few of which can be dimly perceived and will be briefly discussed later. I will here only mention what may be called correlated variation. Important changes in the embryo or larva will probably lead to changes in the mature animal. In monstrosities, the correlations between quite distinct body parts are very curious, and many examples are given in Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire's great work on this subject. Breeders believe that long limbs are almost always accompanied by an elongated head. Some examples of correlation are downright whimsical: cats that are entirely white and have blue eyes are generally deaf, though it has recently been stated by Mr. Tait that this is confined to males. Color and constitutional traits go together, and many remarkable cases could be given among animals and plants. From facts collected by Heusinger, it appears that white sheep and pigs are injured by certain plants, while dark-colored individuals escape. Professor Wyman recently shared a good illustration of this with me: on asking some farmers in Virginia how it was that all their pigs were black, they told him that the pigs ate the paint-root (*Lachnanthes*), which colored their bones pink and caused the hooves of all but the black varieties to drop off. One of the "crackers" (that is, Virginia squatters) added, "We select the black members of a litter for raising, as they alone have a good chance of living." Hairless dogs have imperfect teeth. Long-haired and coarse-haired animals tend to have, it is said, long or many horns. Pigeons with feathered feet have skin between their outer toes. Pigeons with short beaks have small feet, and those with long beaks have large feet. So if a breeder keeps selecting and thus amplifying any particular trait, he will almost certainly modify other parts of the animal unintentionally, owing to the mysterious laws of correlation.

The results of the various, unknown, or only dimly understood laws of variation are infinitely complex and diverse. It is well worth carefully studying the treatises on some of our old cultivated plants — the hyacinth, potato, even the dahlia — and it is really surprising to note the endless points of structure and constitution in which the varieties and sub-varieties differ slightly from each other. The whole organism seems to have become plastic, departing in slight degrees from the parental type.

Any variation that is not inherited is unimportant for our purposes. But the number and diversity of inheritable deviations of structure, both those of slight and those of considerable physiological importance, are endless. Dr. Prosper Lucas's treatise, in two large volumes, is the fullest and best on this subject. No breeder doubts how strong the tendency to inheritance is. "Like produces like" is the breeder's fundamental belief — doubts have been raised about this principle only by theoretical writers. When a deviation of structure often appears, and we see it in both parent and child, we can't be sure it isn't due to the same cause acting on both. But when among individuals apparently exposed to the same conditions, some very rare deviation — due to some extraordinary combination of circumstances — appears in a parent (say, once among several million individuals), and then reappears in the child, the laws of probability almost force us to attribute its reappearance to inheritance. Everyone must have heard of cases of albinism, prickly skin, hairy bodies, and so on appearing in several members of the same family. If strange and rare deviations of structure are truly inherited, then less strange and more common deviations can freely be admitted as inheritable. Perhaps the correct way of looking at this whole subject would be to regard the inheritance of every character as the rule, and non-inheritance as the exception.

The laws governing inheritance are for the most part unknown. No one can say why the same trait in different individuals of the same species, or in different species, is sometimes inherited and sometimes not. Or why a child often reverts to traits of its grandfather or grandmother or a more remote ancestor. Or why a trait is often transmitted from one sex to both sexes, or to one sex alone — more commonly but not exclusively to the same sex. It is a fact of some importance to us that traits appearing in the males of our domestic breeds are often transmitted either exclusively or predominantly to males alone. A much more important rule, and one I think can be trusted, is that whatever age a trait first appears, it tends to reappear in the offspring at a corresponding age — though sometimes earlier. In many cases this couldn't be otherwise: inherited traits in the horns of cattle, for example, could appear only when the offspring is nearly mature. Traits in the silkworm appear at the corresponding caterpillar or cocoon stage. But hereditary diseases and some other facts make me believe the rule has a wider reach — that when there's no obvious reason why a trait should appear at any particular age, it still tends to appear in the offspring at the same stage at which it first showed up in the parent. I believe this rule to be of the highest importance in explaining the laws of embryology. These remarks are, of course, about the first appearance of the trait, not the original cause which may have acted on the egg or on the male reproductive element. In much the same way, the increased length of horns in the offspring of a short-horned cow crossed with a long-horned bull, though appearing late in life, is clearly due to the male parent's contribution.

Having mentioned the subject of reversion, I may here address a claim often made by naturalists — that our domestic varieties, when allowed to run wild, gradually but inevitably revert to the character of their original wild ancestors. From this, it has been argued that no conclusions can be drawn from domestic breeds about species in the wild. I have tried in vain to discover what decisive facts this claim rests on. It would be very difficult to prove it true. We can safely conclude that many of the most strongly marked domestic varieties could not possibly survive in the wild. In many cases we don't know what the original wild ancestor was, so we couldn't tell whether nearly perfect reversion had occurred. To prevent the effects of crossbreeding, only a single variety would need to be released into its new home. Still, since our varieties do occasionally revert in some of their characters to ancestral forms, it seems possible to me that if we could succeed in establishing, or were to cultivate over many generations, the several varieties of the cabbage, for instance, in very poor soil — though in that case some effect would have to be attributed to the direct action of the poor soil — they would largely, or even entirely, revert to the wild ancestral type. Whether or not the experiment would succeed is not critical to our argument, because the experiment itself changes the conditions of life. If it could be shown that our domestic varieties manifested a strong tendency to reversion — that is, to lose their acquired characters while kept under the same conditions and in a large enough population that free crossbreeding might check, by blending, any slight deviations in their structure — in that case, I grant that we could deduce nothing from domestic varieties about species. But there is not a shadow of evidence for this view. To assert that we could not breed our cart horses and racehorses, long- and short-horned cattle, and poultry of various breeds, and edible vegetables, for an unlimited number of generations, would go against all experience.


Character of Domestic Varieties; Difficulty of Distinguishing Between Varieties and Species; Origin of Domestic Varieties from One or More Species

When we look at the hereditary varieties or breeds of our domestic animals and plants and compare them with closely allied species, we generally see in each domestic breed, as I've already noted, less uniformity of character than in true species. Domestic breeds often have a somewhat exaggerated character — by which I mean that although they differ from each other and from other species of the same genus in several minor ways, they often differ to an extreme degree in some one feature, both when compared with one another and especially when compared with the wild species to which they are most closely related. With these exceptions (and with the exception of the perfect fertility of varieties when crossed — a subject I'll discuss later), domestic breeds of the same species differ from each other in the same manner as closely allied species of the same genus in the wild, but the differences are usually less in degree. This must be accepted as true, because the domestic breeds of many animals and plants have been classified by some competent judges as descendants of originally distinct species, and by other equally competent judges as mere varieties. If any clear-cut distinction existed between a domestic breed and a species, this kind of doubt would not keep arising. It has often been stated that domestic breeds don't differ from each other in characters of generic importance. It can be shown that this statement is incorrect. But naturalists differ greatly in deciding which characters have generic importance — all such judgments being, at present, based on experience rather than firm rules. When I explain how genera originate in nature, it will be seen that we have no right to expect often to find a genus-level amount of difference in our domesticated breeds.

In trying to estimate the amount of structural difference between related domestic breeds, we quickly run into doubt, because we don't know whether they descend from one or several parent species. If this could be cleared up, it would be very interesting. If, for instance, it could be shown that the greyhound, bloodhound, terrier, spaniel, and bulldog — which we all know breed true to type — were the offspring of a single species, then such facts would carry great weight in making us doubt the supposed unchangeability of the many closely related natural species (for instance, the many foxes inhabiting different parts of the world). I don't believe, as we shall soon see, that the full extent of difference between the various dog breeds was produced under domestication. I believe that a small part of the difference comes from their descending from distinct species. In the case of strongly marked breeds of some other domesticated species, there is strong or even conclusive evidence that all are descended from a single wild ancestor.

It has often been assumed that humans chose for domestication those animals and plants having an extraordinary inherent tendency to vary, and also an ability to withstand diverse climates. I don't dispute that these capacities have added greatly to the value of most of our domesticated organisms. But how could an early human possibly have known, when first taming an animal, whether it would vary in later generations, or whether it would tolerate other climates? Has the limited variability of the donkey and goose, or the poor tolerance of warmth by the reindeer, or of cold by the common camel, prevented their domestication? I have no doubt that if other animals and plants, equal in number to our domesticated species and belonging to equally diverse groups and countries, were taken from the wild and could be made to breed for an equal number of generations under domestication, they would on average vary as much as the parent species of our existing domesticated organisms have varied.

For most of our anciently domesticated animals and plants, it is not possible to reach any definite conclusion about whether they descend from one or several wild species. The main argument relied on by those who believe in the multiple origin of our domestic animals is that we find great diversity in the breeds depicted on the monuments of ancient Egypt and in the lake-dwellings of Switzerland, and that some of these ancient breeds closely resemble, or are even identical with, breeds still existing today. But this only pushes the history of civilization much further back and shows that animals were domesticated at a much earlier period than was previously supposed. The lake-dwelling people of Switzerland cultivated several kinds of wheat and barley, the pea, the poppy for oil, and flax. They possessed several domesticated animals. They also carried on trade with other nations. All this clearly shows, as Heer has noted, that they had already advanced considerably in civilization. And this in turn implies a long prior period of less advanced civilization, during which domesticated animals kept by different tribes in different districts might have varied and given rise to distinct breeds. Since the discovery of flint tools in surface formations across many parts of the world, all geologists believe that early humans existed at an enormously remote period. And we know that at the present day, there is hardly a tribe so primitive as not to have domesticated at least the dog.

The origin of most of our domestic animals will probably forever remain uncertain. But I may state here that, looking at the domestic dogs of the whole world, I have — after a laborious collection of all known facts — come to the conclusion that several wild species of Canidae have been tamed, and that their blood, in some cases mingled together, flows in the veins of our domestic breeds. Regarding sheep and goats, I can form no definite opinion. From facts communicated to me by Mr. Blyth about the habits, voice, constitution, and structure of the humped Indian cattle, it is almost certain that they descend from a different ancestral stock than our European cattle. Some competent judges believe that European cattle have had two or three wild ancestors, whether or not these deserve to be called separate species. This conclusion, as well as the finding that humped and common cattle are specifically distinct, may indeed be considered established by the admirable research of Professor Rutimeyer. Regarding horses, for reasons I can't detail here, I'm inclined — though with some doubt and against the views of several authors — to believe that all the breeds belong to the same species. Having kept nearly all the English breeds of fowl alive, having bred and crossed them, and examined their skeletons, it seems to me almost certain that all are descendants of the wild Indian fowl, *Gallus bankiva*. This is also the conclusion of Mr. Blyth and others who have studied this bird in India. Regarding ducks and rabbits, some breeds of which differ considerably from each other, the evidence is clear that they all descend from the common wild duck and wild rabbit.

The doctrine that our several domestic breeds originated from several distinct wild species has been carried to an absurd extreme by some authors. They believe that every breed that breeds true, no matter how slight the distinguishing characters, has had its own wild ancestor. At this rate, there must have existed at least twenty species of wild cattle, as many sheep, and several goats in Europe alone, and several even within Great Britain. One author believes that there formerly existed eleven wild species of sheep unique to Britain! When we consider that Britain today has not one unique mammal, and France has few distinct from those of Germany, and so on with Hungary, Spain, and others, yet each of these countries possesses several unique breeds of cattle, sheep, and so on — we must admit that many domestic breeds must have originated in Europe, for where else could they have come from? The same is true for India. Even in the case of dog breeds throughout the world, which I accept are descended from several wild species, it can't be doubted that there has been an immense amount of inherited variation. For who would believe that animals closely resembling the Italian greyhound, the bloodhound, the bulldog, the pug, or the Blenheim spaniel — so unlike all wild Canidae — ever existed in the wild? It has often been loosely stated that all our dog breeds were produced by crossing a few ancestral species. But by crossing we can only get forms that are to some degree intermediate between their parents. If we try to account for our various domestic breeds this way, we must accept the former existence of the most extreme forms — such as the Italian greyhound, bloodhound, bulldog, and so on — in the wild state. Moreover, the possibility of creating distinct breeds by crossing has been greatly exaggerated. Many cases are on record showing that a breed can be modified by occasional crosses, if aided by careful selection of individuals showing the desired trait. But to produce a breed intermediate between two quite distinct breeds would be very difficult. Sir J. Sebright experimented with exactly this goal and failed. The offspring from the first cross between two pure breeds is fairly — and sometimes, as I have found with pigeons, quite — uniform in character, and everything seems simple enough. But when these hybrids are crossed with one another for several generations, hardly two of them are alike, and then the difficulty of the task becomes clear.


Breeds of the Domestic Pigeon, Their Differences and Origin

Believing that it is always best to study some specific group in depth, I have, after careful thought, taken up domestic pigeons. I have kept every breed I could buy or obtain, and have been very generously supplied with skins from several parts of the world — most notably by the Honorable W. Elliot from India and the Honorable C. Murray from Persia. Many treatises in different languages have been published on pigeons, and some of them are very important, being of considerable antiquity. I have associated with several eminent pigeon fanciers and have been permitted to join two of the London Pigeon Clubs. The diversity of the breeds is simply astonishing.

Compare the English carrier and the short-faced tumbler, and see the wonderful difference in their beaks, with corresponding differences in their skulls. The carrier, especially the male, is also remarkable for the wonderful development of the warty skin around the head, accompanied by greatly elongated eyelids, very large nostril openings, and a wide gape of the mouth. The short-faced tumbler has a beak in outline almost like that of a finch, and the common tumbler has the remarkable inherited habit of flying at great height in a compact flock and tumbling head over heels through the air. The runt is a bird of great size, with a long, massive beak and large feet. Some sub-breeds of runts have very long necks, others very long wings and tails, still others strikingly short tails. The barb is related to the carrier but, instead of a long beak, has a very short and broad one. The pouter has a much elongated body, wings, and legs, and its enormously developed crop, which it glories in inflating, can hardly fail to provoke astonishment and even laughter. The turbit has a short, conical beak with a line of reversed feathers running down the breast, and it has the habit of continually expanding, slightly, the upper part of the esophagus. The Jacobin has its feathers so thoroughly reversed along the back of the neck that they form a hood, and it has, proportional to its size, elongated wing and tail feathers. The trumpeter and laugher, as their names suggest, utter a very different coo from the other breeds. The fantail has thirty or even forty tail feathers, instead of the twelve or fourteen that are normal in all members of the great pigeon family. These feathers are kept spread and carried so erect that in good birds the head and tail touch. The oil gland is completely absent. Several other less distinct breeds could be mentioned.

In the skeletons of the various breeds, the development of the bones of the face — in length, breadth, and curvature — differs enormously. The shape, breadth, and length of the lower jaw varies in a highly remarkable manner. The tail and sacral vertebrae vary in number, as does the number of ribs, along with their relative breadth and the presence of bony processes. The size and shape of the openings in the breastbone are highly variable, as is the degree of divergence and relative size of the two arms of the wishbone. The proportional width of the gape of the mouth, the proportional length of the eyelids, of the nostril openings, of the tongue (not always strictly correlated with the length of beak), the size of the crop and of the upper part of the esophagus, the development or absence of the oil gland, the number of the primary wing and tail feathers, the relative length of the wing and tail to each other and to the body, the relative length of the leg and foot, the number of scales on the toes, the development of skin between the toes — all of these are variable. The age at which the adult plumage is acquired varies, as does the condition of the down that clothes the nestlings when they hatch. The shape and size of the eggs vary. The manner of flight, and in some breeds the voice and temperament, differ remarkably. Finally, in certain breeds, the males and females have come to differ slightly from each other.

All told, at least twenty pigeons could be chosen which, if shown to a bird expert and he were told they were wild birds, would certainly be classified by him as well-defined species. Moreover, I don't believe any ornithologist would in this case place the English carrier, the short-faced tumbler, the runt, the barb, pouter, and fantail in the same genus — especially since in each of these breeds, several truly inherited sub-breeds (or species, as he would call them) could be shown to him.

Great as the differences between the breeds of pigeon are, I'm fully convinced that the common opinion among naturalists is correct — that all are descended from the rock pigeon (*Columba livia*), including under this term several geographic races or sub-species that differ from each other in only the most trivial ways. Since several of the reasons that have led me to this belief apply to some degree in other cases, I'll briefly lay them out here.

If the various breeds are not varieties and did not descend from the rock pigeon, they must have descended from at least seven or eight ancestral species — because it is impossible to produce the present domestic breeds by crossing any fewer number. How, for instance, could a pouter be produced by crossing two breeds unless one of the parent stocks already possessed that characteristically enormous crop? The supposed ancestral species must all have been rock pigeons — that is, they did not breed in or willingly perch on trees. But besides *C. livia* with its geographic sub-species, only two or three other species of rock pigeons are known, and these have none of the characters of the domestic breeds. So the supposed ancestral species must either still exist in the countries where they were originally domesticated, yet be unknown to ornithologists — which, considering their size, habits, and remarkable features, seems unlikely — or they must have gone extinct in the wild. But birds that breed on cliff faces and are strong fliers are unlikely to be wiped out. The common rock pigeon, which has the same habits as the domestic breeds, has not been exterminated even on several of the smaller British islands or on the shores of the Mediterranean. The supposed extinction of so many species with habits similar to the rock pigeon seems a very rash assumption. What's more, the various domesticated breeds I've named have been transported to all parts of the world, and some of them must therefore have been carried back to their native country. Yet not one has gone wild or feral — though the dovecote pigeon, which is the rock pigeon in a very slightly altered state, has gone feral in several places. Again, all recent experience shows that it is difficult to get wild animals to breed freely under domestication. Yet under the theory of multiple origins for our pigeons, we would have to assume that at least seven or eight species were so thoroughly domesticated in ancient times, by people at an early stage of civilization, as to be completely fertile in confinement.

An argument of great weight, and one applicable in several other cases, is this: the breeds I've described, while generally agreeing with the wild rock pigeon in constitution, habits, voice, coloring, and most parts of their structure, are certainly highly abnormal in other respects. We may look in vain throughout the whole great family Columbidae for a beak like that of the English carrier, or the short-faced tumbler, or the barb — for reversed feathers like those of the Jacobin — for a crop like that of the pouter — for tail feathers like those of the fantail. So we would have to assume not only that early humans succeeded in thoroughly domesticating several species, but that they intentionally or by chance picked out extraordinarily abnormal species — and further, that these very species have since all gone extinct or become unknown. So many strange coincidences are improbable in the highest degree.

Some facts about the coloring of pigeons deserve careful attention. The rock pigeon is slaty blue with white lower back feathers, though the Indian sub-species, *C. intermedia* of Strickland, has this part bluish. The tail has a dark terminal bar, with the outer feathers edged at the base with white on the outside. The wings have two black bars. Some semi-domestic breeds and some truly wild breeds have, besides the two black bars, the wings checkered with black. These several markings do not occur together in any other species of the entire family. Now, in every one of the domestic breeds, taking thoroughly well-bred birds, all of the above markings — even down to the white edging of the outer tail feathers — sometimes appear perfectly developed. What's more, when birds belonging to two or more distinct breeds are crossed, none of which are blue or have any of the marks I've described, the hybrid offspring are very likely to suddenly acquire these characters.

To give one example out of several I have observed: I crossed some white fantails, which breed very true, with some black barbs — and it so happens that blue varieties of barbs are so rare that I have never heard of one in England. The hybrids were black, brown, and mottled. I also crossed a barb with a spot (a white bird with a red tail and red spot on the forehead, which breeds very true). The hybrids were dusky and mottled. I then crossed one of the barb-fantail hybrids with a barb-spot hybrid, and they produced a bird of as beautiful a blue color, with the white lower back, double black wing bar, and barred and white-edged tail feathers, as any wild rock pigeon! We can understand these facts on the well-known principle of reversion to ancestral characters, if all the domestic breeds descend from the rock pigeon. But if we deny this, we must accept one of two highly improbable alternatives. Either, first, that all the supposed original wild species were colored and marked like the rock pigeon — although no other existing species is colored and marked this way — so that in each separate breed there would be a tendency to revert to the very same colors and markings. Or second, that each breed, even the purest, has within a dozen, or at most within a score, of generations been crossed with the rock pigeon. I say within a dozen or twenty generations because no case is known of crossed descendants reverting to an ancestor of foreign blood removed by a greater number of generations. In a breed that has been crossed only once, the tendency to revert to any character derived from that cross will naturally become less and less with each succeeding generation, as there will be less of the foreign blood. But when there has been no cross, and there is a tendency in the breed to revert to a character lost during some former generation, this tendency — for all we can see to the contrary — may be transmitted undiminished for an indefinite number of generations. These two distinct cases of reversion are often confused by those who have written on inheritance.

Finally, the hybrids from crosses between all the breeds of pigeon are perfectly fertile, as I can state from my own observations, made deliberately on the most distinct breeds. Now, hardly any cases have been established with certainty of hybrids from two quite distinct species of animals being perfectly fertile. Some authors believe that long-continued domestication eliminates this strong tendency toward sterility between species. From the history of the dog and some other domestic animals, this conclusion is probably correct when applied to species closely related to each other. But to extend it so far as to suppose that species originally as distinct as carriers, tumblers, pouters, and fantails now are should yield perfectly fertile offspring when crossed with each other — that seems to me rash in the extreme.

From these several reasons — the improbability that early humans made seven or eight supposed pigeon species breed freely under domestication; these supposed species being completely unknown in the wild; their never having gone feral anywhere; these species displaying certain very abnormal characters compared with all other Columbidae, though so like the rock pigeon in most other respects; the occasional reappearance of the blue color and various black markings in all the breeds, both when kept pure and when crossed; and finally, the hybrid offspring being perfectly fertile — from all these reasons taken together, we can safely conclude that all our domestic breeds descend from the rock pigeon, or *Columba livia*, with its geographic sub-species.

In further support of this view, I may add: first, that the wild *C. livia* has been found capable of domestication in Europe and in India, and that it agrees in habits and in a great number of structural details with all the domestic breeds. Second, that although an English carrier or a short-faced tumbler differs immensely in certain characters from the rock pigeon, by comparing the several sub-breeds of these two types — especially those brought from distant countries — we can construct an almost perfect series of gradations between them and the rock pigeon. We can do the same in some other cases, though not with all breeds. Third, those characters that are mainly distinctive of each breed are in each case eminently variable: for instance, the wattle and beak length of the carrier, the shortness of the tumbler's beak, and the number of tail feathers in the fantail. The explanation of this fact will be obvious when we come to discuss selection. Fourth, pigeons have been watched, tended, and loved by many people with the utmost care. They have been domesticated for thousands of years in several parts of the world. The earliest known record of pigeons is from the fifth Egyptian dynasty, about 3000 BC, as was pointed out to me by Professor Lepsius, though Mr. Birch informs me that pigeons appear in a bill of fare from the previous dynasty. In the time of the Romans, as we learn from Pliny, immense prices were given for pigeons: "Indeed, they have come to such a point that they can reckon up their pedigree and lineage." Pigeons were much valued by Akbar Khan in India, around the year 1600; never less than 20,000 pigeons were taken with the court. "The monarchs of Iran and Turan sent him some very rare birds," and, continues the courtly historian, "His Majesty, by crossing the breeds — a method never practiced before — has improved them astonishingly." Around the same period, the Dutch were as passionate about pigeons as the ancient Romans had been. The paramount importance of these considerations in explaining the immense amount of variation that pigeons have undergone will also be obvious when we discuss selection. We shall then also see how it is that the various breeds so often have a somewhat exaggerated character. It is also a most favorable circumstance for the production of distinct breeds that male and female pigeons can easily be mated for life, and thus different breeds can be kept together in the same aviary.

I have discussed the probable origin of domestic pigeons at some length — yet not nearly enough — because when I first kept pigeons and observed the various breeds, knowing full well how truly they breed, I felt just as much difficulty in believing that since domestication they had all come from a common ancestor as any naturalist could feel in reaching a similar conclusion about the many species of finches, or other groups of birds, in nature. One thing has struck me particularly: nearly all the breeders of various domestic animals, and the growers of plants, with whom I have spoken or whose writings I have read, are firmly convinced that the several breeds each has attended to are descended from as many originally distinct species. Ask, as I have asked, a celebrated raiser of Hereford cattle whether his cattle might not have descended from Longhorns, or both from a common ancestor, and he will laugh you to scorn. I have never met a pigeon, poultry, duck, or rabbit fancier who was not fully convinced that each main breed descended from a distinct species. Van Mons, in his treatise on pears and apples, shows how completely he disbelieves that the various types — for instance, a Ribston Pippin or a Codlin apple — could ever have come from seeds of the same tree. Countless other examples could be given. The explanation, I think, is simple. From long-continued study, these breeders are deeply impressed by the differences between the various breeds. And though they know well that each breed varies slightly — for they win their prizes by selecting such slight differences — they ignore all general arguments and refuse to add up in their minds the slight differences accumulated over many successive generations. May not those naturalists who, knowing far less of the laws of inheritance than the breeder, and knowing no more than he does of the intermediate links in the long lines of descent, yet accept that many of our domestic breeds descend from the same parents — may they not learn a lesson in caution, when they dismiss the idea that species in the wild are direct descendants of other species?


Principles of Selection Anciently Followed, and Their Effects

Now let's briefly consider the steps by which domestic breeds have been produced, whether from one or from several related species. Some effect may be attributed to the direct and definite action of external conditions of life, and some to habit. But it would take a bold person to account by such causes for the differences between a draft horse and a racehorse, a greyhound and a bloodhound, a carrier and a tumbler pigeon. One of the most remarkable features of our domesticated breeds is that we see in them adaptation — not to the animal's or plant's own good, but to human use or fancy. Some variations useful to us have probably arisen suddenly, in a single step. Many botanists, for instance, believe that the fuller's teasel, with its hooks that no mechanical device can rival, is only a variety of the wild *Dipsacus* — and this amount of change may have arisen suddenly in a seedling. So it probably was with the turnspit dog, and this is known to have been the case with the Ancon sheep. But when we compare the draft horse and the racehorse, the dromedary and the camel, the various breeds of sheep suited to either cultivated land or mountain pasture — with the wool of one breed good for one purpose and that of another breed for another — when we compare the many breeds of dogs, each useful to us in different ways — when we compare the gamecock, so stubborn in battle, with other breeds so little quarrelsome, with "everlasting layers" that never want to sit on their eggs, and with the bantam so small and elegant — when we compare the vast array of agricultural, culinary, orchard, and flower-garden varieties of plants, most useful to us at different seasons and for different purposes, or so beautiful in our eyes — we must, I think, look beyond mere variability. We can't suppose that all the breeds were suddenly produced as perfect and useful as we now see them. Indeed, in many cases we know that is not their history. The key is humanity's power of accumulative selection: nature gives successive variations; humans add them up in certain directions useful to them. In this sense, we may be said to have made for ourselves useful breeds.

The great power of this principle of selection is not hypothetical. It is certain that several of our eminent breeders have, even within a single lifetime, modified their breeds of cattle and sheep to a large extent. To fully appreciate what they have done, it is almost necessary to read the many treatises devoted to this subject and to inspect the animals. Breeders routinely speak of an animal's constitution as something plastic, which they can shape almost as they please. If I had space, I could quote numerous passages to this effect from highly competent authorities. Youatt, who was probably better acquainted with the works of agriculturalists than almost anyone and was himself an excellent judge of animals, speaks of the principle of selection as "that which enables the agriculturalist, not only to modify the character of his flock, but to change it altogether. It is the magician's wand, by means of which he may summon into life whatever form and mold he pleases." Lord Somerville, speaking of what breeders have done for sheep, says: "It would seem as if they had chalked out upon a wall a form perfect in itself, and then had given it existence." In Saxony, the importance of the principle of selection in merino sheep is so fully recognized that men follow it as a trade: the sheep are placed on a table and studied like a painting by a connoisseur. This is done three times at intervals of months, and the sheep are each time marked and graded, so that the very best may ultimately be selected for breeding.

What English breeders have actually achieved is proved by the enormous prices given for animals with a good pedigree, and these have been exported to almost every part of the world. The improvement is by no means generally due to crossing different breeds — all the best breeders are strongly opposed to this practice, except sometimes among closely related sub-breeds. And when a cross has been made, the closest selection is far more essential even than in ordinary cases. If selection consisted merely in separating out some very distinct variety and breeding from it, the principle would be so obvious as to hardly be worth mentioning. But its importance lies in the great effect produced by the accumulation, in one direction over successive generations, of differences absolutely invisible to an untrained eye — differences which I for one have tried in vain to detect. Not one person in a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to become an eminent breeder. If gifted with these qualities and willing to study the subject for years and devote a lifetime to it with tireless perseverance, such a person will succeed and may make great improvements. If lacking any of these qualities, they will certainly fail. Few would readily believe the natural ability and years of practice required to become even a skilled pigeon fancier.

The same principles are followed by plant breeders, though the variations are often more abrupt. No one supposes that our finest plant varieties were produced by a single variation from the wild ancestor. We have proof that this is not so in several cases where exact records have been kept. To give a very minor example, the steadily increasing size of the common gooseberry may be cited. We see astonishing improvement in many flower varieties when today's flowers are compared with drawings made only twenty or thirty years ago. When a plant variety is fairly well established, the seed growers don't pick out the best plants but merely go over their seed beds and pull up the "rogues," as they call plants that deviate from the proper standard. With animals, this kind of selection is likewise followed — for hardly anyone is so careless as to breed from their worst animals.

Regarding plants, there is another way to observe the accumulated effects of selection — by comparing the diversity of flowers in the different varieties of the same species in the flower garden with the diversity of leaves, pods, tubers, or whatever part is valued in the kitchen garden, and with the diversity of fruit in the orchard. See how different the leaves of the cabbage are, yet how extremely alike the flowers. How unlike the flowers of the pansy are, yet how alike the leaves. How much the fruit of different kinds of gooseberries differs in size, color, shape, and hairiness, yet the flowers show very slight differences. It is not that the varieties which differ greatly in one feature don't differ at all in others — this is hardly ever, perhaps never, the case (I speak from careful observation). The law of correlated variation, whose importance should never be overlooked, will ensure some differences. But as a general rule, there can be no doubt that the continued selection of slight variations — whether in the leaves, the flowers, or the fruit — will produce breeds differing from each other chiefly in those characters.

Someone might object that the principle of selection has been practiced as a systematic method for scarcely more than three-quarters of a century. It has certainly received more attention in recent years, and many treatises have been published on the subject, and the results have been correspondingly rapid and important. But it is very far from true that the principle is a modern discovery. I could cite several references to works of great antiquity in which the full importance of the principle is recognized. In early and rough periods of English history, prized animals were often imported and laws were passed to prevent their export. The destruction of horses under a certain size was ordered — which may be compared to the "roguing" of plants by nurserymen. I find the principle of selection clearly stated in an ancient Chinese encyclopedia. Explicit rules are laid down by some of the Roman classical writers. From passages in Genesis, it is clear that the color of domestic animals was attended to at that early period. Indigenous peoples sometimes cross their dogs with wild canine species to improve the breed, and they formerly did so, as attested by passages in Pliny. The indigenous peoples of South Africa match their draft cattle by color, as do some of the Inuit their teams of dogs. Livingstone states that good domestic breeds are highly valued by the people in the interior of Africa who have not had contact with Europeans. Some of these facts do not demonstrate actual selection, but they show that the breeding of domestic animals was carefully attended to in ancient times and is still attended to by the most isolated peoples. It would indeed have been strange if attention had not been paid to breeding, for the inheritance of good and bad qualities is so obvious.


Unconscious Selection

At the present time, eminent breeders try, through methodical selection with a distinct goal in mind, to create a new strain or sub-breed superior to anything of the kind in the country. But for our purposes, a form of selection that may be called unconscious — resulting from everyone trying to own and breed from the best individual animals — is more important. A man who intends keeping pointers naturally tries to get the best dogs he can and afterwards breeds from his own best dogs, but he has no wish or expectation of permanently altering the breed. Yet we may infer that this process, continued over centuries, would improve and modify any breed, in the same way as Bakewell, Collins, and others, by this very same process only carried out more methodically, greatly modified the forms and qualities of their cattle even within their own lifetimes. Slow and imperceptible changes of this kind could never be recognized unless actual measurements or careful drawings of the breeds had been made long ago for comparison. In some cases, however, unchanged or little-changed individuals of the same breed exist in less developed districts where the breed has been less improved. There is reason to believe that King Charles's spaniel has been unconsciously modified to a large extent since the time of that monarch. Some highly competent authorities are convinced that the setter descends directly from the spaniel and has probably been slowly altered from it. It is known that the English pointer has been greatly changed within the last century, and in this case the change is believed to have been mainly achieved by crosses with the foxhound. But what concerns us is that the change was made unconsciously and gradually, yet so effectively that although the old Spanish pointer certainly came from Spain, Mr. Borrow, as he informed me, has not seen any native dog in Spain resembling our pointer.

By a similar process of selection, and by careful training, English racehorses have come to surpass in speed and size the Arabian horses from which they descend, so that the latter, by the regulations for the Goodwood Races, are given a weight advantage. Lord Spencer and others have shown how the cattle of England have increased in weight and in early maturity compared with the stock formerly kept in this country. By comparing the accounts given in various old treatises of the former and present state of carrier and tumbler pigeons in Britain, India, and Persia, we can trace the stages through which they have gradually passed and come to differ so greatly from the rock pigeon.

Youatt gives an excellent illustration of the effects of a course of selection that may be considered unconscious, since the breeders could never have expected or even wished to produce the result that followed — namely, the development of two distinct strains. The two flocks of Leicester sheep kept by Mr. Buckley and Mr. Burgess, as Youatt remarks, "have been purely bred from the original stock of Mr. Bakewell for upwards of fifty years. There is not a suspicion in the mind of anyone at all acquainted with the subject that the owner of either flock has deviated in any one instance from the pure blood of Mr. Bakewell's flock, and yet the difference between the sheep possessed by these two gentlemen is so great that they have the appearance of being quite different varieties."

If there exist peoples so primitive as never to think about the inherited character of the offspring of their domestic animals, yet any one animal particularly useful to them for any special purpose would be carefully preserved during famines and other disasters — and such choice animals would thus generally leave more offspring than the inferior ones. In this case, there would be a kind of unconscious selection going on. We see the value set on animals even by the most isolated peoples — the inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, for example, killed and ate their old women in times of famine, considering them of less value than their dogs.

In plants, the same gradual process of improvement through the occasional preservation of the best individuals — whether or not distinct enough to be ranked as separate varieties at their first appearance, and whether or not two or more species or varieties have become blended together by crossing — can plainly be seen in the increased size and beauty we now see in the varieties of the pansy, rose, pelargonium, dahlia, and other plants, compared with the older varieties or with their wild ancestors. No one would ever expect to get a first-rate pansy or dahlia from the seed of a wild plant. No one would expect to raise a first-rate melting pear from the seed of a wild pear, though they might succeed from a poor seedling growing wild if it had come from a garden stock. The pear, though cultivated in classical times, appears from Pliny's description to have been a fruit of very inferior quality. I have seen great surprise expressed in horticultural works at the wonderful skill of gardeners in having produced such splendid results from such poor materials. But the art has been simple, and as far as the final result is concerned, has been followed almost unconsciously. It has consisted in always cultivating the best known variety, sowing its seeds, and when a slightly better variety chanced to appear, selecting it, and so on. But the gardeners of the classical period, who cultivated the best pears they could get, never imagined what splendid fruit we would eat — though we owe our excellent fruit in some small degree to their having naturally chosen and preserved the best varieties they could find anywhere.

A large amount of change, slowly and unconsciously accumulated in this way, explains, as I believe, the well-known fact that in many cases we can't identify, and therefore don't know, the wild ancestors of the plants that have been cultivated longest in our flower and kitchen gardens. If it has taken centuries or thousands of years to improve or modify most of our plants to their present standard of usefulness, we can understand why neither Australia, the Cape of Good Hope, nor any other region inhabited by peoples without agriculture has provided us a single plant worth cultivating. It is not that these countries, so rich in species, don't by some strange chance possess the wild ancestors of any useful plants, but that the native plants have not been improved by continued selection to a standard of perfection comparable with that achieved by plants in countries with long histories of civilization.

Regarding the domestic animals kept by peoples without agriculture, it should not be overlooked that these animals almost always have to find their own food, at least during certain seasons. And in two very differently situated countries, individuals of the same species having slightly different constitutions or structures would often succeed better in one country than in the other. Thus, by a process of "natural selection" — as will be more fully explained later — two sub-breeds might be formed. This perhaps partly explains why the varieties kept by isolated peoples, as some authors have noted, have more of the character of true species than the varieties kept in more developed countries.

Given the important role that human selection has played, as I've described it here, it becomes immediately obvious how it is that our domestic breeds show adaptation in their structure or habits to human needs or fancies. We can, I think, also understand the frequently exaggerated character of our domestic breeds, and likewise why the differences between them are so great in external characters yet relatively slight in internal parts or organs. A breeder can hardly select, or only with great difficulty, any deviation of structure except one that is externally visible — and indeed rarely cares about what is internal. They can never act by selection except on variations that nature first provides in some slight degree. No one would ever try to create a fantail until they saw a pigeon with a tail developed in some slight degree in an unusual manner, or a pouter until they saw a pigeon with a crop of somewhat unusual size. And the more abnormal or unusual any character was when it first appeared, the more likely it would be to catch attention. But to use an expression like "trying to make a fantail" is, I have no doubt, in most cases utterly wrong. The person who first selected a pigeon with a slightly larger tail never dreamed what the descendants of that pigeon would become through long-continued, partly unconscious and partly methodical selection. Perhaps the ancestor of all fantails had only fourteen tail feathers, somewhat expanded, like the present Java fantail, or like individuals of other distinct breeds in which as many as seventeen tail feathers have been counted. Perhaps the first pouter pigeon did not inflate its crop much more than the turbit now expands the upper part of its esophagus — a habit that all fanciers ignore, as it is not one of the valued features of the breed.

Nor should we think that some great deviation of structure would be necessary to catch the fancier's eye. A fancier perceives extremely small differences, and it is human nature to value any novelty, however slight, in one's own possession. Nor should the value that would formerly have been placed on any slight differences in individuals of the same species be judged by the value placed on them now, after several breeds have been firmly established. It is known that with pigeons, many slight variations now occasionally appear, but these are rejected as faults or deviations from the standard of perfection in each breed. The common goose has not given rise to any marked varieties — hence the Toulouse and the common breed, which differ only in color (that most fleeting of characters), have recently been exhibited as distinct at our poultry shows.

These views seem to explain something that has sometimes been noticed — that we know hardly anything about the origin or history of any of our domestic breeds. But in fact, a breed, like a dialect of a language, can hardly be said to have a distinct origin. A person preserves and breeds from an individual with some slight deviation of structure, or takes more care than usual in matching their best animals, and thus improves them. The improved animals slowly spread in the immediate neighborhood. But they will as yet hardly have a distinct name, and from being only slightly valued, their history will have been ignored. When further improved by the same slow and gradual process, they spread more widely and will be recognized as something distinct and valuable, and will then probably first receive a local name. In countries with less developed communication, the spread of a new sub-breed will be a slow process. As soon as the points of value are recognized, the principle of unconscious selection, as I have called it, will always tend — perhaps more at one period than at another, as the breed rises or falls in fashion, and perhaps more in one district than another, depending on the state of civilization of the inhabitants — slowly to add to the characteristic features of the breed, whatever they may be. But the chance will be infinitely small that any record was preserved of such slow, varying, and imperceptible changes.


Circumstances Favorable to Man's Power of Selection

I will now say a few words about the circumstances, favorable or unfavorable, to our power of selection. A high degree of variability is obviously favorable, as it freely provides the raw materials for selection to work on — not that mere individual differences are insufficient, with extreme care, to allow the accumulation of a large amount of modification in almost any desired direction. But since variations that are clearly useful or pleasing to us appear only occasionally, the chance of their appearing will be much increased by keeping a large number of individuals. Therefore, numbers are of the highest importance for success. On this principle, Marshall once remarked of the sheep of part of Yorkshire: "As they generally belong to poor people, and are mostly in small lots, they never can be improved." On the other hand, nurseries, from keeping large stocks of the same plant, are generally far more successful than amateurs in raising new and valuable varieties. A large number of individuals of an animal or plant can be raised only where conditions for its propagation are favorable. When individuals are scarce, all will be allowed to breed whatever their quality, and this will effectively prevent selection. But probably the most important factor is that the animal or plant should be so highly valued by people that the closest attention is paid to even the slightest deviations in its qualities or structure. Unless such attention is paid, nothing can be achieved. I have seen it seriously remarked that it was most fortunate the strawberry began to vary just when gardeners began to pay attention to this plant. No doubt the strawberry had always varied since it was cultivated, but the slight varieties had been neglected. As soon as gardeners picked out individual plants with slightly larger, earlier, or better fruit, raised seedlings from them, and again picked out the best seedlings and bred from them, then (with some help from crossing distinct species) those many admirable varieties of the strawberry were raised which have appeared during the last half century.

With animals, the ability to prevent unwanted crosses is an important factor in the formation of new breeds — at least in a country that is already stocked with other breeds. In this respect, the enclosure of land plays a part. Wandering peoples or the inhabitants of open plains rarely possess more than one breed of the same species. Pigeons can be mated for life, and this is a great convenience for the fancier, since many breeds can be improved and kept true even though kept together in the same aviary. This circumstance must have greatly favored the formation of new breeds. Pigeons, I might add, can be bred in great numbers and at a very quick rate, and inferior birds may be freely rejected, since when killed they serve for food. Cats, on the other hand, because of their nocturnal roaming habits, can't be easily paired. And although they are so much valued by women and children, we rarely see a distinct breed maintained for long — such breeds as we do sometimes see are almost always imported from another country. Although I don't doubt that some domestic animals vary less than others, the rarity or absence of distinct breeds of the cat, the donkey, the peacock, the goose, and so on may be attributed mainly to selection not having been applied: in cats, because of the difficulty of pairing them; in donkeys, because only a few are kept by poor people with little attention paid to their breeding (for recently, in certain parts of Spain and the United States, this animal has been surprisingly improved by careful selection); in peacocks, because they are not easily reared and large flocks are not kept; in geese, because they are valued only for two purposes — food and feathers — and especially because no pleasure has been taken in displaying distinct breeds. But the goose, under the conditions to which it is exposed when domesticated, seems to have a remarkably inflexible constitution, though it has varied to a slight extent, as I have described elsewhere.

Some authors have maintained that the amount of variation in our domestic organisms is soon reached and can never afterwards be exceeded. It would be somewhat rash to assert that the limit has been attained in any one case, for almost all our animals and plants have been greatly improved in many ways within a recent period — and this implies variation. It would be equally rash to assert that characters now increased to their utmost limit could not, after remaining fixed for many centuries, vary again under new conditions of life. No doubt, as Wallace has remarked with much truth, a limit will eventually be reached. For instance, there must be a limit to the speed of any land animal, since this will be determined by the friction to be overcome, the weight of the body to be carried, and the power of contraction in the muscle fibers. But what concerns us is that the domestic varieties of the same species differ from each other in almost every character that humans have attended to and selected for more than do the distinct species of the same genera. Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire has proved this for size, and the same holds for color, and probably for the length of hair. Regarding speed, which depends on many bodily characters, the racehorse Eclipse was far fleeter, and a draft horse is comparably stronger, than any two natural species belonging to the same genus. The same is true for plants: the seeds of the different varieties of bean or maize probably differ more in size than do the seeds of distinct species in any one genus in those same two families. The same holds for the fruit of the several varieties of the plum, and even more strikingly with the melon, as well as in many other similar cases.

To sum up on the origin of our domestic breeds of animals and plants: changed conditions of life are of the highest importance in causing variability, both by acting directly on the organism and indirectly by affecting the reproductive system. It is not likely that variability is an inherent and necessary feature under all circumstances. The greater or lesser force of inheritance and reversion determine whether variations will endure. Variability is governed by many unknown laws, of which correlated traits are probably the most important. Something — but how much we don't know — may be attributed to the direct action of the conditions of life. Some effect, perhaps a great one, may be attributed to the increased use or disuse of parts. The final result is thus infinitely complex. In some cases, the crossbreeding of originally distinct species appears to have played an important role in the origin of our breeds. Once several breeds have been formed in any country, their occasional crossbreeding, with the aid of selection, has no doubt greatly aided in the formation of new sub-breeds. But the importance of crossing has been much exaggerated, both for animals and for plants that are propagated by seed. For plants that are propagated by cuttings, buds, and the like, the importance of crossing is immense, because the cultivator can here disregard the extreme variability of both hybrids and crossbreeds, and the sterility of hybrids. But plants not propagated by seed are of little importance to us, since their endurance is only temporary. Over all these causes of change, the accumulative action of selection — whether applied methodically and quickly, or unconsciously and slowly but more effectively — seems to have been the dominant force.
