II: Variation Under Nature


II

Variation Under Nature


Before applying the principles from the last chapter to organisms in the wild, we need to briefly discuss whether wild species are actually subject to variation. To treat this subject properly, I'd need to present a long catalog of dry facts, but I'll save those for a future work. I also won't get into the various definitions that have been given of the term "species." No single definition has satisfied all naturalists, yet every naturalist knows roughly what he means when he uses the word. Generally the term includes an unspoken assumption of a distinct act of creation. The term "variety" is almost equally hard to define, but here shared descent is almost always implied, even though it can rarely be proved. We also have what are called monstrosities, but these grade into varieties. By a monstrosity I mean some major deviation of structure that is generally harmful, or at least not useful to the species. Some authors use the term "variation" in a technical sense, meaning a change caused directly by the physical conditions of life, and "variations" in this sense are supposedly not inherited. But who can say that the stunted shells in the brackish waters of the Baltic, or the dwarfed plants on Alpine summits, or the thicker fur of an animal from the far north, wouldn't be inherited for at least a few generations? And in that case, the form would be called a variety.

It's doubtful whether sudden and major deviations of structure, like those we occasionally see in our domesticated organisms -- especially in plants -- are ever permanently passed on in the wild. Almost every part of every organism is so beautifully fitted to its complex conditions of life that it seems just as unlikely that any part could have been suddenly produced in a perfect state as that a complex machine could have been invented by humans in a perfect state. Under domestication, monstrosities sometimes occur that resemble normal structures in very different animals. For example, pigs have occasionally been born with a kind of trunk, and if any wild species of the same genus had naturally possessed a trunk, it might have been argued that this appeared as a monstrosity. But after diligent searching, I've failed to find cases of monstrosities resembling normal structures in closely related species -- and those are the only cases that bear on the question. If monstrous forms of this kind ever do appear in the wild and are capable of reproducing (which isn't always the case), since they occur rarely and as isolated individuals, their survival would depend on unusually favorable circumstances. They would also, during the first and succeeding generations, cross with the ordinary form, and their abnormal character would almost inevitably be lost. But I'll return in a later chapter to the preservation and continuation of single or occasional variations.


Individual Differences

The many slight differences that appear in offspring from the same parents -- or which we can reasonably assume arose this way, from being observed among individuals of the same species living in the same confined area -- may be called individual differences. No one supposes that all individuals of the same species are cast in the same actual mold. These individual differences are extremely important for us, because they are often inherited, as everyone knows, and they provide the raw material for natural selection to act on and accumulate, in the same way that a breeder accumulates individual differences in his domesticated organisms in whatever direction he chooses. These individual differences generally affect what naturalists consider unimportant parts. But I could show, with a long catalog of facts, that parts which must be called important -- whether viewed from a physiological or a classification standpoint -- sometimes vary among individuals of the same species. I'm convinced that even the most experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of cases of variability, even in important parts of structure, that he could collect from reliable sources, as I have collected over a course of years. It's worth remembering that systematists are far from happy when they find variability in important characters, and that not many people will painstakingly examine internal and important organs and compare them across many specimens of the same species. No one would have expected that the branching of the main nerves close to the great central ganglion of an insect would vary within the same species. You'd think that changes of this kind could only happen through slow degrees. Yet the naturalist Sir John Lubbock has shown a degree of variability in these main nerves in Coccus that can almost be compared to the irregular branching of the stem of a tree. This keen naturalist, I should add, has also shown that the muscles in the larvae of certain insects are far from uniform. Authors sometimes argue in a circle when they claim that important organs never vary -- because these same authors practically define as "important" (as some few naturalists have honestly admitted) only those parts that don't vary. Under this reasoning, no instance of an important part varying will ever be found. But under any other definition, many instances can certainly be given.

There is one point connected with individual differences that is extremely puzzling: I'm referring to those genera that have been called "protean" or "polymorphic," in which species show an extraordinary amount of variation. For many of these forms, hardly any two naturalists agree whether to rank them as species or as varieties. Good examples include Rubus, Rosa, and Hieracium among plants, several genera of insects, and Brachiopod shells. In most polymorphic genera, some of the species do have fixed and definite characters. Genera that are polymorphic in one country seem to be, with a few exceptions, polymorphic in other countries as well -- and likewise, judging from Brachiopod shells, in former periods of time. These facts are very puzzling, because they seem to show that this kind of variability is independent of the conditions of life. I suspect that in at least some of these polymorphic genera, we're seeing variations that are of no benefit or harm to the species, and which therefore have not been seized on and made definite by natural selection, as I'll explain later.

Individuals of the same species often show, as everyone knows, great differences of structure that are independent of variation -- as in the two sexes of various animals, in the two or three castes of sterile females or workers among insects, and in the immature and larval stages of many lower animals. There are also cases of dimorphism and trimorphism, in both animals and plants. For example, Alfred Russel Wallace, who has recently drawn attention to this subject, showed that the females of certain butterfly species in the Malay Archipelago regularly appear in two or even three strikingly distinct forms, not connected by intermediate varieties. Fritz Muller described similar but even more extraordinary cases in the males of certain Brazilian crustaceans: the male of a Tanais regularly occurs in two distinct forms -- one with strong and differently shaped pincers, and the other with antennae much more richly supplied with scent-detecting hairs. Although in most of these cases the two or three forms, in both animals and plants, are not currently connected by intermediate gradations, it's possible that they once were. Wallace, for instance, describes a certain butterfly on one island that shows a great range of varieties connected by intermediate links, and the extreme forms of this chain closely resemble the two forms of a related dimorphic species living in another part of the Malay Archipelago. Similarly with ants: the several worker castes are generally quite distinct, but in some cases, as we'll see later, the castes are connected by finely graded varieties. The same is true, as I've observed myself, with some dimorphic plants. It certainly seems remarkable at first that the same female butterfly should have the power to produce, at the same time, three distinct female forms and a male -- and that a hermaphrodite plant should produce from the same seed capsule three distinct hermaphrodite forms, bearing three different kinds of females and three or even six different kinds of males. But these cases are really just exaggerations of the common fact that a female produces offspring of two sexes, which sometimes differ from each other in striking ways.



Doubtful Species

The forms that have a considerable degree of species-like character, but that are so closely similar to other forms -- or are so closely linked to them by intermediate gradations -- that naturalists hesitate to rank them as distinct species: these are in several respects the most important for us. We have every reason to believe that many of these doubtful and closely related forms have permanently retained their characters for a long time -- as long, so far as we know, as have fully recognized species. In practice, when a naturalist can connect two forms by means of intermediate links, he treats one as a variety of the other, ranking the most common form (but sometimes the one first described) as the species, and the other as the variety. But cases of great difficulty sometimes arise in deciding whether or not to rank one form as a variety of another, even when they are closely connected by intermediate links. Nor will the commonly assumed hybrid nature of the intermediate forms always resolve the difficulty. In very many cases, however, one form is ranked as a variety of another not because intermediate links have actually been found, but because analogy leads the observer to suppose that they either exist somewhere now or may have existed in the past. And here a wide door is opened for doubt and guesswork.

So in deciding whether a form should be ranked as a species or a variety, the opinion of naturalists with sound judgment and wide experience seems the only guide to follow. We must, however, in many cases decide by majority opinion, since few well-marked and well-known varieties can be named that haven't been ranked as species by at least some competent judges.

That doubtful varieties of this kind are far from uncommon cannot be disputed. Compare the various floras of Great Britain, France, or the United States, compiled by different botanists, and see what a surprising number of forms have been ranked by one botanist as good species and by another as mere varieties. The botanist H. C. Watson, to whom I'm deeply grateful for assistance of all kinds, has identified for me 182 British plants that are generally considered varieties but have all been ranked by some botanists as species. In making this list he left out many minor varieties that have nonetheless been ranked by some botanists as species, and he entirely omitted several highly polymorphic genera. Under these genera, including the most polymorphic forms, Mr. Babington lists 251 species, while Mr. Bentham lists only 112 -- a difference of 139 doubtful forms! Among animals that mate for each birth and are highly mobile, doubtful forms ranked by one zoologist as a species and by another as a variety can rarely be found within the same country, but are common in separated areas. How many of the birds and insects in North America and Europe that differ very slightly from each other have been ranked by one eminent naturalist as undoubted species, and by another as varieties, or, as they are often called, geographical races! Wallace, in several valuable papers on the various animals -- especially the Lepidoptera -- inhabiting the islands of the great Malay Archipelago, shows that they can be sorted into four categories: variable forms, local forms, geographical races or subspecies, and true representative species. The variable forms vary widely within a single island. The local forms are moderately constant and distinct on each separate island, but when specimens from all the islands are compared, the differences are so slight and gradual that it's impossible to define or describe them -- even though the extreme forms are distinct enough. The geographical races or subspecies are local forms that are completely fixed and isolated, but since they don't differ from each other in strongly marked and important characters, "there is no possible test but individual opinion to determine which of them shall be considered as species and which as varieties." Finally, representative species fill the same ecological role on each island as do the local forms and subspecies, but since they differ from each other more than the local forms and subspecies do, they are almost universally ranked by naturalists as true species. Still, no reliable criterion can possibly be given by which variable forms, local forms, subspecies, and representative species can be distinguished.

Many years ago, when comparing -- and watching others compare -- the birds from the closely neighboring islands of the Galapagos Archipelago with one another and with those from the American mainland, I was struck by how entirely vague and arbitrary the distinction between species and varieties really is. On the islets of the little Madeira group there are many insects described as varieties in Mr. Wollaston's admirable work, which would certainly be ranked as distinct species by many entomologists. Even Ireland has a few animals, now generally regarded as varieties, that have been ranked as species by some zoologists. Several experienced ornithologists consider the British red grouse to be only a strongly marked variety of a Norwegian species, while the majority rank it as an undoubted species unique to Great Britain. A wide distance between the homes of two doubtful forms leads many naturalists to rank them as distinct species. But what distance will suffice? If the distance between America and Europe is enough, will the distance between Europe and the Azores, or Madeira, or the Canaries, or between the individual islets of these small archipelagos, also be enough?

The distinguished American entomologist B. D. Walsh described what he calls phytophagic varieties and phytophagic species. Most plant-feeding insects live on one kind of plant or on one group of plants; some feed on many kinds without varying as a result. In several cases, however, Walsh observed that insects found living on different plants show, in their larval or adult stage or both, slight but consistent differences in color, size, or in the nature of their secretions. In some instances only the males differ in this way; in others, both males and females. When the differences are somewhat more strongly marked, and when both sexes and all ages are affected, the forms are ranked by all entomologists as good species. But no observer can determine for another -- even if he can do so for himself -- which of these phytophagic forms should be called species and which should be called varieties. Walsh ranks the forms that would presumably interbreed freely as varieties, and those that appear to have lost this ability as species. Since the differences depend on the insects having fed for a long time on distinct plants, we can't expect to find intermediate links connecting the various forms. The naturalist thus loses his best guide for determining whether to rank doubtful forms as varieties or species. This same problem necessarily arises with closely related organisms living on distinct continents or islands. On the other hand, when an animal or plant ranges over the same continent or inhabits many islands in the same archipelago and takes different forms in different areas, there is always a good chance that intermediate forms will be discovered linking the extremes -- and the forms are then downgraded to the rank of varieties.

A few naturalists maintain that animals never have varieties. But these same naturalists rank the slightest difference as having species-level significance, and when the same identical form is found in two distant countries or in two geological formations, they believe that two distinct species are hiding under the same appearance. Used this way, the term "species" becomes a meaningless abstraction, implying and assuming a separate act of creation. Many forms that highly competent judges consider to be varieties so completely resemble species in their characters that other equally competent judges have ranked them as species. But arguing about whether they should be called species or varieties, before any definition of these terms has been generally accepted, is beating the air.

Many of the cases of strongly marked varieties or doubtful species deserve careful attention, and several interesting lines of argument -- from geographical distribution, analogical variation, hybridism, and so on -- have been brought to bear in trying to determine their rank. But space doesn't permit me to discuss them here. Close investigation will no doubt bring naturalists to agreement on many of these doubtful forms. Yet it must be admitted that it is in the best-known countries where we find the greatest number of them. I've been struck by the fact that if any animal or plant in the wild is highly useful to humans, or for any reason closely attracts our attention, varieties of it will almost always be found on record. These varieties, moreover, will often be ranked by some authors as species. Take the common oak: how closely it has been studied, yet a German author makes more than a dozen species out of forms that are almost universally considered by other botanists to be varieties. And in this country, the highest botanical authorities and practical experts can be cited on both sides of the question of whether the sessile and pedunculated oaks are good and distinct species or mere varieties.

I should mention here a remarkable paper recently published by the botanist Alphonse de Candolle on the oaks of the whole world. No one ever had more ample materials for distinguishing species, or could have worked on them with more dedication and skill. He first gives in detail all the many points of structure that vary across the different species, estimating numerically how frequently each variation occurs. He identifies more than a dozen characters that may be found varying even on the same branch -- sometimes according to age or development, sometimes without any clear reason. Such characters are of course not useful for defining species, but they are, as the botanist Asa Gray has pointed out in commenting on this paper, the kind that generally do enter into species definitions. De Candolle then says that he gives the rank of species to forms that differ by characters which never vary on the same tree and are never found connected by intermediate states. After this discussion -- the result of so much labor -- he emphatically remarks: "They are mistaken, who repeat that the greater part of our species are clearly limited, and that the doubtful species are in a feeble minority. This seemed to be true, so long as a genus was imperfectly known, and its species were founded upon a few specimens, that is to say, were provisional. Just as we come to know them better, intermediate forms flow in, and doubts as to specific limits augment." He also adds that it is the best-known species that present the greatest number of spontaneous varieties and subspecies. Thus Quercus robur has twenty-eight varieties, all of which, except six, are clustered around three subspecies: Q. pedunculata, sessiliflora, and pubescens. The forms connecting these three subspecies are comparatively rare. And as Asa Gray again observes, if these connecting forms -- which are now rare -- were to become totally extinct, the three subspecies would hold exactly the same relation to each other as do the four or five provisionally accepted species that closely surround the typical Quercus robur. In the end, De Candolle admits that out of the 300 species to be listed in his Prodromus as belonging to the oak family, at least two-thirds are provisional species -- meaning they don't strictly meet the definition of a true species given above. It should be added that De Candolle no longer believes species are immutable creations, but concludes that the theory of descent is the most natural one, "and the most accordant with the known facts in palaeontology, geographical botany and zoology, of anatomical structure and classification."

When a young naturalist begins studying a group of organisms entirely new to him, he is at first very puzzled about which differences to consider species-level and which to consider variety-level -- because he knows nothing about the amount and kind of variation the group is subject to. This shows, at the very least, how common variation is. But if he limits his attention to one group within one country, he'll soon make up his mind about most of the doubtful forms. His general tendency will be to create many species, because he'll become impressed -- just like the pigeon or poultry fancier I mentioned earlier -- with the amount of difference in the forms he's constantly studying. And he has little general knowledge of analogical variation in other groups and other countries to correct his first impressions. As he extends his range of observations, he'll encounter more difficult cases, because he'll meet a greater number of closely related forms. But if his observations are wide enough, he'll generally be able to make up his own mind in the end -- though he'll succeed only by accepting a great deal of variation, and the truth of this conclusion will often be disputed by other naturalists. When he comes to study related forms brought from countries that are no longer connected -- where he can't hope to find intermediate links -- he'll be forced to rely almost entirely on analogy, and his difficulties will reach a peak.

Certainly no clear line of demarcation has yet been drawn between species and subspecies -- that is, the forms which in some naturalists' opinion come very close to, but don't quite reach, the rank of species. Nor has a clear line been drawn between subspecies and well-marked varieties, or between lesser varieties and individual differences. These differences blend into each other in an unbroken series, and the series gives the impression of an actual passage from one to the next.

This is why I regard individual differences, though of little interest to the systematist, as extremely important for us -- they are the first step toward the slight varieties that are barely thought worth recording in works on natural history. And I regard varieties that are in any degree more distinct and permanent as steps toward more strongly marked and permanent varieties, and those in turn as leading to subspecies, and then to species. The passage from one stage of difference to another may, in many cases, simply result from the nature of the organism and the different physical conditions it has long been exposed to. But for the more important and adaptive characters, the passage from one stage to another can safely be attributed to the cumulative action of natural selection (to be explained later) and to the effects of increased use or disuse of parts. A well-marked variety may therefore be called an incipient species -- but whether this belief is justified must be judged by the weight of the various facts and arguments presented throughout this work.

It shouldn't be assumed that all varieties or incipient species reach the rank of species. They may go extinct, or they may persist as varieties for very long periods, as Mr. Wollaston has shown with certain fossil land-shells in Madeira, and as Gaston de Saporta has shown with plants. If a variety were to flourish so as to exceed the parent species in numbers, it would then rank as the species, and the original species as the variety. Or it might come to replace and drive the parent species to extinction. Or both might coexist and both rank as independent species. But we'll return to this subject later.

From these remarks you can see that I regard the term "species" as one arbitrarily given, for the sake of convenience, to a set of individuals closely resembling each other -- and that it does not essentially differ from the term "variety," which is given to less distinct and more fluctuating forms. The term "variety," in turn, compared with mere individual differences, is also applied arbitrarily, for convenience.



Wide-Ranging, Much Diffused, and Common Species Vary Most

Guided by theoretical considerations, I thought that some interesting results might be obtained about the nature and relationships of the species that vary most, by tabulating all the varieties in several well-studied floras. At first this seemed like a simple task. But H. C. Watson, to whom I'm much indebted for valuable advice and help on this subject, soon convinced me that there were many difficulties -- as did the botanist Joseph Hooker afterward, in even stronger terms. I'll save the discussion of these difficulties, and the tables of proportional numbers of varying species, for a future work. Hooker allows me to add that after carefully reading my manuscript and examining the tables, he thinks the following statements are fairly well established. The whole subject, however, treated as briefly as it necessarily is here, is rather confusing, and I can't avoid making references to the "struggle for existence," "divergence of character," and other topics to be discussed later.

Alphonse de Candolle and others have shown that plants with very wide ranges generally have varieties -- and this might have been expected, since they are exposed to diverse physical conditions and come into competition (which, as we'll see later, is a far more important factor) with different sets of organisms. But my tables further show that, in any limited country, the species that are most common -- that is, most abundant in individuals -- and the species that are most widely spread within their own country (which is a different thing from having a wide overall range, and to some extent different from mere commonness) most often give rise to varieties well-marked enough to have been recorded in botanical works. So it is the most flourishing species -- or, as they may be called, the dominant species, those that range widely, are the most spread out in their own country, and are the most numerous in individuals -- that most often produce well-marked varieties, or, as I consider them, incipient species. And this might have been expected: since varieties, in order to become permanent to any degree, necessarily have to compete with the other inhabitants of the country, the species that are already dominant will be the most likely to produce offspring that, though somewhat modified, still inherit the advantages that enabled their parents to become dominant over their neighbors. In these remarks about dominance, I should clarify that I'm referring only to forms that compete with each other, and especially to members of the same genus or class with nearly similar ways of life. When it comes to the number of individuals or commonness of species, the comparison of course applies only to members of the same group. A flowering plant may be called dominant if it is more numerous in individuals and more widely spread than the other plants of the same country that live under nearly the same conditions. Such a plant is not less dominant because some green alga in the water or some parasitic fungus is far more numerous in individuals and more widely spread. But if the alga or the parasitic fungus exceeds its own relatives in these respects, it will then be dominant within its own group.



Species of the Larger Genera in Each Country Vary More Frequently Than the Species of the Smaller Genera

If the plants listed in any country's flora are divided into two equal groups -- all those belonging to the larger genera (that is, genera containing many species) on one side, and all those in the smaller genera on the other -- the larger genera will be found to include a somewhat greater number of the very common, widely spread, or dominant species. This might have been expected, since the mere fact that many species of the same genus live in any country shows that something in the conditions there -- organic or inorganic -- is favorable to that genus. And so we might have expected to find, in the larger genera, a greater proportion of dominant species. But so many factors tend to obscure this result that I'm surprised my tables show even a small majority on the side of the larger genera. I'll mention just two sources of confusion. Freshwater and salt-loving plants generally have very wide ranges and are widely spread, but this seems connected with the nature of the habitats they occupy, and has little or no relation to the size of the genera they belong to. Again, plants that are lower in organizational complexity are generally much more widely spread than more complex plants, and here again there is no close relation to the size of the genera. The cause of simpler plants ranging widely will be discussed in my chapter on geographical distribution.

Because I regard species as nothing more than strongly marked and well-defined varieties, I was led to expect that the species of larger genera in each country would more often show varieties than the species of smaller genera. The reasoning is this: wherever many closely related species (that is, species of the same genus) have been formed, many varieties or incipient species ought, as a general rule, to be forming now. Where many large trees grow, we expect to find saplings. Where many species of a genus have been formed through variation, circumstances have been favorable for variation, and so we might expect those circumstances to still be favorable. On the other hand, if we regard each species as a special act of creation, there is no apparent reason why more varieties should occur in a group with many species than in one with few.

To test this expectation, I arranged the plants of twelve countries, and the beetles of two districts, into two nearly equal groups -- species of the larger genera on one side, species of the smaller genera on the other. It has invariably proved to be the case that a larger proportion of the species in the larger genera show varieties than do the species in the smaller genera. Moreover, the species of the large genera that do show varieties invariably show a larger average number of varieties than do the species of the small genera. Both these results hold when another division is made, and when all the smallest genera -- those with only one to four species -- are excluded from the tables entirely. These facts have a clear meaning if species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties: wherever many species of the same genus have been formed -- where, if we may use the expression, the species factory has been active -- we should generally find the factory still in operation. This is especially true since we have every reason to believe that the process of manufacturing new species is a slow one. And this certainly holds true if varieties are viewed as incipient species, for my tables clearly show, as a general rule, that wherever many species of a genus have been formed, the species of that genus show a number of varieties -- that is, incipient species -- beyond the average. This is not to say that all large genera are now varying rapidly and thus increasing in the number of their species, or that no small genera are now varying and increasing. If that were so, it would have been fatal to my theory, since geology plainly tells us that small genera have, over time, often grown greatly in size, and that large genera have often reached their peak, declined, and disappeared. All I want to show is that, where many species of a genus have been formed, on average many are still forming -- and this certainly holds true.



Many of the Species Included Within the Larger Genera Resemble Varieties in Being Very Closely, but Unequally, Related to Each Other, and in Having Restricted Ranges

There are other relationships between the species of large genera and their recorded varieties that deserve notice. We've seen that there is no infallible criterion for distinguishing species from well-marked varieties, and when intermediate links between doubtful forms have not been found, naturalists are forced to decide based on the amount of difference between them, judging by analogy whether the difference is enough to raise one or both to the rank of species. The amount of difference is therefore one very important criterion in deciding whether two forms should be ranked as species or varieties. Now, the botanist Fries noted with regard to plants, and the entomologist Westwood with regard to insects, that in large genera the amount of difference between species is often extremely small. I've tried to test this numerically using averages, and as far as my imperfect results go, they confirm this view. I've also consulted some sharp and experienced observers, and after deliberation, they agree. In this respect, then, the species of larger genera resemble varieties more than the species of smaller genera do. Or to put it another way: in the larger genera, where a greater-than-average number of varieties or incipient species are now being produced, many of the species already formed still resemble varieties to some extent, because they differ from each other by less than the usual amount.

Moreover, the species of the larger genera are related to each other in the same way that the varieties of any one species are related to each other. No naturalist claims that all the species of a genus are equally distinct from each other; they can generally be divided into subgenera, sections, or smaller groups. As Fries has well observed, little groups of species are generally clustered like satellites around other species. And what are varieties but groups of forms, unequally related to each other, clustered around certain forms -- that is, around their parent species? There is undoubtedly one very important difference between varieties and species: the amount of difference between varieties, when compared with each other or with their parent species, is much less than that between species of the same genus. But when we come to discuss what I call the principle of divergence of character, we'll see how this can be explained, and how the smaller differences between varieties tend to increase into the greater differences between species.

There is one more point worth noting. Varieties generally have very restricted ranges. This statement is really almost a truism, since if a variety were found to have a wider range than its supposed parent species, their names would be swapped. But there is reason to believe that species which are very closely related to other species, and which in that way resemble varieties, often have restricted ranges too. For instance, H. C. Watson has marked for me in the well-vetted London Catalogue of Plants (4th edition) sixty-three plants that are listed as species but that he considers so closely related to other species as to be of doubtful value. These sixty-three supposed species range, on average, over 6.9 of the provinces into which Watson has divided Great Britain. In that same catalog, fifty-three acknowledged varieties are recorded, and these range over 7.7 provinces -- whereas the species to which these varieties belong range over 14.3 provinces. So the acknowledged varieties have very nearly the same restricted average range as the closely related forms that Watson has flagged for me as doubtful species, but which are almost universally ranked by British botanists as good and true species.



Summary

In the end, varieties cannot be distinguished from species -- except, first, by the discovery of intermediate linking forms, and second, by a certain indefinite amount of difference between them. Two forms that differ very little are generally ranked as varieties, even when they can't be closely connected. But the amount of difference needed to give any two forms the rank of species can't be defined. In genera with more than the average number of species in any country, the species of those genera have more than the average number of varieties. In large genera, the species tend to be closely but unequally related, forming little clusters around other species. Species very closely related to other species apparently have restricted ranges. In all these respects, the species of large genera show a strong similarity to varieties. And we can clearly understand these similarities if species once existed as varieties, and originated that way -- whereas these similarities are utterly inexplicable if species are independent creations.

We've also seen that it is the most flourishing or dominant species of the larger genera within each group that, on average, produce the greatest number of varieties. And varieties, as we'll see later, tend to become converted into new and distinct species. So the larger genera tend to become still larger, and throughout nature the forms of life that are now dominant tend to become even more dominant by leaving many modified and dominant descendants. But, by steps to be explained later, the larger genera also tend to break up into smaller genera. And so the forms of life throughout the world become divided into groups subordinate to groups.
