III: Struggle for Existence


III

Struggle for Existence


Before getting into the subject of this chapter, I need to make a few preliminary remarks to show how the struggle for existence connects to natural selection. As we saw in the last chapter, there is some individual variability among organisms in the wild -- indeed, I'm not aware that anyone has ever disputed this. It doesn't matter for our purposes whether a multitude of doubtful forms are called species, subspecies, or varieties -- what rank, for instance, the two or three hundred doubtful forms of British plants deserve to hold, so long as we admit that some well-marked varieties exist. But the mere existence of individual variability and a few well-marked varieties, though necessary as the foundation for the work, doesn't help us much in understanding how species arise in nature. How have all those exquisite adaptations of one part of an organism to another part, and to the conditions of life, and of one living thing to another, been perfected? We see these beautiful co-adaptations most clearly in the woodpecker and the mistletoe, and only a little less clearly in the humblest parasite clinging to the hairs of a mammal or the feathers of a bird; in the structure of the beetle that dives through water; in the plumed seed carried by the gentlest breeze. In short, we see beautiful adaptations everywhere and in every part of the living world.

Again, we might ask: how is it that varieties, which I have called incipient species, eventually become converted into fully distinct species, which in most cases obviously differ from each other far more than the varieties of the same species do? How do those groups of species -- what we call distinct genera, which differ from each other more than species of the same genus -- arise? All these results, as we'll see more fully in the next chapter, follow from the struggle for life. Because of this struggle, variations, however slight and whatever their cause, if they are in any degree useful to the individuals of a species -- in their infinitely complex relationships to other organisms and to their physical conditions -- will tend to be preserved in those individuals and will generally be inherited by their offspring. The offspring will thus have a better chance of surviving, because of the many individuals of any species that are born in each generation, only a small number can survive. I have called this principle -- by which each slight variation, if useful, is preserved -- natural selection, to highlight its relationship to humanity's power of selective breeding. But the expression often used by Herbert Spencer, survival of the fittest, is more accurate and sometimes equally useful. We have seen that humans, through selective breeding, can certainly produce great results and can adapt organisms to our own uses by accumulating slight but useful variations that nature provides. But natural selection, as we'll see later, is a force constantly ready for action, and is as immeasurably superior to our feeble efforts as the works of nature are to those of human craft.

Now let's discuss the struggle for existence in more detail. In my future work, this subject will be treated at the greater length it deserves. The elder Augustin de Candolle and the geologist Charles Lyell have shown extensively and thoughtfully that all living things are exposed to severe competition. When it comes to plants, no one has treated this subject with more energy and skill than the botanist W. Herbert, Dean of Manchester -- clearly the result of his great horticultural knowledge. Nothing is easier than to admit in words the truth of the universal struggle for life, or harder -- at least I found it so -- than to constantly keep this conclusion in mind. Yet unless it is thoroughly ingrained in your thinking, the whole web of nature, with every fact about distribution, rarity, abundance, extinction, and variation, will be only dimly seen or completely misunderstood. We look at the face of nature bright with gladness; we often see a superabundance of food. We don't see, or we forget, that the birds singing idly around us mostly live on insects or seeds, and are constantly destroying life. Or we forget how heavily these songsters, or their eggs, or their nestlings are destroyed by predatory birds and mammals. We don't always keep in mind that although food may be superabundant right now, it is not so at all seasons of every year.


The Term, Struggle for Existence, Used in a Large Sense

I should explain upfront that I use this term in a broad and metaphorical sense, including the dependence of one organism on another, and including -- which is more important -- not only the life of the individual but success in leaving offspring. Two wolves in a time of famine may truly be said to struggle with each other over which one gets food and lives. But a plant on the edge of a desert is said to struggle for life against the drought, though it would be more accurate to say it depends on moisture. A plant that annually produces a thousand seeds, of which on average only one reaches maturity, may more truly be said to struggle with the plants of the same and other species that already cover the ground. The mistletoe depends on apple trees and a few other species, but it can only in a stretched sense be said to struggle with those trees -- though if too many of these parasites grow on the same tree, it weakens and dies. But several seedling mistletoes growing close together on the same branch may more truly be said to struggle with each other. Since the mistletoe is spread by birds, its existence depends on them; and it may metaphorically be said to struggle with other fruit-bearing plants by tempting birds to eat and thus scatter its seeds. In all these senses, which blend into each other, I use the general term "struggle for existence" for convenience.



Geometrical Ratio of Increase

A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high rate at which all organisms tend to increase. Every creature that produces several eggs or seeds during its natural lifetime must suffer destruction at some period of its life, and during some season or occasional year. Otherwise, on the principle of geometrical increase, its numbers would quickly become so extraordinarily large that no country could support them. So, since more individuals are produced than can possibly survive, there must in every case be a struggle for existence -- either one individual against another of the same species, or against individuals of different species, or against the physical conditions of life. It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with tremendous force to the whole animal and plant kingdoms. In nature there can be no artificial increase of food and no deliberate restraint from breeding. Although some species may currently be increasing in numbers, more or less rapidly, all cannot do so -- the world simply would not hold them.

There is no exception to the rule that every organism naturally increases at so high a rate that, if not destroyed, the earth would soon be covered by the descendants of a single pair. Even slow-breeding humans have doubled in population every twenty-five years, and at this rate, in less than a thousand years there would literally not be standing room for our descendants. Linnaeus calculated that if an annual plant produced only two seeds -- and no plant is this unproductive -- and their seedlings the next year produced two, and so on, then in twenty years there would be a million plants. The elephant is considered the slowest breeder of all known animals, and I have taken some trouble to estimate its probable minimum rate of natural increase. It is safest to assume that it begins breeding at thirty years old, continues until ninety, produces six young in that interval, and lives to a hundred. If so, after a period of 740 to 750 years, there would be nearly nineteen million elephants alive, all descended from the first pair.

But we have better evidence than mere theoretical calculations -- namely, the numerous recorded cases of the astonishingly rapid increase of various animals in the wild, when conditions have been favorable for two or three consecutive seasons. Even more striking is the evidence from domestic animals of many kinds that have gone wild in various parts of the world. If the reports of the rate of increase of slow-breeding cattle and horses in South America, and more recently in Australia, had not been well documented, they would have been incredible. So it is with plants: cases could be given of introduced plants that have become common throughout whole islands in less than ten years. Several plants, such as the cardoon and a tall thistle, which now are the most common over the wide plains of La Plata -- covering square leagues of land to the near-exclusion of every other plant -- were introduced from Europe. And there are plants that now range in India, as I hear from Dr. Falconer, from Cape Comorin to the Himalayas, which have been imported from America since its discovery. In such cases -- and endless others could be given -- no one supposes that the fertility of these animals or plants has been suddenly and temporarily increased to any noticeable degree. The obvious explanation is that conditions have been highly favorable, and that consequently there has been less destruction of the old and young, and nearly all the young have been able to breed. Their geometrical ratio of increase, the result of which is always surprising, simply explains their extraordinarily rapid spread and expansion in their new homes.

In the wild, almost every full-grown plant annually produces seeds, and among animals there are very few that do not breed every year. So we can confidently say that all plants and animals tend to increase at a geometrical ratio -- that all would rapidly fill every habitat where they could possibly exist, and that this geometrical tendency to increase must be checked by destruction at some period of life. Our familiarity with larger domestic animals tends, I think, to mislead us: we see no great destruction falling on them and forget that thousands are slaughtered annually for food. In the wild, an equal number would somehow have to be eliminated.

The only difference between organisms that annually produce eggs or seeds by the thousands and those that produce very few is that the slow breeders would need a few more years to populate a whole district, no matter how large, under favorable conditions. The condor lays a couple of eggs and the ostrich a score, yet in the same country the condor may be the more numerous of the two. The fulmar petrel lays just one egg, yet it is believed to be the most numerous bird in the world. One fly deposits hundreds of eggs, and another, like the hippobosca, just a single one. But this difference does not determine how many individuals of the two species a district can support. A large number of eggs matters most for species that depend on a fluctuating food supply, because it lets them increase rapidly in number. But the real importance of producing large numbers of eggs or seeds is to make up for heavy destruction at some period of life -- and in the great majority of cases, that period is an early one. If an animal can somehow protect its own eggs or young, a small number may be produced and the population can still be fully maintained. But if many eggs or young are destroyed, many must be produced or the species will go extinct. It would be enough to maintain the full population of a tree that lived on average for a thousand years if just a single seed were produced once in a thousand years -- assuming that seed were never destroyed and could be guaranteed to germinate in a suitable place. So in all cases, the average number of any animal or plant depends only indirectly on the number of its eggs or seeds.

When looking at nature, it is absolutely essential to keep these considerations in mind -- never to forget that every single organism may be said to be striving with all its might to increase in numbers; that each lives by a struggle at some period of its life; that heavy destruction inevitably falls either on the young or old during each generation or at recurring intervals. Ease any check, reduce the destruction even slightly, and the number of that species will almost instantly increase to any amount.



Nature of the Checks to Increase

The causes that check the natural tendency of each species to increase are extremely obscure. Look at the most vigorous species: the more it swarms in numbers, the more it will tend to increase still further. We don't know exactly what the checks are even in a single instance. Nor will this surprise anyone who considers how ignorant we are on this subject even regarding humanity, although we are incomparably better understood than any other animal. This subject of the checks to increase has been ably treated by several authors, and I hope in a future work to discuss it at considerable length, especially regarding the wild animals of South America. Here I will make only a few remarks, just to remind the reader of some of the key points. Eggs or very young animals generally seem to suffer the most, though this is not always the case. With plants there is enormous destruction of seeds, but from some observations I've made, it appears that seedlings suffer most from germinating in ground already thickly stocked with other plants. Seedlings are also destroyed in vast numbers by various enemies. For instance, on a piece of ground three feet long and two feet wide, dug and cleared -- where there could be no choking from other plants -- I marked all the seedlings of our native weeds as they came up, and out of 357, no fewer than 295 were destroyed, mainly by slugs and insects. If turf that has long been mowed -- and the same would apply to turf closely grazed by livestock -- is allowed to grow freely, the more vigorous plants gradually kill the less vigorous ones, even though they are fully grown. Out of twenty species growing on a small plot of mowed turf (three feet by four), nine species died out because the other species were allowed to grow up unchecked.

The amount of food for each species, of course, sets the extreme limit to which it can increase. But very often it is not obtaining food but serving as prey to other animals that determines the average population of a species. There seems to be little doubt, for example, that the numbers of partridges, grouse, and hares on any large estate depend mainly on the destruction of predators. If not a single game bird were shot during the next twenty years in England, and at the same time no predators were killed, there would in all probability be less game than at present -- even though hundreds of thousands of game animals are now shot annually. On the other hand, in some cases, as with the elephant, none are killed by predators; even the tiger in India very rarely dares to attack a young elephant protected by its mother.

Climate plays an important role in determining the average numbers of a species, and periodic seasons of extreme cold or drought seem to be the most effective of all checks. I estimated -- mainly from the greatly reduced number of nests in the spring -- that the winter of 1854-55 destroyed four-fifths of the birds on my own property. This is a tremendous death toll, when we remember that ten percent is an extraordinarily severe mortality from epidemics in humans. The effect of climate seems at first glance quite independent of the struggle for existence. But insofar as climate mainly acts by reducing food, it triggers the most severe struggle between individuals -- whether of the same or different species -- that depend on the same kind of food. Even when climate, for instance extreme cold, acts directly, it will be the least vigorous individuals, or those that got the least food through the advancing winter, that will suffer most. When we travel from south to north, or from a wet region to a dry one, we always see some species gradually getting rarer and rarer, and finally disappearing. Since the change of climate is obvious, we're tempted to attribute the whole effect to its direct action. But this is a false view: we forget that each species, even where it is most abundant, is constantly suffering enormous destruction at some period of its life from enemies or competitors for the same place and food. If those enemies or competitors are even slightly favored by any change of climate, they will increase in numbers. And since each area is already fully stocked with inhabitants, the other species must decrease. When we travel southward and see a species declining in numbers, we can be sure that the cause lies just as much in other species being favored as in this one being harmed. The same is true when we travel northward, but to a somewhat lesser degree, because the number of species of all kinds -- and therefore of competitors -- decreases as you go north. So in going northward, or ascending a mountain, we far more often meet with stunted forms caused by the directly harmful action of climate than we do in heading southward or descending a mountain. When we reach the Arctic regions, or snow-capped summits, or absolute deserts, the struggle for life is almost exclusively against the elements.

That climate acts mainly in an indirect way, by favoring other species, we can clearly see from the enormous number of plants that can perfectly well endure our climate in our gardens but never become established in the wild, because they cannot compete with our native plants or withstand destruction by our native animals.

When a species, due to highly favorable conditions, increases excessively in numbers in a small area, epidemics -- at least this seems generally to happen with our game animals -- often follow. Here we have a check independent of the struggle for life. But even some of these so-called epidemics appear to be caused by parasitic worms, which have been disproportionately favored for some reason -- possibly in part because they spread easily among crowded animals. And here comes a sort of struggle between the parasite and its prey.

On the other hand, in many cases a large population of individuals of the same species, relative to the numbers of its enemies, is absolutely necessary for its survival. We can easily grow plenty of corn and rapeseed in our fields because the seeds vastly outnumber the birds that feed on them. Nor can the birds, though having a superabundance of food at this one season, increase in proportion to the seed supply, since their numbers are kept in check during winter. But anyone who has tried knows how troublesome it is to get seed from a few wheat or similar plants in a garden. I have in this case lost every single seed. This view -- that a large population of the same species is necessary for its survival -- explains, I believe, some curious facts in nature: such as that very rare plants are sometimes extremely abundant in the few spots where they do exist, and that some social plants are social -- that is, abundant in individuals -- even at the extreme edge of their range. For in such cases, we may believe that a plant could exist only where conditions were so favorable that many could survive together, thus saving the species from total destruction. I should add that the benefits of crossbreeding and the harmful effects of inbreeding no doubt play a role in many of these cases, but I won't go into that here.



Complex Relations of All Animals and Plants to Each Other in the Struggle for Existence

Many cases are on record showing how complex and unexpected are the checks and relationships between organisms that have to struggle together in the same region. I will give just a single example, which, though a simple one, interested me. In Staffordshire, on the estate of a relative, where I had plenty of opportunity to investigate, there was a large and extremely barren heath that had never been touched by human hands. But several hundred acres of exactly the same type of land had been enclosed twenty-five years earlier and planted with Scotch fir. The change in the native vegetation of the planted portion of the heath was most remarkable -- more dramatic than you'd typically see in moving from one type of soil to a completely different one. Not only were the proportions of the heath plants completely changed, but twelve species of plants (not counting grasses and sedges) flourished in the plantations that could not be found on the open heath. The effect on insects must have been even greater, because six insect-eating bird species were very common in the plantations that were nowhere to be seen on the heath, while the heath was home to two or three different insect-eating birds. Here we see how powerful the effect of introducing a single tree species has been, with nothing else changed except that the land had been fenced so cattle couldn't enter. But how important fencing is, I saw clearly near Farnham, in Surrey. There are extensive heaths there, with a few clumps of old Scotch firs on the distant hilltops. Within the last ten years, large areas have been fenced off, and self-sown firs are now springing up in huge numbers, so close together that not all can survive. When I learned that these young trees had not been sown or planted, I was so surprised at their numbers that I went to several vantage points where I could survey hundreds of acres of the unfenced heath, and I literally could not see a single Scotch fir except the old planted clumps. But on looking closely between the stems of the heather, I found a multitude of seedlings and little trees that had been perpetually browsed down by cattle. In one square yard, at a point some hundred yards from one of the old clumps, I counted thirty-two little trees. One of them, with twenty-six rings of growth, had tried for many years to raise its head above the heather stems and had failed. No wonder that as soon as the land was fenced, it became thickly clothed with vigorously growing young firs. Yet the heath was so extremely barren and so extensive that no one would ever have imagined that cattle could have so closely and effectively searched it for food.

Here we see that cattle absolutely determine the existence of the Scotch fir. But in several parts of the world, insects determine the existence of cattle. Perhaps Paraguay offers the most curious example, for there neither cattle nor horses nor dogs have ever gone wild, even though they swarm in a feral state to the south and north. The naturalists Azara and Rengger showed that this is caused by the greater number in Paraguay of a certain fly that lays its eggs in the navels of these animals at birth. The increase of these flies, numerous as they are, must in turn be kept in check by some means -- probably by other parasitic insects. So if certain insect-eating birds were to decrease in Paraguay, the parasitic insects would probably increase, and this would reduce the number of the navel-infesting flies -- then cattle and horses would go wild, and this would certainly greatly alter the vegetation (as indeed I've observed in parts of South America). This in turn would greatly affect the insects, and this -- as we just saw in Staffordshire -- the insect-eating birds, and so onward in ever-increasing circles of complexity. Not that in nature the relationships are ever as simple as this. Battle within battle must be continually recurring with varying success. Yet in the long run the forces are so nicely balanced that the face of nature remains uniform for long periods of time -- though the merest trifle would certainly give the victory to one organism over another. Nevertheless, so deep is our ignorance, and so great our presumption, that we are astonished when we hear of the extinction of a living creature; and because we don't see the cause, we invoke catastrophes to devastate the world, or invent laws governing the lifespan of species!

I am tempted to give one more example showing how plants and animals, far apart in the scale of nature, are bound together by a web of complex relationships. I will later have occasion to show that the exotic Lobelia fulgens is never visited in my garden by insects and consequently, because of its particular structure, never sets a seed. Nearly all our orchid species absolutely require visits from insects to remove their pollen masses and thus fertilize them. I have found through experiments that bumblebees are almost essential to the fertilization of the heartsease (Viola tricolor), because other bees do not visit this flower. I have also found that bee visits are necessary for the fertilization of some kinds of clover. For instance, twenty heads of Dutch clover (Trifolium repens) yielded 2,290 seeds, but twenty other heads protected from bees produced not one. Again, 100 heads of red clover (T. pratense) produced 2,700 seeds, but the same number of protected heads produced not a single seed. Only bumblebees visit red clover, because other bees cannot reach the nectar. It has been suggested that moths may fertilize the clovers, but I doubt they could do so in the case of red clover, since their weight is not enough to push down the wing petals. So we can infer with high probability that if the whole group of bumblebees became extinct or very rare in England, the heartsease and red clover would become very rare or disappear entirely. The number of bumblebees in any district depends in large part on the number of field mice, which destroy their combs and nests. Colonel Newman, who has long studied the habits of bumblebees, believes that "more than two-thirds of them are thus destroyed all over England." Now the number of mice depends largely, as everyone knows, on the number of cats. And Colonel Newman says, "Near villages and small towns I have found the nests of bumblebees more numerous than elsewhere, which I attribute to the number of cats that destroy the mice." So it is entirely plausible that the presence of cats in large numbers in a district might determine, through the chain of mice and then bees, the abundance of certain flowers in that district!

In the case of every species, many different checks, acting at different periods of life and during different seasons or years, probably come into play. Some one check or some few are generally the most important, but all work together to determine the average number, or even the existence, of the species. In some cases it can be shown that very different checks act on the same species in different regions. When we look at the plants and bushes clothing a tangled bank, we're tempted to attribute their proportional numbers and kinds to what we call chance. But how false a view this is! Everyone has heard that when an American forest is cut down, a very different vegetation springs up. But it has been observed that ancient Indian ruins in the southern United States, which must formerly have been cleared of trees, now display the same beautiful diversity and proportion of species as the surrounding virgin forests. What a struggle must have gone on during long centuries between the several kinds of trees, each annually scattering its seeds by the thousand! What war between insect and insect -- between insects, snails, and other animals with birds and predators -- all striving to increase, all feeding on each other, or on the trees, their seeds and seedlings, or on the other plants that first covered the ground and thus checked the growth of the trees. Throw up a handful of feathers, and all fall to the ground according to definite laws. But how simple is the problem of where each feather will fall, compared to the action and reaction of the innumerable plants and animals that have determined, over the course of centuries, the proportional numbers and kinds of trees now growing on the old Indian ruins!

The dependence of one organism on another, as of a parasite on its host, generally occurs between organisms far apart in the scale of nature. This is sometimes also the case with those that may strictly be said to struggle with each other for existence, as with locusts and grass-eating mammals. But the struggle will almost always be most severe between individuals of the same species, because they inhabit the same areas, need the same food, and face the same dangers. Among varieties of the same species, the struggle will generally be almost equally severe, and we sometimes see the contest decided quickly. For instance, if several varieties of wheat are sown together and the mixed seed is resown, some of the varieties that best suit the soil or climate, or are naturally the most fertile, will beat the others and produce more seed, and within a few years will replace the other varieties. To maintain a mixed stock of even such extremely similar varieties as differently colored sweet peas, they must be harvested separately each year and the seed then mixed in the right proportions; otherwise the weaker kinds will steadily decrease and disappear. The same is true of sheep varieties: it has been claimed that certain mountain varieties will starve out other mountain varieties, so they cannot be kept together. The same result has followed from keeping different varieties of the medicinal leech together. It may even be doubted whether the varieties of any of our domestic plants or animals have so exactly the same strength, habits, and constitution that the original proportions of a mixed stock -- with crossing prevented -- could be maintained for even half a dozen generations if they were allowed to struggle together in the same way as organisms in the wild, and if the seed or young were not annually preserved in the right proportions.



Struggle for Life Most Severe Between Individuals and Varieties of the Same Species

Since species of the same genus usually -- though by no means always -- have much similarity in habits and constitution, and always in structure, the struggle will generally be more severe between them, when they come into competition, than between species of different genera. We see this in the recent spread of one species of swallow across parts of the United States causing the decline of another species. The recent increase of the mistle thrush in parts of Scotland has caused the decline of the song thrush. How often we hear of one species of rat replacing another under the most different climates! In Russia the small Asian cockroach has everywhere driven out its larger relative. In Australia the imported honeybee is rapidly wiping out the small, stingless native bee. One species of charlock has been known to replace another species -- and so in other cases. We can dimly see why competition should be most severe between closely related forms that fill nearly the same role in nature. But probably in no single case could we say precisely why one species has been victorious over another in the great battle of life.

An extremely important conclusion can be drawn from the foregoing remarks: the structure of every organism is related, in the most essential yet often hidden way, to that of all other organisms with which it competes for food or living space, from which it has to escape, or on which it preys. This is obvious in the teeth and claws of the tiger, and in the legs and claws of the parasite clinging to the hair on the tiger's body. But in the beautifully plumed seed of the dandelion and the flattened, fringed legs of the water beetle, the relationship seems at first limited to the elements of air and water. Yet the advantage of plumed seeds no doubt depends closely on the land being already thickly covered with other plants, so that the seeds may be widely scattered and fall on unoccupied ground. For the water beetle, its legs, so well adapted for diving, allow it to compete with other aquatic insects, to hunt its own prey, and to escape being prey to other animals.

The store of nutrients packed within the seeds of many plants seems at first sight to have no connection to other plants. But from the strong growth of young plants produced from such seeds -- like peas and beans -- when sown in the midst of tall grass, it may be suspected that the main purpose of the nutrients in the seed is to fuel the growth of the seedling while it struggles with other plants growing vigorously all around.

Look at a plant in the middle of its range! Why does it not double or quadruple its numbers? We know that it can perfectly well withstand a little more heat or cold, dampness or dryness, because elsewhere it ranges into slightly hotter or colder, wetter or drier areas. In this case we can clearly see that if we wanted to give the plant the power to increase in numbers, we would have to give it some advantage over its competitors, or over the animals that prey on it. At the edges of its geographic range, a change of constitution with respect to climate would clearly be an advantage. But we have reason to believe that only a few plants or animals range so far that they are destroyed solely by the severity of the climate. Not until we reach the extreme limits of life -- in the Arctic regions or on the borders of an utter desert -- does competition cease. The land may be extremely cold or dry, yet there will still be competition between a few species, or between individuals of the same species, for the warmest or dampest spots.

So we can see that when a plant or animal is placed in a new country among new competitors, the conditions of its life will generally be changed in an essential way, even if the climate is exactly the same as in its former home. If its average numbers are to increase in its new home, we would have to modify it in a different way than we would have in its native country, because we would have to give it some advantage over a different set of competitors or enemies.

It is a useful exercise to try in imagination to give any one species an advantage over another. Probably in no single case would we know what to do. This ought to convince us of our ignorance about the mutual relationships of all living things -- a conviction as necessary as it is hard to acquire. All we can do is to keep steadily in mind that each organism is striving to increase at a geometrical ratio; that each, at some period of its life, during some season of the year, during each generation or at intervals, has to struggle for life and suffer great destruction. When we reflect on this struggle, we may console ourselves with the full belief that the war of nature is not incessant, that no fear is felt, that death is generally prompt, and that the vigorous, the healthy, and the happy survive and multiply.
