IV. Natural Selection; or the Survival of the Fittest


How will the struggle for existence, briefly discussed in the last chapter, act on variation? Can the principle of selection, which we've seen is so powerful in human hands, apply in nature? I think we'll see that it can act with tremendous efficiency. Keep in mind the endless number of slight variations and individual differences that occur in our domesticated organisms, and to a lesser degree in those in the wild -- along with the strength of heredity. Under domestication, you could truly say that the whole organism becomes somewhat plastic. But the variability we almost universally find in our domestic organisms is not directly produced by humans, as the botanist Joseph Hooker and the botanist Asa Gray have rightly pointed out. We can neither create varieties nor prevent them from appearing. We can only preserve and accumulate those that do occur. Unintentionally, we expose organisms to new and changing conditions of life, and variability follows -- but similar changes of conditions can and do occur in nature. Keep in mind, too, how infinitely complex and tightly interlocking are the relationships of all organisms to each other and to their physical environment -- and consequently, what an infinitely varied range of structural differences might be useful to each organism under changing conditions of life. Can it really be thought improbable, seeing that variations useful to humans have undoubtedly occurred, that other variations useful in some way to each organism in the great and complex battle of life should occur over the course of many successive generations? If such variations do occur, can we doubt -- remembering that many more individuals are born than can possibly survive -- that individuals having any advantage, however slight, over others would have the best chance of surviving and reproducing? On the other hand, we can be sure that any variation even slightly harmful would be ruthlessly eliminated. This preservation of favorable individual differences and variations, and the destruction of harmful ones, I have called natural selection, or the survival of the fittest. Variations that are neither useful nor harmful would not be affected by natural selection, and would be left as a fluctuating element, as we perhaps see in certain polymorphic species, or would eventually become fixed, depending on the nature of the organism and the nature of the conditions.

Several writers have misunderstood or objected to the term natural selection. Some have even imagined that natural selection induces variability, when in fact it only implies the preservation of variations that arise and are beneficial to an organism under its conditions of life. No one objects to farmers speaking of the powerful effects of human selection -- and in that case, the individual differences provided by nature, which the farmer selects for some purpose, must of course first occur. Others have objected that the term selection implies conscious choice in the animals that become modified. It has even been argued that since plants have no will, natural selection doesn't apply to them! Taken literally, no doubt, natural selection is an imperfect term -- but who ever objected to chemists speaking of the "elective affinities" of various elements? An acid cannot strictly be said to choose the base it combines with. It has been said that I speak of natural selection as an active power or deity -- but who objects to an author speaking of the attraction of gravity as ruling the movements of the planets? Everyone knows what is meant by such metaphorical expressions, and they're almost necessary for the sake of brevity. In the same way, it's hard to avoid personifying the word "Nature" -- but by nature I mean only the combined action and result of many natural laws, and by laws I mean the sequence of events as we've determined them. With a little familiarity, these superficial objections will be forgotten.

We'll best understand the probable course of natural selection by taking the case of a country undergoing some slight physical change -- a shift in climate, for instance. The proportional numbers of its inhabitants will almost immediately change, and some species will probably go extinct. From what we've seen of the intricate and complex way the inhabitants of any country are bound together, any change in the numerical proportions of the inhabitants -- quite apart from the climate change itself -- would seriously affect the others. If the country were open on its borders, new forms would certainly immigrate, and this too would seriously disturb the relationships among the former inhabitants. But in the case of an island, or of a country partly surrounded by barriers, where new and better-adapted forms couldn't freely enter, there would be openings in the natural order that would certainly be better filled if some of the original inhabitants were modified in some way. Had the area been open to immigration, those same openings would have been seized by intruders. In such cases, slight modifications that in any way helped the individuals of any species by better adapting them to their altered conditions would tend to be preserved -- and natural selection would have free scope for its work of improvement.

We have good reason to believe, as shown in the first chapter, that changes in conditions of life tend to increase variability. In the cases just described, the conditions have changed, and this would clearly favor natural selection by providing a better chance for beneficial variations to appear. Without such variations, natural selection can do nothing. Under the term "variations," it must never be forgotten that mere individual differences are included. Just as a human breeder can produce great results with domestic animals and plants by accumulating individual differences in any given direction, so could natural selection -- but far more easily, since it has incomparably more time to work with. Nor do I believe that any great physical change, such as a shift in climate, or any unusual degree of isolation to block immigration, is actually necessary to leave new and unoccupied openings for natural selection to fill by improving some of the varying inhabitants. Since all the inhabitants of each country are struggling together with finely balanced forces, extremely slight modifications in the structure or habits of one species would often give it an advantage over others. And still further modifications of the same kind would often further increase the advantage, as long as the species continued under the same conditions of life and benefited from similar means of subsistence and defense. No country can be named where all the native inhabitants are now so perfectly adapted to each other and to the physical conditions that none of them could be still better adapted or improved. In all countries, the natives have been so far outcompeted by introduced species that they've allowed some foreigners to take firm possession of the land. And since foreigners have beaten some of the natives everywhere, we can safely conclude that the natives might have been modified to their advantage, so as to have better resisted the intruders.

Human breeders can produce, and certainly have produced, great results by their methodical and unconscious means of selection -- so what might natural selection not accomplish? Humans can act only on external and visible traits. Nature -- if I may be allowed to personify the natural preservation or survival of the fittest -- cares nothing for appearances, except insofar as they're useful to any organism. She can act on every internal organ, on every shade of constitutional difference, on the whole machinery of life. Humans select only for their own benefit; Nature only for the benefit of the organism she tends. Every selected trait is fully exercised by her, as is implied by the fact of its selection. Humans keep organisms from many climates in the same country. They seldom exercise each selected trait in some especially fitting manner. They feed a long-beaked pigeon and a short-beaked pigeon on the same food. They don't exercise a long-backed or long-legged mammal in any special way. They expose sheep with long wool and short wool to the same climate. They don't allow the most vigorous males to compete for the females. They don't rigorously destroy all inferior animals, but protect all their stock during each varying season, as far as lies in their power. They often begin their selection with some half-monstrous form, or at least with some modification prominent enough to catch the eye or to be plainly useful to them. Under nature, the slightest differences of structure or constitution may well tip the finely balanced scale in the struggle for life, and so be preserved. How fleeting are the wishes and efforts of humans! How short their time, and consequently how poor their results, compared with those accumulated by Nature during whole geological periods! Can we wonder, then, that Nature's products should be far "truer" in character than ours -- that they should be infinitely better adapted to the most complex conditions of life, and should plainly bear the stamp of far higher workmanship?

It may metaphorically be said that natural selection is daily and hourly scrutinizing, throughout the world, the slightest variations -- rejecting those that are bad, preserving and adding up all that are good -- silently and imperceptibly working, whenever and wherever opportunity offers, at the improvement of each organism in relation to its living and non-living conditions. We see nothing of these slow changes in progress, until the hand of time has marked the long passage of ages, and then so imperfect is our view into long-past geological ages that we see only that the forms of life are now different from what they formerly were.

For any great amount of modification to take place in a species, a variety, once formed, must again -- perhaps after a long interval of time -- vary or present individual differences of the same favorable nature as before. And these must again be preserved, and so onward, step by step. Seeing that individual differences of the same kind continually recur, this can hardly be considered an unreasonable assumption. But whether it's true, we can judge only by seeing how far the hypothesis accords with and explains the general phenomena of nature. On the other hand, the common belief that the amount of possible variation is a strictly limited quantity is likewise a simple assumption.

Although natural selection can act only through and for the good of each organism, traits and structures that we might consider utterly trivial may be acted on. When we see leaf-eating insects green, and bark-feeders mottled grey; the alpine ptarmigan white in winter, the red grouse the color of heather -- we must believe that these colors serve these birds and insects by protecting them from danger. Grouse, if not killed at some point in their lives, would increase in countless numbers. They're known to suffer heavily from birds of prey, and hawks are guided by eyesight to their prey -- so much so that in parts of the continent, people are warned not to keep white pigeons, as they're the most likely to be killed. So natural selection could be effective in giving each kind of grouse its proper color, and in keeping that color, once acquired, true and constant. And we shouldn't think that the occasional killing of an animal of a particular color would have little effect. Remember how essential it is, in a flock of white sheep, to destroy a lamb with the faintest trace of black. We've seen how the color of hogs that feed on the "paint-root" in Virginia determines whether they live or die. In plants, the down on the fruit and the color of the flesh are considered by botanists to be traits of the most trivial importance. Yet we hear from an excellent horticulturist, Downing, that in the United States smooth-skinned fruits suffer far more from a beetle, a curculio, than those with down; that purple plums suffer far more from a certain disease than yellow plums; while another disease attacks yellow-fleshed peaches far more than those with other colored flesh. If, with all the aids of cultivation, these slight differences make a great difference in growing the various varieties, then surely in nature, where the trees would have to struggle with other trees and with a host of enemies, such differences would effectively settle which variety -- whether smooth or downy, yellow-fleshed or purple-fleshed -- should succeed.

When we look at the many small differences between species, which as far as our ignorance allows us to judge seem quite unimportant, we must not forget that climate, food, and so on have no doubt produced some direct effect. It's also necessary to keep in mind that, due to correlated development, when one part varies and those variations are accumulated through natural selection, other modifications, often of the most unexpected nature, will follow.

Just as we see that variations appearing at any particular period of life under domestication tend to reappear in the offspring at the same period -- for instance, in the shape, size, and flavor of the seeds of our many varieties of crop plants; in the caterpillar and cocoon stages of silkworm varieties; in the eggs of poultry and in the color of their chicks' down; in the horns of our sheep and cattle when nearly adult -- so in nature, natural selection will be able to act on and modify organisms at any age, by accumulating variations profitable at that age and inherited at a corresponding age. If it profits a plant to have its seeds more and more widely spread by the wind, I can see no greater difficulty in this being brought about through natural selection than in the cotton grower increasing and improving by selection the down in the pods of his cotton plants. Natural selection may modify and adapt the larva of an insect to a score of circumstances wholly different from those affecting the mature insect -- and these modifications may affect, through correlated development, the structure of the adult. Conversely, modifications in the adult may affect the structure of the larva. But in all cases natural selection will ensure that such changes are not harmful -- for if they were, the species would go extinct.

Natural selection will modify the structure of the young in relation to the parent, and of the parent in relation to the young. In social animals, it will adapt the structure of each individual for the benefit of the whole community, if the community benefits from the selected change. What natural selection cannot do is modify the structure of one species, without giving it any advantage, for the good of another species. Although statements to this effect can be found in works of natural history, I cannot find a single case that holds up under investigation. A structure used only once in an animal's life, if of great importance, might be modified to any extent by natural selection -- for instance, the great jaws of certain insects, used exclusively for opening the cocoon, or the hard tip on the beak of unhatched birds, used for breaking the egg. It has been claimed that of the best short-beaked tumbler pigeons, more die in the egg than manage to get out of it, so that fanciers assist in the hatching. Now, if nature had to make the beak of a full-grown pigeon very short for the bird's own advantage, the process of modification would be very slow, and there would simultaneously be the most rigorous selection of all the young birds within the egg that had the most powerful and hardest beaks, since all with weak beaks would inevitably die. Or, more delicate and more easily broken shells might be selected, since the thickness of the shell is known to vary like every other structure.

It's worth noting here that with all organisms there must be much random destruction, which can have little or no influence on the course of natural selection. For instance, a vast number of eggs or seeds are devoured annually, and these could be modified through natural selection only if they varied in some way that protected them from their enemies. Yet many of these eggs or seeds would perhaps, if not destroyed, have produced individuals better adapted to their conditions of life than any of those that happened to survive. Similarly, a vast number of mature animals and plants, whether or not they are the best adapted to their conditions, must be destroyed annually by accidental causes -- causes that would not be lessened in the slightest by certain changes of structure or constitution that would in other ways be beneficial to the species. But even if the destruction of adults is very heavy, as long as the number that can exist in any area is not wholly kept down by such causes -- or again, even if the destruction of eggs or seeds is so great that only a hundredth or a thousandth part develop -- yet among those that do survive, the best-adapted individuals, assuming there is any variability in a favorable direction, will tend to reproduce in larger numbers than the less well adapted. If the numbers are wholly kept down by the causes just mentioned, as will often be the case, natural selection will be powerless in certain beneficial directions. But this is no valid objection to its effectiveness at other times and in other ways -- for we're far from having any reason to suppose that many species ever undergo modification and improvement at the same time in the same area.


Sexual Selection

Since peculiarities often appear under domestication in one sex and become hereditably attached to that sex, the same will no doubt happen in nature. This makes it possible for the two sexes to be modified through natural selection in relation to different habits of life, as sometimes occurs, or for one sex to be modified in relation to the other, as commonly occurs. This leads me to say a few words on what I've called sexual selection. This form of selection depends not on a struggle for existence against other organisms or against external conditions, but on a struggle between individuals of one sex -- generally the males -- for possession of the other sex. The result is not death for the unsuccessful competitor, but few or no offspring. Sexual selection is therefore less rigorous than natural selection. Generally, the most vigorous males -- those best fitted for their places in nature -- will leave the most offspring. But in many cases, victory depends not so much on general vigor as on having special weapons confined to the male sex. A hornless stag or spurless rooster would have a poor chance of leaving numerous offspring. Sexual selection, by always allowing the victor to breed, could surely give indomitable courage, length of spur, and strength to the wing to strike with the spurred leg, in nearly the same way that the brutal cockfighter does through careful selection of his best birds. How low in the scale of nature the law of battle extends, I don't know. Male alligators have been described as fighting, bellowing, and whirling around, like warriors in a war dance, for possession of the females. Male salmon have been observed fighting all day long. Male stag beetles sometimes bear wounds from the huge mandibles of other males. The males of certain wasps and related insects have been frequently seen by that incomparable observer M. Fabre fighting for a particular female, who sits by as an apparently unconcerned spectator of the struggle and then retires with the conqueror. The war is perhaps most severe between the males of polygamous animals, and these seem most often equipped with special weapons. The males of carnivorous animals are already well armed, though even to them and to others, special means of defense may be given through sexual selection -- like the mane of the lion and the hooked jaw of the male salmon -- for the shield may be as important for victory as the sword or spear.

Among birds, the contest is often more peaceful in character. Everyone who has studied the subject believes that there is the fiercest rivalry among the males of many species to attract females by singing. The rock-thrush of Guiana, birds of paradise, and some others congregate, and successive males display with the most elaborate care, showing off their gorgeous plumage to best advantage. They likewise perform strange dances before the females, who stand by as spectators and at last choose the most attractive partner. Those who have closely studied birds in captivity know well that they often develop individual preferences and dislikes. Sir R. Heron described how a pied peacock was strongly attractive to all his hen birds. I can't go into the necessary details here, but if humans can in a short time give beauty and an elegant carriage to their bantam chickens, according to their standard of beauty, I see no good reason to doubt that female birds, by selecting over thousands of generations the most melodious or beautiful males according to their standard of beauty, could produce a marked effect. Some well-known patterns in the plumage of male and female birds, compared with the plumage of the young, can partly be explained through sexual selection acting on variations that occur at different ages and are transmitted to males alone or to both sexes at corresponding ages. But I don't have space here to go into this subject.

So it is, as I believe, that when the males and females of any animal have the same general habits of life but differ in structure, color, or ornament, such differences have been mainly caused by sexual selection -- that is, by individual males having had, in successive generations, some slight advantage over other males in their weapons, means of defense, or attractiveness, which they've transmitted to their male offspring alone. Yet I wouldn't wish to attribute all sexual differences to this agency. We see in our domestic animals peculiarities arising and becoming attached to the male sex that apparently have not been enhanced through selection by humans. The tuft of hair on the breast of the wild turkey cock cannot be of any use, and it's doubtful whether it's ornamental in the eyes of the female bird. Indeed, had the tuft appeared under domestication, it would have been called a monstrosity.


Illustrations of the Action of Natural Selection, or the Survival of the Fittest

In order to make it clear how, as I believe, natural selection acts, I must ask permission to give one or two imaginary illustrations. Let's take the case of a wolf that preys on various animals, securing some by craft, some by strength, and some by speed. Suppose that the fastest prey -- a deer, for instance -- had increased in numbers due to some change in the country, or that other prey had decreased in numbers, during the season when the wolf was hardest pressed for food. Under such circumstances, the swiftest and slimmest wolves would have the best chance of surviving, and so would be preserved or selected -- provided always that they kept enough strength to overpower their prey at this or some other time of year, when they were forced to hunt other animals. I can see no more reason to doubt this would be the result than to doubt that humans can improve the speed of their greyhounds by careful and methodical selection, or by that kind of unconscious selection that follows from each person simply trying to keep the best dogs without any thought of modifying the breed.

Even without any change in the proportional numbers of the animals the wolf preyed on, a cub might be born with an innate tendency to pursue certain kinds of prey. This shouldn't be thought very improbable, since we often observe great differences in the natural tendencies of our domestic animals. One cat, for instance, takes to catching rats, another mice. One cat, according to Mr. St. John, brings home winged game, another hares or rabbits, and another hunts on marshy ground and almost nightly catches woodcocks or snipes. The tendency to catch rats rather than mice is known to be inherited. Now, if any slight innate change of habit or of structure benefited an individual wolf, it would have the best chance of surviving and leaving offspring. Some of its young would probably inherit the same habits or structure, and by repeating this process, a new variety might be formed that would either replace or coexist with the parent form of wolf. Or again, the wolves inhabiting a mountainous district, and those frequenting the lowlands, would naturally be forced to hunt different prey. Through the continued preservation of the individuals best fitted for each habitat, two varieties might slowly be formed. These varieties would crossbreed and blend where they met -- but to this subject of crossbreeding we'll soon have to return. I may add that, according to Mr. Pierce, there are two varieties of wolf inhabiting the Catskill Mountains in the United States -- one with a light, greyhound-like form that pursues deer, and the other more bulky, with shorter legs, which more frequently attacks the shepherd's flocks.

It should be noted that in the above illustration, I'm speaking of the slimmest individual wolves, and not of any single strongly marked variation being preserved. In former editions of this work I sometimes spoke as if the latter had frequently occurred. I recognized the great importance of individual differences, and this led me to fully discuss the results of unconscious selection by humans, which depends on the preservation of all the more or less valuable individuals and on the destruction of the worst. I also recognized that the preservation in nature of any occasional deviation of structure, such as a monstrosity, would be a rare event -- and that, if initially preserved, it would generally be lost by subsequent crossbreeding with ordinary individuals. Nevertheless, until reading an able and valuable article in the North British Review (1867), I didn't appreciate how rarely single variations, whether slight or strongly marked, could be perpetuated. The author takes the case of a pair of animals producing during their lifetime two hundred offspring, of which, from various causes of destruction, only two on average survive to reproduce. This is rather an extreme estimate for most of the higher animals, but by no means so for many of the lower organisms. He then shows that if a single individual were born that varied in some way giving it twice as good a chance of life as the others, the chances would still be strongly against its survival. Supposing it survived and bred, and that half its young inherited the favorable variation -- still, as the reviewer goes on to show, the young would have only a slightly better chance of surviving and breeding, and this chance would go on decreasing in succeeding generations. The justice of these remarks cannot, I think, be disputed. If, for instance, a bird of some kind could get its food more easily by having a curved beak, and if one were born with a strongly curved beak and consequently flourished, there would nonetheless be a very poor chance of this one individual perpetuating its kind to the exclusion of the common form. But there can hardly be a doubt, judging by what we see under domestication, that this result would follow from the preservation during many generations of a large number of individuals with more or less strongly curved beaks, and from the destruction of a still larger number with the straightest beaks.

It should not, however, be overlooked that certain rather strongly marked variations, which no one would rank as mere individual differences, frequently recur because a similar organism is similarly acted on -- of which fact numerous instances could be given from our domestic organisms. In such cases, if the varying individual did not actually transmit its newly acquired trait to its offspring, it would undoubtedly transmit to them, as long as the existing conditions remained the same, a still stronger tendency to vary in the same way. There can also be little doubt that the tendency to vary in the same way has often been so strong that all the individuals of the same species have been similarly modified without the aid of any form of selection. Or only a third, fifth, or tenth part of the individuals may have been affected, of which fact several instances could be given. Thus Graba estimates that about one-fifth of the guillemots in the Faroe Islands consist of a variety so well marked that it was formerly ranked as a distinct species under the name Uria lacrymans. In cases of this kind, if the variation were beneficial, the original form would soon be replaced by the modified form, through the survival of the fittest.

On the effects of crossbreeding in eliminating variations of all kinds, I'll have to return to this topic later. But it may be noted here that most animals and plants keep to their own territories and don't needlessly wander about -- we see this even with migratory birds, which almost always return to the same spot. So each newly formed variety would generally be local at first, as seems to be the common rule with varieties in nature. Similarly modified individuals would soon exist in a small group together and would often breed together. If the new variety were successful in its battle for life, it would slowly spread from a central district, competing with and conquering the unchanged individuals on the margins of an ever-increasing circle.

It may be worth giving another and more complex illustration of how natural selection works. Certain plants excrete sweet juice, apparently for the sake of eliminating something harmful from the sap. This is done, for instance, by glands at the base of the stipules in some legumes, and at the backs of the leaves of the common laurel. This juice, though small in quantity, is eagerly sought by insects -- but their visits in no way benefit the plant. Now let's suppose that the juice or nectar was excreted from inside the flowers of a certain number of plants of any species. Insects seeking the nectar would get dusted with pollen and would often carry it from one flower to another. The flowers of two distinct individuals of the same species would thus get crossed -- and the act of crossing, as can be fully proved, gives rise to vigorous seedlings, which would consequently have the best chance of flourishing and surviving. The plants that produced flowers with the largest glands or nectaries, excreting the most nectar, would most often be visited by insects and would most often be crossed. So in the long run they would gain the upper hand and form a local variety. The flowers that also had their stamens and pistils positioned -- in relation to the size and habits of the particular insect visiting them -- so as to favor in any degree the transport of pollen, would likewise be favored. We might have taken the case of insects visiting flowers for the sake of collecting pollen instead of nectar. Since pollen is formed solely for the purpose of fertilization, its destruction appears to be a simple loss to the plant. Yet if a little pollen were carried, at first occasionally and then habitually, by the pollen-eating insects from flower to flower, and a cross thus achieved, then although nine-tenths of the pollen were destroyed, it might still be a great gain to the plant. And the individuals that produced more and more pollen, and had larger anthers, would be selected.

When our plant, by this long-continued process, had been made highly attractive to insects, they would unintentionally carry pollen regularly from flower to flower. That they do this effectively I could easily show by many striking facts. I'll give only one, as it also illustrates one step in the separation of the sexes of plants. Some holly trees bear only male flowers, which have four stamens producing a rather small quantity of pollen and a rudimentary pistil. Other holly trees bear only female flowers; these have a full-sized pistil and four stamens with shriveled anthers in which not a grain of pollen can be detected. Having found a female tree exactly sixty yards from a male tree, I put the stigmas of twenty flowers, taken from different branches, under the microscope, and on all of them without exception there were a few pollen grains, and on some a profusion. Since the wind had been blowing for several days from the female toward the male tree, the pollen couldn't have been carried that way. The weather had been cold and stormy, and therefore not favorable to bees. Nevertheless every female flower I examined had been effectively fertilized by bees that had flown from tree to tree in search of nectar. But to return to our imaginary case: as soon as the plant had been made so highly attractive to insects that pollen was regularly carried from flower to flower, another process might begin. No naturalist doubts the advantage of what has been called the "physiological division of labor." So we may believe that it would be advantageous to a plant to produce stamens alone in one flower or on one whole plant, and pistils alone in another flower or on another plant. In plants under cultivation and placed in new conditions of life, sometimes the male organs and sometimes the female organs become more or less impotent. Now, if we suppose this to occur even to the slightest degree in nature, then since pollen is already carried regularly from flower to flower, and since a more complete separation of the sexes would be advantageous on the principle of the division of labor, individuals with this tendency increasingly developed would be continually favored or selected, until at last a complete separation of the sexes might be achieved. It would take up too much space to show the various steps through which the separation of the sexes in plants of various kinds is apparently now in progress. But I may add that some species of holly in North America are, according to Asa Gray, in an exactly intermediate condition, or as he puts it, are more or less dioeciously polygamous.

Now let's turn to the nectar-feeding insects. We may suppose the plant whose nectar we've been slowly increasing by continued selection to be a common plant, and that certain insects depended largely on its nectar for food. I could give many facts showing how eager bees are to save time -- for instance, their habit of cutting holes and sucking the nectar at the bases of certain flowers, which with very little more trouble they could enter by the mouth. With such facts in mind, it's believable that under certain circumstances, individual differences in the curvature or length of the proboscis, too slight for us to notice, might benefit a bee or other insect, so that certain individuals would be able to get their food more quickly than others. The communities to which they belonged would then flourish and throw off many swarms inheriting the same traits. The tubes of the corolla of the common red and incarnate clovers (Trifolium pratense and incarnatum) do not at a quick glance appear to differ in length. Yet the honeybee can easily suck the nectar from the incarnate clover, but not from the common red clover, which is visited by bumblebees alone. So whole fields of red clover offer in vain an abundant supply of precious nectar to the honeybee. That this nectar is much liked by the honeybee is certain, for I have repeatedly seen -- but only in autumn -- many honeybees sucking the flowers through holes bitten in the base of the tube by bumblebees. The difference in the length of the corolla in the two kinds of clover, which determines whether the honeybee can visit, must be very small. I've been told that when red clover has been mown, the flowers of the second crop are somewhat smaller, and that these are visited by many honeybees. I don't know whether this statement is accurate, nor whether another published claim can be trusted -- namely, that the Ligurian bee, which is generally considered a mere variety of the common honeybee and freely crosses with it, is able to reach and suck the nectar of the red clover. Thus, in a country where this kind of clover was abundant, it might be a great advantage to the honeybee to have a slightly longer or differently constructed proboscis. On the other hand, since the fertility of this clover absolutely depends on bees visiting the flowers, if bumblebees were to become rare in any country, it might be a great advantage to the plant to have a shorter or more deeply divided corolla, so that honeybees could suck its flowers. In this way I can understand how a flower and a bee might slowly become -- either simultaneously or one after the other -- modified and adapted to each other in the most perfect manner, through the continued preservation of all the individuals that showed slight variations of structure mutually favorable to each other.

I'm well aware that this theory of natural selection, illustrated in the above imaginary examples, is open to the same objections that were first raised against Sir Charles Lyell's noble views on "the modern changes of the earth, as illustrative of geology." But we now seldom hear the forces we see still at work dismissed as trivial and insignificant when used to explain the excavation of the deepest valleys or the formation of long lines of inland cliffs. Natural selection acts only by the preservation and accumulation of small inherited modifications, each beneficial to the organism that's preserved. And just as modern geology has almost banished the idea that a great valley was excavated by a single massive flood, so will natural selection banish the belief in the continual creation of new organisms, or in any great and sudden modification of their structure.


On the Crossbreeding of Individuals

I must here introduce a short digression. In the case of animals and plants with separate sexes, it's obvious that two individuals must always unite for each birth (with the exception of the curious and not well-understood cases of parthenogenesis). But in the case of hermaphrodites, this is far from obvious. Nevertheless, there is reason to believe that with all hermaphrodites, two individuals either occasionally or habitually come together for reproduction. This view was suggested long ago, though tentatively, by Sprengel, Knight, and Kolreuter. We'll soon see its importance. But I must treat the subject here with extreme brevity, though I have the materials prepared for a full discussion. All vertebrate animals, all insects, and some other large groups of animals pair for each birth. Modern research has greatly reduced the number of supposed hermaphrodites, and of the real hermaphrodites, a large number do pair -- that is, two individuals regularly unite for reproduction, which is all that concerns us. But there are still many hermaphroditic animals that certainly don't habitually pair, and the vast majority of plants are hermaphrodites. What reason, it may be asked, is there for supposing that in these cases two individuals ever come together for reproduction? Since it's impossible here to go into details, I must rely on some general considerations alone.

In the first place, I've collected a large body of facts and conducted many experiments showing -- in line with the almost universal belief of breeders -- that with animals and plants, a cross between different varieties, or between individuals of the same variety but of a different strain, gives vigor and fertility to the offspring. On the other hand, inbreeding diminishes vigor and fertility. These facts alone incline me to believe that it is a general law of nature that no organism fertilizes itself for an eternity of generations, but that a cross with another individual is occasionally -- perhaps at long intervals of time -- indispensable.

On the belief that this is a law of nature, we can, I think, understand several large classes of facts that are otherwise inexplicable. Every plant breeder knows how unfavorable exposure to wet is for the fertilization of a flower, yet what a multitude of flowers have their anthers and stigmas fully exposed to the weather! If an occasional cross is indispensable, despite the plant's own anthers and pistil standing so near each other as almost to ensure self-fertilization, the fullest freedom for the entrance of pollen from another individual would explain this exposure of the organs. Many flowers, on the other hand, have their reproductive organs closely enclosed, as in the great pea family (the Papilionaceae). But these almost invariably show beautiful and curious adaptations related to the visits of insects. So necessary are the visits of bees to many of these flowers that their fertility is greatly diminished if these visits are prevented. Now, it's scarcely possible for insects to fly from flower to flower without carrying pollen from one to another, greatly benefiting the plant. Insects act like a camel-hair paintbrush -- it's enough to touch the anthers of one flower and then the stigma of another to ensure fertilization. But it must not be supposed that bees would thus produce a multitude of hybrids between distinct species, for if a plant's own pollen and that from another species are placed on the same stigma, the plant's own pollen is so dominant that it invariably and completely destroys, as the botanist Gartner has shown, the influence of the foreign pollen.

When the stamens of a flower suddenly spring toward the pistil, or slowly move one after another toward it, the mechanism seems designed solely to ensure self-fertilization -- and no doubt it's useful for that purpose. But the action of insects is often required to cause the stamens to spring forward, as Kolreuter showed to be the case with the barberry. And in this very genus, which seems to have a special mechanism for self-fertilization, it's well known that if closely related forms or varieties are planted near each other, it's nearly impossible to raise pure seedlings, so freely do they naturally cross. In numerous other cases, far from self-fertilization being favored, there are special mechanisms that effectively prevent the stigma from receiving pollen from its own flower, as I could show from the works of Sprengel and others, as well as from my own observations. For instance, in Lobelia fulgens, there is a truly beautiful and elaborate mechanism by which all the infinitely numerous pollen grains are swept out of the joined anthers of each flower before the stigma of that individual flower is ready to receive them. Since this flower is never visited, at least in my garden, by insects, it never sets a seed -- though by placing pollen from one flower on the stigma of another, I raise plenty of seedlings. Another species of Lobelia, which is visited by bees, seeds freely in my garden. In very many other cases, though there's no special mechanical device to prevent the stigma from receiving pollen from the same flower, either the anthers burst before the stigma is ready for fertilization, or the stigma is ready before the pollen of that flower is ready, as Sprengel and more recently Hildebrand and others have shown, and as I can confirm. So these so-called dichogamous plants have in fact separated sexes and must habitually be crossed. The same is true of the reciprocally dimorphic and trimorphic plants mentioned earlier. How strange these facts are! How strange that the pollen and stigmatic surface of the same flower, though placed so close together as if for the very purpose of self-fertilization, should in so many cases be mutually useless to each other! How simply these facts are explained by the view that an occasional cross with a distinct individual is advantageous or indispensable!

If several varieties of cabbage, radish, onion, and some other plants are allowed to set seed near each other, a large majority of the seedlings turn out, as I found, to be hybrids. For instance, I raised 233 seedling cabbages from some plants of different varieties growing near each other, and of these only 78 were true to their kind, and some even of these were not perfectly true. Yet the pistil of each cabbage flower is surrounded not only by its own six stamens but by those of the many other flowers on the same plant, and the pollen of each flower readily gets on its stigma without insect assistance -- for I've found that plants carefully protected from insects produce the full number of pods. How, then, does it happen that such a vast number of the seedlings are hybrids? It must be because the pollen of a distinct variety has a dominant effect over the flower's own pollen -- and this is part of the general law that good comes from the crossbreeding of distinct individuals of the same species. When distinct species are crossed the case is reversed, for a plant's own pollen is always dominant over foreign pollen. But to this subject we'll return in a future chapter.

In the case of a large tree covered with innumerable flowers, it may be objected that pollen could seldom be carried from tree to tree, and at most only from flower to flower on the same tree -- and flowers on the same tree can be considered as distinct individuals only in a limited sense. I believe this objection is valid, but that nature has largely guarded against it by giving trees a strong tendency to bear flowers with separate sexes. When the sexes are separated, even though the male and female flowers may be produced on the same tree, pollen must be regularly carried from flower to flower -- and this gives a better chance of pollen being occasionally carried from tree to tree. That trees of all groups have their sexes separated more often than other plants, I find to be the case in this country. At my request, the botanist Dr. Hooker tabulated the trees of New Zealand, and Dr. Asa Gray those of the United States, and the result was as I had anticipated. On the other hand, Dr. Hooker tells me the rule doesn't hold in Australia. But if most Australian trees are dichogamous -- having their male and female parts maturing at different times -- the same result would follow as if they bore flowers with separate sexes. I've made these few remarks on trees simply to draw attention to the subject.

Turning briefly to animals: various terrestrial species are hermaphrodites, such as the land snails and earthworms, but these all pair. As yet I haven't found a single terrestrial animal that can fertilize itself. This remarkable fact, which offers so strong a contrast with terrestrial plants, makes sense if an occasional cross is indispensable. Because of the nature of the fertilizing element in terrestrial animals, there are no means analogous to the action of insects and wind with plants by which an occasional cross could be achieved without two individuals coming together. Among aquatic animals, there are many self-fertilizing hermaphrodites -- but here currents of water offer an obvious means for an occasional cross. As with flowers, I have been unable, after consulting one of the highest authorities -- namely, Professor Huxley -- to find a single hermaphrodite animal with the reproductive organs so perfectly enclosed that access from outside, and the occasional influence of a distinct individual, can be shown to be physically impossible. Barnacles (Cirripedes) long appeared to me to present a case of great difficulty on this point. But I've been able, by a fortunate chance, to prove that two individuals, though both are self-fertilizing hermaphrodites, do sometimes cross.

It must have struck most naturalists as a strange oddity that, in both animals and plants, some species of the same family and even of the same genus -- though agreeing closely with each other in their whole organization -- are hermaphrodites, while some have separate sexes. But if, in fact, all hermaphrodites do occasionally crossbreed, the difference between them and species with separate sexes is, as far as function is concerned, very small.

From these several considerations, and from the many specific facts I've collected but cannot give here, it appears that with animals and plants an occasional cross between distinct individuals is a very general, if not universal, law of nature.


Circumstances Favorable for the Production of New Forms Through Natural Selection

This is an extremely intricate subject. A great amount of variability -- under which term individual differences are always included -- will obviously be favorable. A large number of individuals, by giving a better chance within any given period for beneficial variations to appear, will compensate for a lesser amount of variability in each individual, and is, I believe, a highly important element of success. Though nature grants long periods of time for the work of natural selection, she does not grant an indefinite period. Since all organisms are striving to seize every place in the natural order, if any one species does not become modified and improved at a corresponding rate with its competitors, it will be driven to extinction. Unless favorable variations are inherited by at least some of the offspring, nothing can be accomplished by natural selection. The tendency to reversion may often check or prevent the work -- but since this tendency hasn't prevented humans from forming numerous domestic breeds by selection, why should it prevail against natural selection?

In the case of methodical selection, a breeder selects for some definite purpose, and if the individuals are allowed to freely crossbreed, the work will completely fail. But when many people, without intending to alter the breed, share a nearly common standard of perfection and all try to obtain and breed from the best animals, improvement surely but slowly follows from this unconscious process of selection, even though there is no separation of selected individuals. So it will be in nature. Within a confined area, with some place in the natural order not perfectly occupied, all the individuals varying in the right direction, though in different degrees, will tend to be preserved. But if the area is large, its several districts will almost certainly present different conditions of life. Then, if the same species undergoes modification in different districts, the newly formed varieties will crossbreed on the borders of each. But we'll see in the sixth chapter that intermediate varieties, inhabiting intermediate districts, will in the long run generally be replaced by one of the adjoining varieties. Crossbreeding will chiefly affect those animals that mate for each birth, wander widely, and don't breed at a very rapid rate. So with animals of this nature -- birds, for instance -- varieties will generally be confined to separate regions, and this I find to be the case. With hermaphroditic organisms that cross only occasionally, and likewise with animals that mate for each birth but wander little and can increase rapidly, a new and improved variety might be quickly formed in any one spot. It might maintain itself as a group there and afterwards spread, so that the individuals of the new variety would chiefly cross with each other. On this principle, nursery growers always prefer saving seed from a large body of plants, as the chance of crossbreeding is thus lessened.

Even with animals that mate for each birth and don't reproduce rapidly, we must not assume that free crossbreeding would always eliminate the effects of natural selection. For I can bring forward a considerable body of facts showing that within the same area, two varieties of the same animal may long remain distinct -- from frequenting different habitats, from breeding at slightly different seasons, or from the individuals of each variety preferring to pair together.

Crossbreeding plays a very important part in nature by keeping the individuals of the same species, or of the same variety, true and uniform in character. It will obviously be far more effective with those animals that mate for each birth. But as already stated, we have reason to believe that occasional crossbreeding takes place with all animals and plants. Even if these occur only at long intervals of time, the young thus produced will gain so much in vigor and fertility over the offspring from long-continued self-fertilization that they'll have a better chance of surviving and reproducing. And so in the long run, the influence of crosses, even at rare intervals, will be great. With organisms extremely low in the scale that don't reproduce sexually, can't conjugate, and can't possibly crossbreed, uniformity of character can be retained only through the principle of inheritance and through natural selection destroying any individuals departing from the proper type. If conditions change and the form undergoes modification, uniformity of character can be given to the modified offspring solely by natural selection preserving similar favorable variations.

Isolation is also an important element in the modification of species through natural selection. In a confined or isolated area, if not very large, the living and non-living conditions of life will generally be almost uniform, so that natural selection will tend to modify all the varying individuals of the same species in the same way. Crossbreeding with the inhabitants of surrounding areas will also be prevented. Moritz Wagner has published an interesting essay on this subject, showing that the role of isolation in preventing crosses between newly formed varieties is probably even greater than I supposed. But for reasons already given, I can by no means agree with this naturalist that migration and isolation are necessary elements for the formation of new species. The importance of isolation is likewise great in preventing, after any physical change in conditions such as climate or elevation of the land, the immigration of better-adapted organisms. Thus new openings in the natural order of the district will be left to be filled by the modification of the old inhabitants. Finally, isolation will give time for a new variety to be improved at a slow rate, and this may sometimes be of much importance. If, however, an isolated area is very small -- either from being surrounded by barriers or from having very unusual physical conditions -- the total number of inhabitants will be small, and this will slow the production of new species through natural selection by decreasing the chances of favorable variations arising.

The mere passage of time by itself does nothing, either for or against natural selection. I state this because it has been wrongly asserted that I assume time plays an all-important part in modifying species, as if all forms of life were necessarily undergoing change through some innate law. The passage of time is important only insofar as it gives a better chance of beneficial variations arising and of their being selected, accumulated, and fixed. It also tends to increase the direct action of the physical conditions of life on each organism's constitution.

If we turn to nature to test the truth of these remarks, and look at any small isolated area such as an oceanic island, although the number of species inhabiting it is small, as we'll see in our chapter on geographical distribution, yet a very large proportion of these species are endemic -- that is, they've been produced there and nowhere else in the world. So an oceanic island at first sight seems to have been highly favorable for the production of new species. But we may deceive ourselves, for to determine whether a small isolated area or a large open area like a continent has been more favorable for the production of new forms, we ought to make the comparison within equal time periods -- and this we're unable to do.

Although isolation is of great importance in the production of new species, on the whole I'm inclined to believe that largeness of area is still more important, especially for the production of species that will prove capable of enduring for a long period and of spreading widely. Throughout a great and open area, not only will there be a better chance of favorable variations arising from the large number of individuals of the same species living there, but the conditions of life are much more complex because of the large number of already existing species. If some of these many species become modified and improved, others will have to be improved at a corresponding rate, or they'll be driven to extinction. Each new form, also, as soon as it has been much improved, will be able to spread over the open and continuous area and will thus come into competition with many other forms. Moreover, great areas, though now continuous, will often -- owing to former changes in sea level -- have existed in a broken condition, so that the good effects of isolation will generally, to some extent, have played their part as well. Finally, I conclude that although small isolated areas have been in some respects highly favorable for the production of new species, the course of modification will generally have been more rapid on large areas. And what is more important, the new forms produced on large areas -- which have already been victorious over many competitors -- will be those that spread most widely and give rise to the greatest number of new varieties and species. They will thus play a more important part in the changing history of the living world.

In line with this view, we can perhaps understand some facts that will come up again in our chapter on geographical distribution -- for instance, the fact that the organisms of the smaller continent of Australia are now giving way before those of the larger Eurasian area. In the same way, continental organisms have everywhere become widely established on islands. On a small island, the race for life will have been less severe, and there will have been less modification and less extinction. This is why the flora of Madeira, according to Oswald Heer, resembles to some extent the extinct tertiary flora of Europe. All freshwater basins, taken together, make up a small area compared with that of the sea or the land. Consequently, the competition between freshwater organisms will have been less severe than elsewhere. New forms will have been more slowly produced, and old forms more slowly driven to extinction. And it is in freshwater basins that we find seven genera of ganoid fishes -- remnants of a once dominant order. And in fresh water we find some of the most unusual forms now known in the world, such as the platypus (Ornithorhynchus) and the lungfish (Lepidosiren), which, like fossils, connect to a certain extent orders that are now widely separated in the natural scale. These unusual forms may be called living fossils: they've endured to the present day from having inhabited a confined area and from having been exposed to less varied, and therefore less severe, competition.

To sum up, as far as the extreme intricacy of the subject allows: the circumstances favorable and unfavorable for the production of new species through natural selection. I conclude that for land-dwelling organisms, a large continental area that has undergone many changes in elevation will have been the most favorable for the production of many new forms of life, fitted to endure for a long time and to spread widely. While the area existed as a continent, the inhabitants will have been numerous in individuals and kinds, and will have been subjected to severe competition. When converted by subsidence into large separate islands, many individuals of the same species will still have existed on each island. Crossbreeding on the borders of each new species' range will have been prevented. After physical changes of any kind, immigration will have been blocked, so that new openings in the natural order of each island will have had to be filled by the modification of the old inhabitants. And time will have been allowed for the varieties on each island to become well modified and perfected. When, by renewed elevation, the islands were converted back into a continental area, there will again have been very severe competition. The most favored or improved varieties will have been able to spread. There will have been much extinction of the less improved forms, and the relative proportional numbers of the various inhabitants of the reunited continent will again have been changed. And again there will have been a fair field for natural selection to further improve the inhabitants, and thus to produce new species.

That natural selection generally acts with extreme slowness I fully admit. It can act only when there are openings in the natural order of a district that can be better occupied by the modification of some of its existing inhabitants. The occurrence of such openings will often depend on physical changes, which generally take place very slowly, and on the immigration of better-adapted forms being prevented. As some of the old inhabitants become modified, the mutual relationships of others will often be disturbed, and this will create new openings, ready to be filled by better-adapted forms. But all this will take place very slowly. Although all the individuals of the same species differ in some slight degree from each other, it would often be a long time before differences of the right nature in various parts of the body might occur. The result would often be greatly delayed by free crossbreeding. Many will exclaim that these several causes are more than sufficient to neutralize the power of natural selection. I don't believe so. But I do believe that natural selection will generally act very slowly, only at long intervals of time, and only on a few of the inhabitants of the same region. I further believe that these slow, intermittent results accord well with what geology tells us of the rate and manner at which the inhabitants of the world have changed.

Slow though the process of selection may be, if feeble humans can do so much by artificial selection, I can see no limit to the amount of change, to the beauty and complexity of the mutual adaptations between all organisms, with one another and with their physical conditions of life, that may have been brought about in the long course of time through nature's power of selection -- that is, by the survival of the fittest.


Extinction Caused by Natural Selection

This subject will be more fully discussed in our chapter on geology, but it must be touched on here because it is intimately connected with natural selection. Natural selection acts solely through the preservation of variations that are in some way advantageous, which consequently endure. Because of the high geometrical rate of increase of all organisms, each area is already fully stocked with inhabitants, and it follows that as the favored forms increase in number, the less favored will generally decrease and become rare. Rarity, as geology tells us, is the precursor to extinction. We can see that any form represented by few individuals will run a good chance of total extinction during great fluctuations in the seasons or from a temporary increase in the number of its enemies. But we may go further than this. Unless we admit that the number of species can go on indefinitely increasing, many old forms must become extinct as new ones are produced. That the number of species has not indefinitely increased, geology plainly tells us, and we'll soon attempt to show why the number of species throughout the world has not become immeasurably great.

We've seen that the species most numerous in individuals have the best chance of producing favorable variations within any given period. We have evidence of this in the facts stated in the second chapter, showing that it is the common, widespread, and dominant species that offer the greatest number of recorded varieties. Therefore, rare species will be less quickly modified or improved within any given period, and they'll consequently be beaten in the race for life by the modified and improved descendants of the commoner species.

From these several considerations, I think it inevitably follows that as new species are formed through natural selection over the course of time, others will become rarer and rarer, and finally extinct. The forms that stand in closest competition with those undergoing modification and improvement will naturally suffer most. And we've seen in the chapter on the struggle for existence that it is the most closely allied forms -- varieties of the same species, and species of the same genus or related genera -- which, from having nearly the same structure, constitution, and habits, generally come into the severest competition with each other. Consequently, each new variety or species, during the progress of its formation, will generally press hardest on its nearest relatives, and tend to exterminate them. We see the same process of extermination among our domesticated organisms, through the selection of improved forms by humans. Many curious examples could be given showing how quickly new breeds of cattle, sheep, and other animals, and varieties of flowers, take the place of older and inferior kinds. In Yorkshire, it is historically known that the ancient black cattle were displaced by the longhorns, and that these "were swept away by the shorthorns" (I quote the words of an agricultural writer) "as if by some murderous pestilence."


Divergence of Character

The principle I've designated by this term is of high importance, and explains, as I believe, several important facts. In the first place, varieties, even strongly marked ones, though having somewhat of the character of species -- as is shown by the hopeless doubts in many cases about how to rank them -- yet certainly differ far less from each other than do good and distinct species. Nevertheless, according to my view, varieties are species in the process of formation, or are, as I've called them, incipient species. How, then, does the lesser difference between varieties become amplified into the greater difference between species? That this does habitually happen, we must infer from the fact that most of the innumerable species throughout nature show well-marked differences, whereas varieties, the supposed prototypes and parents of future well-marked species, show slight and poorly defined differences. Mere chance, as we may call it, might cause one variety to differ in some trait from its parents, and the offspring of this variety again to differ from its parent in the same trait and to a greater degree. But this alone would never account for so habitual and large a degree of difference as that between species of the same genus.

As has always been my practice, I've sought light on this question from our domestic organisms. We find something analogous here. It will be admitted that the production of breeds so different as Shorthorn and Hereford cattle, racehorses and draft horses, the several breeds of pigeons, and so on, could never have been accomplished by the mere chance accumulation of similar variations over many successive generations. In practice, one fancier is struck by a pigeon having a slightly shorter beak; another fancier is struck by a pigeon having a somewhat longer beak; and on the acknowledged principle that "fanciers do not and will not admire a medium standard, but like extremes," they both go on -- as has actually occurred with the sub-breeds of the tumbler pigeon -- choosing and breeding from birds with longer and longer beaks, or with shorter and shorter beaks. Again, we may suppose that at an early period of history, the people of one nation or district required swifter horses, while those of another required stronger and bulkier horses. The early differences would be very slight. But in the course of time, from the continued selection of swifter horses in the one case and of stronger ones in the other, the differences would become greater and would be noted as forming two sub-breeds. Ultimately, after the passage of centuries, these sub-breeds would become two well-established and distinct breeds. As the differences became greater, the inferior animals with intermediate traits -- being neither very swift nor very strong -- would not have been used for breeding, and would thus have tended to disappear. Here, then, we see in human production the action of what may be called the principle of divergence, causing differences that at first were barely noticeable to steadily increase, and the breeds to diverge in character both from each other and from their common parent.

But how, it may be asked, can any analogous principle apply in nature? I believe it can and does apply most efficiently -- though it was a long time before I saw how -- from the simple fact that the more diversified the descendants from any one species become in structure, constitution, and habits, the better they'll be able to seize on many and widely diversified places in the natural order, and so increase in numbers.

We can clearly see this in the case of animals with simple habits. Take the case of a carnivorous mammal whose population in any country has long ago reached its full average. If its natural power of increase is allowed to act, it can succeed in increasing -- the country not undergoing any change in conditions -- only by its varying descendants seizing on places currently occupied by other animals. Some of them, for instance, might become able to feed on new kinds of prey, either dead or alive; some might inhabit new habitats, climbing trees, going into the water, and some might perhaps become less carnivorous. The more diversified in habits and structure the descendants of our carnivorous animal become, the more niches they'll be able to occupy. What applies to one animal applies throughout all time to all animals -- that is, if they vary -- for otherwise natural selection can do nothing. So it will be with plants. It has been experimentally proven that if a plot of ground is sown with one species of grass, and a similar plot is sown with several distinct genera of grasses, a greater number of plants and a greater weight of dry herbage can be raised in the latter than in the former case. The same has been found to hold when one variety and several mixed varieties of wheat have been sown on equal areas of ground. So if any one species of grass were to keep on varying, and the varieties were continually selected that differed from each other in the same way, though to a very slight degree, as do the distinct species and genera of grasses, a greater number of individual plants of this species, including its modified descendants, would succeed in living on the same piece of ground. And we know that each species and each variety of grass is annually sowing almost countless seeds, and is thus striving, as it were, to the utmost to increase in number. Consequently, over the course of many thousand generations, the most distinct varieties of any one species of grass would have the best chance of succeeding and of increasing in numbers, and thus of replacing the less distinct varieties. And varieties, when rendered very distinct from each other, take the rank of species.

The truth of the principle that the greatest amount of life can be supported by great diversification of structure is seen under many natural circumstances. In an extremely small area, especially if freely open to immigration and where the contest between individual and individual must be very severe, we always find great diversity in its inhabitants. For instance, I found that a piece of turf, three feet by four in size, which had been exposed for many years to exactly the same conditions, supported twenty species of plants belonging to eighteen genera and eight orders -- which shows how much these plants differed from each other. So it is with the plants and insects on small and uniform islands, and also in small ponds of fresh water. Farmers find that they can raise more food by a rotation of plants belonging to the most different groups. Nature follows what may be called a simultaneous rotation. Most of the animals and plants that live close around any small piece of ground could live on it (supposing its nature not to be in any way unusual), and may be said to be striving to the utmost to live there. But it turns out that where they come into the closest competition, the advantages of diversification of structure, with the accompanying differences of habit and constitution, determine that the inhabitants jostling each other most closely shall, as a general rule, belong to what we call different genera and orders.

The same principle is seen in the establishment of plants through human agency in foreign lands. It might have been expected that the plants succeeding in becoming established in any land would generally be closely allied to the native plants -- for these are commonly regarded as specially created and adapted for their own country. It might also have been expected that established plants would belong to a few groups especially adapted to certain habitats in their new homes. But the case is very different. Alphonse de Candolle has well remarked, in his great and admirable work, that floras gain through the establishment of foreign plants, proportionally with the number of native genera and species, far more in new genera than in new species. To give a single instance: in the last edition of Dr. Asa Gray's Manual of the Flora of the Northern United States, 260 established plants are listed, and these belong to 162 genera. We thus see that these established plants are of a highly diversified nature. They also differ to a large extent from the natives, for out of the 162 genera of established plants, no less than 100 genera are not native there, and thus a large proportional addition is made to the genera now living in the United States.

By considering the nature of the plants or animals that have successfully competed with the natives in any country and become established there, we may gain some rough idea of how some of the natives would have had to be modified in order to gain an advantage over their countrymen. We may at least infer that diversification of structure, amounting to new differences at the genus level, would be profitable to them.

The advantage of diversification of structure in the inhabitants of the same region is, in fact, the same as that of the physiological division of labor in the organs of the same individual body -- a subject so well explained by Milne Edwards. No physiologist doubts that a stomach adapted to digest vegetable matter alone, or flesh alone, draws more nutrition from these substances. So in the overall economy of any land, the more widely and perfectly the animals and plants are diversified for different ways of life, the greater the number of individuals capable of supporting themselves there. A set of animals with their organization only slightly diversified could hardly compete with a set more perfectly diversified in structure. It may be doubted, for instance, whether the Australian marsupials, which are divided into groups differing but little from each other and feebly representing, as Mr. Waterhouse and others have remarked, our carnivorous, grazing, and rodent mammals, could successfully compete with these well-developed groups. In the Australian mammals, we see the process of diversification in an early and incomplete stage of development.


The Probable Effects of Natural Selection Through Divergence of Character and Extinction, on the Descendants of a Common Ancestor

After the foregoing discussion, which has been much compressed, we may assume that the modified descendants of any one species will succeed better the more diversified they become in structure, and are thus enabled to encroach on places occupied by other organisms. Now let's see how this principle of benefit derived from divergence of character, combined with the principles of natural selection and of extinction, tends to act.

The accompanying diagram will help us understand this rather complex subject. Let A to L represent the species of a genus that is large in its own country. These species are supposed to resemble each other in unequal degrees, as is generally the case in nature, and as is represented in the diagram by the letters standing at unequal distances. I've said a large genus because, as we saw in the second chapter, on average more species vary in large genera than in small genera, and the varying species of the large genera present a greater number of varieties. We've also seen that the species that are the commonest and most widely spread vary more than the rare and restricted species. Let (A) be a common, widely spread, and varying species belonging to a genus large in its own country. The branching and diverging dotted lines of unequal lengths proceeding from (A) may represent its varying offspring. The variations are supposed to be extremely slight, but of the most diversified nature. They're not supposed to all appear simultaneously, but often after long intervals of time, nor are they all supposed to last for equal periods. Only those variations that are in some way beneficial will be preserved or naturally selected. And here the importance of the principle of benefit derived from divergence of character comes in -- for this will generally lead to the most different or divergent variations (represented by the outer dotted lines) being preserved and accumulated by natural selection. When a dotted line reaches one of the horizontal lines and is there marked by a small numbered letter, a sufficient amount of variation is supposed to have been accumulated to form it into a fairly well-marked variety, such as would be thought worthy of record in a systematic work.

The intervals between the horizontal lines in the diagram may represent each a thousand or more generations. After a thousand generations, species (A) is supposed to have produced two fairly well-marked varieties, namely a1 and m1. These two varieties will generally still be exposed to the same conditions that made their parents variable, and the tendency to variability is itself hereditary. Consequently they will also tend to vary, and commonly in nearly the same manner as their parents. Moreover, these two varieties, being only slightly modified forms, will tend to inherit those advantages that made their parent (A) more numerous than most of the other inhabitants of the same country. They will also share in those more general advantages that made the genus to which the parent species belonged a large genus in its own country. All these circumstances are favorable to the production of new varieties.

If, then, these two varieties are variable, the most divergent of their variations will generally be preserved during the next thousand generations. After this interval, variety a1 is supposed in the diagram to have produced variety a2, which will, owing to the principle of divergence, differ more from (A) than did variety a1. Variety m1 is supposed to have produced two varieties, m2 and s2, differing from each other and more considerably from their common parent (A). We may continue the process by similar steps for any length of time: some of the varieties, after each thousand generations, producing only a single variety but in a more and more modified condition; some producing two or three varieties; and some failing to produce any. Thus the varieties or modified descendants of the common parent (A) will generally go on increasing in number and diverging in character. In the diagram the process is represented up to the ten-thousandth generation, and in a condensed and simplified form up to the fourteen-thousandth generation.

But I must remark here that I don't suppose the process ever goes on so regularly as represented in the diagram (though in itself made somewhat irregular), nor that it goes on continuously. It's far more probable that each form remains unchanged for long periods and then again undergoes modification. Nor do I suppose that the most divergent varieties are invariably preserved: a medium form may often long endure, and may or may not produce more than one modified descendant. For natural selection will always act according to the nature of the places that are either unoccupied or not perfectly occupied by other organisms, and this will depend on infinitely complex relationships. But as a general rule, the more diversified in structure the descendants from any one species can be made, the more places they'll be able to seize on, and the more their modified offspring will increase. In our diagram the line of succession is broken at regular intervals by small numbered letters marking the successive forms that have become sufficiently distinct to be recorded as varieties. But these breaks are imaginary, and might have been inserted anywhere, after intervals long enough to allow the accumulation of a considerable amount of divergent variation.

Since all the modified descendants from a common and widely spread species belonging to a large genus will tend to share the same advantages that made their parent successful in life, they will generally go on multiplying in number as well as diverging in character. This is represented in the diagram by the several divergent branches proceeding from (A). The modified offspring from the later and more highly improved branches in the lines of descent will probably often take the place of, and so destroy, the earlier and less improved branches. This is represented in the diagram by some of the lower branches not reaching to the upper horizontal lines. In some cases, no doubt, the process of modification will be confined to a single line of descent, and the number of modified descendants will not be increased, although the amount of divergent modification may have been amplified. This case would be represented in the diagram if all the lines proceeding from (A) were removed except that from a1 to a10. In the same way, the English racehorse and English pointer have apparently both gone on slowly diverging in character from their original stocks, without either having given off any fresh branches or breeds.

After ten thousand generations, species (A) is supposed to have produced three forms -- a10, f10, and m10 -- which, from having diverged in character during the successive generations, will have come to differ greatly, but perhaps unequally, from each other and from their common parent. If we suppose the amount of change between each horizontal line in our diagram to be very small, these three forms may still be only well-marked varieties. But we have only to suppose the steps in the process of modification to be more numerous or greater in amount to convert these three forms into doubtful or at least into well-defined species. Thus the diagram illustrates the steps by which the small differences distinguishing varieties are increased into the larger differences distinguishing species. By continuing the same process for a greater number of generations (as shown in the diagram in a condensed and simplified manner), we get eight species, marked by the letters between a14 and m14, all descended from (A). Thus, as I believe, species are multiplied and genera are formed.

In a large genus it's probable that more than one species would vary. In the diagram I've assumed that a second species (I) has produced, by analogous steps, after ten thousand generations, either two well-marked varieties (w10 and z10) or two species, according to the amount of change supposed to be represented between the horizontal lines. After fourteen thousand generations, six new species, marked by the letters n14 to z14, are supposed to have been produced. In any genus, the species that are already very different in character from each other will generally tend to produce the greatest number of modified descendants -- for these will have the best chance of seizing on new and widely different places in the natural order. So in the diagram I've chosen the extreme species (A), and the nearly extreme species (I), as those that have varied most and have given rise to new varieties and species. The other nine species (marked by capital letters) of our original genus may for long but unequal periods continue to transmit unaltered descendants, and this is shown in the diagram by the dotted lines prolonged upward at unequal lengths.

But during the process of modification represented in the diagram, another of our principles -- namely, that of extinction -- will have played an important part. Since in each fully stocked country natural selection necessarily acts by the selected form having some advantage in the struggle for life over other forms, there will be a constant tendency in the improved descendants of any one species to replace and exterminate at each stage of descent their predecessors and their original ancestor. For it should be remembered that the competition will generally be most severe between those forms that are most nearly related to each other in habits, constitution, and structure. So all the intermediate forms between the earlier and later states -- that is, between the less and more improved states of the same species -- as well as the original parent species itself, will generally tend to become extinct. The same will probably be true of many whole collateral lines of descent, which will be conquered by later and improved lines. If, however, the modified offspring of a species gets into some distinct country, or becomes quickly adapted to some quite new habitat where offspring and ancestor don't come into competition, both may continue to exist.

If, then, our diagram is assumed to represent a considerable amount of modification, species (A) and all the earlier varieties will have become extinct, being replaced by eight new species (a14 to m14), and species (I) will be replaced by six new species (n14 to z14).

But we may go further than this. The original species of our genus were supposed to resemble each other in unequal degrees, as is generally the case in nature. Species (A) was more nearly related to B, C, and D than to the other species, and species (I) more to G, H, K, and L than to the others. These two species (A and I) were also supposed to be very common and widely spread, so that they must originally have had some advantage over most of the other species of the genus. Their modified descendants, fourteen in number at the fourteen-thousandth generation, will probably have inherited some of these same advantages. They've also been modified and improved in a diversified manner at each stage of descent, so as to have become adapted to many related places in the natural economy of their country. It seems therefore extremely probable that they will have taken the places of, and thus exterminated, not only their parents (A) and (I), but also some of the original species most closely related to their parents. So very few of the original species will have transmitted offspring to the fourteen-thousandth generation. We may suppose that only one (F) of the two species (E and F) that were least closely related to the other nine original species has transmitted descendants to this late stage of descent.

The new species in our diagram, descended from the original eleven species, will now number fifteen. Owing to the divergent tendency of natural selection, the extreme amount of difference in character between species a14 and z14 will be much greater than that between the most distinct of the original eleven species. The new species, moreover, will be related to each other in a widely different manner. Of the eight descendants from (A), the three marked a14, q14, and p14 will be closely related from having recently branched off from a10. The two marked b14 and f14, from having diverged at an earlier period from a5, will be somewhat distinct from the first three. And finally, o14, e14, and m14 will be closely related to one another but, from having diverged at the very beginning of the process of modification, will be widely different from the other five species. They may constitute a subgenus or a distinct genus.

The six descendants from (I) will form two subgenera or genera. But since the original species (I) differed greatly from (A), standing nearly at the extreme end of the original genus, the six descendants from (I) will, owing to inheritance alone, differ considerably from the eight descendants from (A). The two groups, moreover, are supposed to have gone on diverging in different directions. The intermediate species (and this is a very important point) that connected the original species (A) and (I) have all become extinct except (F), and have left no descendants. Therefore the six new species descended from (I) and the eight descendants from (A) will have to be ranked as very distinct genera, or even as distinct subfamilies.

Thus it is, as I believe, that two or more genera are produced by descent with modification from two or more species of the same genus. And the two or more parent species are supposed to be descended from some one species of an earlier genus. In our diagram this is indicated by the broken lines beneath the capital letters, converging in sub-branches downward toward a single point -- this point represents a species, the supposed ancestor of our several new subgenera and genera.

It's worth pausing to reflect on the character of the new species F14, which is supposed not to have diverged much in character but to have retained the form of (F), either unaltered or altered only slightly. In this case, its relationships to the other fourteen new species will be of a curious and roundabout nature. Being descended from a form that stood between the parent species (A) and (I), now supposed to be extinct and unknown, it will be somewhat intermediate in character between the two groups descended from these two species. But since these two groups have gone on diverging in character from the type of their parents, the new species (F14) will not be directly intermediate between them, but rather between the types of the two groups -- and every naturalist will be able to call such cases to mind.

In the diagram, each horizontal line has so far been supposed to represent a thousand generations, but each may represent a million or more generations. It may also represent a section of the successive layers of the earth's crust including fossil remains. We'll have to refer to this subject again when we come to our chapter on geology, and I think we'll see then that the diagram throws light on the relationships of extinct species. These, though generally belonging to the same orders, families, or genera as those now living, are often to some degree intermediate in character between existing groups. And we can understand this, for the extinct species lived at various remote epochs when the branching lines of descent had diverged less.

I see no reason to limit the process of modification, as now explained, to the formation of genera alone. If in the diagram we suppose the amount of change represented by each successive group of diverging dotted lines to be great, the forms marked a14 to p14, those marked b14 and f14, and those marked o14 to m14, will form three very distinct genera. We'll also have two very distinct genera descended from (I), differing widely from the descendants of (A). These two groups of genera will thus form two distinct families, or orders, according to the amount of divergent modification supposed to be represented in the diagram. And the two new families, or orders, descend from two species of the original genus, and these are supposed to be descended from some still more ancient and unknown form.

We've seen that in each country it is the species belonging to the larger genera that most often present varieties or incipient species. This is indeed to be expected, for since natural selection acts through one form having some advantage over other forms in the struggle for existence, it will chiefly act on those that already have some advantage. The largeness of any group shows that its species have inherited from a common ancestor some advantage in common. So the struggle for the production of new and modified descendants will mainly be between the larger groups, which are all trying to increase in number. One large group will slowly conquer another large group, reduce its numbers, and thus lessen its chance of further variation and improvement. Within the same large group, the later and more highly perfected subgroups, from branching out and seizing on many new places in the natural order, will constantly tend to replace and destroy the earlier and less improved subgroups. Small and broken groups and subgroups will finally disappear. Looking to the future, we can predict that the groups of organisms that are now large and triumphant, and which are least broken up -- that is, which have as yet suffered least extinction -- will for a long period continue to increase. But which groups will ultimately prevail, no one can predict, for we know that many groups formerly most extensively developed have now become extinct. Looking still more remotely to the future, we may predict that, owing to the continued and steady increase of the larger groups, a multitude of smaller groups will become utterly extinct and leave no modified descendants. Consequently, of the species living at any one period, extremely few will transmit descendants to a remote futurity. I'll have to return to this subject in the chapter on classification, but I may add that since, according to this view, extremely few of the more ancient species have transmitted descendants to the present day, and since all the descendants of the same species form a class, we can understand how it is that there exist so few classes in each main division of the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Although few of the most ancient species have left modified descendants, at remote geological periods the earth may have been almost as well populated with species of many genera, families, orders, and classes as it is today.


On the Degree to Which Organization Tends to Advance

Natural selection acts exclusively by the preservation and accumulation of variations that are beneficial under the living and non-living conditions to which each creature is exposed at all periods of life. The ultimate result is that each creature tends to become more and more improved in relation to its conditions. This improvement inevitably leads to the gradual advancement of the organization of the greater number of living beings throughout the world. But here we enter on a very intricate subject, for naturalists have not defined to each other's satisfaction what is meant by an advance in organization. Among the vertebrates, the degree of intellect and an approach in structure to humans clearly come into play. It might be thought that the amount of change the various parts and organs pass through in their development from embryo to maturity would serve as a standard of comparison. But there are cases, as with certain parasitic crustaceans, in which several parts of the structure become less developed, so that the mature animal cannot be called higher than its larva. Von Baer's standard seems the most widely applicable and the best -- namely, the amount of differentiation of the parts of the same organism in the adult state (as I should be inclined to add), and their specialization for different functions; or, as Milne Edwards would express it, the completeness of the division of physiological labor. But we'll see how unclear this subject is if we look, for instance, at fishes. Some naturalists rank as highest those that, like the sharks, come closest to amphibians, while other naturalists rank the common bony or teleostean fishes as highest, since they are most strictly fish-like and differ most from the other vertebrate classes. We see the obscurity of the subject still more plainly by turning to plants, among which the standard of intellect is of course completely excluded. Here some botanists rank as highest those plants that have every organ -- sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils -- fully developed in each flower, whereas other botanists, probably with more truth, look at plants that have their several organs much modified and reduced in number as the highest.

If we take as the standard of high organization the amount of differentiation and specialization of the several organs in each adult organism (and this will include the advancement of the brain for intellectual purposes), natural selection clearly leads toward this standard. All physiologists admit that the specialization of organs, insofar as they perform their functions better in this state, is an advantage to each organism. So the accumulation of variations tending toward specialization is within the scope of natural selection. On the other hand, keeping in mind that all organisms are striving to increase at a high rate and to seize on every unoccupied or poorly occupied place in the natural order, it's quite possible for natural selection to gradually fit an organism to a situation in which several organs would be unnecessary or useless. In such cases there would be a regression in the scale of organization. Whether organization on the whole has actually advanced from the remotest geological periods to the present day will be more conveniently discussed in our chapter on geological succession.

But someone might object: if all organisms thus tend to rise in the scale, how is it that throughout the world a multitude of the lowest forms still exist? And how is it that in each great class, some forms are far more highly developed than others? Why haven't the more highly developed forms everywhere replaced and exterminated the lower? Lamarck, who believed in an innate and inevitable tendency toward perfection in all organisms, seems to have felt this difficulty so strongly that he was led to suppose that new and simple forms are continually being produced by spontaneous generation. Science has not yet proved the truth of this belief, whatever the future may reveal. On our theory, the continued existence of lowly organisms offers no difficulty -- for natural selection, or the survival of the fittest, does not necessarily include progressive development. It only takes advantage of such variations as arise and are beneficial to each creature under its complex conditions of life. And it may be asked: what advantage, as far as we can see, would it be to a single-celled organism, to an intestinal worm, or even to an earthworm, to be highly organized? If it were no advantage, these forms would be left by natural selection unimproved, or only slightly improved, and might remain for indefinite ages in their present lowly condition. And geology tells us that some of the lowest forms, such as single-celled organisms and rhizopods, have remained for an enormous period in nearly their present state. But to suppose that most of the many now existing low forms have not advanced at all since the first dawn of life would be extremely rash. Any naturalist who has dissected some of the organisms now ranked as very low in the scale must have been struck by their truly wondrous and beautiful organization.

Nearly the same remarks apply if we look at the different grades of organization within the same great group -- for instance, in the vertebrates, to the coexistence of mammals and fish; among mammals, to the coexistence of humans and the platypus; among fishes, to the coexistence of the shark and the lancelet (Amphioxus), which in the extreme simplicity of its structure approaches the invertebrate classes. But mammals and fish hardly come into competition with each other. The advancement of the whole class of mammals, or of certain members in this class, to the highest grade would not lead to their taking the place of fishes. Physiologists believe that the brain must be bathed by warm blood to be highly active, and this requires breathing air -- so warm-blooded mammals living in the water are at a disadvantage in having to come continually to the surface to breathe. Among fishes, members of the shark family would not tend to replace the lancelet, for the lancelet, as I hear from Fritz Muller, has as its sole companion and competitor on the barren sandy shore of South Brazil an unusual annelid worm. The three lowest orders of mammals -- namely, marsupials, edentates, and rodents -- coexist in South America in the same region with numerous monkeys, and probably interfere little with each other. Although organization on the whole may have advanced and may still be advancing throughout the world, the scale will always present many degrees of perfection. The high advancement of certain whole classes, or of certain members of each class, does not at all necessarily lead to the extinction of those groups with which they don't enter into close competition. In some cases, as we'll see later, lowly organized forms appear to have been preserved to the present day from inhabiting confined or unusual habitats, where they've been subjected to less severe competition and where their small numbers have reduced the chance of favorable variations arising.

Finally, I believe that many lowly organized forms now exist throughout the world from various causes. In some cases, variations of a favorable nature may never have arisen for natural selection to act on and accumulate. In no case, probably, has time been sufficient for the utmost possible amount of development. In some few cases there has been what we must call regression of organization. But the main cause lies in the fact that under very simple conditions of life, a high organization would be of no service -- and might possibly be an actual disadvantage, as being of a more delicate nature and more liable to be disrupted and injured.

Looking to the first dawn of life, when all organisms, as we may believe, had the simplest structure -- how, it has been asked, could the first step in the advancement or differentiation of parts have arisen? Herbert Spencer would probably answer that as soon as simple single-celled organisms came by growth or division to be composed of several cells, or became attached to any supporting surface, his law that "homologous units of any order become differentiated in proportion as their relations to incident forces become different" would come into action. But as we have no facts to guide us, speculation on the subject is almost useless. It is, however, an error to suppose that there would be no struggle for existence, and consequently no natural selection, until many forms had been produced. Variations in a single species inhabiting an isolated location might be beneficial, and thus the whole body of individuals might be modified, or two distinct forms might arise. But, as I remarked toward the close of the introduction, no one ought to feel surprised at much remaining unexplained about the origin of species, if we make due allowance for our profound ignorance of the relationships among the inhabitants of the world at the present time, and still more so during past ages.


Convergence of Character

Mr. H. C. Watson thinks that I've overrated the importance of divergence of character (in which, however, he apparently believes), and that convergence, as it may be called, has likewise played a part. If two species belonging to two distinct though related genera had both produced a large number of new and divergent forms, it's conceivable that these might approach each other so closely that they would all have to be classed under the same genus -- and thus the descendants of two distinct genera would converge into one. But it would in most cases be extremely rash to attribute to convergence a close and general similarity of structure in the modified descendants of widely distinct forms. The shape of a crystal is determined solely by molecular forces, and it's not surprising that dissimilar substances should sometimes assume the same form. But with living organisms we should bear in mind that the form of each depends on an infinity of complex relationships: on the variations that have arisen (these being due to causes far too intricate to trace); on the nature of the variations that have been preserved or selected (and this depends on the surrounding physical conditions, and in a still higher degree on the surrounding organisms with which each being has come into competition); and finally, on inheritance -- in itself a fluctuating element -- from innumerable ancestors, all of which have had their forms determined through equally complex relationships. It's incredible that the descendants of two organisms that originally differed in a marked manner should ever afterward converge so closely as to approach identity throughout their whole organization. If this had occurred, we should find the same form, unrelated by descent, recurring in widely separated geological formations -- and the balance of evidence is opposed to any such idea.

Mr. Watson has also objected that the continued action of natural selection, together with divergence of character, would tend to make an indefinite number of species. As far as merely non-living conditions are concerned, it seems probable that a sufficient number of species would soon become adapted to all considerable diversities of heat, moisture, and so on. But I fully admit that the relationships between organisms are more important, and as the number of species in any country goes on increasing, the living conditions must become more and more complex. Consequently, there seems at first no limit to the amount of beneficial diversification of structure, and therefore no limit to the number of species that might be produced. We don't know that even the most species-rich area is fully stocked with species: at the Cape of Good Hope and in Australia, which support an astonishing number of species, many European plants have become established. But geology shows us that from an early part of the tertiary period, the number of species of shells, and from the middle part of this same period, the number of mammals, has not greatly or at all increased. What then checks an indefinite increase in the number of species? The amount of life -- I don't mean the number of species -- supported on an area must have a limit, depending so largely as it does on physical conditions. Therefore, if an area is inhabited by very many species, each or nearly each species will be represented by few individuals, and such species will be liable to extermination from accidental fluctuations in the seasons or in the number of their enemies. The process of extermination in such cases would be rapid, whereas the production of new species must always be slow. Imagine the extreme case of as many species as individuals in England -- the first severe winter or very dry summer would exterminate thousands upon thousands of species. Rare species -- and each species will become rare if the number of species in any country becomes indefinitely increased -- will, on the principle often explained, present within a given period few favorable variations. Consequently, the process of giving birth to new species would thus be slowed. When any species becomes very rare, inbreeding will help to exterminate it. Authors have thought that this comes into play in accounting for the decline of the aurochs in Lithuania, of red deer in Scotland, and of bears in Norway, among others. Finally, and this I'm inclined to think is the most important factor, a dominant species that has already beaten many competitors in its own home will tend to spread and replace many others. Alphonse de Candolle has shown that those species which spread widely tend generally to spread very widely. Consequently they will tend to replace and exterminate several species in several areas, and thus check the runaway increase of species throughout the world. The botanist Dr. Hooker has recently shown that in the southeast corner of Australia, where apparently there are many invaders from different quarters of the globe, the endemic Australian species have been greatly reduced in number. How much weight to attribute to these several considerations I won't pretend to say. But together they must limit in each country the tendency toward an indefinite increase of species.


Summary of Chapter

If under changing conditions of life organisms present individual differences in almost every part of their structure -- and this cannot be disputed; if there is, owing to their geometrical rate of increase, a severe struggle for life at some age, season, or year -- and this certainly cannot be disputed; then, considering the infinite complexity of the relationships of all organisms to each other and to their conditions of life, causing an infinite diversity in structure, constitution, and habits to be advantageous to them, it would be a most extraordinary fact if no variations had ever occurred useful to each organism's own welfare, in the same manner as so many variations have occurred useful to humans. But if variations useful to any organism ever do occur, individuals so equipped will certainly have the best chance of being preserved in the struggle for life -- and from the strong principle of inheritance, these will tend to produce offspring similarly equipped. This principle of preservation, or the survival of the fittest, I have called natural selection. It leads to the improvement of each creature in relation to its living and non-living conditions of life, and consequently, in most cases, to what must be regarded as an advance in organization. Nevertheless, low and simple forms will long endure if well fitted for their simple conditions of life.

Natural selection, on the principle of traits being inherited at corresponding ages, can modify the egg, seed, or young as easily as the adult. Among many animals, sexual selection will have given its aid to ordinary selection by assuring to the most vigorous and best-adapted males the greatest number of offspring. Sexual selection will also give characters useful to the males alone in their struggles or rivalry with other males, and these traits will be transmitted to one sex or to both sexes, according to the form of inheritance that prevails.

Whether natural selection has really acted in this way to adapt the various forms of life to their several conditions and stations must be judged by the general weight and balance of evidence given in the following chapters. But we've already seen how it leads to extinction -- and how largely extinction has acted in the world's history, geology plainly declares. Natural selection also leads to divergence of character, for the more organisms diverge in structure, habits, and constitution, the more of them can be supported on the same area -- as we see proof of by looking at the inhabitants of any small spot and at the organisms established in foreign lands. Therefore, during the modification of the descendants of any one species, and during the incessant struggle of all species to increase in numbers, the more diversified the descendants become, the better their chance of success in the battle for life. Thus the small differences distinguishing varieties of the same species steadily tend to increase, till they equal the greater differences between species of the same genus, or even of distinct genera.

We've seen that it is the common, the widely spread, and the widely ranging species, belonging to the larger genera within each class, that vary most -- and these tend to transmit to their modified offspring the superiority that now makes them dominant in their own countries. Natural selection, as has just been remarked, leads to divergence of character and to much extinction of the less improved and intermediate forms of life. On these principles, the nature of the relationships and the generally well-defined distinctions between the innumerable organisms in each class throughout the world may be explained. It is a truly wonderful fact -- the wonder of which we tend to overlook from familiarity -- that all animals and all plants throughout all time and space should be related to each other in groups subordinate to groups, in the manner we everywhere see: namely, varieties of the same species most closely related, species of the same genus less closely and unequally related, forming sections and subgenera, species of distinct genera much less closely related, and genera related in different degrees forming subfamilies, families, orders, subclasses, and classes. The several subordinate groups in any class cannot be ranked in a single line, but seem clustered around points, and these around other points, and so on in almost endless cycles. If species had been independently created, no explanation would have been possible for this kind of classification. But it is explained through inheritance and the complex action of natural selection, entailing extinction and divergence of character, as we've seen illustrated in the diagram.

The relationships of all the organisms of the same class have sometimes been represented by a great tree. I believe this comparison largely speaks the truth. The green and budding twigs may represent existing species, and those produced during former years may represent the long succession of extinct species. At each period of growth, all the growing twigs have tried to branch out on all sides and to overtop and kill the surrounding twigs and branches, in the same manner as species and groups of species have at all times overmastered other species in the great battle for life. The limbs divided into great branches, and these into lesser and lesser branches, were themselves once, when the tree was young, budding twigs -- and this connection of the former and present buds by ramifying branches may well represent the classification of all extinct and living species in groups subordinate to groups. Of the many twigs that flourished when the tree was a mere bush, only two or three, now grown into great branches, yet survive and bear the other branches. So with the species that lived during long-past geological periods: very few have left living and modified descendants. From the first growth of the tree, many a limb and branch has decayed and dropped off, and these fallen branches of various sizes may represent those whole orders, families, and genera that have now no living representatives and are known to us only as fossils. As we here and there see a thin, straggling branch springing from a fork low down in a tree, and which by some chance has been favored and is still alive on its summit, so we occasionally see an animal like the platypus or the lungfish, which in some small degree connects by its relationships two large branches of life, and which has apparently been saved from fatal competition by having inhabited a protected habitat. As buds give rise by growth to fresh buds, and these, if vigorous, branch out and overtop on all sides many a feebler branch, so by generation I believe it has been with the great Tree of Life, which fills with its dead and broken branches the crust of the earth, and covers the surface with its ever-branching and beautiful ramifications.
