CHAPTER V
Laws of Variation


Up to this point, I've sometimes spoken as if the variations -- so common and diverse in domesticated organisms, and to a lesser degree in wild ones -- were due to chance. This is, of course, a completely incorrect way to put it, but it serves to honestly acknowledge our ignorance about what causes each particular variation. Some authors believe that producing individual differences, or slight deviations in structure, is just as much a function of the reproductive system as making offspring resemble their parents. But the fact that variations and monstrosities occur far more often under domestication than in nature, and that species with wide ranges are more variable than those with restricted ranges, leads to the conclusion that variability is generally related to the conditions of life each species has been exposed to over many successive generations. In the first chapter, I tried to show that changed conditions act in two ways: directly on the whole body or on certain parts alone, and indirectly through the reproductive system. In all cases, two factors are at work: the nature of the organism, which is by far the more important, and the nature of the conditions. The direct action of changed conditions leads to either definite or indefinite results. In the latter case, the organism seems to become plastic, and we see a great deal of fluctuating variability. In the former case, the organism is the sort that yields readily when subjected to certain conditions, and all, or nearly all, the individuals become modified in the same way.

It's very difficult to determine how far changed conditions -- climate, food, and so on -- have acted in a definite manner. There's reason to believe that over time the effects have been greater than we can prove with clear evidence. But we can safely conclude that the countless complex mutual adaptations of structure we see throughout nature between various organisms cannot be attributed simply to such direct action. In the following cases, the conditions do seem to have produced some slight definite effect: E. Forbes asserts that shells at their southern limit, and when living in shallow water, are more brightly colored than those of the same species from further north or from greater depths -- though this certainly doesn't always hold true. Mr. Gould believes that birds of the same species are more brightly colored under a clear atmosphere than when living near the coast or on islands. And Wollaston is convinced that living near the sea affects the colors of insects. Moquin-Tandon gives a list of plants that, when growing near the seashore, develop somewhat fleshy leaves, though they aren't fleshy elsewhere. These slightly varying organisms are interesting insofar as they display characteristics analogous to those possessed by species that are confined to similar conditions.

When a variation is of even the slightest use to any organism, we can't tell how much to attribute to the accumulated action of natural selection, and how much to the direct action of the conditions of life. For example, it's well known to furriers that animals of the same species have thicker and better fur the further north they live. But who can tell how much of this difference is due to the warmest-clad individuals having been favored and preserved over many generations, and how much to the direct action of the harsh climate? For it does appear that climate has some direct effect on the hair of our domestic mammals.

Examples could be given of similar varieties being produced from the same species under conditions of life as different as you could possibly imagine -- and, on the other hand, of dissimilar varieties being produced under apparently the same conditions. Again, countless examples are known to every naturalist of species staying true to form, not varying at all, despite living under the most opposite climates. Considerations like these lead me to put less weight on the direct action of surrounding conditions, and more on a tendency to vary due to causes we're entirely ignorant of.

In one sense, the conditions of life may be said not only to cause variability, either directly or indirectly, but also to include natural selection, since the conditions determine whether this or that variety will survive. But when humans are the selecting agents, we can clearly see that the two elements of change are distinct: variability is somehow stimulated, but it's the human will that accumulates variations in a certain direction. And it's this latter force that corresponds to the survival of the fittest in nature.


Effects of the Increased Use and Disuse of Parts, as Controlled by Natural Selection

From the facts discussed in the first chapter, I think there can be no doubt that use in our domestic animals has strengthened and enlarged certain parts, and disuse has diminished them -- and that such modifications are inherited. In wild nature, we have no standard of comparison for judging the effects of long-continued use or disuse, since we don't know the ancestral forms. But many animals possess structures that are best explained by the effects of disuse. As Professor Owen has remarked, there's no greater oddity in nature than a bird that cannot fly -- yet there are several in this state. The loggerhead duck of South America can only flap along the water's surface, and has its wings in nearly the same condition as the domestic Aylesbury duck. It's a remarkable fact that the young birds, according to Mr. Cunningham, can fly, while the adults have lost this power. Since the larger ground-feeding birds seldom take flight except to escape danger, it's likely that the nearly wingless condition of several birds now inhabiting (or which recently inhabited) various oceanic islands -- islands with no predatory mammals -- has been caused by disuse. The ostrich does inhabit continents and is exposed to danger from which it cannot escape by flight, but it can defend itself by kicking its enemies as effectively as many mammals. We can reasonably believe that the ancestor of the ostrich genus had habits like those of the bustard, and that as its body grew larger and heavier over successive generations, its legs were used more and its wings less, until they became incapable of flight.

Kirby has remarked (and I've observed the same thing) that the front feet of many male dung-feeding beetles are often broken off. He examined seventeen specimens in his own collection, and not one had even a remnant left. In Onites apelles, the front feet are so habitually lost that the insect has been described as not having them. In some other genera they're present, but in a rudimentary condition. In the Ateuchus, or sacred beetle of the Egyptians, they're completely absent. The evidence that accidental mutilations can be inherited is currently not decisive, but the remarkable cases observed by Brown-Sequard in guinea pigs -- involving inherited effects of operations -- should make us cautious about denying this tendency. So it's probably safest to view the complete absence of the front feet in Ateuchus, and their rudimentary condition in some other genera, not as cases of inherited mutilations, but as due to the effects of long-continued disuse. Since many dung-feeding beetles are generally found with their front feet lost, this must happen early in life, which means the feet can't be very important or much used by these insects.

In some cases, we might easily attribute to disuse modifications that are wholly or mainly due to natural selection. Mr. Wollaston discovered the remarkable fact that 200 beetles out of the 550 species (though more are now known) inhabiting Madeira are so deficient in wings that they cannot fly -- and that of the twenty-nine endemic genera, no less than twenty-three have all their species in this condition! Several facts point to natural selection as the main cause: beetles in many parts of the world are very frequently blown to sea and perish; the beetles in Madeira, as Wollaston observed, stay hidden until the wind dies down and the sun comes out; the proportion of wingless beetles is larger on the exposed Desertas than on Madeira itself; and especially the extraordinary fact, which Wollaston strongly emphasizes, that certain large groups of beetles -- elsewhere enormously abundant -- which absolutely require the use of their wings, are here almost entirely absent. All these considerations lead me to believe that the wingless condition of so many Madeira beetles is mainly due to the action of natural selection, probably combined with disuse. Over many successive generations, each individual beetle that flew least -- either because its wings were even slightly less well-developed, or because of lazier habits -- would have had the best chance of surviving by not being blown out to sea. On the other hand, those beetles that most readily took to flight would most often have been blown to sea and destroyed.

The insects in Madeira that are not ground-feeders, and which -- like certain flower-feeding beetles and moths -- must regularly use their wings to find food, have, as Wollaston suspects, their wings not reduced at all, but actually enlarged. This is perfectly compatible with the action of natural selection. When a new insect first arrived on the island, the tendency of natural selection to enlarge or reduce the wings would depend on whether more individuals were saved by successfully battling the winds, or by giving up the attempt and rarely or never flying. It's like mariners shipwrecked near a coast: it would have been better for the good swimmers if they could swim even further, while it would have been better for the bad swimmers if they couldn't swim at all and had clung to the wreck.

The eyes of moles and of some burrowing rodents are rudimentary in size, and in some cases are completely covered by skin and fur. This state of the eyes is probably due to gradual reduction from disuse, perhaps aided by natural selection. In South America, a burrowing rodent called the tuco-tuco, or Ctenomys, is even more subterranean in its habits than the mole. I was told by a Spaniard who had often caught them that they were frequently blind. One that I kept alive was certainly in this condition; the cause, as appeared on dissection, was inflammation of the nictitating membrane. Since frequent inflammation of the eyes must be harmful to any animal, and since eyes are certainly not necessary for animals with subterranean habits, a reduction in their size -- with the eyelids fusing shut and fur growing over them -- might in such cases be an advantage. And if so, natural selection would aid the effects of disuse.

It's well known that several animals belonging to very different classes, which inhabit the caves of Carniola and Kentucky, are blind. In some of the crabs, the eye-stalk remains, though the eye is gone -- the stand for the telescope is there, but the telescope with its lenses has been lost. Since it's hard to imagine that eyes, though useless, could be in any way harmful to animals living in darkness, their loss can be attributed to disuse. In one of the blind animals -- the cave rat (Neotoma) -- two specimens were captured by Professor Silliman more than half a mile from the mouth of the cave, and therefore not in the deepest depths. Their eyes were shiny and large. And these animals, as Professor Silliman informed me, after being exposed to gradually increasing light for about a month, developed a dim ability to perceive objects.

It's hard to imagine conditions more similar than deep limestone caverns under a nearly identical climate. So under the old view that blind cave animals were separately created for the American and European caves, you'd expect very close similarity in their organization and relationships. This is certainly not the case if we look at the two whole faunas. With respect to the insects alone, Schiodte has remarked: "We are accordingly prevented from considering the entire phenomenon in any other light than something purely local, and the similarity which is exhibited in a few forms between the Mammoth Cave (in Kentucky) and the caves in Carniola, otherwise than as a very plain expression of that analogy which exists generally between the fauna of Europe and of North America." On my view, we must suppose that American animals, having in most cases ordinary powers of vision, slowly migrated over successive generations from the outer world into the deeper and deeper recesses of the Kentucky caves, just as European animals did into the caves of Europe. We have some evidence of this gradual transition. As Schiodte remarks: "We accordingly look upon the subterranean faunas as small branches which have penetrated into the earth from the geographically limited faunas of the adjacent areas, and which, as they extended themselves into darkness, have become adapted to their surroundings. Animals not far removed from ordinary forms prepare the transition from light to darkness. Next follow those that are built for twilight; and last of all, those suited for total darkness, whose structure is quite peculiar." It should be understood that Schiodte's remarks apply not to the same species, but to distinct species. By the time an animal has reached, after countless generations, the deepest recesses, disuse will on this view have more or less completely obliterated its eyes. Natural selection will often have brought about other changes, such as an increase in the length of the antennae or feelers, as compensation for blindness. Despite such modifications, we'd still expect to see in the cave animals of America relationships to the other inhabitants of that continent, and in those of Europe, relationships to the inhabitants of Europe. And this is the case with some of the American cave animals, as I hear from Professor Dana, and some of the European cave insects are very closely related to those of the surrounding country. It would be difficult to give any rational explanation for the relationships of blind cave animals to the other inhabitants of the two continents under the standard view of their independent creation. That several cave inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds should be closely related is exactly what we'd expect from the well-known relationship of most of their other organisms. Since a blind species of Bathyscia is found in abundance on shady rocks far from caves, the loss of vision in the cave species of this genus probably had nothing to do with its dark habitat -- it's natural that an insect already deprived of vision would readily become adapted to dark caverns. Another blind genus, Anophthalmus, offers a remarkable peculiarity: as Mr. Murray observes, its species have never been found anywhere except in caves, yet those inhabiting the various caves of Europe and America are distinct. But it's possible that the ancestors of these several species, back when they had functioning eyes, may formerly have ranged over both continents and then gone extinct everywhere except in their present secluded homes. Far from feeling surprised that some cave animals should be very unusual -- as Agassiz has remarked regarding the blind fish Amblyopsis, and as is the case with the blind Proteus among European reptiles -- I'm only surprised that more relics of ancient life have not been preserved, given the less intense competition that the sparse inhabitants of these dark homes must have faced.


Acclimatization

Habit is hereditary in plants -- in the timing of flowering, in the time of dormancy, in the amount of rain required for seeds to germinate, and so on -- and this leads me to say a few words about acclimatization. Since it's extremely common for distinct species of the same genus to inhabit hot and cold countries, if it's true that all species of the same genus descended from a single ancestor, then acclimatization must be readily achieved during a long course of descent. It's well known that each species is adapted to the climate of its own home: species from arctic or even temperate regions can't endure a tropical climate, or vice versa. Similarly, many succulent plants can't endure a damp climate. But the degree to which species are adapted to the climates where they live is often overrated. We can infer this from our frequent inability to predict whether an imported plant will survive our climate, and from the number of plants and animals brought from different countries that are perfectly healthy here. We have reason to believe that species in nature are limited in their ranges by competition with other organisms quite as much as, or more than, by adaptation to particular climates. But whether or not this adaptation is in most cases very close, we do have evidence with some plants of their becoming naturally habituated to different temperatures -- that is, they become acclimatized. For example, pines and rhododendrons raised from seed collected by Dr. Hooker from the same species growing at different heights on the Himalayas were found to possess different constitutional powers of resisting cold when grown in this country. Mr. Thwaites informs me that he has observed similar facts in Ceylon. Analogous observations have been made by Mr. H. C. Watson on European plant species brought from the Azores to England, and I could give other cases. Regarding animals, several well-documented instances could be given of species having greatly extended their range from warmer to colder latitudes, or vice versa, within historical times. But we don't know for certain that these animals were strictly adapted to their native climate, though in ordinary cases we assume so. Nor do we know that they've subsequently become specially acclimatized to their new homes, so as to be better fitted for them than they were at first.

Since we can reasonably infer that our domestic animals were originally chosen by early humans because they were useful and because they bred readily in captivity -- not because they were later found capable of far-flung transportation -- the common and extraordinary ability of our domestic animals to not only withstand the most different climates but to remain perfectly fertile under them (a far more demanding test) can be used as an argument that a large proportion of other animals currently in a wild state could easily be brought to tolerate widely different climates. We shouldn't push this argument too far, however, because some of our domestic animals probably descend from several wild stocks: the blood of a tropical and an arctic wolf may perhaps be mingled in our domestic breeds. The rat and mouse can't be considered domestic animals, but they've been transported by humans to many parts of the world and now have a far wider range than any other rodent -- they live under the cold climate of the Faroes in the north and the Falklands in the south, and on many an island in the tropics. So adaptation to any special climate may be seen as a quality readily grafted onto an innate wide flexibility of constitution, common to most animals. On this view, the ability of humans and our domestic animals to endure the most different climates, and the fact that the extinct elephant and rhinoceros formerly endured a glacial climate while the living species are now all tropical or subtropical in their habits, shouldn't be seen as oddities, but as examples of a very common flexibility of constitution brought into action under special circumstances.

How much acclimatization of species to any particular climate is due to mere habit, how much to natural selection of varieties with different innate constitutions, and how much to both combined, is an unclear question. I believe that habit or custom does have some influence, both from analogy and from the constant advice given in agricultural works -- even in the ancient encyclopedias of China -- to be very cautious when transporting animals from one district to another. And since it's unlikely that humans have succeeded in selecting so many breeds and sub-breeds with constitutions specially suited to their own regions, the result must, I think, be due to habit. On the other hand, natural selection would inevitably tend to preserve those individuals born with constitutions best adapted to whatever country they inhabited. In books on many kinds of cultivated plants, certain varieties are said to withstand certain climates better than others. This is strikingly shown in works on fruit trees published in the United States, where certain varieties are routinely recommended for the northern states and others for the southern states. And since most of these varieties are of recent origin, they can't owe their constitutional differences to habit. The case of the Jerusalem artichoke -- which is never grown from seed in England, meaning new varieties haven't been produced -- has even been put forward as proof that acclimatization can't be achieved, since it's now as tender as it ever was! The case of the kidney bean has also been often cited for a similar purpose, and with much greater force. But until someone actually sows, for twenty or more generations, his kidney beans so early that a very large proportion are destroyed by frost, then collects seed from the few survivors with care to prevent accidental crosses, and then again gets seed from these seedlings with the same precautions, the experiment can't be said to have even been tried. Nor should we suppose that differences in the constitution of seedling kidney beans never appear -- an account has been published showing how much hardier some seedlings are than others, and I've personally observed striking instances of this.

On the whole, we can conclude that habit, or use and disuse, have in some cases played a considerable part in modifying constitution and structure. But their effects have often been largely combined with, and sometimes overruled by, the natural selection of innate variations.


Correlated Variation

By this expression I mean that the whole body is so tied together during its growth and development that when slight variations in any one part occur and are accumulated through natural selection, other parts become modified too. This is a very important subject, most imperfectly understood, and no doubt entirely different kinds of facts can easily be confused here. We'll see shortly that simple inheritance often gives the false appearance of correlation. One of the most obvious real cases is that variations arising in the young or larval stage naturally tend to affect the structure of the mature animal. The parts that are homologous -- identical in structure at an early embryonic stage, and necessarily exposed to similar conditions -- seem especially liable to vary in a similar way. We see this in the right and left sides of the body varying in the same manner, in the front and hind legs varying together, and even in the jaws and limbs varying together, for the lower jaw is believed by some anatomists to be homologous with the limbs. I have no doubt that these tendencies can be more or less completely overridden by natural selection. For example, a family of stags once existed with an antler on only one side, and if this had been of any great use to the breed, natural selection could probably have made it permanent.

Homologous parts, as some authors have remarked, tend to fuse together. This is often seen in abnormal plants, and nothing is more common than the union of homologous parts in normal structures -- such as the union of petals into a tube. Hard parts seem to affect the shape of adjoining soft parts. Some authors believe that in birds, the diversity in the shape of the pelvis causes the remarkable diversity in the shape of the kidneys. Others believe that the shape of the pelvis in the human mother influences the shape of the child's head through pressure. In snakes, according to Schlegel, the shape of the body and the manner of swallowing determine the position and shape of several of the most important internal organs.

The nature of the bond between correlated parts is frequently quite obscure. Geoffroy St. Hilaire has forcefully pointed out that certain malformations frequently coexist, while others rarely do, without our being able to explain why. What could be more singular than the relationship in cats between complete whiteness, blue eyes, and deafness? Or between the tortoiseshell color and the female sex? Or in pigeons, between feathered feet and skin between the outer toes, or between the presence of more or less down on newly hatched chicks and the future color of their plumage? Or again, the relationship between hair and teeth in the naked Turkish dog, though here homology no doubt plays a role? On this last case, I think it can hardly be accidental that the two orders of mammals most abnormal in their skin covering -- Cetacea (whales) and Edentata (armadillos, scaly anteaters, and so on) -- are also, on the whole, the most abnormal in their teeth. But there are so many exceptions to this rule, as Mr. Mivart has pointed out, that it has little value.

I know of no case better suited to show the importance of the laws of correlation and variation -- independently of utility, and therefore of natural selection -- than the difference between the outer and inner flowers in some Composite and Umbelliferous plants. Everyone is familiar with the difference between the ray florets and central florets of, for instance, the daisy, and this difference is often accompanied by the partial or complete abortion of the reproductive organs. But in some of these plants, the seeds also differ in shape and texture. These differences have sometimes been attributed to the pressure of the surrounding bracts on the florets, or to their mutual pressure, and the shape of the seeds in the ray florets of some Composites supports this idea. But with the Umbellifers, it's by no means the case, as Dr. Hooker informs me, that the species with the densest heads are those which most frequently differ in their inner and outer flowers. It might have been thought that the development of the ray petals, by drawing nourishment from the reproductive organs, causes their abortion. But this can hardly be the only explanation, because in some Composites the seeds of the outer and inner florets differ without any difference in the petals. Possibly these various differences may be connected with the different flow of nutrients toward the central and outer flowers. We know, at least, that with irregular flowers, those nearest the center axis are most subject to becoming abnormally symmetrical -- a condition called peloria. I can add, as an example of this and as a striking case of correlation, that in many pelargoniums the two upper petals in the central flower of the cluster often lose their patches of darker color. And when this occurs, the attached nectar tube is completely aborted -- the central flower thus becoming regular. When the color is absent from only one of the two upper petals, the nectar tube isn't completely aborted but is much shortened.

Regarding the development of the petals, Sprengel's idea that the ray florets serve to attract insects -- whose role is highly advantageous or necessary for the fertilization of these plants -- is very probably correct. And if so, natural selection may have come into play. But when it comes to the seeds, it seems impossible that their differences in shape -- which aren't always correlated with any difference in the petals -- can be beneficial in any way. Yet in the Umbellifers, these differences are of such apparent importance -- the seeds being sometimes straight-ribbed in the outer flowers and curved in the central flowers -- that the elder De Candolle founded his main divisions in the order on such characteristics. So modifications of structure that taxonomists consider highly significant may be entirely due to the laws of variation and correlation, without being, as far as we can judge, of the slightest use to the species.

We may often falsely attribute to correlated variation structures that are common to whole groups of species, and which in truth are simply due to inheritance. An ancient ancestor may have acquired through natural selection some one modification in structure, and after thousands of generations, some other independent modification. These two modifications, having been transmitted to a whole group of descendants with diverse habits, would naturally be thought to be correlated in some necessary way. Some other correlations are apparently due to the manner in which natural selection can act. For example, Alphonse de Candolle has remarked that winged seeds are never found in fruits that don't open. I'd explain this rule by the impossibility of seeds gradually becoming winged through natural selection unless the seed cases were open. Only in that case could seeds that were slightly better adapted for wind dispersal gain an advantage over those less well-suited for wide distribution.


Compensation and Economy of Growth

The elder Geoffroy and Goethe proposed, at about the same time, their law of compensation or balance of growth. Or as Goethe expressed it, "in order to spend on one side, nature is forced to economize on the other side." I think this holds true to some extent with our domestic animals: if nourishment flows to one part or organ in excess, it rarely flows in excess to another part as well. It's hard to get a cow to give lots of milk and fatten up easily at the same time. The same varieties of cabbage don't yield both abundant, nutritious foliage and a plentiful supply of oil-bearing seeds. When the seeds in our fruits become shrunken, the fruit itself gains considerably in size and quality. In our poultry, a large tuft of feathers on the head is generally accompanied by a smaller comb, and a large beard by smaller wattles. For species in the wild, it can hardly be claimed that the law applies universally. But many good observers, especially botanists, believe it to be true. I won't give any examples here, though, because I see hardly any way to distinguish between, on one hand, a part being greatly developed through natural selection while an adjoining part is reduced by the same process or by disuse, and on the other hand, the actual diversion of nutrients from one part due to excessive growth in another adjoining part.

I also suspect that some of the cases of compensation that have been put forward, along with some other facts, may fall under a more general principle: namely, that natural selection is continually trying to economize in every part of the body. If under changed conditions a structure that was previously useful becomes less useful, its reduction will be favored, because it benefits the individual not to have its nutrients wasted in building up a useless structure. This is the only way I can understand a fact that struck me greatly when I was examining barnacles, and of which many other examples could be given: when a barnacle is parasitic within another barnacle and thus protected, it loses its own shell or carapace more or less completely. This is the case with the male Ibla, and in a truly extraordinary way with Proteolepas. In all other barnacles, the carapace consists of three highly important anterior segments of the head, enormously developed and furnished with large nerves and muscles. But in the parasitic and protected Proteolepas, the whole front part of the head is reduced to the merest rudiment attached to the bases of the grasping antennae. Now, the saving of a large and complex structure, when it's been made unnecessary, would be a real advantage to each successive individual of the species. In the struggle for life to which every animal is exposed, each would have a better chance of supporting itself by wasting less nutriment.

Thus, as I believe, natural selection will tend in the long run to reduce any part of the body as soon as it becomes unnecessary through changed habits -- without necessarily causing some other part to be developed to a corresponding degree. And conversely, natural selection may perfectly well succeed in greatly developing an organ without requiring, as a necessary trade-off, the reduction of some adjoining part.


Multiple, Rudimentary, and Lowly Organized Structures Are Variable

It seems to be a rule, as noted by Geoffroy St. Hilaire, both with varieties and species, that when any part or organ is repeated many times in the same individual -- such as the vertebrae in snakes, or the stamens in flowers with many stamens -- the number is variable. But when the same part or organ occurs in smaller numbers, the count is constant. The same author, along with some botanists, has further remarked that multiple parts are extremely prone to vary in structure. Since "vegetative repetition," to use Professor Owen's expression, is a sign of low organization, these observations agree with the common view among naturalists that organisms lower on the scale of life are more variable than those higher up. I believe this is because, in low organisms, the various parts haven't been highly specialized for particular functions. And as long as the same part has to perform diverse tasks, we can perhaps see why it should remain variable -- why natural selection shouldn't have so carefully preserved or rejected each little deviation of form as when the part serves a single specific purpose. In the same way, a knife that has to cut all sorts of things can be almost any shape, while a tool for a particular job must be a particular shape. Natural selection, we should never forget, can act only through and for the advantage of each organism.

Rudimentary parts, as is generally recognized, tend to be highly variable. We'll have to return to this subject later. I'll only add here that their variability seems to result from their uselessness, and consequently from natural selection having had no power to keep deviations in their structure in check.


A Part Developed in Any Species in an Extraordinary Degree or Manner, in Comparison with the Same Part in Allied Species, Tends to Be Highly Variable

Several years ago, I was much struck by a remark to this effect made by Mr. Waterhouse. Professor Owen also seems to have reached a nearly similar conclusion. It's hopeless to try to convince anyone of the truth of this proposition without laying out the long array of facts I've collected, which can't possibly be presented here. I can only state my conviction that it's a rule of high generality. I'm aware of several sources of error, but I hope I've made proper allowances for them. It should be understood that the rule doesn't apply to any part, however unusually developed, unless it's unusually developed in one species or a few species compared to the same part in many closely related species. For instance, the wing of the bat is a highly abnormal structure in the class of mammals, but the rule wouldn't apply here because the entire group of bats possesses wings. It would apply only if some one species had wings developed in a remarkable manner compared to the other species of the same genus. The rule applies very strongly to secondary sexual characters when displayed in any unusual manner. The term "secondary sexual characters," coined by Hunter, refers to characters attached to one sex but not directly connected with the act of reproduction. The rule applies to males and females, but more rarely to females, since they seldom display remarkable secondary sexual characters. That the rule applies so clearly to secondary sexual characters may be because these characters are highly variable in general, whether or not they're displayed in any unusual way -- and I think there can be little doubt about this. But that our rule isn't confined to secondary sexual characters is clearly shown in the case of hermaphrodite barnacles. I paid particular attention to Mr. Waterhouse's remark while investigating this order, and I'm fully convinced that the rule almost always holds. I will, in a future work, give a list of all the more remarkable cases. I'll give just one here, as it illustrates the rule in its broadest application. The opercular valves of sessile barnacles (rock barnacles) are, in every sense of the word, very important structures, and they differ extremely little even between distinct genera. But in the several species of one genus, Pyrgoma, these valves show a marvelous amount of diversification. The homologous valves in the different species are sometimes completely unlike in shape. And the amount of variation among individuals of the same species is so great that it's no exaggeration to say that varieties of the same species differ from each other in the characters of these important structures more than do species belonging to other distinct genera.

Since birds of the same species inhabiting the same country vary extremely little, I've paid particular attention to them, and the rule certainly seems to hold in this class. I can't establish that it applies to plants, and this would have seriously shaken my belief in its truth, had not the great variability of plants made it particularly difficult to compare their relative degrees of variability.

When we see any part or organ developed to a remarkable degree in a species, the fair assumption is that it's of high importance to that species. Nevertheless, it's in this case especially prone to variation. Why should this be so? Under the view that each species has been independently created, with all its parts as we now see them, I can see no explanation. But under the view that groups of species descended from some other species and have been modified through natural selection, I think we can shed some light on this. First, let me make some preliminary observations. If, in our domestic animals, any part or the whole animal is neglected and no selection is applied, that part (for instance, the comb in the Dorking fowl) or the whole breed will cease to have a uniform character. The breed may be said to be degenerating. In rudimentary organs, and in those that have been only slightly specialized for any particular purpose, and perhaps in polymorphic groups, we see a nearly parallel case. In such situations, natural selection either hasn't come or can't come into full play, and the organism is left in a fluctuating condition. But what concerns us more here is that those features in our domestic animals currently undergoing rapid change by continued selection are also especially prone to variation. Look at individual birds of the same breed of pigeon, and see what a tremendous amount of difference there is in the beak of tumblers, the beak and wattle of carriers, the posture and tail of fantails, and so on -- these being the features now mainly focused on by English breeders. Even in the same sub-breed, as in that of the short-faced tumbler, it's notoriously difficult to breed nearly perfect birds, since many depart widely from the standard. There may truly be said to be a constant struggle going on between, on one hand, the tendency to revert to a less refined state combined with an innate tendency toward new variations, and on the other hand, the power of steady selection to keep the breed true. In the long run, selection wins the day, and we wouldn't expect to fail so completely as to breed a bird as rough as a common tumbler from a good short-faced strain. But as long as selection is actively going on, much variability in the parts undergoing modification can always be expected.

Now let's turn to nature. When a part has been developed in an extraordinary manner in any one species compared to the other species of the same genus, we can conclude that this part has undergone an extraordinary amount of modification since the period when the several species branched off from the common ancestor of the genus. This period will seldom be extremely remote, as species rarely endure for more than one geological period. An extraordinary amount of modification implies an unusually large and long-continued amount of variability, which has been continually accumulated by natural selection for the benefit of the species. But since the variability of the extraordinarily developed part has been so great and long-continued within a period not excessively remote, we might, as a general rule, still expect to find more variability in such parts than in other parts of the body that have remained nearly constant for a much longer period. And this, I'm convinced, is the case. I see no reason to doubt that the struggle between natural selection on one hand, and the tendency to reversion and variability on the other, will in time cease, and that the most abnormally developed organs may be made constant. So when an organ, however abnormal, has been transmitted in approximately the same condition to many modified descendants -- as with the wing of the bat -- it must have existed, according to our theory, for an immense period in nearly the same state. And thus it has come to be no more variable than any other structure. It's only in those cases where the modification has been comparatively recent and extraordinarily great that we should expect to find what might be called generative variability still present to a high degree. In this case, the variability won't yet have been fixed by the continued selection of individuals varying in the required manner and degree, and by the continued rejection of those tending to revert to a former, less modified condition.


Specific Characters More Variable Than Generic Characters

The principle just discussed can be applied to our present subject. It's well known that specific characters are more variable than generic ones. To explain by a simple example: if in a large genus of plants some species had blue flowers and some had red, the color would be only a specific character, and no one would be surprised at one of the blue species varying to red, or vice versa. But if all the species had blue flowers, the color would become a generic character, and its variation would be a more unusual event. I've chosen this example because the explanation most naturalists would offer doesn't apply here -- namely, that specific characters are more variable than generic ones because they come from parts of less physiological importance than those commonly used for classifying genera. I believe this explanation is partly, yet only indirectly, true. I'll have to return to this point in the chapter on classification. It would be almost unnecessary to provide evidence for the statement that ordinary specific characters are more variable than generic ones. But with respect to important characters, I've repeatedly noticed in works on natural history that when an author remarks with surprise that some important organ or part, generally very constant throughout a large group of species, differs considerably in closely related species, it's often variable among individuals of the same species too. And this fact shows that a character which is generally of generic value, when it drops in rank and becomes only of specific value, often becomes variable -- even though its physiological importance may remain the same. Something of the same kind applies to monstrosities: Geoffroy St. Hilaire apparently has no doubt that the more an organ normally differs across species of the same group, the more subject it is to abnormalities in individuals.

Under the standard view of each species having been independently created, why should the part of the structure that differs from the same part in other independently created species of the same genus be more variable than those parts that are closely alike in the several species? I don't see that any explanation can be given. But under the view that species are only strongly marked and fixed varieties, we might often expect to find them still continuing to vary in those parts of their structure that have varied within a moderately recent period and have thus come to differ. Or to state the case another way: the features in which all the species of a genus resemble each other, and in which they differ from related genera, are called generic characters. These can be attributed to inheritance from a common ancestor, since it can rarely have happened that natural selection would have modified several distinct species, adapted to more or less different habits, in exactly the same way. And since these so-called generic characters have been inherited from before the period when the several species first branched off from their common ancestor, and have subsequently not varied or come to differ in any degree, or only slightly, it's not likely that they should vary today. On the other hand, the features in which species differ from other species of the same genus are called specific characters. Since these specific characters have varied and come to differ since the period when the species branched off from a common ancestor, it's likely that they should still often be somewhat variable -- at least more variable than those parts of the body that have remained constant for a very long period.


Secondary Sexual Characters Variable

I think naturalists would agree, without my going into detail, that secondary sexual characters are highly variable. It will also be agreed that species of the same group differ from each other more widely in their secondary sexual characters than in other parts of their organization. Compare, for instance, the amount of difference between the males of game birds, in which secondary sexual characters are strongly displayed, with the amount of difference between the females. The cause of the original variability of these characters isn't clear. But we can see why they wouldn't have been rendered as constant and uniform as other traits: they're accumulated by sexual selection, which is less rigid in its action than ordinary selection, since it doesn't entail death, but only gives fewer offspring to the less favored males. Whatever the cause of the variability of secondary sexual characters, since they are highly variable, sexual selection has had a wide scope for action. And it may thus have succeeded in giving to the species of the same group a greater amount of difference in these traits than in other respects.

It's a remarkable fact that the secondary differences between the two sexes of the same species are generally displayed in the very same parts of the body where species of the same genus differ from each other. I'll give in illustration the first two instances that happen to be on my list, and since the differences in these cases are of a very unusual nature, the relationship can hardly be accidental. The same number of joints in the feet is a character common to very large groups of beetles, but in the Engidae, as Westwood has remarked, the number varies greatly -- and the number likewise differs between the two sexes of the same species. Again, in the digging wasps (fossorial Hymenoptera), the wing venation is a character of the highest importance, because it's common to large groups. But in certain genera, the venation differs between different species, and likewise between the two sexes of the same species. Sir J. Lubbock has recently remarked that several tiny crustaceans offer excellent illustrations of this law: "In Pontella, for instance, the sexual characters are afforded mainly by the anterior antennae and by the fifth pair of legs: the specific differences also are principally given by these organs." This relationship has a clear meaning on my view: I look at all the species of the same genus as having as certainly descended from the same ancestor as have the two sexes of any one species. Consequently, whatever part of the structure of the common ancestor, or of its early descendants, became variable, variations of this part would very likely be taken advantage of by natural and sexual selection -- in order to fit the several species to their various places in the natural order, and likewise to fit the two sexes of the same species to each other, or to fit the males to compete with other males for the possession of females.

Finally, then, I conclude that the greater variability of specific characters -- those that distinguish species from species -- compared to generic characters, which are shared by all the species; that the frequent extreme variability of any part developed to an extraordinary degree in one species compared to its relatives; and the slight variability of a part, however extraordinarily developed, if it's common to a whole group of species; that the great variability of secondary sexual characters and their great difference in closely related species; and that secondary sexual and ordinary specific differences are generally displayed in the same parts of the body -- all these principles are closely connected together. All are mainly due to the species of the same group being the descendants of a common ancestor, from whom they have inherited much in common. Parts that have recently and extensively varied are more likely still to go on varying than parts that have long been inherited and have not varied. Natural selection has, depending on the lapse of time, more or less completely overcome the tendency to reversion and to further variability. Sexual selection is less rigid than ordinary selection. And variations in the same parts have been accumulated by natural and sexual selection, thus becoming adapted for both secondary sexual and for ordinary purposes.


Distinct Species Present Analogous Variations, So That a Variety of One Species Often Assumes a Character Proper to an Allied Species, or Reverts to Some of the Characters of an Early Progenitor

These propositions will be most easily understood by looking at our domestic breeds. The most distinct breeds of pigeon, in countries widely apart, have sub-varieties with reversed feathers on the head and feathers on the feet -- characters not possessed by the ancestral rock pigeon. These are analogous variations in two or more distinct breeds. The frequent presence of fourteen or even sixteen tail feathers in the pouter may be considered a variation mimicking the normal structure of another breed, the fantail. I believe no one would doubt that all such analogous variations are due to the several breeds of pigeon having inherited from a common parent the same constitution and tendency to variation, when acted upon by similar unknown influences. In the plant kingdom, we have a case of analogous variation in the enlarged stems -- or, as they're commonly called, roots -- of the Swedish turnip and rutabaga, plants which several botanists consider varieties produced by cultivation from a common parent. If this isn't the case, it would then be one of analogous variation in two so-called distinct species, and a third could be added: namely, the common turnip. Under the standard view of each species having been independently created, we'd have to attribute this similarity in the enlarged stems of these three plants not to the true cause of shared descent and a resulting tendency to vary in a similar way, but to three separate yet closely related acts of creation. Many similar cases of analogous variation have been observed by Naudin in the great gourd family, and by various authors in our cereals. Similar cases occurring with insects in the wild have lately been discussed with great skill by Mr. Walsh, who has grouped them under his "law of equable variability."

With pigeons, however, we have another case: the occasional appearance in all the breeds of slaty-blue birds with two black bars on the wings, white loins, a bar at the end of the tail, and the outer feathers edged near their bases with white. Since all these marks are characteristic of the parent rock pigeon, I believe no one would doubt that this is a case of reversion, not of a new yet analogous variation appearing in the several breeds. We can, I think, confidently reach this conclusion, because, as we've seen, these colored marks are especially likely to appear in the crossed offspring of two distinct and differently colored breeds. In this case, there's nothing in the external conditions of life to cause the reappearance of the slaty-blue, with all its markings, beyond the influence of the mere act of crossing on the laws of inheritance.

It's certainly a very surprising fact that characters should reappear after being lost for many -- probably for hundreds of -- generations. But when a breed has been crossed only once with some other breed, the offspring occasionally show for many generations a tendency to revert to the foreign breed -- some say, for a dozen or even twenty generations. After twelve generations, the proportion of blood (to use a common expression) from one ancestor is only 1 in 2,048. And yet, as we see, it's generally believed that a tendency to reversion is retained by this tiny remnant of foreign blood. In a breed that hasn't been crossed, but in which both parents have lost some character their ancestor possessed, the tendency to reproduce the lost character -- whether strong or weak -- might, as I previously remarked, be transmitted for almost any number of generations, for all we know. When a character that has been lost in a breed reappears after a great number of generations, the most probable explanation isn't that one individual suddenly takes after an ancestor removed by hundreds of generations. Rather, in each successive generation, the character in question has been lying dormant, and at last, under unknown favorable conditions, it is expressed. With the barb pigeon, for instance, which very rarely produces a blue bird, it's probable that there's a dormant tendency in each generation to produce blue plumage. The abstract improbability of such a tendency being transmitted through a vast number of generations is no greater than the improbability of quite useless or rudimentary organs being similarly transmitted. A mere tendency to produce a rudiment is indeed sometimes inherited this way.

Since all the species of the same genus are supposed to have descended from a common ancestor, it might be expected that they would occasionally vary in an analogous manner -- so that the varieties of two or more species would resemble each other, or that a variety of one species would resemble another distinct species in certain characters (this other species being, on our view, only a well-marked and permanent variety). But characters due exclusively to analogous variation would probably be unimportant, because the preservation of all functionally important characters will have been determined through natural selection in accordance with the different habits of the species. It might further be expected that species of the same genus would occasionally show reversions to long-lost characters. However, since we don't know the common ancestor of any natural group, we can't distinguish between reversionary and analogous characters. If, for instance, we didn't know that the parent rock pigeon was neither feather-footed nor crest-crowned, we couldn't have told whether such characters in our domestic breeds were reversions or only analogous variations. But we might have inferred that the blue color was a case of reversion from the number of markings correlated with this tint, which wouldn't all likely have appeared together from simple variation. We especially might have inferred this from the blue color and its associated marks so often appearing when differently colored breeds are crossed. So, although in nature it must generally be left doubtful which cases are reversions to formerly existing characters and which are new but analogous variations, we ought, on our theory, sometimes to find the varying offspring of a species taking on characters already present in other members of the same group. And this is undoubtedly the case.

The difficulty in distinguishing variable species is largely due to the varieties mimicking, as it were, other species of the same genus. A considerable catalog could also be given of forms intermediate between two other forms, which themselves can only doubtfully be ranked as species. This shows, unless all these closely related forms are considered independently created species, that they have in varying assumed some of the characters of the others. But the best evidence of analogous variations comes from parts or organs that are generally constant in character but occasionally vary so as to resemble, in some degree, the same part or organ in a related species. I've collected a long list of such cases, but here, as before, I'm at the great disadvantage of not being able to present them. I can only repeat that such cases certainly occur and seem to me very remarkable.

I will, however, give one curious and complex case -- not because it affects any important character, but because it occurs in several species of the same genus, partly under domestication and partly in the wild. It's a case almost certainly of reversion. The donkey sometimes has very distinct transverse bars on its legs, like those on the legs of a zebra. It has been said that these are most visible in the foal, and from inquiries I've made, I believe this to be true. The stripe on the shoulder is sometimes double, and very variable in length and outline. A white donkey (but not an albino) has been described without either spinal or shoulder stripe, and these stripes are sometimes very faint or actually completely absent in dark-colored donkeys. The koulan of Pallas is said to have been seen with a double shoulder stripe. Mr. Blyth has seen a specimen of the hemionus with a distinct shoulder stripe, though it properly has none. And I've been informed by Colonel Poole that foals of this species are generally striped on the legs and faintly on the shoulder. The quagga, though so plainly barred like a zebra over the body, has no bars on the legs -- but Dr. Gray has illustrated one specimen with very distinct zebra-like bars on the hocks.

Regarding the horse, I've collected cases in England of the spinal stripe in horses of the most distinct breeds and of all colors. Transverse bars on the legs are not rare in duns and mouse-duns, and in one instance in a chestnut. A faint shoulder stripe can sometimes be seen in duns, and I've seen a trace in a bay horse. My son made a careful examination and sketch for me of a dun Belgian carthorse with a double stripe on each shoulder and with leg stripes. I've personally seen a dun Devonshire pony, and a small dun Welsh pony has been carefully described to me, both with three parallel stripes on each shoulder.

In the northwest part of India, the Kattywar breed of horses is so generally striped that, as I hear from Colonel Poole, who examined this breed for the Indian government, a horse without stripes isn't considered purely bred. The spine is always striped; the legs are generally barred; and the shoulder stripe, which is sometimes double and sometimes triple, is common. The side of the face is moreover sometimes striped. The stripes are often most visible in the foal and sometimes quite disappear in old horses. Colonel Poole has seen both gray and bay Kattywar horses striped when first foaled. I also have reason to suspect, from information given me by Mr. W. W. Edwards, that in the English racehorse the spinal stripe is much more common in the foal than in the full-grown animal. I recently bred a foal myself from a bay mare (the offspring of a Turkoman horse and a Flemish mare) by a bay English racehorse. This foal, when a week old, was marked on its hindquarters and on its forehead with numerous very narrow, dark, zebra-like bars, and its legs were faintly striped. All the stripes soon disappeared completely. Without going into further details, I can state that I've collected cases of leg and shoulder stripes in horses of very different breeds in various countries, from Britain to eastern China and from Norway in the north to the Malay Archipelago in the south. In all parts of the world, these stripes occur far most often in duns and mouse-duns -- and by the term "dun," a large range of colors is included, from one between brown and black to a close approach to cream.

I'm aware that Colonel Hamilton Smith, who has written on this subject, believes that the several breeds of the horse descended from several ancestral species, one of which, the dun, was striped -- and that the appearances described above are all due to ancient crosses with the dun stock. But this view can safely be rejected, for it's highly improbable that the heavy Belgian carthorse, Welsh ponies, Norwegian cobs, the lanky Kattywar breed, and so on -- inhabiting the most distant parts of the world -- should all have been crossed with one supposed ancestral stock.

Now let's turn to the effects of crossing the several species of the horse genus. Rollin asserts that the common mule from the donkey and horse is particularly apt to have bars on its legs. According to Mr. Gosse, in certain parts of the United States, about nine out of ten mules have striped legs. I once saw a mule with its legs so heavily striped that anyone might have thought it was a hybrid zebra. And Mr. W. C. Martin, in his excellent treatise on the horse, has illustrated a similar mule. In four colored drawings I've seen of hybrids between the donkey and zebra, the legs were much more plainly barred than the rest of the body, and in one of them there was a double shoulder stripe. In Lord Morton's famous hybrid from a chestnut mare and male quagga, the hybrid and even the pure offspring subsequently produced from the same mare by a black Arabian sire were much more plainly barred across the legs than even the pure quagga. Lastly, and this is another most remarkable case, a hybrid has been illustrated by Dr. Gray (and he tells me he knows of a second case) from the donkey and the hemionus. This hybrid -- though the donkey only occasionally has stripes on its legs, and the hemionus has none and doesn't even have a shoulder stripe -- nevertheless had all four legs barred and had three short shoulder stripes, like those on the dun Devonshire and Welsh ponies, and even had some zebra-like stripes on the sides of its face. Regarding this last detail, I was so convinced that not even a stripe of color appears by what is commonly called chance, that I was led solely by the occurrence of the face stripes on this hybrid from the donkey and hemionus to ask Colonel Poole whether such face stripes ever occurred in the eminently striped Kattywar breed of horses -- and was, as we've seen, answered in the affirmative.

What are we to make of all these facts? We see several distinct species of the horse genus becoming, by simple variation, striped on the legs like a zebra, or striped on the shoulders like a donkey. In the horse, we see this tendency strongest whenever a dun tint appears -- a tint approaching the general coloring of the other species of the genus. The appearance of the stripes isn't accompanied by any change of form or by any other new character. We see this tendency to become striped most strongly displayed in hybrids between several of the most distinct species. Now consider the case of the several breeds of pigeons: they descended from a pigeon (including two or three subspecies or geographical races) of a bluish color with certain bars and other marks. When any breed takes on a bluish tint by simple variation, these bars and other marks invariably reappear -- but without any other change of form or character. When the oldest and truest breeds of various colors are crossed, we see a strong tendency for the blue tint and bars and marks to reappear in the hybrids. I've stated that the most probable explanation for the reappearance of very ancient characters is that there's a tendency in the young of each successive generation to produce the long-lost character, and that this tendency, from unknown causes, sometimes prevails. And we've just seen that in several species of the horse genus the stripes are either plainer or appear more commonly in the young than in the old. Call the breeds of pigeons -- some of which have bred true for centuries -- species, and how exactly parallel is the case with that of the species of the horse genus! For myself, I venture confidently to look back thousands upon thousands of generations, and I see an animal striped like a zebra, but perhaps otherwise very differently built -- the common parent of our domestic horse (whether or not it descended from one or more wild stocks), of the donkey, the hemionus, the quagga, and the zebra.

Anyone who believes that each equine species was independently created will, I presume, assert that each species was created with a tendency to vary, both in nature and under domestication, in this particular manner, so as often to become striped like the other species of the genus. And that each was created with a strong tendency, when crossed with species inhabiting distant parts of the world, to produce hybrids resembling in their stripes not their own parents but other species of the genus. To accept this view is, it seems to me, to reject a real cause for an unreal, or at least unknown, one. It makes the works of God a mere mockery and deception. I would almost as soon believe, with the old and ignorant cosmogonists, that fossil shells had never lived but had been created in stone to mock the shells now living on the seashore.


Summary

Our ignorance of the laws of variation is profound. Not in one case out of a hundred can we claim to assign any reason why this or that part has varied. But whenever we have the means of making a comparison, the same laws appear to have acted in producing the lesser differences between varieties of the same species and the greater differences between species of the same genus. Changed conditions generally cause mere fluctuating variability, but sometimes they produce direct and definite effects -- and these may become strongly marked over time, though we don't have enough evidence on this point. Habit in producing constitutional peculiarities, and use in strengthening and disuse in weakening and diminishing organs, appear in many cases to have been powerful in their effects. Homologous parts tend to vary in the same manner, and homologous parts tend to fuse together. Modifications in hard parts and in external parts sometimes affect softer and internal parts. When one part is greatly developed, it perhaps tends to draw nourishment from adjoining parts. And every part of the structure that can be saved without harm will be saved. Changes of structure at an early age may affect parts that develop later. And many cases of correlated variation, whose nature we're unable to understand, undoubtedly occur. Multiple parts are variable in number and in structure, perhaps because such parts haven't been closely specialized for any particular function, so that their modifications haven't been closely checked by natural selection. It probably follows from this same cause that organisms low on the scale of life are more variable than those standing higher, which have their whole body more specialized. Rudimentary organs, being useless, are not regulated by natural selection, and are therefore variable. Specific characters -- that is, the characters that have come to differ since the several species of the same genus branched off from a common parent -- are more variable than generic characters, or those that have long been inherited and haven't differed within this same period. In these remarks, we've been discussing special parts or organs being still variable because they have recently varied and thus come to differ. But we also saw in the second chapter that the same principle applies to the whole individual: in a district where many species of a genus are found -- where there has been much former variation and differentiation, or where the factory of new specific forms has been actively at work -- in that district and among these species, we now find, on average, the most varieties. Secondary sexual characters are highly variable, and such characters differ greatly across species of the same group. Variability in the same parts of the body has generally been taken advantage of in giving secondary sexual differences to the two sexes of the same species, and specific differences to the several species of the same genus. Any part or organ developed to an extraordinary size or in an extraordinary manner, compared with the same part or organ in related species, must have gone through an extraordinary amount of modification since the genus arose. And so we can understand why it should often still be variable to a much higher degree than other parts, for variation is a long-continued and slow process, and natural selection will in such cases not yet have had time to overcome the tendency to further variability and to reversion to a less modified state. But when a species with an extraordinarily developed organ has become the parent of many modified descendants -- which on our view must be a very slow process, requiring a long lapse of time -- in this case, natural selection has succeeded in giving a fixed character to the organ, however extraordinarily it may have been developed. Species inheriting nearly the same constitution from a common parent, and exposed to similar influences, naturally tend to present analogous variations. Or these same species may occasionally revert to some of the characters of their ancient ancestors. Although new and important modifications may not arise from reversion and analogous variation, such modifications will add to the beautiful and harmonious diversity of nature.

Whatever the cause may be of each slight difference between offspring and their parents -- and a cause for each must exist -- we have reason to believe that it is the steady accumulation of beneficial differences which has given rise to all the more important modifications of structure in relation to the habits of each species.
