VII

Miscellaneous Objections to the Theory of Natural Selection


I'll devote this chapter to addressing various objections that have been raised against my views, since doing so may help clarify some of the earlier discussions. It would be pointless to address all of them, though, because many have been made by writers who haven't bothered to understand the subject. For example, a distinguished German naturalist has claimed that the weakest part of my theory is that I consider all organisms as imperfect. What I actually said is that none are as perfectly adapted as they could be to their conditions of life -- and this is demonstrated by the fact that native species in many parts of the world have been displaced by foreign invaders. Nor could organisms, even if perfectly adapted at one point in time, remain so when their conditions changed -- unless they changed too. And no one would argue that the physical conditions of every country, along with the number and kinds of its inhabitants, haven't undergone many changes.

A critic has recently insisted, with a show of mathematical precision, that longevity is a great advantage to all species, so anyone who believes in natural selection "must arrange his genealogical tree" so that all descendants live longer than their ancestors! Can't our critics imagine that a biennial plant or a small animal might extend into a cold climate and die there every winter, yet still survive from year to year through its seeds or eggs -- thanks to advantages gained through natural selection? Mr. E. Ray Lankester has recently discussed this subject and concludes, as far as this extremely complex question allows him to judge, that longevity is generally related to the species' level of organization, as well as to how much energy it spends on reproduction and general activity. And these conditions have probably been largely determined through natural selection.

It has been argued that since none of the animals and plants of Egypt that we know about have changed in the last three or four thousand years, probably none in any part of the world have either. But as Mr. G. H. Lewes has pointed out, this line of argument proves too much: the ancient domestic breeds depicted on Egyptian monuments, or found embalmed, are closely similar or even identical to those alive today -- yet all naturalists accept that these breeds were produced through modification of their original types. The many animals that have remained unchanged since the beginning of the glacial period would actually have been an incomparably stronger case, since these have been exposed to enormous changes in climate and have migrated over vast distances. In Egypt, by contrast, the conditions of life have remained essentially uniform for several thousand years, as far as we know. The fact that little or no change has occurred since the glacial period might count against those who believe in an innate and necessary law of development, but it's powerless against the theory of natural selection -- or survival of the fittest -- which holds that when beneficial variations or individual differences happen to arise, they will be preserved. But this will only happen under certain favorable conditions.

The celebrated paleontologist Bronn, at the close of his German translation of this work, asks how, on the principle of natural selection, a variety can live side by side with the parent species. If both have become adapted to slightly different habits or conditions, they could live together. And if we set aside polymorphic species (in which variability seems to be of a peculiar nature), along with all mere temporary variations such as size, albinism, and so on, the more permanent varieties are generally found -- as far as I can discover -- inhabiting distinct areas, such as highlands versus lowlands, or dry versus wet districts. Moreover, in animals that wander a lot and crossbreed freely, their varieties seem to be generally confined to distinct regions.

Bronn also insists that distinct species never differ from each other in just a single feature, but always in many parts. He asks: how is it that many parts of an organism should have been modified at the same time through variation and natural selection? But there's no need to suppose that all parts of an organism were modified simultaneously. The most striking changes, beautifully adapted for some purpose, might -- as I've previously noted -- be acquired by successive small variations, first in one part and then in another. Since they would all be inherited together, they would appear to us as if they had developed simultaneously. The best answer, however, to this objection comes from domestic breeds that have been modified, mainly through human selection, for some special purpose. Look at the racehorse and the draft horse, or at the greyhound and the mastiff. Their entire frames, and even their temperaments, have been modified. But if we could trace each step in the history of their transformation -- and the later steps can be traced -- we wouldn't see great simultaneous changes, but first one part and then another being slightly modified and improved. Even when selection has been applied by humans to just one feature alone -- and our cultivated plants offer the best examples -- it will always be found that although this one part, whether flower, fruit, or leaves, has been greatly changed, almost all the other parts have been slightly modified too. This can be attributed partly to the principle of correlated development and partly to what's called spontaneous variation.

A much more serious objection has been raised by Bronn, and recently by the anthropologist Broca: that many traits appear to be of no use whatever to their possessors, and therefore couldn't have been influenced by natural selection. Bronn points to the length of the ears and tails in different species of hares and mice, the complex folds of enamel in the teeth of many animals, and a multitude of similar cases. With respect to plants, this subject has been discussed by the botanist Nageli in an excellent essay. He admits that natural selection has accomplished much, but he insists that plant families differ from each other mainly in structural features that appear to be quite unimportant for the welfare of the species. He therefore believes in an innate tendency toward progressive and more perfect development. He points to the arrangement of cells in tissues and of leaves on the stem as cases where natural selection couldn't have played a role. To these we could add the numerical divisions of the flower parts, the position of the ovules, the shape of the seed when it's not useful for dispersal, and so on.

There is real force in this objection. Nevertheless, we should first be extremely cautious about claiming to decide which structures are, or have formerly been, useful to each species. Second, we should always keep in mind that when one part is modified, other parts will be too, through various poorly understood causes -- such as increased or decreased nutrient flow to a part, mutual pressure, an early-developing part affecting one that develops later, and so forth -- as well as through other causes that lead to the many mysterious cases of correlated variation, which we don't understand at all. These effects can all be grouped together, for brevity, under the expression "the laws of growth." Third, we have to allow for the direct and definite effects of changed living conditions, and for so-called spontaneous variations, in which the nature of the conditions apparently plays only a minor role. Bud-variations, such as a moss-rose appearing on a common rose bush, or a nectarine on a peach tree, are good examples of spontaneous variations. But even in these cases, if we remember the power of a tiny drop of poison to produce complex galls, we shouldn't be too sure that these variations aren't the result of some local change in the sap, caused by some change in conditions. There must be some effective cause for each slight individual difference, as well as for the more strongly marked variations that occasionally arise. And if the unknown cause were to act persistently, it's almost certain that all the individuals of the species would be similarly modified.

In the earlier editions of this work, I probably underestimated the frequency and importance of modifications due to spontaneous variability. But it's impossible to attribute to this cause the countless structures so well adapted to the habits of life of each species. I can no more believe in this than in the idea that the well-adapted form of a racehorse or greyhound -- which so amazed the older naturalists before the principle of selection was well understood -- can be explained this way.

It may be worth illustrating some of these points. Regarding the supposed uselessness of various parts and organs, it hardly needs saying that even in the most familiar animals, many structures exist that are so highly developed that no one doubts their importance, yet their function has only recently been discovered -- or hasn't been discovered at all. Since Bronn offers the length of the ears and tail in different species of mice as examples (though trivial ones) of structural differences that can serve no special purpose, I should mention that, according to Dr. Schobl, the external ears of the common mouse are supplied in an extraordinary way with nerves, so that they clearly serve as touch-sensitive organs. The length of the ears, then, can hardly be unimportant. We'll also see shortly that the tail is a highly useful gripping organ in some species, and its usefulness would be very much affected by its length.

With respect to plants, to which I'll confine myself in the following remarks because of Nageli's essay, it will be admitted that the flowers of orchids present a multitude of curious structures that just a few years ago would have been considered mere structural differences without any special function. They are now known to be of the greatest importance for the fertilization of the species through the help of insects, and they were probably developed through natural selection. No one until recently would have imagined that in dimorphic and trimorphic plants, the different lengths and arrangements of the stamens and pistils could serve any purpose. But now we know they do.

In certain whole groups of plants, the ovules stand upright, and in others they are suspended. Within the same ovary of some plants, one ovule takes the former position and another the latter. These positions seem at first to be purely structural, with no physiological significance. But Dr. Hooker tells me that within the same ovary, the upper ovules alone are fertilized in some cases, and the lower ones alone in others. He suggests that this probably depends on the direction in which the pollen-tubes enter the ovary. If so, the position of the ovules -- even when one is upright and the other is suspended within the same ovary -- would result from the selection of any slight deviations in position that favored fertilization and seed production.

Several plants belonging to distinct orders regularly produce two kinds of flowers -- one open, with the ordinary structure, the other closed and imperfect. These two kinds sometimes differ remarkably in structure, yet on the same plant you can see them grading into each other. The ordinary open flowers can be crossbred, and the benefits that certainly come from this process are thus secured. The closed, imperfect flowers, however, are clearly of great importance because they produce a large stock of seed with absolute reliability, using remarkably little pollen. The two kinds of flowers often differ greatly in structure, as I just mentioned. The petals in the imperfect flowers almost always consist of mere remnants, and the pollen grains are reduced in diameter. In *Ononis columnae*, five of the alternate stamens are rudimentary, and in some species of *Viola*, three stamens are in this state, with two retaining their function but being very small. In six out of thirty closed flowers of an Indian violet (species unknown, since the plants never produced perfect flowers for me), the sepals are reduced from the normal five to three. In one section of the Malpighiaceae, the closed flowers are still further modified, according to A. de Jussieu: the five stamens opposite the sepals are all aborted, while a sixth stamen opposite a petal is alone developed -- and this stamen isn't present in the ordinary flowers of this species. The style is aborted, and the ovaries are reduced from three to two. Now, although natural selection may well have had the power to prevent some flowers from opening and to reduce the amount of pollen (which is unnecessary once the flowers are closed), hardly any of the specific modifications above can have been directly determined by natural selection. They must instead have followed from the laws of growth, including the inactivity of parts, during the progressive reduction of pollen and closure of the flowers.

It's so important to understand the effects of the laws of growth that I'll give some additional examples of another kind -- namely, differences in the same part or organ due to differences in position on the same plant. In the Spanish chestnut and certain fir trees, the angles at which the leaves diverge differ between the nearly horizontal and the upright branches, according to Schacht. In the common rue and some other plants, one flower -- usually the central or terminal one -- opens first and has five sepals, five petals, and five divisions in the ovary, while all the other flowers on the plant have four of each. In the British *Adoxa*, the uppermost flower generally has two calyx-lobes with the other organs in fours, while the surrounding flowers generally have three calyx-lobes with the other organs in fives. In many Compositae and Umbelliferae (and some other plants), the outer flowers have much more developed corollas than the central ones, and this often seems connected with the abortion of the reproductive organs. It's a more curious fact, which I've mentioned before, that the seeds of the outer and central flowers sometimes differ greatly in form, color, and other features. In *Carthamus* and some other Compositae, only the central seeds are furnished with a pappus. In *Hyoseris*, the same flower head yields seeds of three different forms. In certain Umbelliferae, the outer seeds are orthospermous and the central one is coelospermous, according to Tausch -- a distinction that De Candolle considered, in other species, to be of the highest systematic importance. Professor Braun mentions a genus of the Fumariaceae in which the flowers in the lower part of the spike bear oval, ribbed, one-seeded nutlets, while those in the upper part bear lance-shaped, two-valved, two-seeded pods. In all these cases, with the exception of the well-developed ray-florets (which serve to make the flowers conspicuous to insects), natural selection cannot, as far as we can judge, have played a role -- or only a very minor one. All these modifications follow from the relative position and interaction of the parts. And it can hardly be doubted that if all the flowers and leaves on the same plant had been subjected to the same external and internal conditions as those in certain positions, all would have been modified in the same way.

In many other cases, we find structural modifications that botanists generally consider to be of great importance, yet which affect only some flowers on the same plant, or which occur on distinct plants growing close together under the same conditions. Since these variations seem to be of no special use to the plants, they cannot have been influenced by natural selection. We're completely ignorant of their cause; we can't even attribute them, as in the last set of cases, to any direct agency like relative position. I'll give just a few examples. It's so common to see flowers on the same plant that are indifferently tetramerous (four-parted), pentamerous (five-parted), and so on, that examples are unnecessary. But since numerical variations are comparatively rare when the parts are few, I should mention that according to De Candolle, the flowers of *Papaver bracteatum* have either two sepals with four petals (which is the common type for poppies) or three sepals with six petals. The way petals are folded in the bud is usually a very constant structural feature in most groups. But Professor Asa Gray states that in some species of *Mimulus*, the bud-folding pattern is almost as frequently like that of the Rhinanthideae as that of the Antirrhinideae, to which latter group the genus actually belongs. Auguste St. Hilaire gives the following cases: the genus *Zanthoxylon* belongs to a division of the Rutaceae with a single ovary, but in some species, flowers with either one or two ovaries may be found on the same plant, even in the same flower cluster. In *Helianthemum*, the capsule has been described as having either one or three chambers. And in *H. mutabile*, "a membrane of varying width extends between the pericarp and the placenta" (originally in French). In the flowers of *Saponaria officinalis*, Dr. Masters has observed instances of both marginal and free central placentation. Finally, St. Hilaire found, toward the southern edge of the range of *Gomphia oleaeformis*, two forms that he initially had no doubt were distinct species. But he later saw them growing on the same bush, and then added: "So here in a single individual we find chambers and a style that attach sometimes to a vertical axis and sometimes to a gynobase" (originally in French).

We thus see that in plants, many structural changes can be attributed to the laws of growth and the interaction of parts, independently of natural selection. But what about Nageli's doctrine of an innate tendency toward perfection or progressive development? Can we say, in these cases of strongly pronounced variation, that the plants have been caught in the act of progressing toward a higher state? On the contrary, I would infer from the mere fact that the parts in question differ so much on the same plant that such modifications are of extremely little importance to the plants themselves -- whatever importance they may have for our classification systems. Acquiring a useless part can hardly be said to raise an organism in the natural scale. And in the case of the imperfect, closed flowers described above, if any new principle must be invoked, it would be one of regression rather than progression. The same would be true of many parasitic and degraded animals. We don't know the cause of the modifications I've described. But if the unknown cause were to act nearly uniformly over a long period, we can infer that the result would be nearly uniform, and all individuals of the species would be modified in the same way.

Because these features are unimportant for the species' welfare, any slight variations in them would not have been accumulated and enhanced through natural selection. A structure that has been developed through long-continued selection, when it ceases to be useful to a species, generally becomes variable, as we see with rudimentary organs -- because it's no longer regulated by the power of selection. But when modifications arise, due to the nature of the organism and its conditions, that are unimportant for the species' welfare, they may be -- and apparently often have been -- transmitted in nearly the same state to numerous otherwise-modified descendants. It can't have been of much importance to the majority of mammals, birds, or reptiles whether they were covered with hair, feathers, or scales. Yet hair has been transmitted to almost all mammals, feathers to all birds, and scales to all true reptiles. A structure that is common to many related forms is ranked by us as having high systematic importance, and is therefore often assumed to be of great vital importance to the species. Thus, as I'm inclined to believe, structural differences that we consider important -- such as the arrangement of leaves, the divisions of the flower or ovary, the position of the ovules, and so on -- first appeared in many cases as fluctuating variations, which sooner or later became constant through the nature of the organism and the surrounding conditions, as well as through the crossbreeding of distinct individuals, but not through natural selection. Since these structural features don't affect the species' welfare, any slight deviations in them couldn't have been governed or accumulated through natural selection. This leads us to a strange conclusion: that features of slight vital importance to the species are the most important ones to the taxonomist. But as we'll see later, when we discuss the genetic principle of classification, this isn't nearly as paradoxical as it first appears.

Although we have no good evidence for an innate tendency toward progressive development in organisms, such development does necessarily follow -- as I tried to show in the fourth chapter -- from the continued action of natural selection. The best definition ever given of a high standard of organization is the degree to which the parts have been specialized and differentiated. And natural selection tends toward this end, since specialization enables the parts to perform their functions more efficiently.


A distinguished zoologist, Mr. St. George Mivart, has recently collected all the objections that have ever been raised -- by myself and others -- against the theory of natural selection, as proposed by Mr. Wallace and myself, and has presented them with admirable skill and force. Lined up together, they make an impressive array. And since it forms no part of Mivart's plan to present the facts and considerations that oppose his conclusions, the reader who wishes to weigh the evidence on both sides is left with no small effort of reason and memory. When discussing specific cases, Mivart ignores the effects of increased use and disuse of parts, which I have always maintained to be highly important and have treated at greater length in my *Variation Under Domestication* than, I believe, any other writer. He also often assumes that I attribute nothing to variation independently of natural selection, whereas in that same work I've collected a greater number of well-established cases than can be found in any other work known to me. My judgment may not be trustworthy, but after reading Mivart's book carefully and comparing each section with what I've said on the same topic, I've never felt more strongly convinced of the general truth of the conclusions I've reached here -- subject, of course, in so complex a subject, to much partial error.

All of Mivart's objections will be, or have been, considered in this book. The one new point that appears to have struck many readers is "that natural selection is incompetent to account for the incipient stages of useful structures." This subject is closely connected to the gradation of features, often accompanied by a change of function -- for instance, the conversion of a swim bladder into lungs -- which I discussed in the last chapter under two headings. Nevertheless, I'll consider in some detail here several of the cases Mivart raises, selecting the most illustrative ones, since space prevents me from addressing all of them.

The giraffe, with its towering height, enormously long neck, forelegs, head, and tongue, has its whole body beautifully adapted for browsing on the higher branches of trees. It can reach food beyond the reach of the other hoofed animals in the same country, and this must be a great advantage during times of drought. The Niata cattle of South America show us how a small difference in structure can make a huge difference in an animal's survival during such periods. These cattle can graze on grass as well as others, but because of the projection of their lower jaw, they can't browse on tree twigs, reeds, and other vegetation that ordinary cattle and horses are driven to during the frequent droughts. So at those times, the Niatas die unless fed by their owners. Before turning to Mivart's objections, it will be helpful to explain once more how natural selection works in ordinary cases. Humans have modified some of their animals without necessarily paying attention to specific structural features, simply by preserving and breeding from the fastest individuals, as with the racehorse and greyhound, or by breeding from the victorious birds, as with the gamecock. Similarly, in nature, with the early giraffe, the individuals that could browse highest -- able during droughts to reach even an inch or two above the others -- would often have been the ones to survive, since they would have ranged over the whole country searching for food. That individuals of the same species often differ slightly in the relative lengths of all their parts can be seen in many works of natural history where careful measurements are given. These slight proportional differences, due to the laws of growth and variation, are of no use or importance to most species. But it would have been different with the early giraffe, given its probable way of life: those individuals whose bodies, or some part of them, were somewhat more elongated than usual would generally have survived. These would have interbred and left offspring that either inherited the same bodily features or tended to vary again in the same direction, while the less favorably proportioned individuals would have been the most likely to die.

Notice that there's no need to separate single pairs, as a human breeder does when methodically improving a breed: natural selection will preserve and thereby separate all the superior individuals, allowing them to interbreed freely, while destroying all the inferior ones. Through this long-continued process -- which corresponds exactly to what I've called unconscious selection by humans, combined no doubt in a very important way with the inherited effects of increased use of parts -- it seems to me almost certain that an ordinary hoofed mammal could be converted into a giraffe.

Against this conclusion, Mivart raises two objections. The first is that increased body size would obviously require more food, and he considers it "very problematical whether the disadvantages arising from this would not, in times of scarcity, more than counterbalance the advantages." But since giraffes actually exist in large numbers in Africa, and since some of the world's largest antelopes -- taller than an ox -- thrive there, why should we doubt that intermediate forms, as far as size is concerned, could formerly have existed there, subjected to the same severe droughts? Surely the ability, at each stage of increasing size, to reach a food supply untouched by the other hoofed animals of the country would have been of some advantage to the developing giraffe. And we shouldn't overlook the fact that increased bulk would serve as protection against almost all predators except the lion. And against the lion, the tall neck -- the taller the better -- would, as Mr. Chauncey Wright has pointed out, serve as a watchtower. It's for this reason, as Sir S. Baker notes, that no animal is more difficult to stalk than the giraffe. This animal also uses its long neck as a weapon, violently swinging its head with its stump-like horns. The survival of each species is rarely determined by any single advantage, but by the combination of all of them, great and small.

Mivart then asks -- and this is his second objection -- if natural selection is so powerful, and if high browsing is such a great advantage, why hasn't any other hoofed animal acquired a long neck and tall stature, besides the giraffe and, to a lesser degree, the camel, guanaco, and macrauchenia? Or again, why hasn't any member of the group developed a long trunk? With respect to South Africa, which was formerly home to enormous herds of giraffes, the answer isn't difficult, and is best given by an analogy. In every meadow in England where trees grow, we see the lower branches trimmed to an exact level by the browsing of horses or cattle. What advantage would it be to sheep, kept in the same meadow, to develop slightly longer necks? In every area, some one kind of animal will almost certainly be able to browse higher than the others. And it's almost equally certain that this one kind alone could have its neck elongated for this purpose through natural selection and increased use. In South Africa, the competition for browsing on the higher branches of acacias and other trees is between giraffe and giraffe, not between giraffes and the other hoofed animals.

Why, in other parts of the world, various animals of this same order haven't developed either a long neck or a trunk can't be clearly answered. But it's as unreasonable to expect a clear answer to such a question as to ask why some event in human history happened in one country but not in another. We don't know the conditions that determine the numbers and range of each species, and we can't even guess what structural changes would help it increase in some new area. We can, however, see in general terms that various causes might have prevented the development of a long neck or trunk. To reach foliage at a considerable height (without climbing, for which hoofed animals are remarkably ill-suited) requires greatly increased body size. And we know that some areas support remarkably few large mammals -- South America, for example, despite being so lush -- while South Africa has them in unparalleled abundance. Why this should be so, we don't know, nor why the later Tertiary periods were apparently much more favorable for large mammals than the present time. Whatever the causes, we can see that certain regions and time periods would have been much more favorable than others for the development of an animal as large as the giraffe.

For an animal to acquire some structure that is specially and substantially developed, it's almost essential that several other parts be modified and mutually adapted. Although every part of the body varies slightly, it doesn't follow that the necessary parts will always vary in the right direction and to the right degree. In different species of our domestic animals, we know that parts vary in different ways and to different degrees, and that some species are much more variable than others. Even if the right variations did arise, it doesn't follow that natural selection would be able to act on them and produce a structure that would apparently benefit the species. For instance, if a species' numbers are determined mainly by predation, or by external or internal parasites -- as often seems to be the case -- then natural selection will be able to do little, or will be greatly slowed, in modifying any particular structure for obtaining food. Finally, natural selection is a slow process, and the same favorable conditions must persist for a long time for any marked effect to be produced. Except by offering such general and vague reasons, we can't explain why hoofed mammals in many parts of the world haven't developed much longer necks or other means of browsing on high branches.

Objections of the same kind as the foregoing have been raised by many writers. In each case, various causes -- besides the general ones just mentioned -- have probably prevented the acquisition through natural selection of structures that we think would be beneficial to certain species. One writer asks why the ostrich hasn't acquired the power of flight. But a moment's reflection shows what an enormous food supply would be needed to give this bird of the desert the energy to move its huge body through the air. Oceanic islands are inhabited by bats and seals, but by no land mammals. Yet since some of these bats are unique species, they must have long inhabited their present homes. So Sir Charles Lyell asks -- and offers certain reasons in answer -- why haven't seals and bats given rise on such islands to forms fitted to live on land? But seals would first have to be converted into large land-dwelling carnivores, and bats into land-dwelling insect-eaters. For the former, there would be no prey. For the bats, ground insects would serve as food, but these would already be heavily preyed upon by the reptiles or birds that first colonized and now abound on most oceanic islands. Gradual structural changes, with each stage beneficial to the changing species, will be favored only under certain special conditions. A strictly land-dwelling animal, by occasionally hunting for food in shallow water, then in streams or lakes, might eventually be converted into an animal so thoroughly aquatic that it could brave the open ocean. But seals wouldn't find on oceanic islands the conditions favorable for their gradual reconversion into a land animal. Bats, as I previously discussed, probably acquired their wings by first gliding through the air from tree to tree, like the so-called flying squirrels, to escape enemies or avoid falls. But once the power of true flight had been acquired, it would never be converted back -- at least for these purposes -- into the less efficient power of gliding. Bats might, like many birds, have had their wings greatly reduced or completely lost through disuse. But for this to happen, they would first have needed to acquire the ability to run quickly on the ground using their hind legs alone, so as to compete with birds or other ground animals -- and for such a change, a bat seems remarkably ill-suited. These speculative remarks are made merely to show that a structural transition, with each step beneficial, is a highly complex matter, and that there's nothing strange about a particular transition not having occurred.

Finally, more than one writer has asked why some animals haven't had their mental powers more highly developed than others, since such development would be advantageous to all. Why haven't apes acquired the intellectual powers of humans? Various reasons could be suggested, but since they're speculative and their relative probability can't be weighed, it would be pointless to list them. We shouldn't expect a definitive answer to this question, since no one can solve the simpler problem of why, of two groups of human societies, one has risen higher in civilization than the other -- and this apparently implies increased brain power.

Let's return to Mivart's other objections. Insects often resemble various objects for the sake of protection -- green or decayed leaves, dead twigs, bits of lichen, flowers, spines, bird droppings, and even other living insects (though I'll return to this last point later). The resemblance is often astonishingly close and extends not just to color but to form, and even to the way the insects hold themselves. The caterpillars that project motionless like dead twigs from the bushes they feed on offer an excellent example of this kind. The cases of imitating objects like bird droppings are rare and exceptional. On this point, Mivart remarks: "As, according to Mr. Darwin's theory, there is a constant tendency to indefinite variation, and as the minute incipient variations will be in all directions, they must tend to neutralize each other, and at first to form such unstable modifications that it is difficult, if not impossible, to see how such indefinite oscillations of infinitesimal beginnings can ever build up a sufficiently appreciable resemblance to a leaf, bamboo, or other object, for natural selection to seize upon and perpetuate."

But in all the cases above, the insects in their original state no doubt already had some rough and accidental resemblance to a common object in the places they frequented. And this isn't at all unlikely, considering the almost infinite number of surrounding objects and the diversity in form and color of the immense number of insects that exist. Since some rough resemblance is necessary for a starting point, we can understand why larger and higher animals don't (with the exception, as far as I know, of one fish) resemble specific objects for protection, but only the surface that commonly surrounds them -- and this mainly in color. Suppose an insect originally happened to somewhat resemble a dead twig or a decayed leaf, and then varied slightly in many ways. All the variations that made the insect look even a little more like that object, and thus helped it escape detection, would be preserved, while other variations would be neglected and eventually lost. Or, if they made the insect look less like the imitated object, they would be eliminated. There would indeed be force in Mivart's objection if we were trying to explain these resemblances independently of natural selection, through mere random variability. But that's not what's being argued, so the objection has no force.

Nor can I see any force in Mivart's difficulty with "the last touches of perfection in the mimicry" -- as in the case described by Wallace of a walking-stick insect (*Ceroxylus laceratus*), which resembles "a stick grown over by a creeping moss or liverwort." The resemblance was so close that a native Dyak insisted the leafy growths were really moss. Insects are preyed on by birds and other enemies whose sight is probably sharper than ours, and every degree of resemblance that helped an insect escape notice or detection would tend to be preserved -- the more perfect the resemblance, the better for the insect. Considering the nature of the differences between species in the group that includes this *Ceroxylus*, there's nothing improbable about this insect having varied in the irregularities on its surface, and these having become more or less green-colored. In every group, the features that differ among the various species are the ones most likely to vary, while the features common to all species in the group (the generic characters) are the most constant.


The Greenland whale is one of the most wonderful animals in the world, and its baleen, or whalebone, one of its most remarkable features. The baleen consists of a row on each side of the upper jaw of about 300 plates or sheets, standing close together at right angles to the long axis of the mouth. Within the main row are some subsidiary rows. The edges and inner margins of all the plates are frayed into stiff bristles, which cover the whole gigantic palate and serve to strain or filter the water, trapping the tiny prey on which these great animals feed. The middle and longest plate in the Greenland whale is ten, twelve, or even fifteen feet long. But in different species of whales, there are gradations in length: the middle plate being four feet in one species, according to Scoresby, three feet in another, eighteen inches in another, and only about nine inches in the rorqual *Balaenoptera rostrata*. The quality of the whalebone also differs among species.

Regarding the baleen, Mivart remarks that if it "had once attained such a size and development as to be at all useful, then its preservation and augmentation within serviceable limits would be promoted by natural selection alone. But how to obtain the beginning of such useful development?" In answer, one might ask: why shouldn't the early ancestors of baleen whales have possessed a mouth constructed something like the ridged beak of a duck? Ducks, like whales, feed by sifting mud and water, and the family has sometimes been called Criblatores, or sifters. I hope I won't be misunderstood as saying that the ancestors of whales actually had mouths ridged like a duck's beak. I only wish to show that this isn't inconceivable, and that the immense plates of baleen in the Greenland whale might have developed from such ridges through finely graduated steps, each useful to its possessor.

The beak of a shoveler duck (*Spatula clypeata*) is a more beautiful and complex structure than the mouth of a whale. The upper mandible is furnished on each side (in the specimen I examined) with a row or comb of 188 thin, elastic plates, beveled at an angle so as to be pointed and placed at right angles to the long axis of the mouth. They arise from the palate and are attached by flexible membrane to the sides of the mandible. Those toward the middle are the longest, about a third of an inch, and they project about fourteen hundredths of an inch below the edge. At their bases is a short subsidiary row of diagonally placed plates. In all these respects, they resemble the plates of baleen in a whale's mouth. But toward the tip of the beak, they differ considerably, projecting inward rather than straight downward. The shoveler's entire head, though incomparably less massive, is about one-eighteenth the length of the head of a moderately large *Balaenoptera rostrata*, in which species the baleen is only nine inches long. So if we were to scale up the shoveler's head to the length of the *Balaenoptera's*, its plates would be six inches long -- two-thirds the length of the baleen in this whale species. The lower mandible of the shoveler duck is furnished with plates of equal length to those above, but finer. In having such plates on the lower jaw, it differs markedly from a whale, which has no baleen on the lower jaw. On the other hand, the tips of these lower plates are frayed into fine bristly points, so they curiously resemble baleen plates. In the genus *Prion*, a member of the distinct petrel family, only the upper mandible is furnished with plates, which are well developed and project below the margin -- so this bird's beak resembles a whale's mouth in this respect.

From the highly developed structure of the shoveler's beak, we can proceed (as I've learned from information and specimens sent to me by Mr. Salvin) without any great gap, as far as sifting ability is concerned, through the beak of *Merganetta armata*, and in some respects through that of *Aix sponsa*, to the beak of the common duck. In the common duck, the plates are much coarser than in the shoveler and are firmly attached to the sides of the mandible. They number only about fifty on each side and don't project below the margin at all. They are flat-topped and edged with translucent, hardened tissue, as if for crushing food. The ridges of the lower mandible are crossed by numerous fine ridges that barely project. Although this beak is far inferior as a sifting device to the shoveler's, everyone knows the common duck constantly uses it for this purpose. There are other species, as I hear from Mr. Salvin, in which the plates are considerably less developed than in the common duck, but I don't know whether they use their beaks for sifting water.

Turning to another group of the same family: in the Egyptian goose (*Chenalopex*), the beak closely resembles that of the common duck, but the plates aren't as numerous, nor as distinct from each other, nor do they project as far inward. Yet this goose, as I'm informed by Mr. E. Bartlett, "uses its bill like a duck by throwing the water out at the corners." Its main food, however, is grass, which it crops like the common goose. In the common goose, the plates of the upper mandible are much coarser than in the duck, nearly fused together, about twenty-seven on each side, and ending upward in tooth-like knobs. The palate is also covered with hard, rounded knobs. The ridges of the lower mandible are serrated with teeth that are much more prominent, coarser, and sharper than in the duck. The common goose doesn't sift water but uses its beak exclusively for tearing or cutting vegetation, for which it's so well fitted that it can crop grass closer than almost any other animal. There are other species of geese, as I hear from Mr. Bartlett, in which the plates are even less developed than in the common goose.

We thus see that a member of the duck family, with a beak built like a common goose's and adapted solely for grazing -- or even one with less well-developed plates -- could be converted by small changes into a species like the Egyptian goose; this into one like the common duck; and finally into one like the shoveler, equipped with a beak almost exclusively adapted for sifting water -- since this bird can hardly use any part of its beak, except the hooked tip, for seizing or tearing solid food. A goose's beak, I might add, could also be converted by small changes into one with prominent, curved teeth, like those of the merganser (a member of the same family), serving the entirely different purpose of catching live fish.

Returning to the whales. *Hyperoodon bidens* has no functional true teeth, but its palate is roughened, according to Lacepede, with small, unequal, hard points of horn. There's therefore nothing improbable in supposing that some early whale-like form had similar horn points on its palate, but more regularly arranged, and which, like the knobs on a goose's beak, helped it seize or tear its food. If so, it can hardly be denied that these points might have been converted through variation and natural selection into plates as well-developed as those of the Egyptian goose, useful both for seizing objects and for sifting water. Then into plates like those of the domestic duck, and onward, until they became as well-built as those of the shoveler, serving exclusively as a sifting apparatus. From this stage -- in which the plates would be two-thirds the length of the baleen in *Balaenoptera rostrata* -- gradations observable in still-living whales lead us onward to the enormous baleen plates of the Greenland whale. There's not the slightest reason to doubt that each step in this progression might have been as useful to certain ancient whales, with the functions of the parts slowly changing during development, as the gradations in the beaks of the different existing members of the duck family are today. We should keep in mind that each species of duck is subjected to a severe struggle for existence, and that every part of its body must be well adapted to its conditions of life.

The Pleuronectidae, or flatfish, are remarkable for their asymmetrical bodies. They rest on one side -- in most species on the left, but in some on the right, and occasionally reversed adult specimens occur. The lower, or resting, surface resembles at first glance the belly of an ordinary fish: it's white, less developed in many ways than the upper side, and the lateral fins are often smaller. But the eyes present the most remarkable feature: they're both placed on the upper side of the head. During early life, however, they sit on opposite sides, and the whole body is symmetrical, with both sides equally colored. Soon the eye that belongs to the lower side begins to glide slowly around the head to the upper side -- but it doesn't pass right through the skull, as was formerly thought. It's obvious that unless the lower eye traveled around this way, it couldn't be used by the fish while lying in its usual position on one side. The lower eye would also have been liable to be scraped against the sandy bottom. That the flatfish are beautifully adapted by their flattened, asymmetrical structure for their way of life is clear from the fact that several species, such as soles and flounders, are extremely common. The main advantages appear to be protection from enemies and ease of feeding on the bottom. The different members of the family present, as Schiodte remarks, "a long series of forms exhibiting a gradual transition from *Hippoglossus pinguis*, which does not considerably alter the shape in which it leaves the egg, to the soles, which are entirely thrown to one side."

Mivart has taken up this case and remarks that a sudden spontaneous shift in the position of the eyes is hardly conceivable -- and I quite agree with him. He then adds: "If the transit was gradual, then how such transit of one eye a minute fraction of the journey towards the other side of the head could benefit the individual is, indeed, far from clear. It seems, even, that such an incipient transformation must rather have been injurious." But he could have found an answer to this objection in the excellent observations published in 1867 by Malm. The flatfish, while very young and still symmetrical, with their eyes on opposite sides of the head, can't stay upright for long because of the excessive depth of their bodies, the small size of their lateral fins, and their lack of a swim bladder. So they soon grow tired and fall to the bottom on one side. While resting this way, they often twist the lower eye upward to see above them, as Malm observed, and they do this so vigorously that the eye is pressed hard against the upper part of the eye socket. The forehead between the eyes consequently becomes, as could clearly be seen, temporarily compressed in width. On one occasion, Malm saw a young fish raise and lower its bottom eye through an angle of about seventy degrees.

We should remember that at this early age, the skull is cartilaginous and flexible, so it readily yields to muscular action. It's also known that in higher animals, even past early youth, the skull will yield and change shape if the skin or muscles are permanently contracted through disease or accident. In lop-eared rabbits, if one ear flops forward and downward, its weight drags forward all the bones of the skull on the same side -- I've published an illustration of this. Malm reports that newly hatched young of perch, salmon, and several other symmetrical fish have the habit of occasionally resting on one side at the bottom. He observed that they often strain their lower eyes so as to look upward, and their skulls are thereby rendered somewhat crooked. These fish, however, are soon able to hold themselves upright, and no permanent effect results. With the flatfish, on the other hand, the older they grow, the more habitually they rest on one side, owing to their increasingly flat bodies, and a permanent effect is thus produced on the shape of the head and the position of the eyes. Judging from analogy, the tendency to this distortion would no doubt be increased through inheritance. Schiodte believes, contrary to some other naturalists, that flatfish are not quite symmetrical even in the embryo. If this is so, we could understand why certain species habitually fall over on the left side while young, and other species on the right side. Malm adds, in support of this view, that the adult *Trachypterus arcticus* -- which is not a flatfish -- rests on its left side at the bottom and swims diagonally through the water. In this fish, the two sides of the head are said to be somewhat different. The great authority on fish, Dr. Gunther, concludes his summary of Malm's paper by noting that "the author gives a very simple explanation of the abnormal condition of the flatfish."

We thus see that the initial stages of the eye's migration from one side of the head to the other -- which Mivart considers would be harmful -- can be attributed to the habit (no doubt beneficial to both the individual and the species) of trying to look upward with both eyes while resting on one side at the bottom. We can also attribute to the inherited effects of use the fact that the mouth in several kinds of flatfish is bent toward the lower surface, with the jaw bones stronger and more effective on this eyeless side of the head than on the other -- for the sake, as Dr. Traquair proposes, of feeding easily on the bottom. Disuse, on the other hand, explains the less developed condition of the whole lower half of the body, including the lateral fins -- though Yarrell thinks the reduced size of these fins is actually advantageous, since "there is so much less room for their action than with the larger fins above." Perhaps the fewer teeth on the upper side of the jaws in the plaice (four to seven, versus twenty-five to thirty on the lower side) can similarly be explained by disuse. From the colorless underside of most fish and many other animals, we may reasonably suppose that the lack of color on the flatfish's bottom side -- whether right or left -- is due to the exclusion of light. But the peculiar speckled appearance of the upper side of the sole, so closely matching the sandy seabed, or the ability of some species (as Pouchet has recently shown) to change color to match the surrounding surface, or the presence of bony bumps on the upper side of the turbot -- these can't be due to light. Here natural selection has probably played a role, as well as in shaping the general body form of these fish and many other features suited to their way of life. We should keep in mind, as I've insisted before, that the inherited effects of increased use -- and perhaps disuse -- will be reinforced by natural selection, since all spontaneous variations in the right direction will be preserved, as will those individuals that inherit to the highest degree the effects of beneficial use. How much to attribute in each case to use, and how much to natural selection, seems impossible to decide.

I can give another example of a structure that apparently owes its origin entirely to use or habit. In some American monkeys, the tip of the tail has been converted into a wonderfully perfect gripping organ, serving as a fifth hand. A reviewer who agrees with Mivart in every detail remarks about this structure: "It is impossible to believe that in any number of ages the first slight incipient tendency to grasp could preserve the lives of the individuals possessing it, or favour their chance of having and of rearing offspring." But there's no need for any such belief. Habit -- and this almost implies that some benefit, great or small, is gained from it -- would in all probability be enough to do the job. Brehm saw the young of an African monkey (*Cercopithecus*) clinging to the underside of their mother by their hands while at the same time hooking their little tails around their mother's tail. Professor Henslow kept some harvest mice (*Mus messorius*) in captivity -- these don't have a structurally prehensile tail -- but he frequently observed them curling their tails around the branches of a bush placed in the cage, thus helping themselves climb. I've received a similar account from Dr. Gunther, who has seen a mouse suspend itself this way. If the harvest mouse had been more strictly tree-dwelling, it might perhaps have developed a structurally prehensile tail, as some other members of the same order have. Why *Cercopithecus*, despite its habits when young, hasn't developed such a tail would be hard to say. It's possible, however, that this monkey's long tail may be more useful as a balancing organ for its prodigious leaps than it would be as a gripping organ.


Mammary glands are shared by the entire class of mammals and are indispensable for their existence. They must therefore have developed at an extremely remote period, and we can know nothing definitive about how they developed. Mivart asks: "Is it conceivable that the young of any animal was ever saved from destruction by accidentally sucking a drop of scarcely nutritious fluid from an accidentally hypertrophied cutaneous gland of its mother? And even if one was so, what chance was there of the perpetuation of such a variation?" But this isn't a fair way to frame the question. Most evolutionists accept that mammals descended from a marsupial form. If so, the mammary glands would have first developed within the marsupial pouch. In the case of the seahorse (*Hippocampus*), the eggs are hatched and the young are reared for a time within a pouch of this kind. The American naturalist Mr. Lockwood believes, from his observations of the young's development, that they are nourished by a secretion from the skin glands of the pouch. Now, with the early ancestors of mammals -- almost before they deserved to be called mammals -- isn't it at least possible that the young were similarly nourished? And if so, the individuals that secreted the most nutritious fluid -- approaching the nature of milk -- would in the long run have reared more well-nourished offspring than those that secreted a poorer fluid. Thus the skin glands, which are the evolutionary equivalents of the mammary glands, would have been improved and made more effective. It's consistent with the widely recognized principle of specialization that the glands over a certain area of the pouch would have become more highly developed than the rest. They would then have formed a breast -- but at first without a nipple, as we see in the platypus (*Ornithorhynchus*), at the base of the mammalian family tree. Through what agency the glands over a certain area became more specialized than the others, I won't pretend to decide -- whether partly through compensatory growth, the effects of use, or natural selection.

The development of mammary glands would have been of no use, and couldn't have been shaped by natural selection, unless the young at the same time were able to take in the secretion. There's no more difficulty in understanding how young mammals instinctively learned to suck than in understanding how unhatched chicks learned to break the eggshell by tapping against it with their specially adapted beaks, or how, just a few hours after hatching, they learn to pick up grains of food. In such cases, the most probable explanation seems to be that the habit was first acquired through practice at a later age and was then passed to offspring at an earlier age. But the young kangaroo is said not to suck -- it only clings to the nipple of its mother, who has the ability to inject milk into the mouth of her helpless, half-formed young. On this point, Mivart remarks: "Did no special provision exist, the young one must infallibly be choked by the intrusion of the milk into the windpipe. But there is a special provision. The larynx is so elongated that it rises up into the posterior end of the nasal passage, and is thus enabled to give free entrance to the air for the lungs, while the milk passes harmlessly on each side of this elongated larynx, and so safely reaches the gullet behind it." Mivart then asks how natural selection could have removed, in the adult kangaroo (and in most other mammals, if we assume they descended from a marsupial form), "this at least perfectly innocent and harmless structure." In answer, it may be suggested that the voice, which is certainly highly important to many animals, could hardly have been used at full strength as long as the larynx entered the nasal passage. And Professor Flower has suggested to me that this structure would have greatly interfered with swallowing solid food.

Now let's turn briefly to the lower divisions of the animal kingdom. The Echinodermata (starfish, sea urchins, and their relatives) are equipped with remarkable organs called pedicellariae, which, when fully developed, consist of a three-pronged forceps -- that is, three serrated arms that fit neatly together, mounted on the tip of a flexible stalk moved by muscles. These forceps can grip any object firmly. Alexander Agassiz has seen a sea urchin rapidly passing particles of waste from forceps to forceps down certain lines of its body, to keep its shell clean. But besides removing debris of all kinds, they clearly serve other functions too, and one of these apparently is defense.

Regarding these organs, Mivart, as on so many previous occasions, asks: "What would be the utility of the first rudimentary beginnings of such structures, and how could such incipient buds have ever preserved the life of a single sea urchin?" He adds: "not even the sudden development of the snapping action would have been beneficial without the freely movable stalk, nor could the latter have been efficient without the snapping jaws, yet no minute, nearly indefinite variations could simultaneously evolve these complex coordinations of structure; to deny this seems to do no less than to affirm a startling paradox." Paradoxical as this may seem to Mivart, three-pronged forceps that are immovably fixed at the base but capable of snapping definitely do exist on some starfish -- and this makes sense if they serve at least partly as a means of defense. Mr. Agassiz, to whose great kindness I'm indebted for much information on this subject, tells me that there are other starfish in which one of the three arms of the forceps is reduced to a support for the other two, and still other genera in which the third arm is completely lost. In *Echinoneus*, the shell is described by M. Perrier as bearing two kinds of pedicellariae -- one resembling those of *Echinus* and the other those of *Spatangus*. Such cases are always interesting because they afford what appear to be sudden transitions, through the loss of one of two states of an organ.

Regarding the steps by which these curious organs evolved, Mr. Agassiz infers from his own research and that of Mr. Muller that pedicellariae in both starfish and sea urchins must undoubtedly be understood as modified spines. This can be inferred from their development in individual organisms, as well as from a long and complete series of gradations across different species and genera -- from simple granules to ordinary spines to perfect three-pronged pedicellariae. The gradation extends even to the way ordinary spines and pedicellariae, with their supporting rods of calcium carbonate, are jointed to the shell. In certain genera of starfish, "the very combinations needed to show that the pedicellariae are only modified branching spines" can be found. We see fixed spines with three equidistant, serrated, movable branches joined near their bases, and higher up on the same spine, three other movable branches. Now, when the latter arise from the summit of a spine, they form, in effect, a crude three-pronged pedicellariae -- and these can be seen on the same spine together with the three lower branches. In this case, the identity between the arms of the pedicellariae and the movable branches of a spine is unmistakable. It's generally accepted that ordinary spines serve as protection. If so, there's no reason to doubt that spines with serrated, movable branches likewise serve for protection -- and they would serve even more effectively as soon as they met together and acted as a gripping or snapping device. Thus every gradation, from an ordinary fixed spine to a fixed pedicellariae, would have been useful.

In certain genera of starfish, these organs, instead of being fixed or mounted on an immovable support, are placed on the tip of a flexible, muscular, though short, stalk. In this case, they probably serve some additional function besides defense. In sea urchins, the steps can be traced by which a fixed spine becomes jointed to the shell and thus made movable. I wish I had space to give a fuller summary of Mr. Agassiz's interesting observations on pedicellariae development. All possible gradations, as he adds, can also be found between the pedicellariae of starfish and the hooks of the Ophiurians (another group of Echinodermata), and again between the pedicellariae of sea urchins and the anchors of the Holothuriae (sea cucumbers), also in the same great class.


Certain compound animals -- or zoophytes, as they've been called -- namely the Polyzoa, are equipped with curious organs called avicularia. These differ greatly in structure across different species. In their most developed form, they curiously resemble a miniature vulture's head and beak, seated on a neck and capable of movement, and the lower jaw is also movable. In one species I observed, all the avicularia on the same branch often moved simultaneously back and forth, with the lower jaw gaping wide open, through an angle of about ninety degrees, in the course of five seconds -- and their movement made the whole colony tremble. When the jaws are touched with a needle, they seize it so firmly that the branch can be shaken by it.

Mivart brings up this case mainly because of the supposed difficulty of organs -- the avicularia of the Polyzoa and the pedicellariae of the Echinodermata -- that he considers "essentially similar," having evolved through natural selection in widely separated divisions of the animal kingdom. But as far as structure goes, I can see no similarity between three-pronged pedicellariae and avicularia. The latter somewhat more closely resemble the claws or pincers of crustaceans, and Mivart might just as reasonably have pointed to this resemblance as a special difficulty -- or even their resemblance to the head and beak of a bird. The avicularia are believed by Mr. Busk, Dr. Smitt, and Dr. Nitsche -- naturalists who have carefully studied this group -- to be homologous with the individual zooids and their cells that make up the colony. The movable lip or lid of the cell corresponds to the lower, movable mandible of the avicularium. Mr. Busk, however, doesn't know of any gradations currently existing between a zooid and an avicularium. It's therefore impossible to guess by what useful gradations one could have been converted into the other. But it by no means follows that such gradations never existed.

Since the pincers of crustaceans somewhat resemble the avicularia of Polyzoa -- both serving as gripping tools -- it may be worth showing that for the former, a long series of useful gradations still exists. In the first and simplest stage, the end segment of a limb closes down either against the flat top of the broad second-to-last segment or against one whole side of it, and can thus grab hold of an object -- but the limb still functions for locomotion. Next, we find one corner of the broad second-to-last segment slightly protruding, sometimes with irregular teeth, against which the end segment closes. As this projection increases in size, with its shape and that of the end segment slightly modified and improved, the pincers become more and more effective, until we end up with an instrument as efficient as a lobster's claw. And all these gradations can actually be traced.

Besides the avicularia, the Polyzoa possess curious organs called vibracula. These generally consist of long bristles, capable of movement and easily stimulated. In one species I examined, the vibracula were slightly curved and serrated along the outer margin, and all of them on the same colony often moved simultaneously -- so that, acting like long oars, they swept a branch rapidly across the glass slide of my microscope. When a branch was placed face-down, the vibracula became entangled and made violent efforts to free themselves. They're thought to serve as a defense, and can be seen, as Mr. Busk notes, "to sweep slowly and carefully over the surface of the colony, removing what might be harmful to the delicate inhabitants of the cells when their tentacles are extended." The avicularia, like the vibracula, probably serve for defense, but they also catch and kill small living animals, which are believed to be swept by the currents within reach of the tentacles of the zooids. Some species have both avicularia and vibracula, some have avicularia alone, and a few have vibracula alone.

It's hard to imagine two structures more different in appearance than a bristle (or vibraculum) and an avicularium that looks like a bird's head. Yet they're almost certainly homologous -- derived from the same source, namely a zooid with its cell. This is why, as Mr. Busk has informed me, these organs grade into each other in some cases. For example, in the avicularia of several species of *Lepralia*, the movable mandible is so elongated and bristle-like that only the presence of the upper or fixed beak identifies it as an avicularium. The vibracula may have developed directly from the cell's lips without passing through an avicularian stage, but it seems more likely that they did pass through that stage, since during the early steps of the transformation, the other parts of the cell, including the zooid inside, could hardly have disappeared all at once. In many cases, the vibracula have a grooved support at their base that seems to represent the fixed beak, though in some species this support is completely absent. This view of how vibracula developed, if correct, is interesting: if all the species with avicularia had gone extinct, no one with the most vivid imagination would ever have guessed that vibracula had originally existed as part of an organ resembling a bird's head, or an irregular box or hood. It's interesting to see two such widely different organs developing from a common origin. And since the movable lip of the cell serves to protect the zooid, there's no difficulty in believing that all the gradations -- from the lip becoming the lower mandible of an avicularium, to its becoming an elongated bristle -- likewise served as protection in different ways and under different circumstances.


In the plant kingdom, Mivart only mentions two cases: the structure of orchid flowers and the movements of climbing plants. Regarding orchids, he says: "The explanation of their origin is deemed thoroughly unsatisfactory -- utterly insufficient to explain the incipient, infinitesimal beginnings of structures which are of utility only when they are considerably developed." Since I've treated this subject fully in another work, I'll give only a few details here on just one of the most striking features of orchid flowers: their pollinia. A pollinium, when fully developed, consists of a mass of pollen grains attached to an elastic foot-stalk or caudicle, which is in turn attached to a small mass of extremely sticky substance. The pollinia are transported by insects from one flower to the stigma of another. In some orchids, there's no caudicle; the pollen grains are merely tied together by fine threads. But since these threads aren't confined to orchids, they needn't be considered here -- though I should mention that at the base of the orchid family tree, in *Cypripedium*, we can see how these threads were probably first developed. In other orchids, the threads join together at one end of the pollen masses, forming the first or beginning trace of a caudicle. That this is the origin of the caudicle, even when it's quite long and fully developed, is supported by the aborted pollen grains that can sometimes be found embedded within the central, solid parts.

Regarding the second key feature -- the small mass of sticky substance attached to the end of the caudicle -- a long series of gradations can be described, each clearly useful to the plant. In most flowers of other groups, the stigma secretes a small amount of sticky substance. In certain orchids, a similar sticky substance is secreted, but in much larger quantities, by one alone of the three stigmas. This stigma, perhaps as a result of the heavy secretion, is rendered sterile. When an insect visits a flower of this kind, it picks up some of the sticky substance and at the same time drags away some pollen grains. From this simple condition -- which differs little from that of countless common flowers -- there are endless gradations to species in which the pollen mass ends in a very short, free caudicle; to others in which the caudicle becomes firmly attached to the sticky substance, with the sterile stigma itself much modified. In this last case, we have a pollinium in its most highly developed and perfect form. Anyone who carefully examines orchid flowers for themselves will not deny the existence of this series of gradations -- from a mass of pollen grains merely tied together by threads, with the stigma barely different from that of ordinary flowers, to a highly complex pollinium beautifully adapted for transport by insects. Nor will they deny that all the gradations in the various species are beautifully adapted, in relation to the general structure of each flower, for fertilization by different insects. In this case, as in almost every other, the inquiry can be pushed further back: how did the stigma of an ordinary flower first become sticky? But since we don't know the full history of any single group of organisms, it's as pointless to ask as it is hopeless to attempt to answer such questions.

Now let's turn to climbing plants. These can be arranged in a long series, from those that simply twine around a support to those I've called leaf-climbers, and to those with tendrils. In these latter two classes, the stems have generally (but not always) lost the power of twining, though they retain the power of revolving, which the tendrils also possess. The gradations from leaf-climbers to tendril-bearers are remarkably close, and certain plants could be placed in either class. But in ascending from simple twiners to leaf-climbers, an important new ability is added: sensitivity to touch. This enables the foot-stalks of the leaves or flowers -- or these modified and converted into tendrils -- to bend around and clasp any object they touch. Anyone who reads my paper on these plants will, I think, agree that all the many gradations in function and structure between simple twiners and tendril-bearers are in each case highly beneficial to the species. For instance, it's clearly a great advantage for a twining plant to become a leaf-climber. And it's likely that every twiner with leaves on long foot-stalks would have developed into a leaf-climber, if those foot-stalks had possessed even the slightest sensitivity to touch.

Since twining is the simplest way of climbing a support and forms the basis of our series, the natural question is: how did plants first acquire this power, which was later improved and enhanced through natural selection? Twining depends, first, on the stems being extremely flexible when young (a feature common to many non-climbing plants), and second, on their continually bending toward all points of the compass in sequence. This movement causes the stems to lean in all directions and to move round and round. As soon as the lower part of a stem strikes an object and is stopped, the upper part keeps bending and revolving, and thus necessarily twines around and up the support. The revolving movement stops after the early growth of each shoot. Since single species and single genera in many widely separated plant families possess the power of revolving and have thus become twiners, they must have acquired this ability independently, rather than inheriting it from a common ancestor. This led me to predict that some slight tendency toward this kind of movement would prove to be quite common among plants that don't climb, and that this would have provided the raw material for natural selection to work on and improve. When I made this prediction, I knew of only one imperfect case: the young flower stalks of a *Maurandia*, which revolved slightly and irregularly, like the stems of twining plants, but without making any use of this habit. Soon afterward, Fritz Muller discovered that the young stems of an *Alisma* and a *Linum* -- plants that don't climb and are widely separated in the natural system -- revolved plainly, though irregularly. He says he has reason to suspect this occurs in some other plants too. These slight movements appear to be of no use to these plants; at any rate, they're of no use at all for climbing, which is our concern. Nevertheless, we can see that if the stems of these plants had been flexible, and if under their conditions it had been advantageous to climb to a height, then the habit of slight, irregular revolving might have been increased and put to use through natural selection, until they were converted into fully developed twiners.

Regarding the sensitivity to touch in the foot-stalks of leaves and flowers, and in tendrils, nearly the same points apply as for the revolving movements of twiners. Since a vast number of species across widely different groups have this kind of sensitivity, it ought to be found in a beginning state in many plants that haven't become climbers. This is indeed the case. I observed that the young flower stalks of the *Maurandia* mentioned above curved slightly toward the side that was touched. Morren found that in several species of *Oxalis*, the leaves and their stalks moved, especially after exposure to hot sun, when they were gently and repeatedly touched or when the plant was shaken. I repeated these observations on some other *Oxalis* species with the same result. In some, the movement was distinct but best seen in young leaves; in others, it was extremely slight. It's a more important fact that, according to the eminent authority Hofmeister, the young shoots and leaves of all plants move after being shaken. And in climbing plants, as we know, only the young, growing foot-stalks and tendrils are sensitive.

It's scarcely possible that these slight movements caused by a touch or shake in the young, growing organs of plants are of any functional importance to them. But plants do possess, in response to various stimuli, powers of movement that are clearly important to them -- for instance, movement toward light (and more rarely away from it), or against the pull of gravity (and more rarely with it). When the nerves and muscles of an animal are stimulated by an electric shock or by the absorption of strychnine, the resulting movements can be called an incidental result, since the nerves and muscles weren't made specially sensitive to these stimuli. Similarly with plants: because they have the power to move in response to certain stimuli, they are incidentally stimulated by a touch or shake. So there's no great difficulty in accepting that in leaf-climbers and tendril-bearers, this tendency has been seized upon and enhanced by natural selection. It's likely, however, for reasons I've discussed in my paper, that this would have occurred only in plants that had already acquired the power of revolving and had thus become twiners.

I've already tried to explain how plants became twiners -- by the enhancement of a tendency to slight, irregular revolving movements that were initially of no use. This movement, like the movement caused by touch, is the incidental result of the power of movement gained for other, beneficial purposes. Whether natural selection has been aided by the inherited effects of use in the gradual development of climbing plants, I won't pretend to decide. But we know that certain periodic movements, like the so-called sleep of plants, are governed by habit.


I've now considered enough -- perhaps more than enough -- of the cases carefully selected by a skilled naturalist to prove that natural selection can't account for the beginning stages of useful structures. And I've shown, I hope, that there's no great difficulty on this point. A good opportunity has been provided to expand somewhat on gradations of structure, often associated with unexpected changes in function -- an important subject that wasn't treated at sufficient length in earlier editions of this work. I'll now briefly summarize the foregoing cases.

With the giraffe, the continued preservation of the tallest individuals of some extinct high-browsing ruminant -- those with the longest necks, legs, and so on, who could feed a little above the average height -- and the continued death of those that couldn't reach as high, would have been sufficient to produce this remarkable animal. But the prolonged use of all the parts, combined with inheritance, would have contributed significantly to their coordination. With the many insects that mimic various objects, there's nothing improbable in the belief that an accidental resemblance to some common object was in each case the foundation for natural selection's work, which was then perfected through the occasional preservation of slight variations that improved the resemblance. This would have continued as long as the insect kept varying and as long as increasingly perfect resemblance helped it escape sharp-eyed enemies. In certain whale species, there's a tendency to form irregular little horn points on the palate. It seems well within the scope of natural selection to preserve all favorable variations until the points were converted first into ridged knobs or teeth (like those on a goose's beak), then into short plates (like those of the domestic duck), then into plates as perfect as the shoveler's -- and finally into the gigantic baleen plates of the Greenland whale. In the duck family, the plates are first used as teeth, then partly as teeth and partly as a sifting apparatus, and finally almost exclusively for sifting.

With structures like these horn plates or whalebone, habit or use can have done little or nothing toward their development, as far as we can judge. The movement of the flatfish's lower eye to the upper side of the head, on the other hand, and the formation of a prehensile tail, can be attributed almost entirely to continued use combined with inheritance. Regarding the mammary glands of higher animals, the most probable theory is that originally the skin glands over the whole surface of a marsupial pouch secreted a nutritious fluid, and that these glands were improved in function through natural selection and concentrated into a limited area, forming a breast. There's no more difficulty in understanding how the branching spines of some ancient echinoderm, which served as protection, were developed through natural selection into three-pronged pedicellariae, than in understanding the development of crustacean pincers through slight, useful modifications of the last and next-to-last segments of a limb that was originally used only for walking. In the avicularia and vibracula of the Polyzoa, we have widely different-looking organs developed from the same source. And with the vibracula, we can understand how the successive gradations might have been useful. With the pollinia of orchids, the threads that originally served to tie together the pollen grains can be traced joining into caudicles, and the steps can likewise be followed by which sticky substance -- such as that secreted by the stigmas of ordinary flowers, and still serving nearly the same purpose -- became attached to the free ends of the caudicles. All these gradations are clearly beneficial to the plants in question. Regarding climbing plants, I needn't repeat what has just been said.

It has often been asked: if natural selection is so powerful, why hasn't this or that structure been gained by certain species, when it would apparently be advantageous? But it's unreasonable to expect a precise answer to such questions, given our ignorance of the past history of each species and of the conditions that currently determine its numbers and range. In most cases, only general reasons can be given, though in a few, specific ones can be offered. Adapting a species to new habits of life requires many coordinated modifications, and it may often have happened that the necessary parts didn't vary in the right way or to the right degree. Many species must have been prevented from increasing in numbers by destructive forces unrelated to the structures that we imagine would be beneficial, making it seem as though natural selection failed to produce them. In such cases, since the struggle for life didn't depend on those structures, they couldn't have been acquired through natural selection. In many cases, complex and long-lasting conditions of a special nature are needed for a structure to develop, and the right conditions may rarely have come together. The belief that any structure we think (often mistakenly) would be beneficial to a species must necessarily be acquired under all circumstances through natural selection contradicts what we understand about how natural selection works. Mivart doesn't deny that natural selection has accomplished something, but he considers it "demonstrably insufficient" to account for the phenomena I explain by its agency. His main arguments have now been considered, and the rest will be addressed later. They seem to me to fall far short of demonstrations, and to carry little weight compared to the evidence favoring the power of natural selection, aided by the other mechanisms I've often specified. I should add that some of the facts and arguments I've used here have been put forward for the same purpose in an able article recently published in the *Medico-Chirurgical Review*.

Today almost all naturalists accept evolution in some form. Mivart believes that species change through "an internal force or tendency," about which, he admits, nothing is known. That species have a capacity for change will be granted by all evolutionists. But there's no need, it seems to me, to invoke any internal force beyond the tendency to ordinary variability, which through human selection has produced many well-adapted domestic breeds, and which, through natural selection, would equally well produce natural varieties or species by graduated steps. The final result will generally have been -- as I've already explained -- an advance in organization, though in some cases a decline.

Mivart is also inclined to believe, and some naturalists agree with him, that new species appear "with suddenness and by modifications appearing at once." For instance, he supposes that the differences between the extinct three-toed *Hipparion* and the horse arose suddenly. He thinks it difficult to believe that a bird's wing "was developed in any other way than by a comparatively sudden modification of a marked and important kind" -- and he apparently extends this view to the wings of bats and pterodactyls. This conclusion, which implies major breaks or discontinuity in the series, seems to me improbable in the highest degree.

Everyone who believes in slow and gradual evolution will of course admit that the changes between species may have been as abrupt and as large as any single variation we encounter in nature or even under domestication. But since species are more variable when domesticated or cultivated than in their natural state, it's unlikely that such great, abrupt variations have often occurred in nature as are occasionally known to arise under domestication. Several of these latter variations can be attributed to reversion, and the characters that reappear were probably, in many cases, originally gained gradually. A still greater number must be called monstrosities -- such as six-fingered humans, porcupine-skinned humans, Ancon sheep, Niata cattle, and so on. Since these differ so widely from natural species, they shed very little light on our subject. Setting aside such cases of abrupt variation, the few that remain would at best constitute, if found in nature, doubtful species closely related to their parent types.

My reasons for doubting whether natural species have changed as abruptly as domestic breeds sometimes have, and for entirely disbelieving that they've changed in the dramatic way Mivart suggests, are as follows. Based on experience, abrupt, strongly marked variations occur in our domestic animals singly and at rather long intervals. If such variations occurred in nature, they would be liable -- as I've previously explained -- to be lost by accidental death and by subsequent crossbreeding. And this is known to happen under domestication, unless such variations are specially preserved and separated by human care. Therefore, for a new species to suddenly appear as Mivart envisions, it's almost necessary to believe -- against all analogy -- that several wonderfully changed individuals appeared simultaneously in the same area. This difficulty, as with unconscious selection by humans, is avoided by the theory of gradual evolution, through the preservation of a large number of individuals that varied more or less in any favorable direction, and the death of a large number that varied in the opposite direction.

That many species have evolved in an extremely gradual manner can hardly be doubted. The species and even the genera of many large natural families are so closely related that it's difficult to tell many of them apart. On every continent, traveling from north to south, from lowland to upland, and so on, we encounter hosts of closely related or representative species, as we do on certain distinct continents that we have reason to believe were formerly connected. (In making these and the following remarks, I'm compelled to touch on subjects I'll discuss later.) Look at the many outlying islands around a continent, and see how many of their inhabitants can only be ranked as doubtful species. The same is true if we look to past times and compare species that have just disappeared with those still living in the same areas, or if we compare fossil species embedded in successive layers of the same geological formation. It's clear that multitudes of species are related in the closest way to other species that still exist or have recently existed, and it's hard to maintain that such species developed abruptly or suddenly. And we shouldn't forget that when we look at specific features of related species, rather than at distinct species, numerous wonderfully fine gradations can be traced connecting very different structures.

Many large groups of facts are intelligible only if species have evolved by very small steps. For instance, the fact that species in larger genera are more closely related to each other and show a greater number of varieties than species in smaller genera. The former are also grouped in small clusters, like varieties around species, and they show other parallels with varieties, as was demonstrated in our second chapter. On this same principle, we can understand why the features that define species are more variable than those that define genera, and why parts developed to an extraordinary degree are more variable than other parts of the same species. Many analogous facts, all pointing in the same direction, could be added.

Although many species have almost certainly been produced by steps no greater than those separating fine varieties, it might be argued that some developed in a different, abrupt manner. Such a claim, however, shouldn't be made without strong evidence. The vague and in some respects false analogies -- as Mr. Chauncey Wright has shown them to be -- that have been put forward in support of this view, such as the sudden crystallization of inorganic substances, or a faceted sphere tumbling from one facet to another, hardly deserve consideration. One class of evidence, however -- the sudden appearance of new and distinct life forms in our geological record -- does at first glance support the idea of abrupt development. But the value of this evidence depends entirely on the completeness of the geological record for remote periods of the world's history. If the record is as fragmentary as many geologists strongly assert, there's nothing surprising about new forms appearing as if they developed suddenly.

Unless we accept transformations as extraordinary as those advocated by Mivart -- such as the sudden development of bird or bat wings, or the sudden conversion of a *Hipparion* into a horse -- the belief in abrupt modification sheds hardly any light on the gaps in our geological record. But against the belief in such abrupt changes, embryology raises a powerful objection. It's well known that the wings of birds and bats, and the legs of horses and other mammals, are indistinguishable at an early embryonic stage and become differentiated only by imperceptibly fine steps. Embryological resemblances of all kinds can be explained -- as we'll see later -- by the idea that the ancestors of existing species varied after their early youth and passed their newly acquired features to their offspring at a corresponding age. The embryo is thus left nearly unchanged and serves as a record of the species' past condition. This is why existing species during the early stages of their development so often resemble ancient, extinct forms belonging to the same class. On this view of what embryological resemblances mean -- and indeed on any view -- it's incredible that an animal could have undergone such dramatic and abrupt transformations as those suggested, yet bear not even a trace in its embryonic development of any sudden change, with every detail of its structure developing instead by imperceptibly fine steps.

Anyone who believes that some ancient form was transformed suddenly through an internal force or tendency into, say, a creature with wings, will be almost forced to assume -- against all analogy -- that many individuals varied at the same time. It can't be denied that such abrupt, dramatic changes of structure are entirely different from what most species appear to have undergone. Such a person will further be forced to believe that many structures beautifully adapted to all the other parts of the same creature and to the surrounding conditions were suddenly produced. And for such complex, wonderful mutual adaptations, they won't be able to offer even a shadow of an explanation. They will be forced to admit that these great, sudden transformations left no trace in the embryo. To accept all this is, it seems to me, to enter the realm of miracles and to leave the realm of science.
