Chapter VIII: Instinct


Many instincts are so remarkable that their development will probably seem to the reader like a difficulty big enough to overthrow my entire theory. Let me say upfront that I'm not concerned here with the origin of mental abilities, any more than I am with the origin of life itself. We're dealing only with the differences in instinct and other mental abilities among animals of the same class.

I won't try to define instinct. It would be easy to show that several distinct mental actions are commonly lumped together under this term, but everyone understands what we mean when we say that instinct drives the cuckoo to migrate and to lay her eggs in other birds' nests. An action that we ourselves need experience to perform, but which an animal -- especially a very young one -- performs without experience, and which many individuals perform in the same way without knowing why they do it, is usually called instinctive. But I could show that none of these characteristics are universal. A small dose of judgment or reason, as the naturalist Pierre Huber put it, often comes into play even in animals low on the scale of nature.

Frederick Cuvier and several of the older philosophers compared instinct with habit. This comparison gives, I think, an accurate picture of the mental state during an instinctive action, but not necessarily of how it originated. Think about how unconsciously we perform many habitual actions -- sometimes even against our conscious will! Yet habits can be modified by will or reason. Habits easily become linked to other habits, to certain times of day, and to states of the body. Once acquired, they often remain constant throughout life. Several other similarities between instincts and habits could be pointed out. Just as when repeating a well-known song, so with instincts: one action follows another in a kind of rhythm. If a person is interrupted while singing a song or reciting something from memory, they're generally forced to go back to pick up the habitual train of thought. Pierre Huber found the same was true with a caterpillar that makes a very complicated cocoon. If he took a caterpillar that had completed its cocoon up to, say, the sixth stage of construction and placed it into a cocoon completed only up to the third stage, the caterpillar simply re-performed the fourth, fifth, and sixth stages. If, however, a caterpillar was taken out of a cocoon made up to the third stage and placed into one finished up to the sixth stage -- so that much of its work was already done for it -- far from benefiting, it was deeply confused. In order to complete its cocoon, it seemed forced to start from the third stage where it had left off, and so it tried to redo the already finished work.

If we suppose any habitual action to become inherited -- and it can be shown that this does sometimes happen -- then the resemblance between what was originally a habit and an instinct becomes so close that you can't tell them apart. If Mozart, instead of playing the piano at three years old with remarkably little practice, had played a tune with no practice at all, he could truly be said to have done so instinctively. But it would be a serious mistake to suppose that most instincts have been acquired by habit in a single generation and then passed on to the next. It can be clearly shown that the most remarkable instincts we know of -- namely, those of the honeybee and of many ants -- could not possibly have been acquired by habit.

Everyone will agree that instincts are as important as bodily structures for the survival of each species under its current conditions. Under changed conditions, it's at least possible that slight modifications of instinct might be beneficial to a species. And if instincts do vary even a little, then I see no difficulty in natural selection preserving and steadily accumulating variations of instinct to any extent that proves beneficial. This, I believe, is how all the most complex and remarkable instincts have originated. Just as modifications of bodily structure arise from and are increased by use or habit, and are reduced or lost by disuse, I have no doubt the same has happened with instincts. But I believe that the effects of habit are in many cases less important than the effects of natural selection acting on what we might call spontaneous variations of instinct -- that is, variations produced by the same unknown causes that produce slight differences in bodily structure.

No complex instinct can possibly arise through natural selection except by the slow and gradual accumulation of numerous small but beneficial variations. So, as with bodily structures, we should expect to find in nature not the actual transitional steps by which each complex instinct was acquired -- those could only be found in the direct ancestors of each species -- but we should find among related species some evidence of such gradations. Or at least we should be able to show that gradations of some kind are possible. And this we certainly can do. I've been surprised to find -- making allowance for the fact that animal instincts have been little observed except in Europe and North America, and that no instincts are known among extinct species -- how commonly gradations leading to the most complex instincts can be discovered. Changes of instinct may sometimes be helped along when a species has different instincts at different periods of life, at different seasons, or under different circumstances. In such cases, either one instinct or the other might be preserved by natural selection. And such cases of diverse instincts within the same species can be shown to occur in nature.

Again, as with bodily structure and in keeping with my theory, the instinct of each species serves its own good, but has never -- as far as we can tell -- been produced for the exclusive benefit of others. One of the strongest cases of an animal apparently acting solely for another's benefit is that of aphids voluntarily yielding their sweet secretion to ants, as Huber first observed. That they do so voluntarily, the following facts show. I removed all the ants from a group of about a dozen aphids on a dock plant and kept the ants away for several hours. After this, I felt sure the aphids would need to excrete. I watched them for some time through a magnifying glass, but not one excreted. I then tickled and stroked them with a hair, imitating as best I could the way ants use their antennae -- but still not one excreted. Then I allowed an ant to visit them, and it immediately seemed, by the eager way it ran about, to realize what a rich flock it had discovered. It began to stroke the abdomen of first one aphid and then another with its antennae, and each, as soon as it felt the touch, immediately lifted its abdomen and released a clear drop of sweet juice, which the ant eagerly devoured. Even the very young aphids behaved this way, showing the action was instinctive, not learned from experience. It's clear from Huber's observations that the aphids show no dislike of the ants: if the ants aren't present, the aphids are eventually forced to eject their secretion on their own. But since the secretion is extremely sticky, it's no doubt convenient for the aphids to have it removed. So they probably don't excrete solely for the ants' benefit. Although there's no evidence that any animal acts exclusively for the good of another species, each species tries to take advantage of the instincts of others, just as each takes advantage of the weaker bodily structure of other species. Certain instincts also cannot be considered absolutely perfect, but since the details of this and similar points aren't essential, I'll pass over them here.

Since some degree of variation in instincts under natural conditions, and the inheritance of those variations, are essential for natural selection to work, I should give as many examples as possible. But lack of space prevents me. I can only state that instincts certainly do vary -- for instance, the migratory instinct varies in both extent and direction, and is sometimes lost entirely. The same is true of birds' nests, which vary partly based on the locations chosen and the climate of the country, but often for reasons entirely unknown to us. The ornithologist Audubon gave several remarkable examples of differences in the nests of the same species in the northern and southern United States. It has been asked: if instinct is variable, why hasn't it given the bee "the ability to use some other material when wax runs short?" But what other natural material could bees use? They will work, as I have seen, with wax hardened with vermilion or softened with lard. The horticulturist Andrew Knight observed that his bees, instead of laboriously collecting propolis, used a cement of wax and turpentine with which he had covered stripped trees. It has also been shown that bees, instead of searching for pollen, will gladly use a very different substance -- namely, oatmeal. Fear of any particular predator is certainly an instinctive quality, as can be seen in nestling birds, though it's strengthened by experience and by seeing fear of the same predator in other animals. The fear of humans is slowly acquired, as I've shown elsewhere, by various animals on remote islands. We see an example of this even in England, in the greater wariness of all our large birds compared to our small ones, because the large birds have been most persecuted by people. We can safely attribute this greater wariness to that cause, for on uninhabited islands large birds are no more fearful than small ones. And the magpie, so wary in England, is tame in Norway, just as the hooded crow is tame in Egypt.

That the mental qualities of animals of the same kind, born in the wild, vary a great deal could be shown by many facts. Several cases could also be given of occasional and unusual habits in wild animals, which, if advantageous to the species, might have given rise through natural selection to new instincts. But I'm well aware that these general statements, without detailed evidence, can make only a weak impression on the reader's mind. I can only repeat my assurance that I don't speak without good evidence.


Inherited Changes of Habit or Instinct in Domesticated Animals

The possibility -- or even probability -- of inherited variations of instinct in nature will be strengthened by briefly considering a few cases under domestication. This will let us see the roles that habit and the selection of so-called spontaneous variations have played in modifying the mental qualities of our domestic animals. It's well known how much domestic animals vary in their mental qualities. With cats, for instance, one naturally takes to catching rats and another mice, and these tendencies are known to be inherited. One cat, according to Mr. St. John, always brought home game birds; another brought hares or rabbits; and another hunted on marshy ground and almost nightly caught woodcocks or snipes. Many curious and authentic examples could be given of various shades of temperament and preference, and likewise of the oddest tricks, linked to certain states of mind or times of day. But let's look at the familiar case of dog breeds. There's no doubt that young pointers -- I've seen striking examples myself -- will sometimes point and even back other dogs the very first time they're taken out. Retrieving is certainly inherited to some degree by retrievers. And shepherd dogs have an inherited tendency to run around a flock of sheep rather than straight at them. I can't see how these actions -- performed without experience by the young, performed in nearly the same way by each individual, performed with eager delight by each breed, and performed without understanding the purpose (for the young pointer can no more know that he points to help his master than the white butterfly knows why she lays her eggs on a cabbage leaf) -- I can't see how these actions differ in any essential way from true instincts. If we were to see one kind of wolf, when young and without any training, stand motionless like a statue as soon as it scented its prey and then slowly creep forward with a distinctive gait, and another kind of wolf rushing around a herd of deer rather than straight at them, driving them to a distant point, we would certainly call these actions instinctive. Domestic instincts, as we might call them, are certainly far less fixed than natural instincts. But they've been shaped by far less rigorous selection and have been passed down for an incomparably shorter period, under less stable conditions of life.

How strongly these domestic instincts, habits, and dispositions are inherited -- and how curiously they become blended -- is well shown when different breeds of dogs are crossed. A cross with a bulldog, for example, has been known to affect the courage and stubbornness of greyhounds for many generations. And a cross with a greyhound has given a whole family of shepherd dogs a tendency to chase hares. These domestic instincts, when tested by crossing, resemble natural instincts, which similarly become curiously blended and for a long time show traces of both parents' instincts. For example, Le Roy described a dog whose great-grandfather was a wolf, and this dog showed a trace of its wild ancestry in only one way: by not coming in a straight line to his master when called.

Domestic instincts are sometimes described as actions that became inherited solely from long-continued and forced habit, but this isn't true. No one would ever have thought of teaching -- and probably couldn't have taught -- the tumbler pigeon to tumble, an action which, as I've witnessed, is performed by young birds that have never seen a pigeon tumble. We can believe that some individual pigeon showed a slight tendency to this strange habit, and that the long-continued selection of the best individuals in successive generations made tumblers what they now are. Near Glasgow there are house-tumblers, as I hear from Mr. Brent, that can't fly eighteen inches high without going head over heels. It's doubtful whether anyone would have thought of training a dog to point if some dog hadn't naturally shown a tendency in that direction -- and this is known to happen occasionally. I once saw it in a pure terrier. The act of pointing is probably, as many have thought, just the exaggerated pause of an animal about to spring on its prey. Once the first tendency to point appeared, methodical selection and the inherited effects of forced training in each successive generation would soon complete the work. And unconscious selection is still going on, as each person tries to get dogs that stand and hunt best, without intending to improve the breed. On the other hand, habit alone has sometimes been enough. Hardly any animal is more difficult to tame than a young wild rabbit; hardly any is tamer than a young domestic rabbit. But I can hardly suppose that domestic rabbits have often been selected for tameness alone. So we must attribute at least the greater part of the inherited change -- from extreme wildness to extreme tameness -- to habit and long-continued close confinement.

Natural instincts are lost under domestication. A remarkable example is seen in those breeds of hens that very rarely or never become "broody" -- that is, they never want to sit on their eggs. Familiarity alone keeps us from seeing how greatly and permanently the minds of our domestic animals have been modified. It's hard to doubt that the love of humans has become instinctive in the dog. All wolves, foxes, jackals, and cat species, when kept tame, are eager to attack poultry, sheep, and pigs. This tendency has been found incurable in dogs brought home as puppies from countries like Tierra del Fuego and Australia, where the indigenous people don't keep these domestic animals. How rarely, on the other hand, do our domesticated dogs, even when quite young, need to be taught not to attack poultry, sheep, and pigs! They do occasionally make an attack, of course, and are then punished -- and if not cured, they're put down. So habit and some degree of selection have probably worked together to civilize our dogs by inheritance. On the other hand, young chickens have completely lost, through habit, the fear of dogs and cats that was no doubt originally instinctive. Captain Hutton tells me that the young chickens of the original wild stock, Gallus bankiva, when reared in India under a domestic hen, are at first extremely wild. The same is true of young pheasants reared in England under a hen. It's not that chickens have lost all fear -- only their fear of dogs and cats. If the hen gives her danger call, they will run (especially young turkeys) from under her and hide in the surrounding grass or thickets. This is clearly done for the instinctive purpose of allowing their mother to fly away, as we see in wild ground birds. But this instinct retained by our chickens has become useless under domestication, because the mother hen has almost lost the power of flight through disuse.

So we can conclude that under domestication, instincts have been acquired and natural instincts have been lost -- partly through habit and partly through humans selecting and accumulating, over successive generations, particular mental habits and actions that first appeared from what we must in our ignorance call accident. In some cases, forced habit alone has been enough to produce inherited mental changes. In other cases, forced habit has done nothing and everything has been the result of selection, pursued both deliberately and unconsciously. But in most cases, habit and selection have probably worked together.


Special Instincts

We'll probably best understand how instincts in nature have been modified by selection by looking at a few specific cases. I'll choose just three: the instinct that drives the cuckoo to lay her eggs in other birds' nests; the slave-making instinct of certain ants; and the cell-building ability of the honeybee. These last two have been generally and rightly ranked by naturalists as the most remarkable of all known instincts.


Instincts of the Cuckoo

Some naturalists believe that the immediate cause of the cuckoo's egg-laying instinct is that she lays her eggs not daily, but at intervals of two or three days. If she were to make her own nest and sit on her own eggs, the first ones laid would have to go unincubated for a while, or there would be eggs and young birds of different ages in the same nest. If so, the process of laying and hatching might be inconveniently long, especially since she migrates very early. And the first-hatched young would probably have to be fed by the male alone. But the American cuckoo is in exactly this situation, for she makes her own nest and has eggs and young of different ages all at the same time. It has been both claimed and denied that the American cuckoo occasionally lays her eggs in other birds' nests, but I've recently heard from Dr. Merrill, of Iowa, that he once found in Illinois a young cuckoo together with a young jay in the nest of a blue jay (Garrulus cristatus). Since both were nearly fully feathered, there could be no mistake in identifying them. I could also give several examples of various birds known to occasionally lay their eggs in other birds' nests.

Now let's suppose that the ancient ancestor of our European cuckoo had the habits of the American cuckoo and occasionally laid an egg in another bird's nest. If the mother bird benefited from this occasional habit -- by being able to migrate earlier, or for any other reason -- or if the young were made more vigorous by exploiting the misguided instinct of another species rather than being raised by their own mother (who could hardly avoid being burdened by having eggs and young of different ages at the same time), then either the old birds or the foster-raised young would gain an advantage. And we'd expect that the young raised this way would be likely to follow, by inheritance, their mother's occasional and unusual habit, and would in turn be inclined to lay their eggs in other birds' nests, and thus be more successful in raising their young. Through a continued process of this kind, I believe the strange instinct of our cuckoo was generated. It has also recently been established on good evidence, by Adolf Muller, that the cuckoo occasionally lays her eggs on bare ground, sits on them, and feeds her young. This rare event is probably a case of reversion to the long-lost original instinct of nest-building.

It has been objected that I haven't discussed other related instincts and structural adaptations in the cuckoo that are said to be necessarily coordinated. But speculation about an instinct known to us in only a single species is pointless, because until recently we had no facts to guide us. Until recently, only the instincts of the European and non-parasitic American cuckoo were known. Now, thanks to Mr. Ramsay's observations, we've learned something about three Australian species that lay their eggs in other birds' nests. The main points to note are three. First, the common cuckoo, with rare exceptions, lays only one egg per nest, so the large and voracious young bird gets plenty of food. Second, the eggs are remarkably small -- no bigger than a skylark's, even though a skylark is about one-quarter the size of a cuckoo. That this small egg size is a real adaptation we can infer from the fact that the non-parasitic American cuckoo lays full-sized eggs. Third, the young cuckoo, soon after birth, has the instinct, the strength, and a properly shaped back for ejecting its foster-siblings, who then die of cold and hunger. This has been boldly called a "beneficent arrangement" so that the young cuckoo may get enough food, and its foster-siblings may die before they've developed much feeling!

Turning now to the Australian species: although these birds generally lay only one egg per nest, it's not rare to find two or even three eggs in the same nest. In the bronze cuckoo, the eggs vary greatly in size, from eight to ten lines in length. Now, if it had been advantageous to this species to lay eggs even smaller than those it currently lays -- either to better deceive certain foster-parents, or more likely to hatch in a shorter period (since there seems to be a relationship between egg size and incubation time) -- then there's no difficulty in believing that a variety or species might have evolved that laid smaller and smaller eggs, since these would have been more safely hatched and reared. Mr. Ramsay notes that two of the Australian cuckoos, when they lay their eggs in an open nest, show a clear preference for nests containing eggs similar in color to their own. The European species apparently shows some tendency toward a similar instinct, but doesn't always follow it, as shown by her laying dull, pale-colored eggs in the nest of the hedge warbler, which has bright greenish-blue eggs. Had our cuckoo always displayed this instinct, it would certainly have been added to the list of instincts supposedly acquired all at once. The eggs of the Australian bronze cuckoo vary, according to Mr. Ramsay, to an extraordinary degree in color. So in this respect, as well as in size, natural selection might have secured and locked in any advantageous variation.

In the case of the European cuckoo, the foster-parents' own offspring are typically ejected from the nest within three days after the cuckoo hatches. Since the cuckoo at this age is in an utterly helpless state, the ornithologist Mr. Gould was initially inclined to think that the ejection was done by the foster-parents themselves. But he has now received a trustworthy account of a young cuckoo that was actually seen -- while still blind and unable even to hold up its own head -- in the act of ejecting its foster-siblings. One of them was placed back in the nest by the observer, and was thrown out again. As for how this strange and cruel instinct was acquired: if it was very important for the young cuckoo to receive as much food as possible soon after birth (as is probably the case), I see no special difficulty in its having gradually acquired, over successive generations, the blind urge, the strength, and the bodily structure needed for the work of ejection. Those cuckoos with the best-developed habits and structure for this would be the most securely raised. The first step toward acquiring this instinct might have been mere restlessness on the part of the young bird when somewhat older and stronger. The habit would then have been improved and passed on to an earlier age. I see no more difficulty in this than in the unhatched young of other birds acquiring the instinct to break through their own shells, or in young snakes having, as the anatomist Owen noted, a temporary sharp tooth in their upper jaws for cutting through tough eggshells. For if each body part is subject to individual variation at all ages, and these variations tend to be inherited at a corresponding or earlier age -- propositions that can't be disputed -- then the instincts and structure of the young could be slowly modified just as surely as those of the adult. Both cases must stand or fall together with the whole theory of natural selection.

Some species of Molothrus, a completely different genus of American birds related to our starlings, have parasitic habits like those of the cuckoo. The species present an interesting gradation in the perfection of their instincts. The sexes of Molothrus badius, according to the excellent observer Mr. Hudson, sometimes live promiscuously together in flocks and sometimes pair off. They either build their own nest or seize one belonging to another bird, occasionally throwing out the original nestlings. They either lay their eggs in the captured nest, or -- oddly enough -- build one of their own on top of it. They usually sit on their own eggs and raise their own young, but Mr. Hudson says they're probably occasionally parasitic, since he has seen the young of this species following adults of a different kind and begging to be fed.

The parasitic habits of another species, Molothrus bonariensis, are much more highly developed but still far from perfect. This bird, as far as we know, invariably lays its eggs in the nests of other species. But remarkably, several sometimes start to build an irregular, untidy nest of their own, placed in absurdly unsuitable spots, like on the leaves of a large thistle. They never, as far as Mr. Hudson has determined, actually complete a nest for themselves. They often lay so many eggs -- from fifteen to twenty -- in the same foster nest that few or none can be hatched. They also have the extraordinary habit of pecking holes in the eggs, whether their own species' or their foster-parents', that they find in the captured nests. They also drop many eggs on bare ground, where they're wasted.

A third species, Molothrus pecoris of North America, has acquired instincts as perfect as those of the cuckoo, for it never lays more than one egg in a foster nest, so the young bird is securely raised. Mr. Hudson is a strong disbeliever in evolution, but he appears to have been so struck by the imperfect instincts of Molothrus bonariensis that he quotes my words and asks: "Must we consider these habits, not as specially endowed or created instincts, but as small consequences of one general law, namely, transition?"

Various birds, as I've already mentioned, occasionally lay their eggs in the nests of other birds. This habit is not uncommon in the Gallinaceae (the chicken-like birds) and sheds some light on the singular instinct of the ostrich. In this family, several hens join together and lay a few eggs first in one nest, then in another, and these are hatched by the males. This instinct can probably be explained by the fact that the hens lay a large number of eggs, but, as with the cuckoo, at intervals of two or three days. The instinct of the American ostrich, however, like that of Molothrus bonariensis, hasn't yet been perfected. A surprising number of eggs lie scattered over the plains, so that in one day's hunting I picked up no fewer than twenty lost and wasted eggs.

Many bees are parasitic and regularly lay their eggs in the nests of other kinds of bees. This case is even more remarkable than the cuckoo's, because these bees have had not only their instincts but their body structure modified in line with their parasitic habits: they don't possess the pollen-collecting apparatus that would be essential if they stored up food for their own young. Some species of Sphegidae (wasp-like insects) are likewise parasitic. The entomologist M. Fabre has recently shown good reason to believe that although Tachytes nigra generally makes its own burrow and stocks it with paralyzed prey for its larvae, when this insect finds a burrow already made and stocked by another wasp, it takes advantage of the prize and becomes a parasite for the occasion. In this case, as with Molothrus or the cuckoo, I see no difficulty in natural selection making an occasional habit permanent, if it benefits the species, and if the insect whose nest and stored food are stolen isn't driven to extinction as a result.


Slave-Making Instinct

This remarkable instinct was first discovered in Formica (Polyerges) rufescens by the naturalist Pierre Huber, an even better observer than his celebrated father. This ant is absolutely dependent on its slaves. Without their help, the species would certainly go extinct within a single year. The males and fertile females do no work of any kind, and the workers or sterile females, though extremely energetic and courageous in capturing slaves, do no other work. They're incapable of building their own nests or feeding their own larvae. When the old nest becomes inconvenient and they need to migrate, it's the slaves that decide on the migration and actually carry their masters in their jaws. The masters are so utterly helpless that when Huber shut up thirty of them without a slave, but with plenty of their favorite food and with their larvae and pupae to stimulate them to work, they did nothing. They couldn't even feed themselves, and many starved to death. Huber then introduced a single slave (F. fusca), and she instantly went to work, fed and saved the survivors, made some cells, tended the larvae, and put everything in order. What could be more extraordinary than these well-documented facts? If we knew of no other slave-making ant, it would be hopeless to speculate how such a remarkable instinct could have evolved.

Another species, Formica sanguinea, was also first identified by Pierre Huber as a slave-making ant. This species is found in southern England, and its habits have been studied by Mr. F. Smith of the British Museum, to whom I owe a great deal for information on this and other subjects. Although I fully trusted Huber's and Smith's accounts, I tried to approach the subject with a skeptical mindset, since anyone might be excused for doubting the existence of so extraordinary an instinct as that of making slaves. So I'll describe my own observations in some detail.

I opened fourteen nests of F. sanguinea and found a few slaves in all of them. Males and fertile females of the slave species (F. fusca) are found only in their own independent colonies and have never been observed in the nests of F. sanguinea. The slaves are black and no more than half the size of their red masters, so the contrast in appearance is striking. When the nest is slightly disturbed, the slaves occasionally come out and, like their masters, are clearly agitated and defend the nest. When the nest is heavily disturbed and the larvae and pupae are exposed, the slaves work energetically alongside their masters to carry them to safety. Clearly, the slaves feel quite at home.

During June and July, over three successive years, I spent many hours watching several nests in Surrey and Sussex and never saw a slave either leave or enter a nest. Since slaves are very few in number during these months, I thought they might behave differently when more numerous. But Mr. Smith tells me that he has watched the nests at various hours during May, June, and August, both in Surrey and Hampshire, and has never seen the slaves -- though present in large numbers in August -- either leave or enter the nest. He considers them strictly household slaves. The masters, on the other hand, can constantly be seen bringing in building materials and food of all kinds.

During 1860, however, in July, I came across a colony with an unusually large stock of slaves, and I observed a few slaves mingled with their masters leaving the nest and marching along the same path to a tall Scotch fir tree twenty-five yards away, which they climbed together, probably in search of aphids or scale insects. According to Huber, who had ample opportunities for observation, the slaves in Switzerland habitually work alongside their masters in building the nest, and they alone open and close the doors morning and evening. As Huber specifically states, their main task is to search for aphids. This difference in the usual habits of masters and slaves in the two countries probably depends simply on the slaves being captured in greater numbers in Switzerland than in England.

One day I was lucky enough to witness a migration of F. sanguinea from one nest to another, and it was a fascinating spectacle to see the masters carefully carrying their slaves in their jaws -- instead of being carried by them, as happens with F. rufescens. Another day my attention was caught by about twenty of the slave-makers hovering around the same spot, clearly not searching for food. They approached and were vigorously fought off by an independent colony of the slave species (F. fusca). Sometimes as many as three of these ants were clinging to the legs of a single slave-making F. sanguinea. The slave-makers ruthlessly killed their small opponents and carried their dead bodies as food back to their nest, twenty-nine yards away. But they were prevented from capturing any pupae to raise as slaves. I then dug up a small batch of F. fusca pupae from another nest and placed them on bare ground near the battle site. They were eagerly seized and carried off by the raiders, who perhaps fancied that they had been victorious in their recent fight after all.

At the same time, I placed nearby a small batch of pupae of another species, F. flava, with a few of these little yellow ants still clinging to the fragments of their nest. This species is sometimes, though rarely, enslaved, as Mr. Smith has described. Although very small, it's extremely courageous, and I've seen it ferociously attack other ants. In one case, I was surprised to find an independent colony of F. flava under a stone beneath a nest of the slave-making F. sanguinea. When I accidentally disturbed both nests, the little ants attacked their big neighbors with astonishing courage.

Now I was curious to find out whether F. sanguinea could distinguish the pupae of F. fusca, which they regularly enslave, from those of the little and fierce F. flava, which they rarely capture. It was clear that they could tell the difference immediately. As we've seen, they eagerly and instantly seized the pupae of F. fusca. But they were clearly terrified when they came across the pupae -- or even the soil from the nest -- of F. flava, and quickly ran away. After about a quarter of an hour, however, shortly after all the little yellow ants had crawled away, they took heart and carried off the pupae.

One evening I visited another colony of F. sanguinea and found a number of these ants returning home and entering their nest carrying the dead bodies of F. fusca (showing this was not a migration) and numerous pupae. I traced a long file of ants burdened with their plunder for about forty yards back to a very thick clump of heath, from which I saw the last individual of F. sanguinea emerge carrying a pupa. But I wasn't able to find the raided nest in the thick undergrowth. The nest must have been close by, however, because two or three F. fusca individuals were rushing about in extreme agitation, and one was perched motionless with its own pupa in its mouth on top of a sprig of heath -- a picture of despair over its devastated home.

Such are the facts -- though they didn't need confirmation by me -- regarding the remarkable instinct of making slaves. Notice what a contrast the instinctive habits of F. sanguinea present compared to those of the continental F. rufescens. The latter doesn't build its own nest, doesn't determine its own migrations, doesn't collect food for itself or its young, and can't even feed itself: it's absolutely dependent on its numerous slaves. Formica sanguinea, on the other hand, has far fewer slaves, and in early summer extremely few. The masters decide when and where to form a new nest, and when they migrate, the masters carry the slaves. Both in Switzerland and England, the slaves seem to have sole charge of the larvae, and the masters alone go on slave-making raids. In Switzerland, the slaves and masters work together building and bringing materials for the nest. Both -- but mainly the slaves -- tend and "milk," as we might say, their aphids, and so both collect food for the community. In England, the masters alone usually leave the nest to gather building materials and food for themselves, their slaves, and larvae. So the masters in England receive much less service from their slaves than they do in Switzerland.

How did the instinct of F. sanguinea originate? I won't pretend to guess. But since ants that are not slave-makers will, as I've seen, carry off pupae of other species when they're scattered near their nests, it's possible that pupae originally stored as food might sometimes survive and develop. The foreign ants thus unintentionally raised would then follow their own instincts and do whatever work they could. If their presence proved useful to the species that had seized them -- if it was more advantageous to capture workers than to produce them -- the habit of collecting pupae, originally for food, might through natural selection be strengthened and made permanent for the very different purpose of raising slaves. Once acquired, even if carried out to a much lesser extent than in our British F. sanguinea (which, as we've seen, gets less help from its slaves than the same species in Switzerland), natural selection might increase and modify the instinct -- always assuming each modification to be useful to the species -- until an ant was formed as completely dependent on its slaves as Formica rufescens.


Cell-Making Instinct of the Honeybee

I won't go into minute details on this subject but will simply outline the conclusions I've reached. You'd have to be a dull person to examine the exquisite structure of a honeycomb, so beautifully adapted to its purpose, without enthusiastic admiration. Mathematicians tell us that bees have essentially solved a difficult geometric problem, making their cells the exact shape to hold the greatest possible amount of honey while using the least possible amount of precious wax in construction. It's been noted that a skilled craftsman with the right tools and measurements would find it very difficult to make cells of wax with the correct shape, even though this is accomplished by a crowd of bees working in a dark hive. No matter how much instinct you grant them, it seems at first completely inconceivable how they can make all the necessary angles and surfaces, or even tell when they've got them right. But the difficulty is not nearly as great as it first appears. All this beautiful work can be shown, I think, to follow from a few simple instincts.

I was led to investigate this subject by Mr. Waterhouse, who showed that the shape of each cell is closely related to the presence of neighboring cells. The following view may perhaps be considered only a modification of his theory. Let's look at the great principle of gradation and see whether nature reveals her method of work.

At one end of a short series, we have bumblebees, which use their old cocoons to hold honey, sometimes adding short tubes of wax, and also making separate, very irregular rounded cells of wax. At the other end, we have the cells of the honeybee, arranged in a double layer. Each cell, as is well known, is a hexagonal prism with the basal edges of its six sides beveled to form an inverted pyramid of three rhombuses. These rhombuses have specific angles, and the three that form the pyramidal base of a single cell on one side of the comb fit into the bases of three adjacent cells on the opposite side.

Between these two extremes -- the perfection of the honeybee's cells and the simplicity of the bumblebee's -- we have the cells of the Mexican Melipona domestica, carefully described and illustrated by Pierre Huber. The Melipona itself is intermediate in structure between the honeybee and bumblebee, but more closely related to the latter. It forms a nearly regular waxen comb of cylindrical cells in which the young are hatched, plus some large cells of wax for storing honey. These honey cells are nearly spherical and nearly equal in size, and they're clustered into an irregular mass. But the key point is this: these cells are always built close enough together that they would intersect or break into each other if the spheres were completed. But this never happens, because the bees build perfectly flat walls of wax between the spheres at the points where they would overlap. So each cell consists of an outer spherical portion plus two, three, or more flat surfaces, depending on how many other cells it touches. When one cell rests on three others -- which, because the spheres are nearly the same size, is very often the case -- the three flat surfaces form a pyramid. This pyramid, as Huber noted, is clearly a rough version of the three-sided pyramidal base of a honeybee's cell. Just as in the honeybee's cells, the three flat surfaces of any one cell also form part of the construction of three neighboring cells. The Melipona obviously saves wax and, more importantly, labor by building this way, because the flat walls between adjacent cells aren't doubled -- they're the same thickness as the outer spherical portions, yet each flat wall forms part of two cells.

Thinking about this case, it occurred to me that if the Melipona made its spheres at a set distance from each other, made them equal in size, and arranged them symmetrically in a double layer, the resulting structure would be as perfect as the comb of the honeybee. I wrote to Professor Miller of Cambridge, and this mathematician kindly reviewed the following statement, drawn up from his information, and confirmed that it is strictly correct:

If a number of equal spheres are placed with their centers in two parallel layers, with the center of each sphere at a distance of radius times the square root of 2 (or radius times 1.41421), or at some lesser distance, from the centers of the six surrounding spheres in the same layer, and at the same distance from the centers of the adjacent spheres in the other parallel layer -- then, if planes of intersection between the spheres in both layers are drawn, the result will be a double layer of hexagonal prisms joined together by pyramidal bases made of three rhombuses. And the rhombuses and the sides of the hexagonal prisms will have every angle exactly the same as the best measurements that have been made of honeybee cells.

But I'm told by Professor Wyman, who has made many careful measurements, that the accuracy of the bee's workmanship has been greatly exaggerated -- so much so that whatever the ideal form of the cell may be, it's rarely if ever actually achieved.

So we can safely conclude that if we could slightly modify the instincts the Melipona already possesses -- instincts that are not particularly remarkable in themselves -- this bee would build a structure as wonderfully perfect as the honeybee's. We'd need to suppose the Melipona could form truly spherical cells of equal sizes -- and this wouldn't be very surprising, since she already does so approximately, and since many insects can bore perfectly cylindrical tunnels in wood, apparently by turning around a fixed point. We'd need to suppose she arranges her cells in flat layers, as she already does with her cylindrical cells. And we'd need to suppose -- and this is the greatest difficulty -- that she can somehow judge accurately how far to stand from her fellow workers when several are making their spheres. But she already has some ability to judge distance, since she always makes her spheres close enough that they partially intersect, and then she joins the intersection points with perfectly flat surfaces. Through such modifications of instincts that aren't very remarkable in themselves -- hardly more remarkable than those that guide a bird to build its nest -- I believe the honeybee has acquired, through natural selection, her matchless architectural powers.

But this theory can be tested by experiment. Following the example of Mr. Tegetmeier, I separated two combs and placed between them a long, thick, rectangular strip of wax. The bees immediately began excavating tiny circular pits in it. As they deepened these little pits, they widened them until they became shallow basins, appearing to the eye as perfectly true parts of a sphere, about the diameter of a cell. It was fascinating to observe that wherever several bees had begun excavating these basins close together, they had started their work at just the right distance from each other so that by the time the basins reached the width of an ordinary cell, and were about one-sixth the depth of the sphere they formed part of, their rims intersected. As soon as this happened, the bees stopped excavating and began building flat walls of wax along the lines of intersection. Each hexagonal prism was thus built on the scalloped edge of a smooth basin, rather than on the straight edges of a three-sided pyramid as in ordinary cells.

I then placed in the hive, instead of a thick rectangular piece of wax, a thin, narrow, knife-edged ridge colored with vermilion. The bees immediately began excavating little basins on both sides, close together, just as before. But the ridge of wax was so thin that the bottoms of the basins, if excavated to the same depth as in the first experiment, would have broken through from opposite sides. The bees didn't let this happen: they stopped excavating in time. So the basins, once they had been slightly deepened, came to have flat bottoms. These flat bottoms, formed by thin little plates of ungnawed vermilion wax, were positioned -- as far as the eye could judge -- exactly along the planes of imaginary intersection between the basins on the opposite side of the ridge. In some parts, only small portions of a rhombic plate were left between opposing basins; in other parts, large portions. The work wasn't neatly done, given the unnatural conditions. The bees must have worked at very nearly the same rate on both sides of the vermilion wax ridge in order to have succeeded in leaving flat plates between the basins by stopping exactly at the planes of intersection.

Given how flexible thin wax is, I don't see any difficulty in the bees, while working on the two sides of a strip of wax, being able to tell when they've gnawed the wax to the right thinness, and then stopping. In ordinary combs, it seemed to me that the bees don't always succeed in working at exactly the same rate from opposite sides. I've noticed half-completed rhombuses at the base of a just-started cell that were slightly concave on one side (where I suppose the bees had excavated too fast) and convex on the opposite side (where they'd worked more slowly). In one clear case, I put the comb back into the hive, let the bees work for a short time, and examined the cell again. I found that the rhombic plate had been completed and was now perfectly flat. It was absolutely impossible, given the extreme thinness of the plate, that they could have achieved this by gnawing away the convex side. I suspect that in such cases, bees standing in the opposing cells push and bend the soft, warm wax (which, as I've tried, is easily done) into the correct intermediate plane, and so flatten it.

From the experiment with the vermilion wax ridge, we can see that if bees were to build a thin wall of wax for themselves, they could make their cells the proper shape by standing at the right distance from each other, excavating at the same rate, and trying to make equal spherical hollows while never letting the spheres break through. Now bees -- as you can clearly see by examining the edge of a growing comb -- do make a rough surrounding wall or rim all around the comb. They gnaw this away from opposite sides, always working in circles as they deepen each cell. They don't build the whole three-sided pyramidal base of any one cell at the same time, but only the one rhombic plate on the extreme growing edge, or two plates, as the case may be. And they never complete the upper edges of the rhombic plates until the hexagonal walls have been started. Some of these statements differ from those of the justly celebrated elder Huber, but I'm convinced of their accuracy. If I had space, I could show they're consistent with my theory.

Huber stated that the very first cell is excavated from a little parallel-sided wall of wax. This isn't, as far as I've seen, strictly correct: the first beginning is always a little hood of wax. But I won't go into those details here. We can see how important a role excavation plays in cell construction. But it would be a serious mistake to suppose that bees can't also build up a rough wall of wax in the right place -- that is, along the plane of intersection between two adjacent spheres. I have several specimens clearly showing they can do this. Even in the rough surrounding rim of a growing comb, curves can sometimes be seen that correspond in position to the planes of the rhombic base plates of future cells. But the rough wall of wax always has to be finished off by extensive gnawing on both sides.

The way bees build is curious: they always make the first rough wall ten to twenty times thicker than the incredibly thin finished wall of the cell that will ultimately remain. We can understand how they work by imagining masons first piling up a broad ridge of cement, then cutting it away equally on both sides near the ground until a smooth, very thin wall is left in the middle -- with the masons always piling the cut-away cement, plus fresh cement, on top of the ridge. The result would be a thin wall steadily growing upward but always topped by a massive cap. Because all cells -- both newly started and completed ones -- are crowned by a strong capping of wax, the bees can cluster and crawl over the comb without damaging the delicate hexagonal walls. These walls, as Professor Miller has kindly measured for me, vary considerably in thickness, averaging (from twelve measurements near the border of the comb) 1/352 of an inch. The basal rhombic plates are thicker, in roughly a three-to-two ratio, averaging (from twenty-one measurements) 1/229 of an inch. Through this remarkable building method, strength is continually given to the comb with the greatest ultimate economy of wax.

It might seem to add to the difficulty that many bees all work together -- one bee working briefly at one cell then moving to another, so that, as Huber noted, as many as twenty individuals work even on the very first cell. I was able to demonstrate this by coating the edges of the hexagonal walls of a single cell, or the outer rim of a growing comb, with an extremely thin layer of melted vermilion wax. I invariably found that the color was spread with the greatest delicacy by the bees -- as delicately as a painter could have done with a brush -- with tiny bits of the colored wax taken from the spot where it had been placed and worked into the growing edges of cells all around. The construction process seems to be a kind of balance struck among many bees, all instinctively standing at the same relative distance from each other, all trying to scoop out equal spheres, and then building up -- or leaving ungnawed -- the planes of intersection between these spheres. It was really fascinating to see, in difficult cases like where two pieces of comb met at an angle, how often the bees would tear down and rebuild the same cell in different ways, sometimes reverting to a shape they had initially rejected.

When bees have a surface to stand on in their proper working positions -- for instance, a slip of wood placed directly under the middle of a comb growing downward, so the comb has to be built over one face of the slip -- in this case, the bees can lay the foundation of one wall of a new hexagon in exactly the right place, projecting beyond the other completed cells. It's enough for the bees to stand at their proper relative distances from each other and from the walls of the last completed cells. Then, by tracing imaginary spheres, they can build a wall in between two adjacent spheres. But as far as I've seen, they never gnaw away and finish off the angles of a cell until a large portion of both that cell and the neighboring cells has been built. This ability of bees to lay down a rough wall in the correct position between two just-started cells is important, because it relates to a fact that at first seems to undermine the theory I've described: namely, that the cells on the extreme edge of wasp combs are sometimes perfectly hexagonal. But I don't have space to go into this subject. Nor does there seem to me any great difficulty in a single insect (like a queen wasp) making hexagonal cells, if she were to work alternately on the inside and outside of two or three cells started at the same time, always standing at the right relative distance from the parts of the cells just begun, tracing spheres or cylinders, and building up the intermediate surfaces.

Since natural selection works only by accumulating slight modifications of structure or instinct, each beneficial to the individual under its conditions of life, it's reasonable to ask: how could a long and gradual succession of modified building instincts, all tending toward the present perfect plan of construction, have benefited the ancestors of the honeybee? I think the answer isn't hard. Cells built like those of the bee or the wasp gain in strength and save greatly on labor, space, and building materials. As for wax production, it's known that bees are often hard pressed to gather enough nectar. Mr. Tegetmeier tells me that experiments have shown that a hive of bees consumes twelve to fifteen pounds of dry sugar to produce a single pound of wax. So a tremendous quantity of nectar must be collected and consumed for the wax needed to build their combs. Moreover, many bees have to sit idle for days during the secretion process. A large store of honey is essential to support a large colony of bees through the winter, and the security of the hive depends mainly on having a large number of bees. So saving wax (which means saving honey, which means saving the time spent collecting it) must be a key factor in any bee family's success.

Of course, a species' success may depend on the number of its predators or parasites, or on entirely different factors, and may have nothing to do with how much honey the bees can collect. But let's suppose that the amount of honey often has determined -- as it probably has -- whether a bee related to our bumblebee could thrive in large numbers in a given area. And let's further suppose that the colony lives through the winter and therefore needs a honey store. In that case, there's no doubt that it would be an advantage to our imaginary bumblebee if a slight modification of her instincts led her to build her wax cells closer together, so they overlapped a bit -- because even a single shared wall between two adjacent cells would save some labor and wax. So it would be progressively more and more advantageous for our bumblebees to make their cells more regular, nearer together, and clustered into a mass, like the cells of the Melipona. In that case, much of the outer surface of each cell would serve as a boundary for adjacent cells, and much labor and wax would be saved. Similarly, it would benefit the Melipona to make her cells closer together and more regular in every way, because then, as we've seen, the spherical surfaces would disappear entirely, replaced by flat ones. The Melipona would make a comb as perfect as the honeybee's. Beyond this stage of architectural perfection, natural selection could not lead, for the honeybee's comb, as far as we can tell, is absolutely perfect in its economy of labor and wax.

So I believe the most remarkable of all known instincts -- that of the honeybee -- can be explained by natural selection taking advantage of numerous, successive, slight modifications of simpler instincts. Natural selection has, by slow degrees, more and more perfectly led the bees to scoop out equal spheres at a given distance from each other in a double layer, and to build up and excavate the wax along the planes of intersection. The bees, of course, no more know that they're making spheres at one particular distance from each other than they know the precise angles of the hexagonal prisms and the basal rhombic plates. The driving force behind the process of natural selection has been the construction of cells of the right strength, size, and shape for the larvae -- achieved with the greatest possible economy of labor and wax. The individual swarm that built the best cells with the least labor and the least waste of honey in producing wax succeeded best, passed on their newly acquired economical instincts to new swarms, and those swarms in turn had the best chance of succeeding in the struggle for existence.


Objections to the Theory of Natural Selection as Applied to Instincts: Sterile Insects

It has been objected to the above view of the origin of instincts that "variations of structure and of instinct must have been simultaneous and perfectly adjusted to each other, since a modification in one without an immediate corresponding change in the other would have been fatal." The force of this objection rests entirely on the assumption that the changes in instinct and structure are sudden. To illustrate: consider the great titmouse (Parus major), mentioned in a previous chapter, which often holds yew seeds between its feet on a branch and hammers with its beak to get at the kernel. What special difficulty would there be in natural selection preserving all the slight individual variations in beak shape that were better and better adapted to cracking open seeds, until a beak was formed as well-suited for this purpose as the nuthatch's -- at the same time that habit, or necessity, or spontaneous changes in taste led the bird to become more and more of a seed-eater? In this case, the beak is supposed to be slowly modified by natural selection in response to slowly changing habits or taste. But suppose the titmouse's feet also grew larger, from correlated development with the beak, or from some other unknown cause. It's not unlikely that such larger feet would lead the bird to climb more and more until it acquired the remarkable climbing instinct and ability of the nuthatch. In this case, a gradual change of structure leads to changed instinctive habits.

To take another case: few instincts are more remarkable than the one that leads the swift of the Eastern Islands to make its nest entirely of thickened saliva. Some birds build their nests of mud, thought to be moistened with saliva. One of the swifts of North America makes its nest, as I've seen, of sticks glued together with saliva, and even with flakes of this substance. Is it really so unlikely that the natural selection of individual swifts that produced more and more saliva should eventually produce a species with instincts leading it to abandon other materials and make its nest exclusively of thickened saliva? And so with other cases. It must be admitted, however, that in many instances we can't tell whether instinct or structure changed first.

No doubt many instincts that are very hard to explain could be brought up against the theory of natural selection -- cases where we can't see how an instinct could have originated; cases where no intermediate steps are known to exist; cases of instincts so trivial they could hardly have been shaped by natural selection; cases of instincts almost identical in animals so far apart on the tree of life that we can't explain the similarity by inheritance from a common ancestor and must believe they were independently acquired through natural selection. I won't go into all these cases here but will focus on one special difficulty that at first seemed to me insurmountable and actually fatal to the whole theory. I mean the sterile females in insect colonies: these sterile workers often differ widely in instinct and in structure from both the males and fertile females, and yet, being sterile, they can't pass on their traits to offspring.

This subject deserves to be discussed at great length, but I'll take only a single case: that of worker or sterile ants. How the workers became sterile is a difficulty, but not a much greater one than any other striking structural modification. It can be shown that some insects and other jointed animals in nature occasionally become sterile. If such insects were social, and it was beneficial to the colony for a number to be born each year that could work but couldn't reproduce, I see no particular difficulty in this having been brought about through natural selection. But I must pass over this preliminary difficulty.

The great difficulty lies in the fact that worker ants differ widely from both males and fertile females in structure -- in the shape of the thorax, in lacking wings, and sometimes in lacking eyes -- and in instinct. As far as instinct alone goes, the extraordinary difference between workers and fertile females would have been even better illustrated by the honeybee. If a worker ant or other sterile insect had been an ordinary animal, I would have unhesitatingly assumed that all its characteristics had been slowly acquired through natural selection -- by individuals born with slight beneficial modifications that were inherited by their offspring, who then varied further and were selected again, and so on. But with the worker ant, we have an insect differing greatly from its parents yet absolutely sterile, so it could never have passed on successively acquired modifications of structure or instinct to offspring. You might well ask: how is it possible to reconcile this with the theory of natural selection?

First, remember that we have countless examples, both in domestic animals and in nature, of all sorts of inherited structural differences linked to certain ages and to either sex. We have differences linked not just to one sex but to the short period when the reproductive system is active, as in the mating plumage of many birds and the hooked jaws of the male salmon. We even have slight differences in the horns of different cattle breeds related to an artificially altered state of the male: oxen of certain breeds have longer horns than oxen of other breeds, relative to the horn length of both bulls and cows of those same breeds. So I see no great difficulty in any trait becoming linked to the sterile condition of certain members of insect colonies. The difficulty lies in understanding how such linked modifications of structure could have been slowly accumulated by natural selection.

This difficulty, though seemingly insurmountable, is lessened -- or as I believe, disappears -- when you remember that selection can be applied to the family as well as to the individual, and can thus achieve the desired result. Cattle breeders want the flesh and fat to be well-marbled together. An animal with this quality has been slaughtered, but the breeder has gone with confidence to the same stock and succeeded. Such is the power of selection that a breed of cattle always producing oxen with extraordinarily long horns could probably be formed by carefully watching which individual bulls and cows, when mated, produced oxen with the longest horns -- even though no ox would ever have reproduced.

Here's a better and real example. According to M. Verlot, some varieties of the double annual stock plant, from having been long and carefully selected to the right degree, always produce a large proportion of seedlings bearing double and completely sterile flowers, but they also yield some single and fertile plants. These fertile plants, by which alone the variety can be propagated, can be compared to the fertile male and female ants, and the double sterile plants to the sterile workers of the same colony. As with the stock varieties, so with social insects: selection has been applied to the family, not the individual, for the sake of a useful result.

So we can conclude that slight modifications of structure or instinct, linked to the sterile condition of certain community members, have proved advantageous. Consequently, the fertile males and females have thrived and passed on to their fertile offspring a tendency to produce sterile members with the same modifications. This process must have been repeated many times until the enormous difference between fertile and sterile females of the same species -- which we see in many social insects -- was produced.

But we haven't yet touched on the peak of the difficulty: the fact that the sterile workers of several ant species differ not only from the fertile females and males but from each other, sometimes to an almost incredible degree, and are thus divided into two or even three castes. These castes generally don't grade into each other but are perfectly distinct -- as different from each other as any two species of the same genus, or even any two genera of the same family. In Eciton, for example, there are worker and soldier castes with extraordinarily different jaws and instincts. In Cryptocerus, the workers of one caste alone carry a remarkable sort of shield on their heads, whose function is completely unknown. In the Mexican Myrmecocystus, the workers of one caste never leave the nest. They're fed by workers of another caste and have enormously swollen abdomens that secrete a kind of honey, taking the place of the honeydew produced by the aphids -- or "domestic cattle," as we might call them -- that our European ants guard and keep captive.

It will certainly seem that I have an overweening confidence in natural selection when I don't admit that such remarkable and well-established facts destroy the theory outright. In the simpler case of sterile insects all of one caste, which I believe have been made different from the fertile males and females through natural selection, we can conclude by analogy with ordinary variation that the successive, slight, beneficial modifications didn't first arise in all the sterile individuals in the same nest but only in some few. Through the survival of colonies whose females produced the most sterile individuals with the advantageous modification, all the sterile workers eventually came to have these traits.

According to this view, we should occasionally find, in the same nest, sterile insects showing gradations of structure. And we do find this, even fairly often, considering how few sterile insects outside Europe have been carefully examined. Mr. F. Smith has shown that the sterile workers of several British ants differ surprisingly from each other in size and sometimes in color, and that the extreme forms can be linked by intermediates taken from the same nest. I've compared such perfect gradations myself. Sometimes the larger or the smaller workers are the most numerous, or both large and small are numerous while those of intermediate size are scarce. Formica flava has larger and smaller workers with a few of intermediate size. In this species, as Mr. Smith has observed, the larger workers have simple eyes (ocelli), which, though small, are clearly visible, while the smaller workers have their ocelli in a rudimentary state. Having carefully dissected several specimens of these workers, I can confirm that the eyes are far more rudimentary in the smaller workers than can be explained merely by their proportionally smaller size. And I fully believe -- though I dare not state it with complete certainty -- that the workers of intermediate size have their ocelli in an exactly intermediate condition.

So here we have two groups of sterile workers in the same nest, differing not only in size but in their organs of vision, yet connected by a few members in an intermediate state. Let me add a thought experiment: if the smaller workers had been the most useful to the colony, and those males and females had been continually selected that produced more and more of the smaller workers until all the workers were of this type, we would then have had an ant species with sterile workers in nearly the same condition as those of Myrmica. For the workers of Myrmica don't even have rudiments of ocelli, though the male and female ants of this genus have well-developed ones.

I can give one more case. So confident was I of occasionally finding gradations of important structures between different castes of sterile workers in the same species that I gladly accepted Mr. F. Smith's offer of numerous specimens from the same nest of the driver ant (Anomma) of West Africa. The reader will perhaps best appreciate the amount of difference in these workers through this strictly accurate comparison: the difference was as if we were to see a set of workers building a house, of whom many were five feet four inches tall and many were sixteen feet tall -- but we must also suppose that the larger workers had heads four times as big (instead of three times) as those of the smaller ones, and jaws nearly five times as big. The jaws of the various-sized worker ants also differed wonderfully in shape and in the form and number of teeth. But the important fact for us is that although the workers can be grouped into distinct size classes, they grade imperceptibly into each other, as do their widely different jaw structures. I speak confidently on this last point, as Sir J. Lubbock made drawings for me, using a camera lucida, of the jaws I dissected from workers of the different sizes. The naturalist Mr. Bates, in his fascinating book The Naturalist on the Amazons, has described similar cases.

With these facts before me, I believe that natural selection, by acting on the fertile parents, could produce a species that regularly generates sterile workers all of large size with one form of jaw, or all of small size with very different jaws, or -- and this is the greatest difficulty -- one set of workers of one size and structure alongside another set of workers of a different size and structure. A graded series would first have been formed, as in the case of the driver ant, and then the extreme forms would have been produced in greater and greater numbers through the survival of the parents that generated them, until no intermediates were produced.

An analogous explanation has been given by Wallace for the equally complex case of certain Malayan butterflies that regularly appear in two or even three distinct female forms, and by Fritz Muller for certain Brazilian crustaceans that similarly appear in two widely distinct male forms. But this subject needn't be discussed further here.

I've now explained how, I believe, the remarkable fact of two distinctly defined castes of sterile workers existing in the same nest -- both widely different from each other and from their parents -- has originated. We can see how their production may have been useful to a social community of ants, on the same principle that the division of labor is useful to human civilization. Ants, however, work by inherited instincts and inherited bodily tools, while humans work by acquired knowledge and manufactured instruments. But I must confess that, with all my faith in natural selection, I would never have expected this principle to be so powerfully effective had the case of these sterile insects not led me to this conclusion. I've therefore discussed this case at some length -- though still not enough -- to show the power of natural selection, and also because this is by far the most serious specific difficulty my theory has encountered.

The case is also very interesting because it proves that in animals, as in plants, any amount of modification can be achieved by the accumulation of numerous small spontaneous variations that are in any way beneficial, without exercise or habit playing any role. For peculiar habits confined to sterile female workers, no matter how long they might be followed, could not possibly affect the males and fertile females, which alone leave descendants. I'm surprised that no one has used this powerful case of sterile insects as an argument against the well-known doctrine of inherited habit, as proposed by Lamarck.


Summary

In this chapter I've tried briefly to show that the mental qualities of our domestic animals vary, and that the variations are inherited. Even more briefly, I've tried to show that instincts vary slightly in nature. No one will dispute that instincts are of the highest importance to each animal. Therefore, there's no real difficulty in natural selection accumulating, under changing conditions of life, slight modifications of instinct that are in any way useful. In many cases, habit or use and disuse have probably played a role as well. I don't claim that the facts given in this chapter greatly strengthen my theory. But none of the difficult cases, to the best of my judgment, destroy it.

On the other hand, the fact that instincts are not always absolutely perfect and are prone to mistakes; that no instinct can be shown to have been produced for the good of other animals, even though animals do exploit each other's instincts; that the principle in natural history of "Nature does not make leaps" applies to instincts as well as to bodily structure, and is plainly explained by the views I've described but is otherwise inexplicable -- all of this supports the theory of natural selection.

This theory is also strengthened by some other facts about instincts -- for example, the common case of closely related but distinct species living in distant parts of the world under very different conditions, yet often retaining nearly the same instincts. We can understand, through the principle of inheritance, how the thrush of tropical South America lines its nest with mud in the same distinctive way as our British thrush. We can understand how the hornbills of Africa and India have the same extraordinary instinct of plastering up and imprisoning the female in a hole in a tree, with only a small opening through which the male feeds her and their young after they hatch. We can understand how the male wrens (Troglodytes) of North America build "decoy nests" to roost in, just like the males of our own wrens -- a habit completely unlike that of any other known bird.

Finally, it may not be a logical deduction, but to my mind it is far more satisfying to view instincts like the young cuckoo ejecting its foster-siblings, ants making slaves, and the larvae of parasitic wasps feeding within the living bodies of caterpillars -- not as specially endowed or divinely created instincts, but as small consequences of one general law leading to the advancement of all living things: namely, multiply, vary, let the strongest live and the weakest die.
