Chapter X: On the Imperfection of the Geological Record


In Chapter VI, I listed the main objections that could fairly be raised against the views I've been defending in this book. Most of them have now been addressed. One, however -- the distinctness of species and the absence of countless transitional forms blending them together -- is a very obvious difficulty. I gave reasons why such links don't commonly exist today, even under the conditions that seem most favorable for them: namely, across an extensive, continuous area with gradually changing physical conditions. I tried to show that each species' survival depends more on the other organisms already living around it than on climate alone, and therefore that the conditions truly governing life don't shade into one another as smoothly as temperature or moisture do. I also tried to show that intermediate varieties, because they exist in smaller numbers than the forms they connect, will generally be outcompeted and driven to extinction as those forms continue to evolve. But the main reason we don't find countless intermediate links everywhere in nature is the very process of natural selection itself, through which new varieties continually replace and supplant their parent forms. Yet in proportion to the enormous scale on which this process of extinction has operated, the number of intermediate varieties that must have formerly existed is truly staggering. So why isn't every geological formation and every rock layer packed with such intermediate links? The fossil record certainly doesn't reveal any such finely graded chain of life, and this is perhaps the most obvious and serious objection that can be raised against my theory. The explanation, I believe, lies in the extreme imperfection of the geological record.

First, we should always keep in mind what kind of intermediate forms must have existed according to the theory. When looking at any two species, I've found it hard to avoid picturing forms directly halfway between them. But this is completely the wrong way to think about it. We should always look for forms intermediate between each species and a common but unknown ancestor -- and that ancestor will generally have differed in some ways from all of its modified descendants. Here's a simple illustration: the fantail and pouter pigeons are both descended from the rock pigeon. If we had every intermediate variety that ever existed, we'd have an extremely detailed series connecting each breed back to the rock pigeon. But we would not have any varieties directly intermediate between the fantail and the pouter -- none, for instance, combining a somewhat expanded tail with a somewhat enlarged crop, the distinctive features of these two breeds. What's more, these two breeds have changed so much that if we had no historical or indirect evidence about their origin, it would have been impossible to determine just from comparing their anatomy with the rock pigeon, Columba livia, whether they descended from this species or from some closely related species like C. oenas.

The same applies to natural species. If we look at forms as different as the horse and the tapir, we have no reason to suppose that links directly intermediate between them ever existed. Instead, both descended from an unknown common ancestor. That common ancestor would have had a general overall resemblance to both the tapir and the horse, but in certain features it may have differed considerably from both -- perhaps even more than they differ from each other. So in all such cases, we wouldn't be able to recognize the ancestral form of any two or more species, even if we carefully compared its anatomy with that of its modified descendants, unless we also had a nearly complete chain of intermediate links.

It is theoretically possible that one of two living forms descended from the other -- for instance, a horse from a tapir. In that case, direct intermediate links would have existed between them. But this would mean that one form had remained unchanged for a very long time while its descendants underwent enormous change, and the principle of competition between organisms -- between parent and offspring -- makes this an extremely rare event. In all cases, new and improved forms of life tend to replace the old, unimproved ones.

According to the theory of natural selection, all living species have been connected to the parent species of each genus by differences no greater than we see between the natural and domestic varieties of the same species today. And those parent species, now generally extinct, were in their turn similarly connected to more ancient forms -- and so on backward, always converging toward the common ancestor of each great group. So the number of intermediate and transitional links between all living and extinct species must have been inconceivably vast. But if this theory is true, such forms certainly lived upon the earth.


On the Lapse of Time, as Inferred from the Rate of Erosion and Deposition

Apart from our failure to find fossil remains of these infinitely numerous connecting links, someone might object that there simply hasn't been enough time for so much evolutionary change, given that all changes happen slowly. It's nearly impossible for me to convey to a reader who isn't a practicing geologist the facts that lead the mind to grasp -- even faintly -- the immensity of geological time. Anyone who can read Sir Charles Lyell's great work, Principles of Geology, which future historians will recognize as having produced a revolution in natural science, and still not accept how vast past periods of time have been, may as well close this book right now. But it isn't enough just to study the Principles of Geology, or to read specialized papers by different researchers on individual formations, noting how each author tries to give some inadequate idea of how long each formation -- or even each individual layer -- took to form. The best way to grasp past time is to understand the forces at work: to learn how deeply the land surface has been worn away, and how much sediment has been deposited. As Lyell pointed out well, the extent and thickness of our sedimentary formations are both the result and the measure of the erosion that the earth's crust has undergone elsewhere. So a person should examine for themselves the great piles of stacked rock layers, and watch the streams carrying down mud, and the waves wearing away sea cliffs, in order to begin to comprehend something about the duration of past time -- the monuments of which surround us on every side.

It's worth walking along the coast, where it's formed of moderately hard rock, and observing the process of erosion. In most places, the tides reach the cliffs only briefly, twice a day, and the waves eat into them only when loaded with sand or pebbles -- there's good evidence that pure water does nothing to wear away rock. Eventually the base of the cliff is undermined, huge fragments fall, and these, lying where they fell, have to be worn down atom by atom until they're small enough to be rolled by the waves, at which point they're more quickly ground into pebbles, sand, or mud. But how often do we see, along the bases of retreating cliffs, rounded boulders thickly covered with marine life, showing how little they've been worn down and how seldom they're rolled about! Moreover, if we follow any line of eroding rocky cliff for a few miles, we find that it's only here and there -- along a short stretch or around a headland -- that the cliffs are actively wearing away right now. Elsewhere, the surface appearance and vegetation show that years have passed since the waves last reached their base.

We've recently learned, however, from the observations of Ramsay -- at the forefront of many excellent researchers including Jukes, Geikie, Croll, and others -- that erosion by the atmosphere is a far more important force than wave action along the coast. The entire land surface is exposed to the chemical action of air and rainwater with its dissolved carbonic acid, and in colder regions to frost. The broken-down material is carried down even gentle slopes during heavy rains, and to a greater extent than you might think, especially in dry regions, by the wind. It's then transported by streams and rivers, which, when flowing fast, deepen their channels and grind the fragments to pieces. On a rainy day, even in gently rolling countryside, you can see the effects of atmospheric erosion in the muddy streams flowing down every slope. Ramsay and Whitaker showed -- and it's a truly striking observation -- that the great lines of escarpment in the Wealden district and those running across England, which were formerly thought to be ancient coastlines, can't have formed that way. Each line is composed of one and the same rock formation, while our actual sea cliffs are everywhere formed by the cutting through of multiple different formations. Given this, we're forced to conclude that these escarpments owe their existence mainly to the fact that the rocks composing them have resisted atmospheric erosion better than the surrounding surface, which has gradually been lowered, leaving the harder rock standing out as ridges. Nothing impresses the mind with the vast duration of time more forcibly than the realization that atmospheric forces -- which seem so weak and work so slowly -- have produced such enormous results.

With this impression of how slowly the land is worn down through atmospheric and coastal erosion, it helps, in order to appreciate the duration of past time, to consider two things: on one hand, the masses of rock that have been removed from many large areas, and on the other, the thickness of our sedimentary formations. I remember being struck when viewing volcanic islands that had been worn by the waves and pared all around into vertical cliffs a thousand or two thousand feet high. The gentle slope of the lava flows, reflecting their formerly liquid state, showed at a glance how far the hard, rocky beds had once extended out into the open ocean. The same story is told even more clearly by geological faults -- those great cracks along which rock layers have been pushed up on one side, or dropped down on the other, by thousands of feet. Since the crust cracked -- and it doesn't much matter whether the movement was sudden or, as most geologists now believe, slow and accomplished in many stages -- the land surface has been so completely smoothed down that no trace of these enormous dislocations is visible from above. The Craven fault, for instance, extends for more than thirty miles, and along this line the vertical displacement of the rock layers ranges from 600 to 3,000 feet. Professor Ramsay has described a downthrow in Anglesey of 2,300 feet, and he tells me he fully believes there's one in Merionethshire of 12,000 feet. Yet in these cases there's nothing on the surface to show such enormous movements. The pile of rocks on either side of the crack has been smoothly swept away.

On the other hand, in all parts of the world, the piles of sedimentary rock layers are wonderfully thick. In the Andes, I estimated one mass of conglomerate at ten thousand feet. Although conglomerates probably accumulated faster than finer sediments, the fact that they're made of worn and rounded pebbles -- each one bearing the stamp of time -- helps show how slowly the mass must have been built up. Professor Ramsay has given me the maximum thickness, measured directly in most cases, of the successive formations in different parts of Great Britain. Here are the results:

  Paleozoic strata (not including volcanic beds): 57,154 feet
  Secondary strata: 13,190 feet
  Tertiary strata: 2,240 feet

That makes a total of 72,584 feet -- very nearly thirteen and three-quarter miles. Some of these formations, which are represented in England by thin beds, are thousands of feet thick on the Continent. Moreover, between each successive formation there are, in the opinion of most geologists, blank periods of enormous length. So the lofty pile of sedimentary rocks in Britain gives only an inadequate idea of the time that elapsed during their accumulation. Thinking about all these facts impresses the mind in almost the same way as the futile attempt to grasp the idea of eternity.

Yet this impression is partly misleading. Mr. Croll, in a thought-provoking paper, argues that we don't err "in forming too great a conception of the length of geological periods," but rather in trying to estimate them in years. When geologists look at large and complex geological phenomena, and then at figures representing several million years, the two produce completely different effects on the mind, and the numbers are immediately pronounced too small. Regarding atmospheric erosion, Croll shows -- by calculating the known amount of sediment carried down annually by certain rivers, relative to their drainage areas -- that 1,000 feet of solid rock, as it gradually disintegrated, would be removed from the average level of the whole area in the course of six million years. This seems astonishing, and some factors suggest the figure may be too large. But even halved or quartered, it's still remarkable. Few of us really grasp what a million means. Croll offers this illustration: take a narrow strip of paper, eighty-three feet four inches long, and stretch it along the wall of a large hall. Then mark off one-tenth of an inch at one end. That tenth of an inch represents one hundred years, and the entire strip represents a million years. But keep in mind, in relation to the subject of this book, what a hundred years actually implies, represented as it is by a measurement utterly insignificant in a hall of those dimensions. Several leading breeders, within a single lifetime, have so dramatically modified some of the larger animals -- which reproduce much more slowly than most smaller ones -- that they've created what fully deserves to be called a new sub-breed. Few people have devoted careful attention to any one lineage for more than half a century, so a hundred years represents the work of two breeders in succession. We shouldn't suppose that species in the wild ever change as quickly as domestic animals under deliberate, methodical selective breeding. The fairer comparison would be with the effects of unconscious selection -- that is, the preservation of the most useful or beautiful animals with no intention of altering the breed. Yet even through this unconscious process, various breeds have noticeably changed over the course of two or three centuries.

Species, however, probably change much more slowly, and within any given region only a few change at the same time. This slowness follows from the fact that all the inhabitants of the same area are already so well adapted to one another that openings in the natural order don't appear until after long intervals, triggered by physical changes of some kind or by the immigration of new forms. Moreover, the right kind of variations -- those that might help some inhabitants better fit their new circumstances -- wouldn't always appear right away. Unfortunately, we have no way to determine, in terms of years, how long it takes to modify a species. But I'll return to the subject of time.


On the Poorness of Fossil Collections

Now let's turn to our richest museums, and what a paltry display they offer! Everyone admits that our collections are incomplete. The remark of that admirable paleontologist Edward Forbes should never be forgotten: that very many fossil species are known and named from single and often broken specimens, or from just a few specimens collected at one location. Only a small portion of the earth's surface has been geologically explored, and no part with enough care, as the important discoveries made every year in Europe prove. No entirely soft-bodied organism can be preserved. Shells and bones decay and disappear when left on the seabed where sediment isn't accumulating. We probably hold a completely mistaken view when we assume that sediment is being deposited over nearly the entire ocean floor at a rate fast enough to bury and preserve fossil remains. Throughout an enormously large proportion of the ocean, the bright blue tint of the water speaks to its purity. The many recorded cases of one formation being conformably covered, after an immense gap in time, by another and later formation -- without the underlying bed showing any signs of erosion in the interval -- seem explicable only if the ocean floor sometimes lies undisturbed for ages. The remains that do get buried in sand or gravel will, when those beds are eventually lifted above sea level, generally be dissolved by rainwater charged with carbonic acid seeping through. Some of the many kinds of animals that live on the beach between high and low tide marks are rarely preserved. For instance, the several species of Chthamalinae (a subfamily of barnacles) coat rocks all over the world in enormous numbers. They're all strictly coastal, with the exception of a single Mediterranean species that lives in deep water -- and this one has been found as a fossil in Sicily, while not one other species has ever been found in any tertiary formation. Yet we know the genus Chthamalus existed during the Cretaceous period. Finally, many great deposits requiring vast amounts of time for their accumulation are completely devoid of fossils, and we can't explain why. One of the most striking examples is the Flysch formation, which consists of shale and sandstone several thousand -- occasionally even six thousand -- feet thick, extending for at least 300 miles from Vienna to Switzerland. Despite the most careful searching of this great mass, no fossils have been found except a few plant remains.

As for the land-dwelling organisms that lived during the Secondary and Paleozoic periods, it's unnecessary to point out that our evidence is fragmentary in the extreme. For instance, until recently not a single land snail was known from either of these vast periods, with the exception of one species discovered by Lyell and Dr. Dawson in the Carboniferous rocks of North America. But now land shells have been found in the Lias. Regarding mammal fossils, a glance at the historical table published in Lyell's Manual will bring home the truth -- how accidental and rare their preservation is -- far better than pages of detail could. Their rarity shouldn't surprise us when we remember how large a proportion of Tertiary mammal bones have been discovered either in caves or in lake-bed deposits, and that not a single cave or true lake-bed formation is known from the age of our Secondary or Paleozoic formations.

But the imperfection of the geological record results mainly from another, more important cause than any of the above: namely, the wide gaps in time between successive formations. This principle has been emphatically accepted by many geologists and paleontologists who, like E. Forbes, completely reject the idea that species change. When we see the formations listed in textbooks, or when we follow them in the field, it's hard to avoid thinking they follow one right after another. But we know, for instance, from Sir R. Murchison's great work on Russia, that wide gaps exist between the stacked formations in that country. The same is true in North America and many other parts of the world. The most skilled geologist, if their attention had been confined exclusively to these large territories, would never have suspected that during the periods blank and barren in their own country, great piles of sediment packed with new and distinctive life forms had been accumulating elsewhere. And if, in any single region, we can barely estimate the length of time that passed between consecutive formations, we can conclude that this could never be accurately determined anywhere. The frequent and dramatic changes in the mineral composition of consecutive formations, generally implying major changes in the geography of the surrounding lands from which the sediment came, fit well with the idea that vast intervals of time separated each formation.

We can, I think, see why the geological formations of each region are almost always intermittent -- that is, they haven't followed one another in an unbroken sequence. Few facts struck me more when examining many hundreds of miles of the South American coast, which has been uplifted several hundred feet in geologically recent times, than the absence of any recent deposits extensive enough to survive even a short geological period. Along the entire west coast, which is home to a distinctive marine fauna, tertiary beds are so poorly developed that no record of its successive distinct marine faunas will probably be preserved for some distant future age. A little reflection explains why. Along the rising coast of western South America, no extensive formations containing recent or Tertiary remains can be found anywhere, even though the supply of sediment must have been enormous for ages, given the tremendous erosion of the coastal rocks and the muddy rivers entering the sea. The explanation is that the coastal and near-shore deposits are continually worn away as soon as the slow, gradual uplift of the land brings them within reach of the grinding action of the waves.

We can, I think, conclude that sediment must accumulate in extremely thick, solid, or extensive masses to withstand the relentless action of the waves when first uplifted and during later shifts in level, as well as subsequent atmospheric erosion. Such thick and extensive accumulations of sediment can form in two ways. First, in the deep ocean -- but in that case the bottom won't be home to as many or as varied organisms as shallower seas, and the mass, when uplifted, will give only an imperfect record of the creatures that lived in the area during its accumulation. Second, sediment may be deposited to any thickness and extent over a shallow bottom, if that bottom continues slowly sinking. In this latter case, as long as the rate of sinking and the supply of sediment roughly balance each other, the sea will remain shallow and favorable for many diverse forms of life. This can produce a fossil-rich formation thick enough, when uplifted, to resist significant erosion.

I'm convinced that nearly all our ancient formations, which are rich in fossils throughout the greater part of their thickness, were formed during periods of subsidence. Since I first published this view in 1845, I've followed the progress of geology and have been surprised to see how author after author, when studying this or that major formation, has reached the same conclusion -- that it accumulated during subsidence. I might add that the only ancient Tertiary formation on the west coast of South America that has been bulky enough to resist the erosion it's so far endured -- though it will hardly survive to a distant geological age -- was deposited during a downward shift in level, and so gained considerable thickness.

All geological evidence tells us plainly that each area has undergone numerous slow shifts in level, and these shifts seem to have affected wide areas. So formations rich in fossils and thick enough to resist later erosion will have formed over wide areas during periods of sinking, but only where the supply of sediment was enough to keep the sea shallow and to bury and preserve remains before they had time to decay. On the other hand, as long as the seabed remained stationary, thick deposits couldn't have accumulated in the shallow parts most favorable to life. Even less could this have happened during the alternating periods of uplift -- or, more accurately, the beds that accumulated during those periods will generally have been destroyed by being lifted up into the zone of wave action.

These observations apply mainly to coastal and near-shore deposits. In the case of an extensive, shallow sea like the one covering a large part of the Malay Archipelago, where the depth ranges from thirty or forty to sixty fathoms, a widely spread formation might form during a period of uplift without suffering too badly from erosion during its slow rise. But the formation couldn't be very thick, because the rising movement would make it thinner than the depth of water in which it formed. Nor would the deposit be well consolidated, or capped by later formations, so it would likely be worn away by atmospheric weathering and wave action during later changes in level. However, Mr. Hopkins has suggested that if one part of the area sank after rising and before being eroded, the deposit formed during the rising phase, though thin, might be protected by fresh accumulations and so be preserved for a long time.

Mr. Hopkins also believes that sedimentary beds of considerable horizontal extent have rarely been completely destroyed. But all geologists -- except the few who think our present metamorphic schists and igneous rocks once formed the original nucleus of the globe -- will agree that these latter rocks have been stripped of their covering to an enormous extent. It's hardly possible that such rocks could have solidified and crystallized while exposed at the surface. But if the metamorphic action occurred at great depths in the ocean, the original protective layer of rock above them may not have been very thick. Granting, then, that gneiss, mica-schist, granite, diorite, and so on were once necessarily buried, how can we account for the vast exposed areas of such rocks in many parts of the world, except by concluding that they've been completely stripped of all the layers that once covered them? That such extensive areas exist is beyond doubt. The granitic region of Parime is described by Humboldt as being at least nineteen times the size of Switzerland. South of the Amazon, Boue maps out an area of these rocks equal to Spain, France, Italy, part of Germany, and the British Isles all combined. This region hasn't been carefully explored, but from the consistent testimony of travelers, the granitic area is very large. Von Eschwege describes a detailed cross-section of these rocks stretching 260 geographical miles inland from Rio de Janeiro in a straight line, and I traveled 150 miles in another direction and saw nothing but granitic rocks. Numerous specimens I collected along the entire coast from near Rio de Janeiro to the mouth of the Plata -- a distance of 1,100 geographical miles -- all belonged to this class. Inland, along the whole northern bank of the Plata, I saw, besides modern Tertiary beds, only one small patch of slightly metamorphosed rock, which alone could have been part of the original covering over the granitic series. Turning to a well-known region, the United States and Canada, as shown in Professor H. D. Rogers' beautiful map -- I estimated the areas by cutting out and weighing the paper -- I find that the metamorphic (excluding the "semi-metamorphic") and granite rocks exceed the whole of the newer Paleozoic formations in the ratio of 19 to 12.5. In many regions, the metamorphic and granite rocks would turn out to be far more extensive than they appear if all the sedimentary beds resting unconformably on them were removed -- beds that couldn't have been part of the original covering under which they crystallized. So it's likely that in some parts of the world, entire formations have been completely eroded away, without a trace left behind.

One observation here is worth a passing note. During periods of uplift, the area of dry land and the adjoining shallow seas will increase, and new habitats will often form -- all conditions favorable, as I've explained before, for the origin of new varieties and species. But during such periods there will generally be a blank in the geological record. Conversely, during periods of sinking, the inhabited area and the number of inhabitants will decrease (except along the shores of a continent when it first breaks up into an archipelago). Consequently, during subsidence, though there will be much extinction, few new varieties or species will arise. And it's during these very periods of subsidence that the fossil-richest deposits have accumulated.


On the Absence of Numerous Intermediate Varieties in Any Single Formation

From all these considerations, there's no doubt that the geological record, viewed as a whole, is extremely incomplete. But if we focus our attention on any one formation, it becomes much harder to understand why we don't find closely graded varieties between the related species that lived at its beginning and at its end. There are several recorded cases of the same species showing different varieties in the upper and lower parts of the same formation. Trautschold, for example, gives a number of instances with ammonites, and Hilgendorf has described a remarkable case of ten gradually changing forms of Planorbis multiformis in the successive beds of a freshwater formation in Switzerland. Although each formation undeniably took a vast number of years to be deposited, several reasons can explain why it shouldn't normally include a complete graded series of links between the species living at its start and finish. I can't assign precise weight to each of the following considerations, but here they are.

Although each formation may represent a very long stretch of time, each is probably short compared with the period needed to transform one species into another. I'm aware that two paleontologists whose opinions deserve great respect -- Bronn and Woodward -- have concluded that the average duration of each formation is two or three times longer than the average lifespan of individual species. But it seems to me that insurmountable difficulties prevent us from reaching any solid conclusion here. When we see a species first appearing in the middle of a formation, it would be extremely rash to conclude that it hadn't previously existed somewhere else. Likewise, when we find a species disappearing before the last layers were deposited, it would be equally rash to assume it went extinct at that point. We forget how small Europe is compared with the rest of the world, and the various stages of the same formation across Europe haven't been correlated with perfect accuracy.

We can safely conclude that marine animals of all kinds have undergone extensive migration due to climate changes and other factors. When we see a species first appearing in a formation, the most likely explanation is that it had just immigrated into that area. It's well known, for instance, that several species appear somewhat earlier in the Paleozoic beds of North America than in those of Europe -- apparently because time was needed for their migration from American to European seas. In examining the most recent deposits in various parts of the world, it's been noted everywhere that some species still living today are common in the deposit but have gone extinct in the immediately surrounding sea -- or conversely, that some are now abundant in the nearby sea but rare or absent in that particular deposit. It's an excellent lesson to reflect on the confirmed amount of migration by European species during the Ice Age, which forms only part of one geological period -- and also to consider the changes in land level, the extreme climate shifts, and the vast span of time all contained within that same glacial period. Yet it's doubtful whether, in any part of the world, sedimentary deposits containing fossils were continuously accumulating in the same area throughout that entire period. It's unlikely, for instance, that sediment was being deposited throughout the whole Ice Age near the mouth of the Mississippi, within the depth range where marine animals thrive best, because we know that major geographic changes occurred in other parts of America during that time. When such beds as were deposited in shallow water near the mouth of the Mississippi during some part of the Ice Age are eventually uplifted, fossils will probably first appear and disappear at different levels, owing to species migration and geographic changes. And in the distant future, a geologist examining these beds would be tempted to conclude that the average lifespan of the embedded fossils was shorter than the Ice Age itself -- when in reality it was far longer, extending from before the glacial epoch to the present day.

To get a perfect gradation between two forms in the upper and lower parts of the same formation, the deposit must have accumulated continuously over a long period -- long enough for the slow process of modification. So the deposit must be very thick, and the species undergoing change must have lived in the same area the whole time. But as we've seen, a thick formation rich in fossils throughout can only accumulate during a period of subsidence. And to keep the depth roughly the same -- which is necessary for the same marine species to keep living in the same spot -- the supply of sediment must nearly match the rate of sinking. But this same sinking will tend to submerge the land from which the sediment comes, reducing the supply even as the downward movement continues. In fact, this nearly exact balance between sediment supply and subsidence is probably a rare occurrence. More than one paleontologist has observed that very thick deposits are usually devoid of fossils except near their upper or lower edges.

Each individual formation, like the whole pile of formations in any country, seems to have generally accumulated intermittently. When we see a formation made up of beds with very different mineral compositions, we can reasonably suspect that deposition was interrupted from time to time. Nor will the closest inspection of a formation tell us how long its deposition actually took. Many examples could be given of beds only a few feet thick that represent formations elsewhere thousands of feet thick, which must have taken an enormous period to accumulate -- yet no one unaware of this would have suspected the vast span of time represented by the thinner formation. Many cases could be given of the lower beds of a formation having been uplifted, eroded, submerged, and then re-covered by the upper beds of the same formation -- showing what wide, easily overlooked gaps occurred during its accumulation. In other cases, we have the clearest evidence in great fossilized trees, still standing upright as they grew, of many long intervals of time and changes in level during the process of deposition -- intervals that would never have been suspected had the trees not been preserved. Lyell and Dr. Dawson, for example, found Carboniferous beds 1,400 feet thick in Nova Scotia, with ancient root-bearing layers stacked one above another at no fewer than sixty-eight different levels. So when the same species occurs at the bottom, middle, and top of a formation, the probability is that it didn't live at that spot during the entire period of deposition. Instead, it disappeared and reappeared, perhaps many times, during the same geological period. Consequently, if it underwent a significant amount of change during the deposition of any one formation, a cross-section wouldn't include all the fine intermediate gradations that must, according to my theory, have existed -- only abrupt, though perhaps slight, changes of form.

It's critically important to remember that naturalists have no golden rule for distinguishing species from varieties. They allow each species a little variability, but when they encounter a somewhat larger difference between two forms, they rank both as separate species -- unless they can connect them through a complete series of intermediate gradations. And for the reasons just given, we can rarely hope to do this in any one geological section. Suppose B and C are two species, and a third, A, is found in an older, underlying bed. Even if A were exactly intermediate between B and C, it would simply be classified as a third, distinct species -- unless it could also be closely connected by intermediate varieties to one or both forms. Nor should we forget, as I've explained before, that A might actually be the ancestor of B and C, and yet wouldn't necessarily be intermediate between them in all respects. So we might find the parent species and its several modified descendants in the lower and upper beds of the same formation, yet without numerous transitional gradations we wouldn't recognize their blood relationship, and would classify them as distinct species.

It's well known that many paleontologists have founded their species on extremely slight differences, and they do this even more readily when the specimens come from different sub-stages of the same formation. Some experienced shell experts are now reclassifying many of the very finely distinguished species of d'Orbigny and others as mere varieties. On this view, we do find the kind of evidence of change that the theory predicts. Look again at the later Tertiary deposits, which contain many shells believed by most naturalists to be identical with living species. Yet some excellent naturalists, like Agassiz and Pictet, insist that all these Tertiary species are specifically distinct, even though the difference is admitted to be very slight. So here, unless we believe these eminent naturalists have been misled by their imaginations, and that these late Tertiary species really show no difference whatsoever from their living counterparts -- or unless we accept, against the judgment of most naturalists, that these Tertiary species are all truly distinct from modern ones -- we have evidence of the frequent occurrence of exactly the kind of slight modifications the theory requires. If we look at somewhat wider intervals of time -- at distinct but consecutive stages of the same major formation -- we find that the embedded fossils, though universally ranked as specifically different, are far more closely related to each other than species found in more widely separated formations. So here again we have clear evidence of change in the direction the theory predicts. But I'll return to this subject in the following chapter.

With animals and plants that reproduce rapidly and don't travel far, there's reason to think, as we've seen before, that their varieties are generally local at first, and that such local varieties don't spread widely and replace their parent form until they've been modified and perfected to a considerable degree. Under this view, the chance of discovering all the early stages of transition between two forms in any one formation in any one country is small, since the successive changes are thought to have been local, confined to one spot. Most marine animals have a wide range, and we've seen that among plants, it's those with the widest range that most often produce varieties. So with shells and other marine animals, it's likely that those with the widest ranges -- far exceeding the limits of the known geological formations in Europe -- have most often given rise to local varieties and eventually to new species. This would again greatly reduce our chances of tracing the stages of transition in any single geological formation.

There's a more important consideration, leading to the same conclusion, recently emphasized by Dr. Falconer: the period during which each species was actively changing, though long in terms of years, was probably short compared with the period during which it remained unchanged.

We also shouldn't forget that even today, with perfect specimens available for examination, two forms can rarely be connected by intermediate varieties and thus proven to be the same species until many specimens have been collected from many places. With fossil species, this can rarely be done. We can perhaps best appreciate how unlikely it is that we'll be able to connect species through numerous, fine, intermediate fossil links by asking ourselves this: Will geologists of some future period be able to prove that our different breeds of cattle, sheep, horses, and dogs descended from a single stock or from several original stocks? Or again, will they be able to determine whether certain seashells along the shores of North America -- ranked by some experts as distinct species from their European counterparts, and by others as mere varieties -- are really varieties, or are truly distinct species? This could be settled by those future geologists only by discovering numerous intermediate gradations in the fossil record -- and such success is improbable in the highest degree.

It has been asserted over and over again by writers who believe in the immutability of species that geology provides no linking forms. As we'll see in the next chapter, this claim is certainly wrong. As Sir J. Lubbock has pointed out, "Every species is a link between other related forms." If we take a genus containing, say, twenty species, recent and extinct, and destroy four-fifths of them, no one doubts that the remaining ones would appear much more distinct from each other. If the most extreme forms in the genus happened to be destroyed, the genus itself would appear more distinct from related genera. What geological research has not revealed is the former existence of infinitely numerous gradations, as fine as those between existing varieties, connecting nearly all existing and extinct species. But this shouldn't be expected -- yet this objection has been repeatedly advanced as a most serious argument against my views.

It may be worth summing up these remarks on the causes of the geological record's imperfection with an imaginary illustration. The Malay Archipelago is roughly the size of Europe from the North Cape to the Mediterranean, and from Britain to Russia -- and therefore equal in area to all the geological formations that have been examined with any accuracy, except those of the United States of America. I fully agree with Mr. Godwin-Austen that the present condition of the Malay Archipelago, with its many large islands separated by wide, shallow seas, probably represents the former state of Europe while most of our formations were being deposited. The Malay Archipelago is one of the richest regions on earth for living things. Yet if every species that ever lived there were collected, how imperfectly would they represent the natural history of the world!

But we have every reason to believe that the land-dwelling organisms of the archipelago would be preserved in an extremely imperfect manner in the formations we suppose to be accumulating there. Not many of the strictly coastal animals, or those living on bare underwater rocks, would be buried in sediment. And those buried in gravel or sand wouldn't survive to a distant age. Wherever sediment wasn't accumulating on the seabed, or wasn't accumulating fast enough to protect organic remains from decay, no fossils could be preserved.

Formations rich in many kinds of fossils, and thick enough to survive into an age as distant in the future as the Secondary formations are in the past, would generally form in the archipelago only during periods of subsidence. These periods of subsidence would be separated from each other by immense intervals of time, during which the area would be either stationary or rising. While rising, the fossiliferous formations on the steeper shores would be destroyed almost as soon as they accumulated, by the relentless wave action, as we now see along the coasts of South America. Even throughout the extensive, shallow seas within the archipelago, sedimentary beds could hardly accumulate to any great thickness during periods of uplift, or become capped and protected by later deposits, and so would have little chance of surviving to a very distant future. During periods of subsidence, there would probably be much extinction. During periods of uplift, there would be much variation, but the geological record would then be less complete.

It's doubtful whether the duration of any one great period of subsidence over the whole or part of the archipelago, together with the simultaneous accumulation of sediment, would exceed the average lifespan of individual species -- and both conditions are essential for preserving all the transitional gradations between any two or more species. If those gradations weren't fully preserved, transitional varieties would simply appear as so many new, though closely related, species. It's also likely that each great period of subsidence would be interrupted by shifts in level, and that slight climate changes would occur during such long periods. In those cases, the inhabitants of the archipelago would migrate, and no closely consecutive record of their modifications could be preserved in any one formation.

Very many of the marine species in the archipelago now range thousands of miles beyond its boundaries. Analogy plainly suggests that it would be mainly these far-ranging species -- though only some of them -- that would most often produce new varieties. Those varieties would at first be local, confined to one place, but if they possessed any clear advantage, or once they were further modified and improved, they would slowly spread and replace their parent forms. When such varieties returned to their original homes, they would differ from their former state in a nearly uniform though perhaps extremely slight degree, and since they would be found in slightly different sub-stages of the same formation, they would -- following the principles used by many paleontologists -- be classified as new and distinct species.

If, then, there's some truth in these observations, we have no right to expect to find in our geological formations an infinite number of the fine transitional forms that, according to the theory, connected all past and present species of the same group into one long, branching chain of life. We should expect to find only a few links -- and we certainly do find some, related to one another more distantly or more closely. And these links, however close they may be, if found in different stages of the same formation, would be ranked by many paleontologists as distinct species. But I don't pretend that I would ever have suspected how poor the record is, even in the best-preserved geological sections, had not the absence of countless transitional links between the species living at the start and end of each formation weighed so heavily on my theory.


On the Sudden Appearance of Whole Groups of Related Species

The abrupt way in which whole groups of species suddenly appear in certain formations has been pointed to by several paleontologists -- for instance, by Agassiz, Pictet, and Sedgwick -- as a fatal objection to the belief in the transmutation of species. If numerous species belonging to the same genera or families really sprang into life all at once, that fact would indeed be fatal to the theory of evolution through natural selection. The development by natural selection of a group of forms, all descended from a single ancestor, must have been an extremely slow process, and the ancestors must have lived long before their modified descendants. But we continually overestimate the completeness of the geological record, and falsely conclude that because certain genera or families haven't been found below a certain stage, they didn't exist before it. In all cases, positive fossil evidence can be trusted implicitly; negative evidence is worthless, as experience has shown again and again. We continually forget how large the world is compared with the area over which our geological formations have been carefully examined. We forget that groups of species may have existed and slowly multiplied elsewhere for a long time before they invaded the ancient archipelagoes of Europe and the United States. We don't allow enough for the enormous intervals of time between our consecutive formations -- intervals perhaps longer, in many cases, than the time it took for each formation to accumulate. These intervals would have provided time for species to multiply from a single ancestor, and in the succeeding formation, such groups of species would appear as if suddenly created.

Let me recall a point I made earlier: it might take a long succession of ages to adapt an organism to some entirely new way of life -- for instance, to fly through the air. The transitional forms would therefore likely remain confined to one region for a long time. But once the adaptation had been achieved and a few species had gained a great advantage over other organisms, a comparatively short time would be needed to produce many divergent forms that would spread rapidly and widely around the world. Professor Pictet, in his excellent review of this work, comments on early transitional forms and, using birds as an example, can't see how the successive modifications of the forelimbs of a supposed ancestral form could possibly have been advantageous. But look at the penguins of the Southern Ocean. Don't these birds have their forelimbs in exactly this intermediate state -- "neither true arms nor true wings"? Yet penguins hold their own victoriously in the battle for life, existing in enormous numbers and in many species. I don't claim that we see in penguins the actual transitional stages through which bird wings evolved. But what special difficulty is there in believing that it might benefit the modified descendants of the penguin to first become able to flap along the ocean surface like the loggerhead duck, and eventually to rise from the surface and glide through the air?

Let me give a few examples to illustrate these points and to show how easy it is to make the mistake of thinking that whole groups of species appeared all at once. Even in the short interval between the first and second editions of Pictet's great work on paleontology, published in 1844-46 and 1853-57, the conclusions about the first appearance and disappearance of several animal groups were considerably revised -- and a third edition would require still more changes. I can recall the well-known fact that in geology textbooks published not many years ago, mammals were always said to have appeared abruptly at the beginning of the Tertiary era. Yet now one of the richest known accumulations of fossil mammals belongs to the middle of the Secondary era, and true mammals have been discovered in the New Red Sandstone near the very beginning of that great series. Cuvier used to argue that no monkey occurred in any Tertiary stratum, but now extinct primate species have been discovered in India, South America, and in Europe, as far back as the Miocene. If not for the rare accident of footprints being preserved in the New Red Sandstone of the United States, who would have dared to suppose that at least thirty different bird-like animals, some of them gigantic, existed during that period? Not a fragment of bone has been discovered in those beds. Not long ago, paleontologists maintained that the entire class of birds appeared suddenly during the Eocene period. But now we know, on the authority of Professor Owen, that a bird certainly lived during the deposition of the Upper Greensand. And still more recently, that strange bird the Archaeopteryx -- with its long, lizard-like tail bearing a pair of feathers on each joint, and wings furnished with two free claws -- was discovered in the Jurassic limestone slates of Solenhofen. Hardly any recent discovery shows more powerfully how little we yet know about the former inhabitants of the world.

Let me give another example that particularly struck me, since it passed under my own eyes. In a paper on fossil sessile barnacles, I argued that given the large number of existing and extinct Tertiary species; the extraordinary abundance of individuals of many species all over the world, from the Arctic to the equator, living at various depths from the upper tidal limit to fifty fathoms; the perfect manner in which specimens are preserved in the oldest Tertiary beds; the ease with which even a fragment of a shell plate can be identified -- given all this, I concluded that if sessile barnacles had existed during the Secondary periods, they would certainly have been preserved and discovered. And since not a single species had been found in beds of that age, I concluded that this great group had suddenly developed at the start of the Tertiary era. This troubled me greatly, adding, as I then thought, yet another instance of the sudden appearance of a major group of species. But my work had hardly been published when a skilled paleontologist, M. Bosquet, sent me a drawing of a perfect specimen of an unmistakable sessile barnacle that he himself had extracted from the Chalk of Belgium. And, as if to make the case as striking as possible, this barnacle was a Chthamalus -- a very common, large, and widespread genus, of which not one species has yet been found even in any Tertiary stratum. Still more recently, a Pyrgoma, a member of a different subfamily of sessile barnacles, was discovered by Mr. Woodward in the Upper Chalk. So we now have abundant evidence that this group of animals existed during the Secondary period.

The case most often cited by paleontologists as an example of the apparently sudden appearance of a whole group is the bony fishes (teleosteans), which according to Agassiz appeared low in the Cretaceous period. This group includes the vast majority of living fish species. But certain Jurassic and Triassic forms are now generally accepted as teleosteans, and even some Paleozoic forms have been classified that way by one leading authority. If teleostean fish had truly appeared suddenly in the northern hemisphere at the start of the Cretaceous, that would have been remarkable -- but it wouldn't have been an insurmountable difficulty unless it could also be shown that these species appeared suddenly and simultaneously in other parts of the world. It's almost unnecessary to point out that hardly any fossil fish are known from south of the equator; and by scanning Pictet's Paleontology, you'll see that very few species are known from several formations in Europe. Some fish families today have a restricted range; the teleosteans may formerly have had a similarly restricted range, and after developing extensively in one sea, may have spread widely. Nor do we have any right to assume that the world's seas have always been as freely connected from south to north as they are today. Even now, if the Malay Archipelago were converted to dry land, the tropical parts of the Indian Ocean would form a large, perfectly enclosed basin in which any great group of marine animals might multiply. There they would remain confined until some species adapted to cooler waters and managed to round the southern capes of Africa or Australia, reaching other, distant seas.

Given all these considerations -- given our ignorance of the geology of countries beyond Europe and the United States, and given the revolution in our paleontological knowledge brought about by the discoveries of the last dozen years -- it seems to me about as rash to make dogmatic pronouncements about the succession of life forms throughout the world as it would be for a naturalist to land for five minutes on a barren point in Australia and then presume to discuss the number and range of its species.


On the Sudden Appearance of Groups of Related Species in the Lowest Known Fossil-Bearing Rocks

There is another related difficulty, and it's much more serious. I'm referring to the way species belonging to several major divisions of the animal kingdom appear suddenly in the lowest known fossil-bearing rocks. Most of the arguments that have convinced me that all existing species of the same group descended from a single ancestor apply with equal force to the earliest known species. For instance, there's no doubt that all the Cambrian and Silurian trilobites descended from some one crustacean, which must have lived long before the Cambrian age and probably differed greatly from any known animal. Some of the most ancient animals, such as the Nautilus and Lingula, don't differ much from living species. And according to the theory, it can't be supposed that these ancient species were the ancestors of all the species in their groups that appeared later, because they aren't intermediate in character in any way.

Consequently, if the theory is true, it's undeniable that before the lowest Cambrian layer was deposited, long periods elapsed -- as long as, or probably far longer than, the entire interval from the Cambrian age to the present day. And during those vast periods, the world swarmed with living creatures. Here we face a formidable objection: it seems doubtful whether the earth, in a condition fit for life, has existed long enough. Sir W. Thompson concludes that the consolidation of the crust can hardly have occurred less than twenty or more than four hundred million years ago, but probably not less than ninety-eight or more than two hundred million years. These very wide limits show how uncertain the data are, and other factors may yet need to be added to the calculation. Mr. Croll estimates that about sixty million years have elapsed since the Cambrian period, but this -- judging from the small amount of evolutionary change since the start of the Ice Age -- seems a very short time for the many and great changes in life that have certainly occurred since the Cambrian. And the previous one hundred and forty million years can hardly be considered sufficient for the development of the varied forms of life that already existed during the Cambrian period. It's probable, however, as Sir William Thompson insists, that the world at a very early stage was subject to more rapid and violent physical changes than those occurring now, and such changes would have tended to drive evolutionary changes at a correspondingly faster rate.

To the question of why we don't find rich fossil-bearing deposits belonging to these assumed earliest periods before the Cambrian system, I can give no satisfactory answer. Several eminent geologists, led by Sir R. Murchison, were until recently convinced that the fossils in the lowest Silurian layer represented the first dawn of life. Other highly qualified judges, such as Lyell and E. Forbes, disputed this conclusion. We shouldn't forget that only a small portion of the world is well known geologically. Not long ago, Barrande added another, lower stage -- rich in new and distinctive species -- beneath the then-known Silurian system. And now, still lower down in the Lower Cambrian formation, Mr. Hicks has found beds in South Wales rich in trilobites and containing various mollusks and segmented worms. The presence of phosphatic nodules and organic matter, even in some of the lowest apparently lifeless rocks, probably indicates life at those periods. And the existence of the Eozoon in the Laurentian formation of Canada is generally accepted. There are three great series of rock layers beneath the Silurian system in Canada, and in the lowest of these the Eozoon is found. Sir W. Logan states that their "combined thickness may possibly far surpass that of all the succeeding rocks, from the base of the Paleozoic series to the present time. We are thus carried back to a period so remote that the appearance of the so-called primordial fauna (of Barrande) may by some be considered a comparatively modern event." The Eozoon belongs to the most simply organized of all animal classes, but is highly organized for its class. It existed in countless numbers and, as Dr. Dawson has remarked, certainly preyed on other tiny organisms, which must have lived in great numbers. So the words I wrote in 1859 about the existence of living beings long before the Cambrian period -- which are almost the same as those later used by Sir W. Logan -- have proved true. Nevertheless, the difficulty of explaining why there aren't vast piles of fossil-rich rock layers beneath the Cambrian system remains very great. It doesn't seem likely that the most ancient beds have been entirely worn away by erosion, or that their fossils have been completely destroyed by metamorphic processes, because if that were the case, we'd find only small remnants of the formations immediately above them, and those would always appear in a partially metamorphosed condition. But the descriptions we have of the Silurian deposits across immense territories in Russia and North America don't support the idea that the older a formation is, the more consistently it has suffered extreme erosion and metamorphism.

The problem must remain unexplained for now, and it can fairly be raised as a valid argument against the views I'm defending here. But to show that an explanation may eventually come, I'll offer the following hypothesis. From the nature of the fossils found in the various formations of Europe and the United States -- which don't appear to have lived in very deep water -- and from the miles-thick sediment these formations are composed of, we can conclude that from first to last, large islands or tracts of land, from which the sediment was derived, existed near the present continents of Europe and North America. This same view has since been supported by Agassiz and others. But we don't know what conditions existed during the intervals between the successive formations -- whether Europe and the United States were dry land during those gaps, or a shallow underwater surface near land where sediment wasn't being deposited, or the floor of a deep, open ocean.

Looking at the existing oceans, which are three times as extensive as the land, we see them dotted with many islands. But hardly any truly oceanic island (with the possible exception of New Zealand, if it can be called truly oceanic) has yet been found to preserve even a remnant of any Paleozoic or Secondary formation. So we can perhaps conclude that during the Paleozoic and Secondary periods, neither continents nor large continental islands existed where our oceans now extend -- because if they had, Paleozoic and Secondary formations would almost certainly have accumulated from sediment worn from their shores, and would have been at least partially uplifted by the shifts in level that must have occurred during those enormously long periods. If we can draw any conclusions from these facts, it would be that where our oceans now extend, oceans have extended from the remotest period on record. And on the other hand, where continents now exist, large tracts of land have existed -- subject, no doubt, to great shifts in level -- since the Cambrian period. The colored map attached to my volume on Coral Reefs led me to conclude that the great oceans are still mainly areas of subsidence, the great archipelagoes still areas of oscillating levels, and the continents areas of uplift. But we have no reason to assume this has always been so from the beginning of time. Our continents seem to have been built by a predominance, across many oscillations, of the force of uplift. But might the areas of predominant movement have shifted over the ages? In periods long before the Cambrian epoch, continents may have existed where oceans now spread, and clear, open oceans may have existed where our continents now stand. Nor would we be justified in assuming that if, say, the bed of the Pacific Ocean were now converted to dry land, we would find sedimentary formations older than the Cambrian in recognizable condition there -- even supposing they had once been deposited. It might well be that layers that had sunk several miles closer to the earth's center, under the enormous weight of the water above, would have undergone far more metamorphic change than layers that had always remained nearer the surface. The immense areas in some parts of the world -- in South America, for example -- of exposed metamorphic rocks, which must have been heated under great pressure, have always seemed to me to require some special explanation. Perhaps what we see in these vast areas are the formations from long before the Cambrian epoch, in a completely metamorphosed and denuded state.

The several difficulties discussed in this chapter -- that although we find many links between existing and formerly existing species in our geological formations, we don't find infinitely numerous fine transitional forms closely joining them all together; that whole groups of species appear suddenly in our European formations; and that formations rich in fossils are almost entirely absent, as far as we currently know, beneath the Cambrian rocks -- are all undoubtedly very serious. We can see this in the fact that the most eminent paleontologists -- Cuvier, Agassiz, Barrande, Pictet, Falconer, E. Forbes, and others -- and all our greatest geologists -- Lyell, Murchison, Sedgwick, and the rest -- have unanimously, and often passionately, maintained the immutability of species. But Sir Charles Lyell now lends the weight of his great authority to the opposite side, and most geologists and paleontologists have been greatly shaken in their former belief. Those who consider the geological record to be in any degree complete will undoubtedly reject my theory at once. For my part, following Lyell's metaphor, I look at the geological record as a history of the world imperfectly kept and written in a changing dialect. Of this history we possess the last volume alone, covering only two or three countries. Of this volume, only here and there a short chapter has been preserved, and of each page, only here and there a few lines. Each word of the slowly changing language, more or less different in the successive chapters, may represent the forms of life entombed in our consecutive formations, which falsely appear to have been abruptly introduced. On this view, the difficulties discussed above are greatly diminished, or even disappear.
