CHAPTER XI

On the Geological Succession of Organic Beings


Now let's see whether the various facts and patterns in the geological succession of living things fit better with the traditional view that species never change, or with the idea that they slowly and gradually evolve through variation and natural selection.

New species have appeared very slowly, one after another, both on land and in the water. Lyell has shown that the evidence for this in the various Tertiary stages is nearly impossible to resist. Every year, new discoveries fill in the gaps between those stages and make the transition between extinct and surviving forms look more gradual. In some of the most recent geological beds -- undoubtedly ancient when measured in years -- only one or two species have gone extinct, and only one or two are new, appearing there for the first time, either locally or, as far as we know, anywhere on Earth. The Secondary formations are more fragmented, but as Bronn has pointed out, the species embedded in each formation didn't all appear or disappear at the same time.

Species belonging to different genera and classes haven't changed at the same rate or to the same degree. In the older Tertiary beds, a few shells from still-living species can be found among a multitude of extinct forms. The paleontologist Falconer gave a striking example of this: a living crocodile species is found alongside many extinct mammals and reptiles in the sub-Himalayan deposits. The Silurian Lingula has barely changed from the living species of that genus, while most other Silurian mollusks and all the crustaceans have changed enormously. Land organisms seem to have changed faster than marine ones -- a striking example of this has been observed in Switzerland. There's some reason to think that organisms higher on the scale of complexity change more quickly than simpler ones, though there are exceptions. The amount of evolutionary change, as Pictet has noted, isn't the same in each successive formation. Yet if we compare any formations that aren't extremely close together in time, we'll find that all the species have undergone some change. Once a species has disappeared from the face of the Earth, we have no reason to think the exact same form ever reappears. The strongest apparent exception to this rule is Barrande's so-called "colonies," which intrude for a time into the middle of an older formation and then let the pre-existing fauna reappear. But Lyell's explanation -- that this is simply a case of temporary migration from a different geographical region -- seems to settle the matter.

All of these facts fit well with our theory, which includes no fixed law of development forcing all the inhabitants of an area to change abruptly, simultaneously, or to the same degree. The process of evolution must be slow and will generally affect only a few species at any given time, because each species' variability is independent of every other's. Whether the variations that arise will be accumulated through natural selection to a greater or lesser degree -- producing more or less permanent change -- depends on many factors: whether the variations are beneficial, how freely crossbreeding occurs, the slowly changing physical conditions of the region, the immigration of new species, and the nature of the other organisms competing with the varying species. So it's not at all surprising that one species keeps the same form much longer than others, or that when it does change, it changes less. We see similar patterns among the living inhabitants of different countries. For instance, the land snails and beetles of Madeira have come to differ considerably from their closest relatives on mainland Europe, while the marine shells and birds have stayed the same. We can probably explain the apparently faster rate of change in land-dwelling and more complex organisms compared to marine and simpler ones by the more intricate relationships that higher organisms have with their living and nonliving surroundings, as I explained in an earlier chapter. When many inhabitants of any area have evolved and improved, we can understand -- based on the principle of competition and the all-important relationships between organisms in the struggle for life -- that any form that didn't become at least somewhat modified and improved would be likely to go extinct. This is why all the species in a region eventually change, if we look at long enough intervals of time. Otherwise, they'd simply die out.

Within the same class, the average amount of change over long and equal periods of time may be roughly the same. But since lasting formations rich in fossils depend on large masses of sediment being deposited in sinking areas, our formations have almost inevitably accumulated at wide and irregular intervals. As a result, the amount of evolutionary change shown by fossils in consecutive formations isn't uniform. Each formation, on this view, doesn't mark a new and complete act of creation. It's just an occasional snapshot, taken almost at random, from an ever-slowly-changing drama.

We can clearly understand why a species, once lost, should never reappear, even if the exact same conditions of life returned. Although the offspring of one species might adapt to fill the role of another species in the natural world -- and no doubt this has happened countless times -- the two forms, old and new, would never be identical. Both would almost certainly inherit different traits from their distinct ancestors, and organisms that already differ would vary in different ways. For example, it's possible that if all our fantail pigeons were destroyed, breeders could create a new breed hardly distinguishable from the current one. But if the parent rock pigeon were also destroyed -- and in nature we have every reason to think that parent forms are generally replaced and driven to extinction by their improved offspring -- it would be incredible that a fantail identical to the existing breed could be produced from any other species of pigeon, or even from any other well-established domestic variety. The successive variations would almost certainly differ to some degree, and the newly formed variety would probably inherit some distinctive differences from its ancestor.

Groups of species -- that is, genera and families -- follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as individual species do, changing more or less quickly and to a greater or lesser degree. Once a group disappears, it never comes back; its existence, as long as it lasts, is continuous. I'm aware that there seem to be some exceptions to this rule, but they are surprisingly few. So few, in fact, that E. Forbes, Pictet, and Woodward -- all strongly opposed to views like mine -- accept that it holds true. And the rule fits perfectly with the theory. All the species in the same group, however long the group has lasted, are modified descendants of one another and ultimately of a common ancestor. In the genus Lingula, for instance, the species that have appeared in succession through all geological ages must have been connected by an unbroken chain of generations, from the lowest Silurian rocks to the present day.

We saw in the last chapter that whole groups of species sometimes appear to have developed abruptly, and I tried to explain this fact, which would be fatal to my theory if true. But such cases are certainly exceptional. The general rule is a gradual increase in numbers until the group reaches its peak, followed sooner or later by a gradual decline. If you represented the number of species in a genus, or the number of genera in a family, as a vertical line of varying thickness rising through successive geological formations, the line would sometimes seem to begin not at a sharp point but abruptly -- though this is misleading. It then gradually thickens upward, often maintaining a steady width for a stretch, and finally thins out in the upper beds, marking the group's decline and eventual extinction. This gradual increase in the number of species within a group fits perfectly with the theory. Species of the same genus, and genera of the same family, can only increase slowly and progressively. The process of modification and the production of many related forms is necessarily slow and gradual: one species first gives rise to two or three varieties, which slowly become species, which in turn produce other varieties and species by equally slow steps, and so on -- like the branching of a great tree from a single trunk -- until the group becomes large.


On Extinction

So far I've only mentioned the disappearance of species and groups of species in passing. Under the theory of natural selection, the extinction of old forms and the production of new, improved ones are intimately connected. The old idea that all life on Earth was periodically swept away by catastrophes has been largely abandoned, even by geologists like Elie de Beaumont, Murchison, and Barrande, whose general views might naturally lead them to that conclusion. On the contrary, the study of the Tertiary formations gives us every reason to believe that species and groups of species disappear gradually, one after another -- first from one location, then from another, and finally from the world altogether. In some cases, though -- like when an isthmus breaks apart and floods of new inhabitants pour into an adjoining sea, or when an island finally sinks beneath the waves -- extinction may have been rapid. Both individual species and whole groups of species last for very unequal periods. Some groups, as we've seen, have endured from the earliest known dawn of life to the present day. Others disappeared before the end of the Paleozoic era. No fixed law seems to determine how long any single species or genus lasts. There's reason to think that the extinction of a whole group is generally slower than its initial rise. If we represent a group's appearance and disappearance as a vertical line of varying thickness, the line tapers more gradually at its upper end (marking the progress of extinction) than at its lower end (marking the group's first appearance and early growth). In some cases, however, the extinction of entire groups -- like the ammonites near the end of the Secondary period -- has been astonishingly sudden.

Extinction has been wrapped in gratuitous mystery. Some authors have even supposed that species, like individuals, have a fixed lifespan. No one has been more astonished than I at the extinction of species. When I found in La Plata the tooth of a horse embedded alongside the remains of Mastodon, Megatherium, Toxodon, and other extinct giants -- all of which coexisted with still-living shellfish at a very late geological period -- I was filled with amazement. After all, since the horse was reintroduced to South America by the Spanish, it has run wild across the entire continent and multiplied at an unparalleled rate. I asked myself: what could so recently have wiped out the ancient horse under conditions that seemed so favorable? But my astonishment was unfounded. Professor Owen quickly realized that the tooth, though very similar to a modern horse's, belonged to an extinct species. If that horse were still alive but somewhat rare, no naturalist would have been the least bit surprised by its rarity, since rarity is a feature of a huge number of species in all classes, in all countries. If we ask ourselves why this or that species is rare, we answer that something in its conditions of life is unfavorable -- but what that something is, we can almost never say. Supposing that fossil horse still existed as a rare species, we could have been certain -- from what we know of all other mammals, even the slow-breeding elephant, and from the history of the domestic horse's introduction to South America -- that under more favorable conditions it would have stocked the whole continent within a very few years. But we couldn't have identified the unfavorable conditions that kept its numbers down -- whether it was one factor or several, at what stage of the horse's life they acted, or how severely each one contributed. If conditions had been getting worse, however slowly, we certainly wouldn't have noticed it. Yet the fossil horse would have become rarer and rarer, and finally gone extinct -- its place seized by some more successful competitor.

It's extremely hard to always keep in mind that the growth of every living creature is constantly being held in check by unseen hostile forces, and that these same unseen forces are more than enough to cause rarity and ultimately extinction. This is so poorly understood that I've repeatedly heard people express surprise that such enormous creatures as the Mastodon and the even more ancient dinosaurs went extinct -- as if sheer size guaranteed victory in the battle of life. On the contrary, great size would in some cases speed up extinction, as Owen has pointed out, because of the larger amount of food required. Before humans inhabited India or Africa, something must have been keeping the elephant population in check. The highly capable Dr. Falconer believed that it was mainly insects, constantly harassing and weakening the elephants in India, that held back their numbers. Bruce reached the same conclusion about the African elephant in Abyssinia. And it's certain that insects and blood-sucking bats determine whether large introduced mammals can survive in several parts of South America.

In many cases in the more recent Tertiary formations, we can see that rarity comes before extinction. And we know this has been the pattern for animals that have been wiped out, either locally or entirely, by human activity. I'll repeat what I published in 1845: to accept that species generally become rare before they become extinct -- to feel no surprise at a species being rare, yet to marvel when it finally vanishes -- is much the same as accepting that sickness is the forerunner of death, feeling no surprise at sickness, but then wondering and suspecting foul play when the sick person dies.

The theory of natural selection is built on the idea that each new variety, and ultimately each new species, is produced and maintained by having some advantage over its competitors. The extinction of less successful forms almost inevitably follows. It works the same way with our domesticated breeds: when a new, slightly improved variety is raised, it first replaces the less improved varieties in its own neighborhood. When much improved, it gets transported far and wide -- like our Shorthorn cattle -- and takes the place of other breeds in other countries. The appearance of new forms and the disappearance of old ones, whether natural or artificial, are bound together. In thriving groups, the number of new species produced within a given time has at some periods probably exceeded the number of old species that went extinct. But we know that species haven't been increasing indefinitely, at least during the later geological periods. So looking at more recent times, we can conclude that the production of new forms has caused the extinction of roughly the same number of old ones.

Competition is generally most severe, as I've explained and illustrated with examples, between forms that are most similar to each other. So the improved, modified descendants of a species will generally drive its parent species to extinction. And if many new forms have developed from a single species, the closest relatives of that species -- the other species in the same genus -- will be the most vulnerable. In this way, I believe, a cluster of new species descended from one ancestor -- a new genus -- comes to replace an old genus belonging to the same family. But it must often have happened that a new species from one group seized the place occupied by a species from a completely different group, causing its extinction. If many related forms develop from the successful invader, many existing species will have to give way, and it will generally be related forms that suffer, since they share some inherited weakness. But whether it's species from the same class or a different one that give way to modified, improved species, a few of the losers may often survive for a long time by being adapted to some specialized way of life or by inhabiting some distant, isolated location where they escape severe competition. For instance, some species of Trigonia -- a large genus of shells in the Secondary formations -- survive in Australian seas. And a few members of the once-great, now nearly extinct group of ganoid fishes still inhabit our freshwater. So the complete extinction of a group is generally, as we've seen, a slower process than its rise.

As for the apparently sudden extinction of whole families or orders -- like trilobites at the end of the Paleozoic era and ammonites at the end of the Secondary period -- we should remember what I said earlier about the probably vast intervals of time between our consecutive formations. During those intervals, there may have been much slow extinction going on. Furthermore, when many species of a new group rapidly take over an area -- whether through sudden immigration or unusually fast diversification -- many older species will have been driven to extinction correspondingly fast. And the forms that give way will typically be related to one another, because they share the same inherited weaknesses.

So it seems to me that the way both individual species and whole groups go extinct fits well with the theory of natural selection. We don't need to be mystified by extinction. If we're going to be mystified by anything, let it be by our own presumption in imagining, even for a moment, that we understand the many complex factors on which each species' existence depends. If we forget for an instant that every species tends to increase enormously, and that some check is always at work -- though we rarely notice it -- the whole workings of nature will be completely obscured. When we can say precisely why this species is more abundant than that one, or why this species and not another can establish itself in a given country -- then, and not until then, should we feel surprised that we can't explain the extinction of any particular species or group.


On the Forms of Life Changing Almost Simultaneously Throughout the World

Few paleontological discoveries are more striking than the fact that life forms change almost simultaneously around the world. Our European Chalk formation, for instance, can be recognized in many distant regions under the most different climates, even where not a fragment of actual chalk rock is found -- in North America, equatorial South America, Tierra del Fuego, the Cape of Good Hope, and the Indian peninsula. At all these far-flung locations, the fossils in certain beds bear an unmistakable resemblance to those of the European Chalk. It's not that the exact same species appear everywhere -- in some cases, not a single species is identical -- but they belong to the same families, genera, and subdivisions of genera, and sometimes share even trivial features like surface ornamentation. Moreover, forms not found in the European Chalk but present in the formations just above or below it appear in the same order at these distant points around the world. In the successive Paleozoic formations of Russia, Western Europe, and North America, several authors have observed a similar parallelism in life forms. The same holds true, according to Lyell, for the European and North American Tertiary deposits. Even if we completely set aside the few fossil species that are common to both the Old and New Worlds, the general parallelism in the succession of life forms through the Paleozoic and Tertiary stages would still be obvious, and the various formations could easily be matched up.

These observations, however, apply to the marine life of the world. We don't have enough data to judge whether land and freshwater organisms at distant locations changed in the same parallel way. We can doubt whether they did. If the Megatherium, Mylodon, Macrauchenia, and Toxodon had been brought to Europe from La Plata without any information about their geological age, no one would have guessed that they lived alongside seashells that are still alive today. But since these bizarre giants coexisted with the Mastodon and Horse, one could at least have inferred that they lived during one of the later Tertiary stages.

When I say that marine life forms changed simultaneously throughout the world, I don't mean within the same year, or even the same century. The expression doesn't even have a very precise geological meaning. If all the marine animals now living in Europe, and all those that lived there during the Pleistocene period -- a very remote time as measured in years, encompassing the entire Ice Age -- were compared with those now living in South America or Australia, even the most skilled naturalist would have difficulty saying whether the present or the Pleistocene inhabitants of Europe more closely resembled those of the southern hemisphere. Similarly, several highly competent observers maintain that the living organisms of the United States are more closely related to those that lived in Europe during certain late Tertiary stages than to the present inhabitants of Europe. If this is true, then fossil-bearing beds now being deposited on the shores of North America could eventually be classified with somewhat older European beds. Nevertheless, looking to the far future, there can be little doubt that all the more recent marine formations -- the upper Pliocene, Pleistocene, and truly modern beds of Europe, North and South America, and Australia -- would be correctly ranked as geologically simultaneous. They contain fossils that are somewhat related to one another and don't include forms found only in the older deposits beneath them.

The fact that life forms change more or less simultaneously, in this broad sense, at distant parts of the world, has greatly impressed those excellent observers de Verneuil and d'Archiac. After noting the parallelism of Paleozoic life forms across various parts of Europe, they wrote: "If, struck by this strange sequence, we turn our attention to North America and discover an analogous series of phenomena, it will appear certain that all these changes in species -- their extinction and the introduction of new ones -- cannot be due to mere changes in ocean currents or other causes that are more or less local and temporary, but must depend on general laws governing the entire animal kingdom." Barrande has made equally forceful remarks to the same effect. It is indeed futile to look to changes in currents, climate, or other physical conditions as the cause of these great transformations in life forms across the world, under the most different climates. We must, as Barrande has said, look to some special law. We'll see this more clearly when we examine the present distribution of organisms and find how slight the connection is between the physical conditions of various countries and the nature of their inhabitants.

This great fact -- the parallel succession of life forms throughout the world -- is fully explained by the theory of natural selection. New species are formed by having some advantage over older forms. The forms that are already dominant, or have some edge over other species in their own region, give rise to the greatest number of new varieties or emerging species. We have clear evidence of this: the plants that are dominant -- the most common and widely distributed -- produce the greatest number of new varieties. It's also natural that dominant, variable, and widely spreading species, which have already invaded the territories of other species to some extent, would have the best chance of spreading still further and giving rise to new varieties and species in new regions. The process of spreading would often be very slow, depending on climate changes, geographical shifts, chance events, and the gradual acclimatization of new species to various climates they must pass through. But over time, dominant forms would generally manage to spread and would ultimately prevail. The spread would probably be slower for the land-dwelling inhabitants of separate continents than for marine inhabitants of the connected seas. So we'd expect to find, as we do, a less strict parallelism in the succession of land organisms than in marine ones.

Thus, it seems to me, the parallel and -- in a broad sense -- simultaneous succession of the same forms of life throughout the world fits well with the principle that new species form when dominant species spread widely and vary. These new species, being themselves dominant thanks to having some advantage over their already-dominant parents as well as other species, spread in turn, vary, and produce new forms. The old forms that are outcompeted and give up their places to the new and victorious ones will generally be related to one another, having inherited some shared weakness. Therefore, as new and improved groups spread around the world, old groups disappear, and the succession of forms everywhere tends to match up, both in their first appearance and final extinction.

There's one more point worth making on this subject. I've given my reasons for believing that most of our great fossil-rich formations were deposited during periods of subsidence, and that vast blank intervals, as far as fossils are concerned, occurred during periods when the sea floor was either stationary or rising, or when sediment wasn't being deposited fast enough to bury and preserve organisms. During these long, blank intervals, I believe the inhabitants of each region underwent considerable modification and extinction, and that there was much migration from other parts of the world. Since large areas tend to be affected by the same geological movements, it's likely that strictly contemporaneous formations have often accumulated over very wide areas in the same part of the globe. But we're far from justified in concluding that this was always the case. When two formations were deposited in two regions during nearly, but not exactly, the same period, we should find in both -- for the reasons I've explained -- the same general succession of life forms. But the species wouldn't match exactly, because there would have been a little more time in one region than the other for modification, extinction, and immigration.

I suspect that cases like this occur in Europe. Mr. Prestwich, in his excellent studies of the Eocene deposits of England and France, draws a close general parallel between the successive stages in the two countries. But when he compares certain stages in England with those in France, he finds that although the numbers of species belonging to the same genera show a curious agreement, the species themselves differ in ways that are very hard to explain given how close the two areas are -- unless an isthmus separated two seas inhabited by distinct but contemporaneous faunas. Lyell has made similar observations about some of the later Tertiary formations. Barrande also shows that there's a striking general parallelism in the successive Silurian deposits of Bohemia and Scandinavia, yet he finds a surprising amount of difference in the species. If the formations in these regions weren't deposited during exactly the same periods -- with a formation in one region often corresponding to a blank interval in the other -- and if in both regions species went on slowly changing during the accumulation of each formation and during the long intervals between them, then the formations in the two regions could be arranged in the same order based on the general succession of life forms. The order would appear to be strictly parallel, but the species wouldn't all be the same in the apparently corresponding stages.


On the Affinities of Extinct Species to Each Other, and to Living Forms

Now let's look at the relationships between extinct and living species. They all fall into a few grand classes, and this fact is immediately explained by the principle of descent. As a general rule, the more ancient a form is, the more it differs from living forms. But as Buckland pointed out long ago, every extinct species can be classified either within a still-existing group or between existing groups. The fact that extinct forms help fill in the gaps between living genera, families, and orders is certainly true, but since this has often been ignored or even denied, it's worth making some remarks on the subject and giving some examples. If we look only at the living species of a class, or only at the extinct ones, the series is much less complete than if we combine both into one general system. In the writings of Professor Owen, we constantly encounter the term "generalized forms" applied to extinct animals. In the writings of Agassiz, we find "prophetic" or "synthetic types." These terms all mean that such forms are, in fact, intermediate or connecting links. Another distinguished paleontologist, M. Gaudry, has shown in the most striking way that many of the fossil mammals he discovered in Attica serve to bridge the gaps between living genera. Cuvier classified the ruminants and pachyderms as two of the most distinct orders of mammals, but so many fossil links have been unearthed that Owen had to completely revise the classification, placing certain pachyderms in the same suborder as ruminants. For example, he traces a gradual series of forms that dissolves the apparently wide gap between the pig and the camel. The hoofed mammals are now divided into even-toed and odd-toed groups, but the Macrauchenia of South America connects these two grand divisions to some extent. No one would deny that Hipparion is intermediate between the modern horse and certain other hoofed forms. What a remarkable connecting link in the chain of mammals is the Typotherium from South America -- as the name Professor Gervais gave it suggests -- which can't be placed in any existing order. The sea cows form a very distinct group of mammals, and one of the most remarkable features of the living dugong and manatee is the complete absence of hind limbs, without even a trace remaining. But the extinct Halitherium had, according to Professor Flower, a bony thighbone "attached to a well-defined hip socket," and it thus makes some approach to ordinary hoofed mammals, to which the sea cows are related in other ways. The whales are wildly different from all other mammals, but the Tertiary Zeuglodon and Squalodon -- placed by some naturalists in an order by themselves -- are considered by Professor Huxley to be undoubtedly whales, and "to constitute connecting links with the aquatic carnivores."

Even the wide gap between birds and reptiles has been shown by Huxley to be partially bridged in the most unexpected way: on one side by the ostrich and the extinct Archaeopteryx, and on the other by Compsognathus, one of the dinosaurs -- that group which includes the most gigantic of all land reptiles. Turning to the invertebrates, Barrande -- and no higher authority could be named -- states that he learns more every day that, although Paleozoic animals can certainly be classified within existing groups, at that ancient time the groups were not as sharply separated from each other as they are now.

Some writers have objected to any extinct species or group being considered intermediate between two living species or groups. If what they mean is that an extinct form must be directly intermediate in all its features between two living forms, the objection is probably valid. But in a natural classification, many fossil species certainly stand between living species, and some extinct genera stand between living genera -- even between genera belonging to different families. The most common pattern, especially with very distinct groups like fish and reptiles, seems to be this: if the living groups are distinguished today by, say, twenty characteristics, the ancient members were separated by somewhat fewer. So the two groups formerly made a somewhat closer approach to each other than they do now.

It's a common belief that the more ancient a form is, the more it tends to connect groups that are now widely separated. This observation must be limited to groups that have undergone substantial change over geological time, and it would be hard to prove in every case -- since now and then a living animal like the Lepidosiren is discovered with affinities pointing toward very different groups. Yet if we compare the older reptiles and amphibians, the older fish, the older cephalopods, and the Eocene mammals with their modern counterparts, we must admit there's truth in the observation.

Let's see how well these various facts fit the theory of descent with modification. Since the subject is somewhat complex, I need to ask the reader to turn to the diagram in Chapter IV. We can suppose that the numbered italic letters represent genera and the dotted lines diverging from them represent species within each genus. The diagram is much too simple -- too few genera and too few species are shown -- but that doesn't matter for our purposes. The horizontal lines can represent successive geological formations, and all the forms below the uppermost line can be considered extinct. The three living genera, a14, q14, and p14, form a small family; b14 and f14 form a closely related family or subfamily; and o14, i14, and m14 form a third family. These three families, together with the many extinct genera on the various lines of descent branching from the parent form (A), will make up an order, because all will have inherited something in common from their ancient ancestor. Following the principle of the continued tendency to divergence of character, which I illustrated using this same diagram, the more recent any form is, the more it will generally differ from its ancient ancestor. This explains the rule that the most ancient fossils differ the most from living forms. We shouldn't assume, however, that divergence of character is inevitable. It depends entirely on whether a species' descendants can seize on many different niches in the natural world. So it's entirely possible, as we've seen with some Silurian forms, that a species might keep changing slightly in response to slightly altered conditions yet retain its same general features through a vast stretch of time. This is represented in the diagram by the letter F14.

All the many forms, extinct and living, descended from (A) make up one order, as I noted before. Through the continued effects of extinction and divergence of character, this order has become divided into several subfamilies and families, some of which died out at different times and some of which have survived to the present.

By looking at the diagram, we can see that if many of the extinct forms embedded in successive formations were discovered at several points low in the series, the three living families on the uppermost line would become less distinct from each other. If, for instance, the genera a1, a5, a10, f8, m3, m6, and m9 were unearthed, the three families would be so closely linked together that they'd probably have to be merged into one great family -- much as has happened with ruminants and certain pachyderms. Yet someone who objected to calling these extinct genera "intermediate" -- the ones that link the living genera of three families -- would be partly justified, since they are intermediate not directly but only through a long and roundabout path through many very different forms. If many extinct forms were discovered above one of the middle horizontal lines (say, above No. VI) but none from below it, then only two of the families (those on the left, a14 etc. and b14 etc.) would have to be merged. The remaining two families would be less distinct from each other than before the fossils were found, but they'd still be separate. Similarly, if the three families made up of eight genera (a14 to m14) on the uppermost line differ from each other by half a dozen important features, then the families that existed at the period marked VI would certainly have differed by fewer features, since at that earlier stage of descent they'd have diverged less from their common ancestor. This is how ancient, extinct genera often end up being more or less intermediate in character between their modified descendants, or between their collateral relatives.

In nature, the process would be far more complicated than the diagram shows. The groups would have been more numerous, they would have lasted for extremely unequal lengths of time, and they would have been modified in varying degrees. Since we possess only the last volume of the geological record, and that in very fragmentary condition, we have no right to expect -- except in rare cases -- to fill in the wide gaps in the natural classification and thereby unite distinct families or orders. All we can reasonably expect is that groups which have undergone substantial modification within known geological periods should, in older formations, make some slight approach toward each other. The older members should differ less from each other in some of their features than the living members of the same groups do. And according to the combined evidence of our best paleontologists, this is frequently the case.

Thus, on the theory of descent with modification, the main facts about the relationships of extinct forms to each other and to living forms are explained in a satisfying way. And they are completely inexplicable on any other view.

On this same theory, it's clear that the fauna during any one great period of Earth's history will be intermediate in general character between what preceded it and what followed it. The species that lived at the sixth great stage of descent in the diagram are the modified offspring of those at the fifth stage and the parents of those that became still more modified at the seventh. So they could hardly fail to be roughly intermediate in character between the forms above and below them. We must, however, allow for the complete extinction of some earlier forms, for immigration of new forms from other regions, and for a large amount of modification during the long blank intervals between successive formations. With those allowances, the fauna of each geological period is undoubtedly intermediate in character between the preceding and following faunas. I need give only one example: when the Devonian system was first discovered, paleontologists immediately recognized its fossils as intermediate in character between those of the overlying Carboniferous and underlying Silurian systems. But each fauna isn't necessarily exactly intermediate, since unequal amounts of time have elapsed between consecutive formations.

It's no real objection to this statement -- that each period's fauna as a whole is roughly intermediate between the preceding and following ones -- that certain genera are exceptions to the rule. For instance, the species of mastodons and elephants, when arranged by Dr. Falconer in two ways -- first by their mutual affinities and second by their periods of existence -- don't match up. The most extreme species in character aren't the oldest or the most recent, and those that are intermediate in character aren't intermediate in age. But even in this and similar cases, suppose for a moment that the record of each species' first appearance and disappearance were complete (which is far from the case): we'd still have no reason to expect that forms produced in succession would necessarily last for corresponding lengths of time. A very ancient form might occasionally have survived much longer than a form produced later elsewhere, especially for land-dwelling organisms in separate regions. To compare small things with great: if the main living and extinct varieties of the domestic pigeon were arranged by their physical similarities, this arrangement wouldn't closely match the order in which they were created, and even less the order in which they disappeared. The parent rock pigeon still lives, while many varieties intermediate between the rock pigeon and the carrier pigeon have gone extinct. Carriers, which are extreme in the important trait of beak length, originated earlier than short-beaked tumblers, which are at the opposite end of the series in this respect.

Closely connected with the idea that fossils from an intermediate formation are intermediate in character is the fact, stressed by all paleontologists, that fossils from two consecutive formations are far more closely related to each other than fossils from two widely separated formations. Pictet gives a well-known example: the general resemblance of the fossils from the various stages of the Chalk formation, even though the species are distinct at each stage. This fact alone, from its generality, seems to have shaken Professor Pictet's belief in the immutability of species. Anyone familiar with the distribution of living species around the globe won't try to explain the close resemblance of distinct species in consecutive formations by claiming the physical conditions of the ancient areas stayed nearly the same. Remember that marine life forms have changed almost simultaneously throughout the world, and therefore under the most different climates and conditions. Consider the tremendous upheavals in climate during the Pleistocene period, which includes the entire Ice Age, and notice how little the marine species were affected.

On the theory of descent, it makes perfect sense that fossils from closely consecutive formations should be closely related even though they're classified as distinct species. Since the accumulation of each formation was often interrupted, and since long blank intervals separated successive formations, we shouldn't expect to find -- as I tried to show in the last chapter -- all the intermediate varieties between the species at the beginning and end of these periods in any one or two formations. But after intervals that are very long in years, though only moderately long in geological terms, we should find closely related forms -- what some authors call "representative species." And that's exactly what we do find. In short, we find just the kind of evidence of slow, barely perceptible changes in species that we have every right to expect.


On the State of Development of Ancient Compared with Living Forms

We saw in Chapter IV that the best standard yet proposed for measuring an organism's degree of perfection or "highness" is the degree of differentiation and specialization of its parts at maturity. We also saw that since specialization benefits each organism, natural selection will tend to make each being's organization more specialized and perfect -- and in this sense, higher. This doesn't mean that natural selection can't leave many creatures with simple, unimproved structures suited to simple conditions of life. In some cases, it may even simplify an organism's structure, though leaving these simplified beings better adapted to their new way of life. In another and more general sense, new species become superior to their predecessors because they have to outcompete all the older forms they encounter in the struggle for life. We can therefore conclude that if the Eocene inhabitants of the world could be brought back and put into competition with today's inhabitants under a similar climate, the ancient forms would be beaten and driven to extinction by the modern ones. The same would happen to the Secondary forms if pitted against Eocene ones, and to Paleozoic forms against Secondary ones. So by this fundamental test of victory in the battle for life, as well as by the standard of organ specialization, modern forms ought -- according to the theory of natural selection -- to stand higher than ancient ones. Is this actually the case? A large majority of paleontologists would say yes, and their answer seems correct, though it's difficult to prove.

It's no valid objection to this conclusion that certain brachiopods have barely changed since an extremely remote geological period, or that certain land and freshwater shells have remained nearly the same since they first appeared. Nor is it an insurmountable difficulty that the foraminifera, as Dr. Carpenter has emphasized, haven't advanced in organization since the Laurentian epoch. Some organisms would have to remain suited to simple conditions of life, and what could be better adapted to that role than these lowly organized protozoans? Such objections would be fatal to my theory if it required advancement in organization as a necessary outcome. They would also be fatal if these foraminifera, for instance, could be shown to have first appeared during the Laurentian epoch, or the brachiopods during the Cambrian -- because then there wouldn't have been enough time for these organisms to have developed to the level they'd already reached. Once an organism has advanced to any given point, there's no requirement under natural selection for it to keep progressing, though it will need to be slightly modified in each successive age to hold its place as conditions change slightly. The objections I've mentioned all hinge on how old the world really is and when the various forms of life first appeared -- and that's very much open to debate.

The question of whether organization as a whole has advanced is extraordinarily complex. The geological record, always imperfect, doesn't extend far enough back to show with unmistakable clarity that organization has greatly advanced within the known history of the world. Even today, looking at members of the same class, naturalists don't agree on which forms should be ranked highest. Some consider sharks the highest fish because of their structural similarities to reptiles in certain important respects. Others rank the bony fishes (teleosteans) as highest. The ganoid fishes stand between sharks and teleosteans. Today, teleosteans are overwhelmingly dominant in numbers, but formerly only sharks and ganoids existed. So depending on which standard of "highness" you choose, you could say that fish have either advanced or declined in organization. Trying to compare members of completely different groups on a scale of highness seems hopeless. Who will decide whether a cuttlefish is higher than a bee -- that insect which the great Von Baer believed to be "in fact more highly organized than a fish, though built on a completely different plan"? In the complex struggle for life, it's entirely plausible that crustaceans not very high in their own class might outcompete cephalopods, the most advanced mollusks. Such crustaceans, though not highly developed, would rank very high among invertebrates if judged by the most decisive test of all: the law of battle. Beyond these inherent difficulties in deciding which forms are most advanced, we shouldn't just compare the highest members of a class at two different periods -- though that's undoubtedly an important factor. We should compare all members, high and low, at the two periods. At an ancient time, the highest and lowest mollusk-like animals -- cephalopods and brachiopods -- swarmed in enormous numbers. Today, both groups are greatly reduced, while other groups intermediate in organization have greatly expanded. Consequently, some naturalists maintain that mollusks were formerly more highly developed than now. But a stronger case can be made the other way, by considering the vast reduction in brachiopods and the fact that our living cephalopods, though few in number, are more highly organized than their ancient counterparts. We should also compare the relative proportions of higher and lower classes throughout the world at any two periods. If, for instance, fifty thousand kinds of vertebrate animals exist today, and we knew that only ten thousand kinds existed at some former time, that increase in numbers in the highest class -- implying a great displacement of lower forms -- would represent a clear advance in the organization of the world. We can see how hopelessly difficult it is to make a perfectly fair comparison, under such enormously complex conditions, of the organizational standards of imperfectly known faunas from successive periods.

We'll appreciate this difficulty more clearly by looking at certain present-day faunas and floras. From the extraordinary way that European organisms have recently spread over New Zealand and seized places that must previously have been occupied by native species, we must believe that if all the animals and plants of Great Britain were set free in New Zealand, a multitude of British forms would eventually become thoroughly established there and would drive many of the natives to extinction. On the other hand, since hardly a single species from the southern hemisphere has gone wild anywhere in Europe, we may well doubt whether, if all the organisms of New Zealand were released in Great Britain, any significant number could seize the places now occupied by our native plants and animals. In this sense, the organisms of Great Britain stand much higher on the scale than those of New Zealand. Yet the most skilled naturalist, just from examining the species of both countries, couldn't have predicted this result.

Agassiz and several other highly qualified judges insist that ancient animals resemble, to some extent, the embryos of modern animals in the same classes, and that the geological succession of extinct forms roughly parallels the embryological development of living forms. This view fits beautifully with our theory. In a later chapter, I'll try to show that adults differ from their embryos because variations arise at later stages of life and are inherited at corresponding ages. This process, while leaving the embryo almost unchanged, continually adds more and more differences to the adult over successive generations. The embryo thus becomes a kind of portrait, preserved by nature, of the species' earlier and less modified condition. This view may be true and yet may never be fully provable. Seeing, for instance, that the oldest known mammals, reptiles, and fish unquestionably belong to their proper classes -- though some of these ancient forms are slightly less distinct from each other than the typical members of the same groups are today -- it would be pointless to look for animals with the common embryological character of the vertebrates until fossil-rich beds are discovered far below the lowest Cambrian rocks. And the chances of that discovery are slim.


On the Succession of the Same Types Within the Same Areas, During the Later Tertiary Periods

Mr. Clift showed many years ago that the fossil mammals from Australian caves were closely related to the living marsupials of that continent. In South America, a similar relationship is obvious even to an untrained eye, in the gigantic pieces of armor -- resembling those of the armadillo -- found in several parts of La Plata. Professor Owen has shown in the most striking way that most of the fossil mammals buried there in such abundance are related to South American types. This relationship is even more clearly seen in the wonderful collection of fossil bones assembled by Lund and Clausen from the caves of Brazil. I was so impressed by these facts that I strongly argued, in 1839 and 1845, for this "law of the succession of types" -- this "wonderful relationship in the same continent between the dead and the living." Professor Owen later extended the same generalization to the mammals of the Old World. We see the same law in his reconstructions of the extinct giant birds of New Zealand, and in the birds from the caves of Brazil. Mr. Woodward has shown that the same law holds for seashells, though because most mollusks are so widely distributed, it's not as clearly displayed by them. Other cases could be added, such as the relationship between the extinct and living land snails of Madeira, and between the extinct and living brackish-water shells of the Aralo-Caspian Sea.

Now, what does this remarkable law of the succession of the same types within the same areas mean? You'd have to be very bold to try to account for the difference between the inhabitants of Australia and South America (at the same latitude) by pointing to their different physical conditions -- and then turn around and explain the continuity of the same types within each continent during the later Tertiary periods by pointing to similar conditions. Nor can anyone claim that marsupials had to be produced chiefly or solely in Australia, or that edentates and other American types had to be produced solely in South America. We know that Europe was once home to numerous marsupials. And I've shown in the publications I mentioned that the distribution of land mammals in the Americas was formerly different from what it is now. North America once had a much stronger resemblance to the present character of the southern half of the continent, and the southern half was formerly more closely allied to the northern half than it is today. Similarly, we know from the discoveries of Falconer and Cautley that Northern India was once more closely related in its mammals to Africa than it is now. Analogous facts could be given for the distribution of marine animals.

On the theory of descent with modification, the great law of the long-enduring but not immutable succession of the same types within the same areas is immediately explained. The inhabitants of any part of the world will obviously tend to leave in that region, during the next period of time, closely related though somewhat modified descendants. If the inhabitants of one continent formerly differed greatly from those of another, their modified descendants will still differ in nearly the same way and to nearly the same degree. But after very long intervals of time and great geographical changes allowing much migration, the weaker forms will yield to the more dominant ones, and there will be nothing permanent about the distribution of living things.

Someone might ask mockingly whether I suppose that the Megatherium and other enormous creatures that once lived in South America left behind the sloth, armadillo, and anteater as their degenerate descendants. This can't be accepted for a moment. Those huge animals went completely extinct and left no offspring. But in the caves of Brazil there are many extinct species that are closely similar in size and in all other features to species still living in South America, and some of these fossils may have been the actual ancestors of living species. We must remember that, according to our theory, all species in the same genus descend from a single species. So if six genera, each with eight species, are found in one geological formation, and in the next formation there are six new related or representative genera each with the same number of species, then generally only one species from each old genus left modified descendants making up the new genera. The other seven species in each old genus died out without leaving any offspring. Or -- and this is the far more common case -- two or three species in only two or three of the six older genera were the parents of the new genera, while the remaining species and the remaining old genera went completely extinct. In declining groups, with genera and species shrinking in numbers (as with the edentates of South America), even fewer genera and species will leave modified descendants.


Summary of the Preceding and Present Chapters

I've tried to show that the geological record is extremely imperfect; that only a small portion of the globe has been carefully explored geologically; that only certain classes of organisms have been widely preserved as fossils; that the number of both specimens and species in our museums is absolutely nothing compared to the number of generations that must have passed even during a single formation; that owing to subsidence being almost necessary for the accumulation of fossil-rich deposits thick enough to survive future erosion, great intervals of time must have elapsed between most of our successive formations; that there was probably more extinction during periods of subsidence and more variation during periods of elevation, and during the latter the record was least well kept; that each single formation was not deposited continuously; that the duration of each formation is probably short compared to the average lifespan of a species; that migration played an important role in the first appearance of new forms in any given area and formation; that widely ranging species are the ones that have varied most often and have most frequently given rise to new species; that varieties were at first local; and lastly, that although every species must have passed through numerous transitional stages, the periods during which each underwent modification -- though many and long in years -- were probably short compared to the periods during which each remained unchanged. These causes, taken together, will largely explain why, though we do find many links, we don't find endless varieties connecting all extinct and living forms by the finest gradual steps. It should also be kept in mind that any linking variety found between two forms would be classified, unless the whole chain could be perfectly reconstructed, as a new and distinct species -- since we have no reliable way to distinguish species from varieties.

Anyone who rejects this view of the geological record's imperfection will rightly reject the whole theory. Such a person might ask in vain: where are the countless transitional links that must once have connected the closely related or representative species found in successive stages of the same great formation? They might refuse to accept the immense intervals of time between our consecutive formations. They might overlook how important a role migration has played, when the formations of a great region like Europe are considered. They might point to the apparent -- but often falsely apparent -- sudden appearance of whole groups of species. They might ask: where are the remains of those infinitely numerous organisms that must have existed long before the Cambrian system was laid down? We now know that at least one animal did exist then. But I can answer this last question only by supposing that where our oceans now extend, they have extended for an enormous span of time, and where our continents now stand, they have stood since the beginning of the Cambrian. But long before that, the world looked very different. The older continents, made of formations more ancient than any we know, now exist only as remnants in a metamorphosed condition, or lie still buried under the ocean.

Setting aside these difficulties, the other great leading facts of paleontology fit beautifully with the theory of descent with modification through variation and natural selection. We can understand how new species come in slowly and successively; how species of different classes don't necessarily change together, at the same rate, or to the same degree, yet in the long run all undergo some modification. The extinction of old forms is the almost inevitable consequence of the production of new ones. We can understand why a species, once gone, never reappears. Groups of species increase in number slowly and persist for unequal periods of time, because the process of modification is necessarily slow and depends on many complex factors. The dominant species of large, dominant groups tend to leave many modified descendants, which form new subgroups and groups. As these form, the species of weaker groups, with their inherited disadvantages from a common ancestor, tend to go extinct together, leaving no modified offspring on the face of the Earth. But the complete extinction of a whole group has sometimes been a slow process, thanks to a few descendants lingering on in protected, isolated locations. Once a group has wholly disappeared, it doesn't come back, because the chain of generations has been broken.

We can understand how dominant forms that spread widely and produce the most varieties tend to populate the world with related but modified descendants, and how these generally succeed in displacing the groups that are weaker in the struggle for existence. After long intervals of time, then, life on Earth appears to have changed simultaneously.

We can understand how all forms of life, ancient and modern, fall into a few grand classes. We can understand, from the continued tendency toward divergence of character, why the more ancient a form is, the more it generally differs from those now living -- why ancient and extinct forms often fill gaps between existing forms, sometimes merging two groups previously classed as distinct, but more commonly just bringing them a little closer together. The more ancient a form is, the more often it stands in some degree intermediate between groups that are now distinct, because the more ancient it is, the more closely it will be related to, and consequently resemble, the common ancestor of groups that have since diverged widely. Extinct forms are seldom directly intermediate between living forms; they are intermediate only through a long and roundabout path through other extinct and different forms. We can clearly see why fossils from closely consecutive formations are closely related: they are closely linked by generation. We can clearly see why the remains from an intermediate formation are intermediate in character.

The inhabitants of the world at each successive period have beaten their predecessors in the race for life and are, to that extent, higher on the scale. Their structure has generally become more specialized, and this may explain the common belief among paleontologists that organization on the whole has progressed. Extinct and ancient animals resemble, to some degree, the embryos of more recent animals in the same classes, and this wonderful fact receives a simple explanation on our theory. The succession of the same types of structure within the same areas during the later geological periods stops being mysterious and becomes understandable on the principle of inheritance.

If, then, the geological record is as imperfect as many believe -- and at the very least, it can be said that the record can't be proven to be much more complete -- the main objections to the theory of natural selection are greatly weakened or disappear entirely. On the other hand, all the chief laws of paleontology plainly proclaim, as it seems to me, that species have been produced by ordinary generation: old forms supplanted by new and improved forms of life, the products of variation and the survival of the fittest.
