Chapter XII: Geographical Distribution


When we look at how living things are distributed across the globe, the first great fact that jumps out is this: we can't explain the similarities or differences between the inhabitants of various regions simply by climate and other physical conditions. Nearly every author who has studied this subject recently has come to the same conclusion. The case of the Americas alone would almost be enough to prove it. If we set aside the arctic and northern temperate zones, all authors agree that one of the most fundamental dividing lines in geographical distribution runs between the New World and the Old. Yet if we travel across the vast American continent, from the central United States to its southern tip, we encounter the most wildly diverse conditions -- humid regions, arid deserts, towering mountains, grassy plains, forests, marshes, lakes, and great rivers, under almost every temperature. There is hardly a climate or condition in the Old World that can't be matched in the New -- at least closely enough for the same species to get by. Granted, you can point to small areas in the Old World that are hotter than anything in the New World, but these aren't home to a fauna different from the surrounding regions. It's rare to find a group of organisms confined to a small area whose conditions are only slightly unusual. Despite this general parallel between the conditions of the Old and New Worlds, their living inhabitants are strikingly different!

In the southern hemisphere, if we compare large stretches of land in Australia, South Africa, and western South America between latitudes 25 and 35 degrees, we find areas that are extremely similar in every condition. Yet it would be impossible to point out three faunas and floras more completely different from one another. Or consider this: we can compare the organisms of South America south of latitude 35 degrees with those north of 25 degrees -- regions separated by a span of ten degrees of latitude and exposed to considerably different conditions. Yet these organisms are incomparably more closely related to each other than they are to those of Australia or Africa under nearly the same climate. Similar facts could be given for sea life as well.

A second great fact that strikes us in our general survey is that barriers of any kind -- obstacles to free migration -- are closely and importantly connected to the differences between the organisms of various regions. We see this in the great differences among nearly all the land-based organisms of the New and Old Worlds, except in the northern parts, where the land almost connects. There, under a slightly different climate, there could have been free migration for northern temperate species, as there now is for strictly arctic ones. We see the same pattern in the enormous differences between the inhabitants of Australia, Africa, and South America at the same latitude -- countries that are about as isolated from each other as possible. On each continent, too, we see the same thing: on opposite sides of high, continuous mountain ranges, across great deserts, and even across large rivers, we find different organisms. But since mountain chains, deserts, and the like aren't as impassable, or as enduring, as the oceans separating continents, these differences are far less dramatic than those between distinct continents.

Turning to the sea, we find the same pattern. The marine inhabitants of the eastern and western shores of South America are very different, with extremely few shells, crustaceans, or echinoderms in common. But Dr. Gunther has recently shown that about thirty percent of the fish are the same on opposite sides of the Isthmus of Panama -- a fact that has led naturalists to believe the isthmus was once open water. West of the American shores, a wide stretch of open ocean extends without a single island as a stopping point for emigrants. Here we have a barrier of a different kind, and as soon as we cross it, we meet in the eastern Pacific islands with an entirely distinct fauna. So three marine faunas run north to south in parallel lines not far from each other, under similar climates, but because they're separated by impassable barriers -- either land or open sea -- they're almost completely distinct. On the other hand, traveling still further west from the eastern tropical Pacific islands, we encounter no impassable barriers and find countless islands as stepping stones, or continuous coasts, until after crossing a hemisphere we reach the shores of Africa. Over this vast distance, we meet with no well-defined, distinct marine faunas. Although very few marine animals are common to the three neighboring faunas of eastern and western America and the eastern Pacific islands, many fish range from the Pacific into the Indian Ocean, and many shells are shared between the eastern Pacific islands and the eastern shores of Africa -- on almost exactly opposite sides of the globe.

A third great fact, partly included in what I've just said, is the relatedness of organisms across the same continent or sea, even though the species themselves are different at different locations. This is a law of the widest generality, and every continent offers countless examples. Still, the naturalist traveling from north to south never fails to be struck by how successive groups of organisms -- specifically distinct but closely related -- replace each other. He hears closely related but distinct kinds of birds singing nearly similar songs and sees their nests built in much the same way, but not quite alike, with eggs colored in nearly the same pattern. The plains near the Straits of Magellan are home to one species of rhea (the American ostrich), while northward the plains of La Plata have another species of the same genus -- not a true ostrich or emu, like those living in Africa and Australia at the same latitude. On these same plains of La Plata we see the agouti and vizcacha, animals with nearly the same habits as our hares and rabbits, belonging to the same order of rodents, but clearly showing an American body plan. We climb the lofty peaks of the Cordillera and find an alpine species of vizcacha. We look to the waters and find not the beaver or muskrat, but the coypu and capybara -- rodents of the South American type. Countless other examples could be given. If we look to the islands off the American coast, however much they differ in geological structure, the inhabitants are essentially American, even though they may all be unique species. We can look back to past ages, as shown in the last chapter, and find American types prevailing on the American continent and in American seas. In these facts we see some deep organic connection, running through space and time, across the same areas of land and water, independent of physical conditions. Any naturalist who isn't led to ask what this connection is would have to be pretty dull.

The connection is simply inheritance -- that cause which, as far as we actually know, is the only thing that produces organisms quite like each other, or, as we see with varieties, nearly alike. The differences between inhabitants of different regions can be attributed to modification through variation and natural selection, and probably to a lesser degree to the direct influence of different physical conditions. How different they are will depend on how effectively migration of dominant life forms from one region to another has been blocked, and at how remote a period -- on the nature and number of the original immigrants -- and on how the inhabitants have interacted with each other, leading to the preservation of different modifications. The relationship of organism to organism in the struggle for life is, as I've often pointed out, the most important of all relationships. This is why barriers matter so much -- they check migration. And time matters too, for the slow process of modification through natural selection. Wide-ranging species, abundant in numbers, that have already triumphed over many competitors in their own extensive territories, will have the best chance of seizing new places when they spread into new countries. In their new homes they'll be exposed to new conditions and will frequently undergo further modification and improvement. They'll become still more successful and will produce groups of modified descendants. By this principle of inheritance with modification, we can understand why sections of genera, whole genera, and even entire families are confined to the same areas -- as is so commonly and conspicuously the case.

There is no evidence, as I noted in the last chapter, of any law of inevitable development. Since the variability of each species is an independent property, and natural selection will take advantage of it only insofar as it benefits each individual in its complex struggle for life, the amount of modification in different species won't be uniform. If a number of species, after having long competed with each other in their old homeland, were to migrate together into a new and subsequently isolated country, they would be unlikely to change much. Neither migration nor isolation by themselves do anything. These forces come into play only by bringing organisms into new relationships with each other, and to a lesser degree with the surrounding physical conditions. As we saw in the last chapter, some forms have kept nearly the same character from enormously remote geological periods. In the same way, certain species have migrated over vast distances and haven't changed much or at all.

Under this view, it's clear that the several species of the same genus, though living in the most distant corners of the world, must originally have come from the same source, since they all descended from the same ancestor. For species that have undergone little modification through whole geological periods, it's not hard to believe they migrated from the same region. During the vast geographical and climate changes that have occurred since ancient times, almost any amount of migration is possible. But for many other cases where we have reason to think the species of a genus evolved within comparatively recent times, there's a real difficulty here. It's also obvious that the individuals of the same species, though now living in distant and isolated regions, must have come from one spot where their parents first arose. As I've already explained, it's incredible that identical individuals could have been produced from specifically distinct parents.


Single Centers of Supposed Creation

This brings us to a question that naturalists have debated extensively: whether species were created at one point on the earth's surface, or at multiple points. There are undoubtedly many cases where it's extremely hard to understand how the same species could have migrated from a single point to the various distant and isolated places where it's now found. Still, the simplicity of the view that each species first appeared within a single region is compelling. Anyone who rejects it rejects the straightforward explanation of ordinary reproduction followed by migration, and instead invokes a miracle. It's universally accepted that in most cases, a species' range is continuous. When a plant or animal lives at two points so far apart, or separated by such an obstacle, that the gap couldn't easily have been crossed by migration, the fact is treated as something remarkable and exceptional. The inability to cross a wide sea is clearer for land mammals than perhaps for any other organisms. Accordingly, we find no unexplainable cases of the same mammals living at distant points of the world. No geologist has any trouble with Great Britain having the same four-legged animals as the rest of Europe, since the two were no doubt once connected. But if the same species can arise at two separate points, why don't we find a single mammal common to both Europe and Australia, or Europe and South America? The living conditions are nearly the same, as shown by the fact that a multitude of European animals and plants have become established in America and Australia. And some of the native plants are identical at these distant points of the northern and southern hemispheres. The answer, I believe, is that mammals haven't been able to migrate, while some plants, with their varied means of dispersal, have crossed the wide and broken gaps between continents. The great and striking influence of barriers makes sense only if the great majority of species arose on one side and haven't been able to cross to the other. Some few families, many subfamilies, very many genera, and a still greater number of sections of genera are confined to a single region. Several naturalists have observed that the most natural genera -- those in which the species are most closely related -- are generally confined to the same country, or if they have a wide range, it's continuous. What a strange anomaly it would be if the directly opposite rule held when we go one step lower, to the individuals of the same species, and these had not been -- at least initially -- confined to some one region!

It seems to me, as it has to many other naturalists, that the most probable view is this: each species was produced in one area alone, and subsequently migrated from that area as far as its powers of migration and ability to survive under past and present conditions allowed. There are undoubtedly many cases where we can't explain how the same species could have gotten from one point to another. But the geographical and climate changes that have certainly occurred within recent geological times must have broken up the formerly continuous ranges of many species. So the question becomes: are the exceptions to continuous ranges so numerous and so serious that we should abandon the belief -- made probable by general considerations -- that each species arose in one area and migrated from there as far as it could? It would be hopelessly tedious to discuss every exceptional case of the same species now living at distant and separated points, and I don't pretend that an explanation could be offered for many of them. But after some preliminary remarks, I'll discuss a few of the most striking classes of facts: first, the existence of the same species on the summits of distant mountain ranges, and at distant points in the arctic and antarctic regions; and second (in the following chapter), the wide distribution of freshwater organisms; and third, the occurrence of the same land species on islands and on the nearest mainland, though separated by hundreds of miles of open sea. If the presence of the same species at distant and isolated points on earth can in many cases be explained by each species having migrated from a single birthplace, then -- considering our ignorance about former climate and geography changes and about the various occasional means of transport -- the belief that a single birthplace is the rule seems to me incomparably the safest.

In discussing this subject we'll also be able to consider an equally important point: whether the several species of a genus, which must under my theory all descend from a common ancestor, can have migrated from some one area, undergoing modification along the way. If it can be shown that migration from one region to another probably occurred at some former period -- in cases where most species in one region are different from but closely related to those in another -- then our general view will be much strengthened. The explanation is straightforward under the principle of descent with modification. A volcanic island, for example, thrust up a few hundred miles from a continent, would probably receive a few colonists over time. Their descendants, though modified, would still be related by inheritance to the inhabitants of that continent. Cases like this are common and, as we'll see later, inexplicable under the theory of independent creation. This view of how species in one region relate to those in another doesn't differ much from that put forward by Mr. Wallace, who concluded that "every species has come into existence coincident both in space and time with a preexisting closely allied species." And it's now well known that he attributes this coincidence to descent with modification.

The question of single or multiple centers of creation is different from a related question: whether all the individuals of the same species descend from a single pair, or a single hermaphrodite, or whether -- as some authors suppose -- from many individuals created simultaneously. For organisms that never crossbreed (if any such exist), each species must descend from a succession of modified varieties that replaced each other but never blended with other individuals or varieties of the same species. So at each successive stage of modification, all the individuals of the same form would descend from a single parent. But in the great majority of cases -- namely, all organisms that normally reproduce sexually or occasionally crossbreed -- the individuals of the same species living in the same area will be kept nearly uniform by interbreeding. Many individuals will change simultaneously, and the total modification at each stage won't be due to descent from any single parent. To illustrate what I mean: our English racehorses differ from every other breed, but they don't owe their difference and superiority to descent from any single pair. They owe it to the continued care of selecting and training many individuals in each generation.

Before discussing the three classes of facts that present the greatest difficulty for the theory of "single centers of creation," I need to say a few words about the means of dispersal.


Means of Dispersal

Sir Charles Lyell and other authors have covered this subject thoroughly. I can give here only the briefest summary of the most important facts. Changes in climate must have had a powerful influence on migration. A region now impassable for certain organisms because of its climate might have been a highway for migration when the climate was different. I'll discuss this in some detail shortly. Changes in land elevation must also have been highly influential: a narrow isthmus now separates two marine faunas; submerge it, or imagine it was once submerged, and the two faunas would blend together. Where the sea now extends, land may once have connected islands or even continents, allowing land organisms to pass from one to another. No geologist disputes that great changes in elevation have occurred within the time of existing organisms. Edward Forbes argued that all the islands in the Atlantic must have been recently connected with Europe or Africa, and Europe likewise with America. Other authors have hypothetically bridged every ocean and linked almost every island to some mainland. If Forbes's arguments are to be trusted, it must be admitted that scarcely a single island exists that hasn't recently been joined to some continent. This view cuts through the whole puzzle of how the same species reached the most distant points and removes many difficulties. But in my judgment, we aren't justified in accepting such enormous geographical changes within the period of existing species. It seems to me that we have plenty of evidence for great fluctuations in land and sea level, but not for such vast changes in the position and extent of our continents as would have connected them to each other and to the various intervening oceanic islands in recent times. I freely admit that many islands, now beneath the sea, formerly existed and may have served as stepping stones for plants and many animals during migration. In the coral-producing oceans, such sunken islands are now marked by rings of coral or atolls standing above them. When it is fully accepted -- as it will be someday -- that each species came from a single birthplace, and when we know something definite about the means of distribution, we'll be able to speculate confidently about former extensions of the land. But I don't believe it will ever be proved that within recent times most of our continents, which now stand quite separate, have been continuously or nearly continuously connected to each other and to the many existing oceanic islands. Several facts about distribution point against such enormous geographical upheavals in recent times: the great difference in marine faunas on opposite sides of almost every continent; the close relationship between the Tertiary inhabitants of various lands and seas and their present inhabitants; the degree of relatedness between island mammals and those of the nearest continent, partly determined (as we'll see later) by the depth of the intervening ocean. These and other facts argue against the enormous geographical revolutions that Forbes's view requires. The nature and proportions of oceanic island inhabitants also argue against former continental connections. And the almost universally volcanic composition of such islands doesn't support the idea that they're the remnants of sunken continents. If they had originally been continental mountain ranges, at least some of the islands would have been made of granite, metamorphic schists, old fossiliferous rocks, and other materials, instead of consisting of mere piles of volcanic matter.

I need to say a few words now about what are called accidental means of distribution -- though "occasional means" would be more accurate. I'll confine myself to plants here. In botanical works, this or that plant is often said to be poorly suited for wide dispersal, but how easily seeds can actually be transported across the sea is almost entirely unknown. Until I tried some experiments, with the help of Mr. Berkeley, it wasn't even known how long seeds could survive in seawater. To my surprise, I found that out of eighty-seven kinds, sixty-four germinated after being soaked for twenty-eight days, and a few survived 137 days of immersion. It's worth noting that certain plant orders were far more damaged than others: nine legumes were tried, and with one exception they resisted the saltwater poorly; seven species of the related orders Hydrophyllaceae and Polemoniaceae were all killed by a month's immersion. For convenience, I mostly tested small seeds without their capsules or fruit. Since all of these sank within a few days, they couldn't have floated across wide stretches of sea, whether or not they were damaged by saltwater. I then tried some larger fruits and capsules, and some of these floated for a long time. It's well known how different the buoyancy of green and seasoned timber is, and it occurred to me that floods would often wash dried plants or branches with seed capsules or fruit attached into the sea. So I dried the stems and branches of ninety-four plants with ripe fruit and placed them in seawater. Most sank quickly, but some that had floated only briefly when green floated much longer when dried. For example, ripe hazelnuts sank immediately, but when dried they floated for ninety days and afterward germinated when planted. An asparagus plant with ripe berries floated for twenty-three days; when dried it floated for eighty-five days, and the seeds then germinated. The ripe seeds of Helosciadium sank in two days; when dried they floated for over ninety days and then germinated. Altogether, out of the ninety-four dried plants, eighteen floated for more than twenty-eight days, and some of those eighteen floated for much longer. So since 64 out of 87 kinds of seeds germinated after twenty-eight days' immersion, and since 18 out of 94 distinct species with ripe fruit (though not all the same species as in the first experiment) floated for more than twenty-eight days after drying, we can tentatively conclude that the seeds of about 14 out of 100 kinds of plants from any country might be floated by sea currents for twenty-eight days and still retain their ability to germinate. In Johnston's Physical Atlas, the average speed of the Atlantic currents is thirty-three miles per day (some currents run at sixty miles per day). At this average rate, the seeds of 14 out of 100 plants from one country could be floated 924 miles across the sea to another country. If stranded there and blown inland by a gale to a favorable spot, they would germinate.

After my experiments, M. Martens tried similar ones in a better way: he placed the seeds in a box in the actual sea, so they were alternately wet and exposed to air, like truly floating plants. He tested ninety-eight seeds, mostly different from mine, but he chose many large fruits and seeds from plants that grow near the sea -- which would have favored both longer flotation and better resistance to saltwater. On the other hand, he didn't first dry the plants or branches with fruit, which, as we've seen, would have made some of them float much longer. His result was that 18 out of 98 of his different seed types floated for forty-two days and were then able to germinate. But I have no doubt that plants exposed to actual waves would float for less time than those protected from violent movement in our experiments. So it would perhaps be safer to assume that the seeds of about 10 out of 100 plants in a flora, after being dried, could float across 900 miles of sea and then germinate. The fact that larger fruits often float longer than small ones is interesting, since plants with large seeds or fruit -- which, as Alph. de Candolle has shown, generally have restricted ranges -- could hardly be transported by any other means.

Seeds can occasionally be transported in another way. Driftwood washes up on most islands, even those in the middle of the widest oceans. The natives of coral islands in the Pacific get stones for their tools solely from the roots of drifted trees -- these stones being a valuable royal tax. I've found that when irregularly shaped stones are embedded in tree roots, small pockets of soil are very frequently enclosed in the gaps between and behind them, packed so tightly that not a particle could be washed away during the longest voyage. From one small pocket of soil completely enclosed by the roots of an oak about fifty years old, three flowering plants germinated -- I'm certain of the accuracy of this observation. I can also show that the carcasses of birds floating on the sea sometimes escape being immediately eaten. Many kinds of seeds in the crops of floating birds retain their ability to grow for a long time. Peas and vetches, for instance, are killed by even a few days in seawater, but some taken from the crop of a pigeon that had floated on artificial seawater for thirty days nearly all germinated, to my surprise.

Living birds can hardly fail to be highly effective seed transporters. I could give many facts showing how frequently birds of all kinds are blown by storms vast distances across the ocean. We can safely assume that under such circumstances their flight speed would often be thirty-five miles an hour, and some authors have given much higher estimates. I've never seen nutritious seeds pass through a bird's intestines intact, but hard fruit seeds pass unharmed through even the digestive system of a turkey. Over the course of two months, I picked up twelve kinds of seeds from the droppings of small birds in my garden. These looked perfect, and some that were tested germinated. But here's a more important fact: the crops of birds don't secrete gastric juice and don't -- as I know from testing -- harm the germination of seeds at all. After a bird has found and eaten a large supply of food, it's well established that the grains don't all pass into the gizzard for twelve or even eighteen hours. A bird could easily be blown five hundred miles in that time. Hawks are known to hunt for tired birds, and the contents of their torn crops could easily get scattered. Some hawks and owls swallow their prey whole and after twelve to twenty hours regurgitate pellets that, as I know from experiments at the Zoological Gardens, contain seeds capable of germinating. Seeds of oat, wheat, millet, canary grass, hemp, clover, and beet germinated after spending twelve to twenty-one hours in the stomachs of different birds of prey. Two beet seeds even grew after being retained for two days and fourteen hours. Freshwater fish, I've found, eat seeds of many land and water plants. Fish are frequently eaten by birds, and so the seeds could be transported from place to place. I pushed many kinds of seeds into the stomachs of dead fish and then gave the bodies to fishing eagles, storks, and pelicans. After many hours, these birds either rejected the seeds in pellets or passed them in their droppings, and several of these seeds retained their ability to germinate. Some seeds, however, were always killed by this process.

Locusts are sometimes blown great distances from land. I personally caught one 370 miles from the coast of Africa, and I've heard of others caught at greater distances. The Rev. R. T. Lowe told Sir Charles Lyell that in November 1844, swarms of locusts visited the island of Madeira. They were in countless numbers, as thick as snowflakes in the heaviest blizzard, and extended upward as far as could be seen with a telescope. For two or three days they slowly circled round and round in an immense ellipse, at least five or six miles across, and at night landed on the taller trees, which were completely coated with them. Then they disappeared over the sea as suddenly as they had appeared and haven't visited the island since. Now, in parts of Natal, some farmers believe (though on insufficient evidence) that harmful seeds are introduced into their grasslands in the dung left by the great flights of locusts that often visit the region. Because of this belief, Mr. Weale sent me in a letter a small packet of dried pellets, from which I extracted several seeds under the microscope and raised seven grass plants from them, belonging to two species of two genera. So a swarm of locusts like the one that visited Madeira could easily introduce several kinds of plants to an island lying far from the mainland.

Although the beaks and feet of birds are generally clean, soil sometimes sticks to them. In one case I removed sixty-one grains, and in another twenty-two grains, of dry clay from the foot of a partridge, and in the clay there was a pebble as large as a vetch seed. Here's a better case: a friend sent me the leg of a woodcock with a little cake of dry soil stuck to the shank, weighing only nine grains. This contained a seed of the toad-rush (Juncus bufonius), which germinated and flowered. Mr. Swaysland of Brighton, who for the past forty years has closely watched our migratory birds, tells me he has often shot wagtails, wheatears, and whinchats on their first arrival at our shores, before they had even landed. He has several times noticed little cakes of soil stuck to their feet. Many facts could be given showing how generally soil is packed with seeds. For instance, Professor Newton sent me the leg of a red-legged partridge (Caccabis rufa) that had been wounded and couldn't fly, with a ball of hard earth stuck to it weighing six and a half ounces. The soil had been kept for three years, but when broken up, watered, and placed under a bell glass, no fewer than eighty-two plants sprang from it. These consisted of twelve monocotyledons, including the common oat and at least one kind of grass, and seventy dicotyledons, which -- judging from the young leaves -- included at least three distinct species. With such facts before us, can we doubt that the many birds that are annually blown by storms across great stretches of ocean, and that annually migrate -- for instance, the millions of quails crossing the Mediterranean -- must occasionally transport a few seeds embedded in dirt on their feet or beaks? I'll return to this subject later.

Since icebergs are known to sometimes carry soil and stones, and have even carried brushwood, bones, and the nest of a land bird, they must occasionally have transported seeds from one part to another of the arctic and antarctic regions, as Lyell suggested. During the Glacial period, they would have carried seeds from one part of the now-temperate regions to another. In the Azores, because of the large number of plants shared with Europe compared with other Atlantic islands that stand nearer the mainland, and because of their somewhat northern character compared with the latitude (as noted by Mr. H. C. Watson), I suspected that these islands had been partly stocked by ice-borne seeds during the Glacial epoch. At my request, Sir Charles Lyell wrote to M. Hartung to ask whether he had observed erratic boulders on these islands, and he replied that he had found large fragments of granite and other rocks that don't occur in the archipelago. We can therefore safely conclude that icebergs once deposited their rocky loads on the shores of these mid-ocean islands, and it's at least possible that they also brought the seeds of northern plants.

Considering that these several means of transport -- and other means that undoubtedly remain to be discovered -- have been operating year after year for tens of thousands of years, it would be truly remarkable if many plants had not been widely transported. These means of transport are sometimes called accidental, but this isn't strictly correct: ocean currents aren't accidental, nor is the prevailing direction of gales. It should be noted that almost no means of transport would carry seeds for very great distances. Seeds don't keep their vitality when exposed to seawater for a long time, nor could they be carried long in the crops or intestines of birds. These means would, however, be enough for occasional transport across a few hundred miles of sea, or from island to island, or from a continent to a neighboring island -- but not from one distant continent to another. The floras of distant continents wouldn't become mixed by such means; they would remain as distinct as they are now. Ocean currents, given their direction, would never bring seeds from North America to Britain, though they might -- and do -- bring seeds from the West Indies to our western shores. But even those seeds, if not killed by their long immersion in saltwater, couldn't survive our climate. Almost every year, one or two land birds are blown across the whole Atlantic from North America to the western shores of Ireland and England. But seeds could be transported by these rare wanderers only by one means -- dirt clinging to their feet or beaks -- which is itself a rare accident. Even then, how small the chance that a seed would land on favorable soil and grow to maturity! But it would be a great mistake to argue that because a well-stocked island like Great Britain hasn't -- as far as we know (and it would be very hard to prove this) -- received immigrants from Europe or any other continent through occasional transport in the last few centuries, a poorly stocked island, even one farther from the mainland, wouldn't receive colonists by similar means. Out of a hundred kinds of seeds or animals transported to an island, even one far less well stocked than Britain, perhaps no more than one would be so well suited to its new home as to become established. But this is no valid argument against what could be accomplished by occasional transport over the long span of geological time, while an island was being uplifted and before it had become fully stocked with inhabitants. On almost bare land, with few or no destructive insects or birds, nearly every seed that happened to arrive, if suited to the climate, would germinate and survive.


Dispersal During the Glacial Period

The presence of many identical plants and animals on mountain summits separated by hundreds of miles of lowlands -- where alpine species couldn't possibly survive -- is one of the most striking cases of the same species living at distant points without any apparent way of having migrated between them. It's remarkable enough to see so many of the same plant species living on the snowy Alps or Pyrenees and in the far north of Europe. But it's far more remarkable that the plants on the White Mountains of the United States are all the same as those of Labrador, and nearly all the same -- as the botanist Asa Gray tells us -- as those on the highest mountains of Europe. As long ago as 1747, such facts led the naturalist Gmelin to conclude that the same species must have been independently created at many separate points. We might have stuck with that belief if Agassiz and others hadn't called vivid attention to the Glacial period, which, as we'll now see, provides a simple explanation. We have evidence of almost every conceivable kind, both biological and geological, that within a very recent geological period, central Europe and North America experienced an arctic climate. The ruins of a house destroyed by fire don't tell their story more plainly than the mountains of Scotland and Wales, with their scored flanks, polished surfaces, and perched boulders, tell of the icy rivers that lately filled their valleys. So drastically has Europe's climate changed that in northern Italy, gigantic moraines left by ancient glaciers are now draped with vineyards and cornfields. Throughout a large part of the United States, erratic boulders and scored rocks plainly reveal a former cold period.

The former influence of the glacial climate on the distribution of Europe's inhabitants, as explained by Edward Forbes, is essentially this. But we can follow the changes more easily by imagining a new glacial period slowly arriving and then passing away, as formerly occurred. As the cold set in, and each more southern zone became suitable for the inhabitants of the north, these northern species would take the places of the former temperate-zone inhabitants. The latter would at the same time travel further and further south -- unless they were stopped by barriers, in which case they would die out. The mountains would become covered with snow and ice, and their former alpine inhabitants would descend to the plains. By the time the cold reached its peak, we'd have an arctic fauna and flora covering central Europe as far south as the Alps and Pyrenees, even stretching into Spain. The temperate regions of the United States would likewise be covered by arctic plants and animals, and these would be nearly the same as those of Europe, since the present circumpolar inhabitants -- which we're imagining traveling south everywhere -- are remarkably uniform around the world.

As the warmth returned, the arctic forms would retreat northward, closely followed by the organisms of the more temperate regions. And as the snow melted from the bases of the mountains, the arctic forms would colonize the cleared and thawed ground, always climbing higher as the warmth increased and the snow retreated further, while their relatives continued their northward journey. So when the warmth had fully returned, the same species that had recently lived together on the European and North American lowlands would once again be found in the arctic regions of both the Old and New Worlds, and on many isolated mountain summits far distant from each other.

This explains the identity of many plants at points as immensely remote as the mountains of the United States and those of Europe. It also explains why the alpine plants of each mountain range are especially related to the arctic forms living due north -- or nearly due north -- of them. The first migration when the cold arrived, and the return migration when warmth came back, would generally have been due south and north. The alpine plants of Scotland, as noted by Mr. H. C. Watson, and those of the Pyrenees, as noted by Ramond, are especially related to the plants of northern Scandinavia. Those of the United States are related to Labrador's flora. Those of the Siberian mountains are related to the arctic regions of that country. These views, based on the well-established fact of a former Glacial period, explain the present distribution of alpine and arctic organisms in Europe and America so convincingly that when we find the same species on distant mountain summits in other regions, we can almost conclude -- without further evidence -- that a colder climate once allowed them to migrate across the intervening lowlands, which are now too warm for them to survive.

As the arctic forms moved first south and then back north with the changing climate, they wouldn't have been exposed to any great range of temperatures during their long migrations. And since they all migrated together as a group, their relationships with each other wouldn't have been much disturbed. Following the principles I've laid out in this book, these forms wouldn't have been very likely to change much. But the alpine species, left isolated the moment warmth returned -- first at the bases and ultimately on the summits of mountains -- would have experienced something different. It's unlikely that all the same arctic species would have been stranded on mountain ranges far apart and survived there ever since. They would also, in all probability, have mixed with ancient alpine species that existed on the mountains before the Glacial epoch and were temporarily driven down to the plains during the coldest period. They would also have been exposed to somewhat different climate conditions afterward. Their relationships with each other would thus have been disturbed to some degree, making them more likely to change. And they have changed: if we compare the present alpine plants and animals of the several great European mountain ranges with one another, we find that while many species remain identical, some exist as varieties, some as doubtful forms or subspecies, and some as distinct yet closely related species representing each other on the different ranges.

In the illustration above, I assumed that at the start of our imaginary Glacial period, the arctic organisms were as uniform around the polar regions as they are today. But we also need to assume that many subarctic and some temperate forms were the same around the world, since some species now living on the lower mountain slopes and plains of North America and Europe are identical. How do I account for this uniformity of subarctic and temperate forms around the world at the start of the actual Glacial period? Today, the subarctic and northern temperate organisms of the Old and New Worlds are separated by the entire Atlantic Ocean and by the northern Pacific. During the Glacial period, when the inhabitants of both worlds lived further south than now, they must have been even more completely separated by wider stretches of ocean. So one might well ask how the same species could then -- or previously -- have entered both continents. The explanation, I believe, lies in the climate before the Glacial period began. During the later Pliocene period, the majority of the world's inhabitants were the same species as now, and we have good reason to think the climate was warmer than today. So we can suppose that organisms now living at latitude 60 degrees lived during the Pliocene further north, under the Polar Circle at latitude 66-67 degrees, and that present arctic species then lived on the broken land still nearer to the pole. Now, if we look at a globe, we see that under the Polar Circle there is almost continuous land from western Europe through Siberia to eastern America. This continuity of circumpolar land, together with the freedom for movement that a warmer climate would have allowed, explains the supposed uniformity of subarctic and temperate organisms in the Old and New Worlds before the Glacial epoch.

For reasons I've already mentioned, I believe our continents have long remained in roughly the same relative positions, though subjected to great fluctuations in elevation. I'm strongly inclined to extend the view above and infer that during some earlier and still warmer period, such as the older Pliocene, a large number of the same plants and animals inhabited the almost continuous circumpolar land. These plants and animals, in both the Old and New Worlds, began slowly migrating south as the climate cooled, long before the Glacial period began. We now see their descendants, mostly in modified form, in the central parts of Europe and the United States. This view explains the relationship -- with very little actual identity -- between the organisms of North America and Europe, a relationship that is truly remarkable considering the distance between the two areas and their separation by the whole Atlantic Ocean. It further explains the curious fact, noted by several observers, that the organisms of Europe and America during the later Tertiary stages were more closely related than they are now. During those warmer periods, the northern parts of the Old and New Worlds would have been almost continuously connected by land, serving as a bridge -- since made impassable by cold -- for the exchange of inhabitants.

During the slowly declining warmth of the Pliocene, as soon as the species common to the New and Old Worlds migrated south of the Polar Circle, they would have been completely cut off from each other. For the more temperate organisms, this separation must have happened ages ago. As plants and animals migrated south, they would have mixed in one great region with native American species and had to compete with them; in the other great region, with those of the Old World. Here we have everything favorable for extensive modification -- far more than for the alpine species left isolated within a much more recent period on the mountain ranges and arctic lands of Europe and North America. This is why, when we compare the present living organisms of the temperate regions in the New and Old Worlds, we find very few identical species (though Asa Gray has recently shown that more plants are identical than was formerly supposed). Instead, we find in every major group many forms that some naturalists rank as geographical races and others as distinct species, along with a host of closely related or representative forms that all naturalists consider specifically distinct.

As on land, so in the sea: a slow southward migration of a marine fauna that was nearly uniform along the continuous shores of the Polar Circle during the Pliocene or even earlier would explain -- under the theory of modification -- the many closely related forms now living in completely separated marine areas. This is how I think we can understand the presence of closely related living and extinct Tertiary forms on the eastern and western shores of temperate North America. It also explains the still more striking fact that many closely related crustaceans (as described in Dana's admirable work), some fish, and other marine animals inhabit both the Mediterranean and the seas of Japan -- areas now completely separated by the width of a whole continent and by wide stretches of ocean.

These cases of close relationship -- species either now or formerly inhabiting the seas on the eastern and western shores of North America, the Mediterranean and Japan, and the temperate lands of North America and Europe -- are inexplicable under the theory of creation. We can't claim that such species were created alike to match the nearly similar physical conditions of those areas. If we compare certain parts of South America with parts of South Africa or Australia, for example, we see countries closely similar in all their physical conditions whose inhabitants are utterly different.


Alternating Glacial Periods in the North and South

But we must return to our main subject. I'm convinced that Forbes's view can be greatly extended. In Europe we see the clearest evidence of the Glacial period, from the western shores of Britain to the Ural range and south to the Pyrenees. From the frozen mammals and the mountain vegetation, we can infer that Siberia was similarly affected. In the Lebanon, according to Dr. Hooker, perpetual snow once covered the central ridge and fed glaciers that rolled 4,000 feet down the valleys. The same observer has recently found great moraines at low elevation on the Atlas range in North Africa. Along the Himalayas, at points 900 miles apart, glaciers have left marks of their former descent to low levels. In Sikkim, Dr. Hooker saw corn growing on ancient and gigantic moraines. South of the Asian continent, on the opposite side of the equator, we know from the excellent research of Dr. J. Haast and Dr. Hector that in New Zealand immense glaciers once descended to low levels. The same plants that Dr. Hooker found on widely separated mountains in New Zealand tell the same story of a former cold period. From facts communicated to me by the Rev. W. B. Clarke, it appears there are also traces of former glacial action on the mountains of southeastern Australia.

Looking to America: in the northern half, ice-carried rock fragments have been observed on the eastern side as far south as latitudes 36-37 degrees, and on the Pacific shores -- where the climate is now so different -- as far south as latitude 46 degrees. Erratic boulders have also been found on the Rocky Mountains. In the Cordillera of South America, nearly under the equator, glaciers once extended far below their present level. In central Chile, I examined a vast mound of debris with great boulders crossing the Portillo valley, which almost certainly was once a huge moraine. Mr. D. Forbes tells me that he found in various parts of the Cordillera, from latitude 13 to 30 degrees south, at about 12,000 feet, deeply grooved rocks resembling those he knew well from Norway, along with great masses of debris including scored pebbles. Along this entire stretch of the Cordillera, true glaciers don't exist today even at much greater heights. Further south, on both sides of the continent from latitude 41 degrees to the southernmost tip, we have the clearest evidence of former glacial action in countless immense boulders transported far from their source.

From all these facts -- that glacial action extended around both the northern and southern hemispheres; that in geological terms the period was recent in both; that it lasted a long time in both, judging by the amount of work it accomplished; and that glaciers recently descended to low levels along the entire Cordillera -- it at first seemed to me that we had to conclude the temperature of the whole world had dropped simultaneously during the Glacial period. But Mr. Croll, in a series of admirable papers, has tried to show that a glacial climate results from various physical causes set in motion by an increase in the eccentricity of Earth's orbit. All these causes work toward the same end, but the most powerful seems to be the indirect effect of orbital eccentricity on ocean currents. According to Mr. Croll, cold periods recur regularly every ten or fifteen thousand years, and at long intervals they become extremely severe, depending on certain conditions -- the most important being, as Sir Charles Lyell has shown, the relative position of land and water. Mr. Croll believes the last great Glacial period began about 240,000 years ago and lasted, with slight climate fluctuations, for about 160,000 years. As for more ancient glacial periods, several geologists are convinced by direct evidence that such episodes occurred during the Miocene and Eocene, not to mention still older formations. But the most important result for us from Mr. Croll's work is this: whenever the northern hemisphere passes through a cold period, the temperature of the southern hemisphere actually rises, with much milder winters, mainly because of changes in ocean current direction. And the reverse happens when the southern hemisphere goes through a glacial period. This conclusion sheds so much light on geographical distribution that I'm strongly inclined to trust it, but let me first present the facts that need explaining.

In South America, Dr. Hooker has shown that besides many closely related species, between forty and fifty of the flowering plants of Tierra del Fuego -- a significant portion of its sparse flora -- are shared with North America and Europe, despite these areas being enormously far apart in opposite hemispheres. On the high mountains of equatorial America, a host of unique species belonging to European genera occur. On the Organ Mountains of Brazil, the botanist Gardner found some temperate European, some Antarctic, and some Andean genera that don't exist in the hot lowlands between them. On the Silla of Caracas, the great Humboldt long ago found species belonging to genera characteristic of the Cordillera.

In Africa, several forms characteristic of Europe, along with a few representatives of the Cape of Good Hope flora, occur on the mountains of Abyssinia. At the Cape of Good Hope itself, a very few European species -- believed not to have been introduced by humans -- and several representative European forms are found on the mountains, though they haven't been discovered in the tropical parts of Africa between. Dr. Hooker has also recently shown that several plants growing on the upper parts of the lofty island of Fernando Po and on the neighboring Cameroon Mountains in the Gulf of Guinea are closely related to those on the mountains of Abyssinia and likewise to those of temperate Europe. It now appears, as I hear from Dr. Hooker, that some of these same temperate plants have been discovered by the Rev. R. T. Lowe on the mountains of the Cape Verde Islands. This extension of the same temperate forms almost under the equator, across the entire continent of Africa and to the mountains of the Cape Verde archipelago, is one of the most astonishing facts ever recorded in plant distribution.

On the Himalayas, on the isolated mountain ranges of the Indian peninsula, on the heights of Ceylon, and on the volcanic cones of Java, many plants occur that are either identical or represent each other, and at the same time represent plants of Europe not found in the intervening hot lowlands. A list of the genera collected on the highest peaks of Java conjures up the image of a collection made on a hillock in Europe. Even more striking is the fact that distinctive Australian forms are represented by certain plants growing on the summits of the mountains of Borneo. Some of these Australian forms, as I hear from Dr. Hooker, extend along the heights of the Malay Peninsula and are thinly scattered on one hand across India, and on the other as far north as Japan.

On the southern mountains of Australia, Dr. F. Muller has discovered several European species. Other species not introduced by humans occur on the lowlands, and a long list can be given, as Dr. Hooker tells me, of European genera found in Australia but not in the tropical regions between. In Dr. Hooker's admirable Introduction to the Flora of New Zealand, similar striking facts are given for the plants of that large island. So we see that certain plants growing on the higher tropical mountains everywhere in the world, and on the temperate plains of the north and south, are either the same species or varieties of the same species. It should be noted, however, that these plants aren't strictly arctic forms. As Mr. H. C. Watson has observed, "in receding from polar toward equatorial latitudes, the alpine or mountain flora really becomes less and less arctic." Besides these identical and closely related forms, many species inhabiting the same widely separated areas belong to genera not now found in the tropical lowlands between them.

These brief remarks apply only to plants, but a few similar facts could be given for land animals. Similar cases occur in marine life too. As an example, I can quote the highest authority, Professor Dana: "It is certainly a wonderful fact that New Zealand should have a closer resemblance in its crustacea to Great Britain, its antipode, than to any other part of the world." Sir J. Richardson also speaks of the reappearance on the shores of New Zealand, Tasmania, and elsewhere of northern forms of fish. Dr. Hooker tells me that twenty-five species of algae are common to New Zealand and Europe but haven't been found in the tropical seas between them.

From all these facts -- the presence of temperate forms on the highlands across equatorial Africa, along the Indian peninsula to Ceylon and the Malay Archipelago, and in a less clear-cut way across tropical South America -- it seems almost certain that at some former period, probably during the most severe part of a Glacial period, the lowlands of these great continents everywhere under the equator were home to a considerable number of temperate forms. At that time, the equatorial climate at sea level was probably similar to what's now experienced at five to six thousand feet at the same latitude, or perhaps even cooler. During this coldest period, the equatorial lowlands must have been clothed with a mixed tropical and temperate vegetation, like that which Hooker describes growing luxuriantly at four to five thousand feet on the lower slopes of the Himalayas, but perhaps with an even greater proportion of temperate forms. Similarly, on the mountainous island of Fernando Po in the Gulf of Guinea, Mr. Mann found temperate European forms beginning to appear at about five thousand feet. On the mountains of Panama, at only two thousand feet, Dr. Seemann found the vegetation resembling that of Mexico, "with forms of the torrid zone harmoniously blended with those of the temperate."

Now let's see whether Mr. Croll's conclusion -- that when the northern hemisphere suffered the extreme cold of the great Glacial period, the southern hemisphere was actually warmer -- sheds any light on the currently puzzling distribution of various organisms in the temperate parts of both hemispheres and on the tropical mountains. The Glacial period, measured in years, must have been very long. And when we remember how far some introduced plants and animals have spread within a few centuries, this period would have been more than enough time for any amount of migration. As the cold grew more and more intense, we know that arctic forms invaded the temperate regions. From the facts just given, there can hardly be a doubt that some of the hardiest, most dominant, and widest-spreading temperate forms invaded the equatorial lowlands. The inhabitants of these hot lowlands would at the same time have migrated to the tropical and subtropical regions of the south, because the southern hemisphere was warmer during this period. As the Glacial period waned and both hemispheres gradually recovered their former temperatures, the northern temperate forms living on the equatorial lowlands would have been driven back to their former homes or destroyed, replaced by equatorial forms returning from the south. Some of the northern temperate forms, however, would almost certainly have climbed any nearby highlands. If these were high enough, those species would have survived there for a long time, just as arctic forms survived on the mountains of Europe. They could have survived even if the climate wasn't perfectly suited to them, because the temperature change must have been very slow, and plants clearly have some capacity to acclimatize -- as shown by their passing on to their offspring different abilities to resist heat and cold.

In the regular course of events, the southern hemisphere would in its turn be subjected to a severe Glacial period, with the northern hemisphere becoming warmer. Then the southern temperate forms would invade the equatorial lowlands. The northern forms that had earlier been stranded on the mountains would now descend and mingle with the southern forms. When the warmth returned, the southern forms would go back to their former homes, leaving some species on the mountains and carrying southward with them some of the northern temperate forms that had descended from their mountain refuges. In this way, we'd end up with some species identical in the northern and southern temperate zones and on the mountains of the tropical regions between them. But species stranded for a long time on these mountains, or in opposite hemispheres, would have to compete with many new forms and would be exposed to somewhat different physical conditions. They would therefore be highly likely to change, and they would generally now exist as varieties or as representative species -- which is exactly what we see. We must also keep in mind that both hemispheres have experienced former Glacial periods. These earlier episodes would account, by the same principles, for the many quite distinct species that inhabit the same widely separated areas and belong to genera not now found in the tropical zones between.

It's a remarkable fact, strongly emphasized by Hooker for America and by Alph. de Candolle for Australia, that many more identical or slightly modified species have migrated from north to south than in the reverse direction. We do see a few southern forms on the mountains of Borneo and Abyssinia. I suspect this predominant north-to-south migration is due to the greater extent of land in the north and to northern forms having existed in larger numbers in their own territories. They would consequently have been pushed to a higher level of perfection -- or dominant power -- through natural selection and competition than the southern forms. So when the two groups became mixed in the equatorial regions during the alternations of Glacial periods, the northern forms were more powerful and were able to hold their places on the mountains and afterward migrate south along with the southern forms. The southern forms couldn't do the same with respect to the north. We see the same pattern today: very many European organisms have established themselves in La Plata, New Zealand, and to a lesser degree in Australia, beating the natives, while extremely few southern forms have become established anywhere in the northern hemisphere. This is true despite the fact that hides, wool, and other materials likely to carry seeds have been imported into Europe in large quantities from La Plata over the last two or three centuries and from Australia over the last forty or fifty years. The Nilgiri Mountains in India, however, offer a partial exception: there, as I hear from Dr. Hooker, Australian forms are rapidly spreading and becoming established. Before the last great Glacial period, the tropical mountains were no doubt stocked with unique alpine species. But these have almost everywhere been displaced by the more dominant forms generated in the larger areas and more effective workshops of the north. On many islands, the native species are nearly equaled or even outnumbered by those that have become established from elsewhere -- and this is the first stage toward extinction. Mountains are islands on the land, and their inhabitants have yielded to species from the larger areas of the north, just as the inhabitants of real islands have everywhere yielded -- and are still yielding -- to continental forms introduced through human activity.

The same principles apply to the distribution of land animals and marine organisms in the northern and southern temperate zones and on the tropical mountains. During the height of the Glacial period, when ocean currents were very different from today, some inhabitants of the temperate seas might have reached the equator. A few of these could perhaps have migrated south immediately by staying in the cooler currents, while others might have remained and survived in the colder depths until the southern hemisphere in its turn experienced a glacial climate that allowed their further progress -- in much the same way that, as Forbes pointed out, isolated pockets inhabited by arctic organisms still exist today in the deeper parts of the northern temperate seas.

I'm far from claiming that all the difficulties regarding the distribution and relationships of the identical and related species now living so widely separated in the north and south -- and sometimes on the mountain ranges between them -- are solved by the views I've given above. We can't trace the exact lines of migration. We can't say why certain species and not others have migrated, why certain species have changed and given rise to new forms while others have remained unchanged. We can't hope to explain such things until we can say why one species and not another becomes established by human introduction in a foreign land, or why one species ranges twice or three times as far and is twice or three times as common as another species within their own homes.

Various specific difficulties also remain to be solved -- for instance, the occurrence, as shown by Dr. Hooker, of the same plants at points as enormously remote as Kerguelen Island, New Zealand, and Tierra del Fuego. Icebergs, as Lyell suggested, may have played a role in their dispersal. The existence at these and other distant points of the southern hemisphere of species that, though distinct, belong to genera exclusively confined to the south is an even more remarkable case. Some of these species are so different that we can't suppose there has been enough time since the last Glacial period began for their migration and subsequent modification to the necessary degree. The facts seem to indicate that distinct species belonging to the same genera have migrated outward in radiating lines from a common center. I'm inclined to look -- in the southern hemisphere as in the northern -- to a former and warmer period before the last Glacial period, when the Antarctic lands, now covered with ice, supported a highly distinctive and isolated flora. It may be that before this flora was wiped out during the last Glacial epoch, a few forms had already been widely dispersed to various points of the southern hemisphere by occasional means of transport, using now-sunken islands as stepping stones. In this way, the southern shores of America, Australia, and New Zealand may have received a slight tinting from the same distinctive forms of life.

Sir Charles Lyell, in a striking passage, speculated in language almost identical to mine on the effects of great climate swings throughout the world on geographical distribution. And we've now seen that Mr. Croll's conclusion -- that successive Glacial periods in one hemisphere coincide with warmer periods in the opposite hemisphere -- together with the acknowledgment that species change slowly, explains a multitude of facts about the distribution of the same and related forms of life across the globe. The living waters have flowed during one period from the north and during another from the south, and in both cases have reached the equator. But the stream of life has flowed with greater force from the north than from the south, and has consequently flooded the southern regions more freely. As the tide leaves its drift in horizontal lines, rising higher on the shores where the tide rises highest, so have the living waters left their living drift on our mountain summits, in a line gently rising from the arctic lowlands to a great height under the equator. The various organisms thus left stranded may be compared with indigenous peoples, driven up and surviving in the mountain strongholds of almost every land -- serving as a record, full of interest to us, of the former inhabitants of the surrounding lowlands.
