XIII: Geographical Distribution -- Continued


Freshwater Organisms

Since lakes and river systems are separated from each other by barriers of land, you might expect that freshwater organisms wouldn't range widely within a single country. And since the sea is an even more formidable barrier, you'd think they'd never reach distant countries. But the reality is exactly the opposite. Not only do many freshwater species from different groups have enormous ranges, but closely related species show up in a remarkably consistent pattern all around the world. When I first collected freshwater specimens in Brazil, I remember being struck by how similar the freshwater insects and shells were to those of Britain -- while the surrounding land animals were completely different.

But the wide-ranging power of freshwater organisms can, I think, mostly be explained by the fact that they've become well adapted for short, frequent migrations from pond to pond and stream to stream within their own countries. And from this ability, a tendency toward wide dispersal follows almost as a necessary consequence. I can only consider a few cases here, and some of the hardest to explain involve fish. It was once believed that the same freshwater species never existed on two distant continents. But Dr. Gunther has recently shown that Galaxias attenuatus lives in Tasmania, New Zealand, the Falkland Islands, and mainland South America. This is an extraordinary case, and probably points to dispersal from an Antarctic center during a former warm period. The case is made somewhat less surprising by the fact that species in this genus can somehow cross considerable stretches of open ocean -- one species is common to both New Zealand and the Auckland Islands, even though they're separated by about 230 miles. On the same continent, freshwater fish often range widely and almost capriciously: in two neighboring river systems, some species may be identical while others are completely different.

Fish are probably transported from time to time by what you might call accidental means. Living fish are not that rarely dropped at distant points by whirlwinds, and their eggs can survive for a considerable time after being removed from water. But their dispersal is probably best explained by recent changes in land level that caused rivers to flow into one another. There are also cases of this happening during floods, without any change in land level at all. The wide differences between fish on opposite sides of most continuous mountain ranges -- which must have completely prevented the merging of river systems on either side from very early on -- points to the same conclusion. Some freshwater fish belong to very ancient lineages, and in those cases there has been plenty of time for major geographical changes, and therefore time and opportunity for extensive migration. Moreover, Dr. Gunther has recently concluded from several lines of evidence that fish species tend to persist for a very long time. Saltwater fish can, with care, be gradually acclimated to fresh water. And according to Valenciennes, there is hardly a single group in which all members are confined to fresh water, so a marine species belonging to a freshwater group could travel far along the coast and then, quite likely, adapt to the fresh waters of a distant land.

Some species of freshwater shells have very wide ranges, and closely related species -- which, according to my theory, descend from a common ancestor and must have originated from a single source -- are found all over the world. Their distribution puzzled me at first, since their eggs are unlikely to be transported by birds, and both the eggs and the adults are immediately killed by seawater. I couldn't even figure out how some introduced species had spread so quickly across a single country. But two facts that I've personally observed -- and no doubt many more will be discovered -- shed some light on this. When ducks suddenly emerge from a pond covered with duckweed, I've twice seen those little plants clinging to their backs. And it has happened to me that in moving a bit of duckweed from one aquarium to another, I accidentally stocked the second tank with freshwater shells from the first. But another method may be even more effective: I suspended a duck's feet in an aquarium where many freshwater shell eggs were hatching, and I found that large numbers of the extremely tiny, just-hatched shells crawled onto the feet and clung so firmly that they couldn't be shaken off when removed from the water (though at a slightly more advanced age, they would voluntarily drop off). These just-hatched mollusks, though aquatic by nature, survived on the duck's feet in damp air for twelve to twenty hours. In that time, a duck or heron could fly at least six or seven hundred miles, and if blown across the sea to an oceanic island or any other distant point, it would certainly land on a pool or stream. Sir Charles Lyell told me that a Dyticus water beetle has been caught with an Ancylus -- a freshwater shell resembling a limpet -- firmly attached to it. And a water beetle of the same family, a Colymbetes, once flew on board the Beagle when we were forty-five miles from the nearest land. How much farther it might have been carried by a favorable wind, no one can say.

As for plants, it has long been known that many freshwater and even marsh species have enormous ranges, spanning both continents and the most remote oceanic islands. This is strikingly illustrated, according to Alph. de Candolle, in those large groups of land plants that have very few aquatic members -- the aquatic ones seem to immediately acquire a wide range, as if by consequence. I think favorable means of dispersal explain this. I've mentioned before that dirt sometimes sticks in considerable quantity to the feet and beaks of birds. Wading birds, which frequent the muddy edges of ponds, would be the most likely to have muddy feet if suddenly startled into flight. Birds of this group wander more than those of any other order and are occasionally found on the most remote and barren islands in the open ocean. They wouldn't be likely to land on the sea surface, so any dirt on their feet wouldn't get washed off. And when they reached land, they would naturally fly to their freshwater haunts. I don't think botanists realize just how packed the mud of ponds is with seeds. I've tried several little experiments, but I'll give only the most striking one here: in February, I took three tablespoons of mud from three different spots beneath the water at the edge of a little pond. This mud, when dry, weighed only six and three-quarter ounces. I kept it covered in my study for six months, pulling up and counting each plant as it grew. The plants were of many kinds, and altogether numbered 537 -- yet the sticky mud had all fit in a breakfast cup! Considering these facts, I think it would be truly inexplicable if waterbirds did not carry the seeds of freshwater plants to distant, unstocked ponds and streams. The same process may also work with the eggs of some of the smaller freshwater animals.

Other unknown factors have probably played a part as well. I've mentioned that freshwater fish eat some kinds of seeds, though they reject many others after swallowing them. Even small fish swallow seeds of moderate size, like those of the yellow water lily and Potamogeton. Herons and other birds, century after century, have gone on devouring fish day after day. They then take flight and travel to other waters, or get blown across the sea. And as we've seen, seeds retain their ability to germinate when ejected many hours later in pellets or excrement. When I saw the large size of the seeds of the magnificent water lily Nelumbium, and remembered Alph. de Candolle's remarks on its distribution, I thought the means of its dispersal must be inexplicable. But Audubon reported finding seeds of the great southern water lily -- probably, according to Dr. Hooker, the Nelumbium luteum -- in a heron's stomach. Now, this bird must often have flown with its stomach thus well stocked to distant ponds, and then, getting a hearty meal of fish, I believe by analogy that it would have ejected the seeds in a pellet, still able to germinate.

When considering these various means of distribution, we should remember that when a pond or stream is first formed -- on a rising islet, for example -- it will be unoccupied, and a single seed or egg will have a good chance of succeeding. Although there will always be a struggle for life among the inhabitants of any pond, however few in number, the total number of species even in a well-stocked pond is small compared to the number inhabiting an equal area of land. So competition between them will probably be less intense than between land species, and an intruder from foreign waters would have a better chance of establishing itself than a land colonist would. We should also remember that many freshwater organisms rank low in the scale of life, and we have reason to believe such organisms change more slowly than more complex ones -- which gives time for aquatic species to migrate. And we shouldn't forget the likelihood that many freshwater forms once ranged continuously across immense areas and then went extinct at intermediate points. But the wide distribution of freshwater plants and lower animals -- whether retaining the exact same form or modified to some degree -- seems to depend mainly on the wide dispersal of their seeds and eggs by animals, especially by freshwater birds, which are powerful fliers that naturally travel from one body of water to another.


The Inhabitants of Oceanic Islands

We now come to the last of the three classes of facts that I've selected as presenting the greatest difficulty for the view that not only have all individuals of the same species migrated from a single area, but that closely related species -- though now living at the most distant points on Earth -- have all descended from a single area, the birthplace of their early ancestors. I've already given my reasons for not believing that continental extensions on so enormous a scale occurred within the period of existing species that all the many islands of the world's oceans were stocked with their present land inhabitants by land bridges. This view removes many difficulties, but it doesn't fit all the facts about island life. In the following discussion, I won't limit myself to the question of dispersal alone, but will consider some other cases that bear on the truth of the two competing theories: independent creation versus descent with modification.

The species of all kinds that inhabit oceanic islands are few in number compared with those on equivalent continental areas. Alph. de Candolle acknowledges this for plants, and Wollaston for insects. New Zealand, for instance, with its towering mountains and diverse habitats, stretching over 780 miles of latitude, together with the outlying Auckland, Campbell, and Chatham Islands, contains altogether only 960 kinds of flowering plants. If we compare this modest number with the species that swarm over equal areas in southwestern Australia or at the Cape of Good Hope, we have to conclude that some cause beyond just different physical conditions has produced such a huge difference. Even the uniform county of Cambridge has 847 plants, and the little island of Anglesey 764 -- though a few ferns and some introduced plants are included in these numbers, and the comparison isn't quite fair in some respects. We know that the barren island of Ascension originally had fewer than half a dozen flowering plants, yet many species have now become established there, just as they have on New Zealand and every other oceanic island you could name. On St. Helena, there's good reason to believe that the introduced plants and animals have nearly or completely wiped out many native species. Anyone who accepts the doctrine that each species was separately created must also accept that a sufficient number of well-adapted plants and animals were not created for oceanic islands -- because humans have unintentionally stocked them far more fully and successfully than nature ever did.

Although oceanic islands have few species overall, the proportion of endemic kinds -- those found nowhere else in the world -- is often extremely high. If we compare, for instance, the number of endemic land shells on Madeira, or endemic birds in the Galapagos Archipelago, with the numbers on any continent, and then compare the island's area with the continent's, the point becomes clear. This is what theory would predict: species arriving after long intervals in a new, isolated place, and having to compete with unfamiliar neighbors, would be especially prone to modification and would often produce groups of modified descendants. But it doesn't follow that just because nearly all species of one class on an island are unique, those of another class -- or even another section of the same class -- will also be unique. This difference seems to depend partly on whether non-modified species arrived together as a group, so their relationships to each other weren't much disrupted, and partly on the frequent arrival of unmodified immigrants from the parent country, with which the island forms have interbred. We should keep in mind that the offspring of such crosses would gain in vigor, so even an occasional cross would have more impact than you might expect. Let me give a few examples. In the Galapagos Islands, there are twenty-six land birds, of which twenty-one (or perhaps twenty-three) are unique to the islands. But of the eleven marine birds, only two are unique -- and obviously marine birds could reach these islands much more easily and frequently than land birds. Bermuda, on the other hand, sits at about the same distance from North America as the Galapagos do from South America, and has a very distinctive soil, yet it doesn't possess a single endemic land bird. We know from Mr. J. M. Jones's excellent account that very many North American birds visit Bermuda regularly or occasionally. And almost every year, as Mr. E. V. Harcourt informs me, many European and African birds are blown to Madeira. That island has ninety-nine kinds of birds, of which only one is unique (though very closely related to a European form), and three or four others are confined to Madeira and the Canaries. So Bermuda and Madeira have been stocked from the neighboring continents with birds that have competed and co-adapted with one another for ages. When these birds settled in their new homes, each species was kept by the others in its proper niche, and consequently was unlikely to change much. Any tendency to change would also have been checked by interbreeding with unmodified immigrants arriving regularly from the mainland. Madeira is also home to a remarkable number of unique land shells, while not a single seashell species is unique to its shores. And though we don't fully understand how seashells disperse, we can see that their eggs or larvae -- perhaps attached to seaweed or floating timber, or to the feet of wading birds -- could cross three or four hundred miles of open sea far more easily than land shells. The different orders of insects on Madeira show nearly the same pattern.

Oceanic islands sometimes completely lack animals of certain whole classes, and their roles are filled by other groups. In the Galapagos Islands, reptiles take -- or recently took -- the place of mammals, and in New Zealand, gigantic wingless birds did the same. Although I'm describing New Zealand here as an oceanic island, there's some question about whether it really qualifies. It's large, and it isn't separated from Australia by a very deep sea. Based on its geological character and the direction of its mountain ranges, the Rev. W. B. Clarke has recently argued that New Zealand, along with New Caledonia, should really be considered extensions of Australia. Turning to plants, Dr. Hooker has shown that in the Galapagos the relative proportions of different plant orders are very different from what you'd find elsewhere. All such differences in numbers, and the complete absence of certain groups of animals and plants, are usually chalked up to differences in the islands' physical conditions -- but that explanation is quite doubtful. Ease of immigration seems to have been just as important as the nature of those conditions.

Many remarkable little facts could be pointed out about the inhabitants of oceanic islands. For instance, on certain islands that have no mammals at all, some of the endemic plants have beautifully hooked seeds -- yet few relationships in nature are more obvious than that hooks exist to transport seeds in the wool or fur of four-legged animals. But a hooked seed could have been carried to an island by other means. The plant then evolved into an endemic species while still keeping its hooks, which became a useless feature -- just like the shriveled wings beneath the fused wing covers of many island beetles. Here's another interesting pattern: islands often have trees or bushes belonging to orders that everywhere else consist only of herbaceous species. As Alph. de Candolle has shown, trees generally have restricted ranges, whatever the reason may be. So trees would be unlikely to reach distant oceanic islands. But an herbaceous plant that had no chance of competing with the fully developed trees on a continent could, once established on an island, gain an advantage over other herbaceous plants by growing taller and taller, rising above them. In this situation, natural selection would tend to increase the plant's stature, whatever order it belonged to, first converting it into a bush and then into a tree.


The Absence of Frogs and Land Mammals on Oceanic Islands

Regarding the absence of whole orders of animals from oceanic islands, Bory St. Vincent pointed out long ago that frogs, toads, and newts are never found on any of the many islands scattered across the great oceans. I've taken pains to verify this claim and found it to be true, with the exceptions of New Zealand, New Caledonia, the Andaman Islands, and perhaps the Solomon Islands and the Seychelles. But I've already noted that it's doubtful whether New Zealand and New Caledonia should really count as oceanic islands, and this is even more doubtful for the Andaman and Solomon groups and the Seychelles. This general absence of frogs, toads, and newts from so many true oceanic islands can't be explained by their physical conditions. In fact, islands seem to be perfectly suited for these animals: frogs introduced to Madeira, the Azores, and Mauritius have multiplied so rapidly that they've become a nuisance. But since these animals and their eggs are immediately killed by seawater (with the exception, as far as is known, of one Indian species), getting them across the ocean would be extremely difficult. That's why they don't exist on truly oceanic islands. But if you believe in separate creation, it would be very hard to explain why they were never created there.

Mammals present a similar case. I've carefully searched the oldest travel accounts and haven't found a single reliable instance of a land mammal (excluding domesticated animals kept by the natives) living on an island more than 300 miles from a continent or large continental island -- and many islands much closer are equally bare. The Falkland Islands, which have a wolf-like fox, come closest to an exception. But this group can't really be considered oceanic, since it sits on an underwater bank connected to the mainland at a distance of about 280 miles. Moreover, icebergs once carried boulders to its western shores, and they may have formerly transported foxes, just as frequently happens in arctic regions today. Yet you can't say that small islands can't support at least small mammals, because they occur on many very small islands close to continents. And hardly an island can be named where our smaller four-legged animals haven't become established and greatly multiplied after being introduced. You also can't argue, on the standard creationist view, that there hasn't been enough time for mammals to be created on these islands. Many volcanic islands are extremely ancient, as shown by the enormous erosion they've undergone and by their Tertiary rock layers. There has also been time for the evolution of endemic species in other groups. And on continents, it's known that new mammal species appear and disappear faster than other, lower animals. Although land mammals don't occur on oceanic islands, flying mammals do appear on nearly every island. New Zealand has two bat species found nowhere else. Norfolk Island, the Fiji Archipelago, the Bonin Islands, the Caroline and Mariana Archipelagoes, and Mauritius all have their own unique bats. Why, one might ask, has the supposed creative force produced bats and no other mammals on remote islands? On my view, the answer is simple: no land mammal can cross a wide stretch of ocean, but bats can fly across. Bats have been seen flying by day far out over the Atlantic Ocean, and two North American species regularly or occasionally visit Bermuda, 600 miles from the mainland. I've learned from Mr. Tomes, who has made a special study of bats, that many species have enormous ranges and are found on both continents and far-flung islands. So we need only suppose that such wide-ranging species have been modified in their new homes to fit their new conditions, and we can understand the presence of endemic bats on oceanic islands alongside the complete absence of all other land mammals.

There's another interesting relationship: the connection between the depth of the sea separating islands from each other or from the nearest continent, and the degree of relatedness among their mammal populations. Mr. Windsor Earl made some striking observations on this point, later greatly expanded by Mr. Wallace's admirable research on the great Malay Archipelago. This archipelago is divided near Celebes by a deep ocean trench that separates two very different mammal faunas. On either side, the islands sit on moderately shallow submarine banks, and these islands are inhabited by the same or closely related four-legged animals. I haven't yet had time to follow up on this across all parts of the world, but as far as I've investigated, the relationship holds. For instance, Britain is separated from Europe by a shallow channel, and the mammals are the same on both sides. The same is true of the islands near Australia's shores. The West Indian Islands, on the other hand, sit on a deeply submerged bank nearly a thousand fathoms deep, and while we find American forms there, the species and even the genera are quite distinct. Since the amount of change that animals undergo depends partly on the passage of time, and since islands separated by shallow channels are more likely to have been connected within the recent past than those separated by deeper channels, we can understand why there's a relationship between sea depth and the degree of relatedness between two mammal faunas -- a relationship that is completely inexplicable under the theory of independent creation.

The facts I've laid out about the inhabitants of oceanic islands -- the small number of species with a high proportion of endemic forms; the modification of some groups but not others in the same class; the absence of entire orders like frogs and land mammals despite the presence of bats; the unusual proportions of certain plant orders; the evolution of herbaceous plants into trees -- all of this seems to me to fit much better with the idea that occasional means of transport, operating over long periods of time, have stocked these islands, rather than with the belief that all oceanic islands were once connected to the nearest continent. Under that latter view, we'd expect the different groups to have immigrated more evenly, and because the species would have arrived together as a body, their relationships to each other wouldn't have been much disrupted. They either wouldn't have changed at all, or would all have changed in a more uniform way.

I don't deny that there are many serious difficulties in understanding how many of the inhabitants of the more remote islands -- whether still in their original form or subsequently modified -- reached their present homes. But we shouldn't overlook the probability that other islands once existed as stepping stones, of which no trace now remains. Let me describe one difficult case. Almost all oceanic islands, even the most isolated and smallest, are home to land shells -- usually endemic species, but sometimes species found elsewhere, as Dr. A. A. Gould has strikingly demonstrated for the Pacific. Now, it's well known that land shells are easily killed by seawater. Their eggs, at least the ones I've tested, sink in it and die. Yet there must be some unknown but occasionally effective means of getting them across the ocean. Could the just-hatched young sometimes cling to the feet of birds roosting on the ground and get carried that way? It occurred to me that land shells, when hibernating and having sealed the opening of their shell with a membrane, might float in crevices of driftwood across moderately wide stretches of sea. And I find that several species in this state can survive unharmed in seawater for seven days. One shell, Helix pomatia, after being treated this way and then allowed to hibernate again, was placed in seawater for twenty days and recovered perfectly. In that time, the shell could have been carried by an average ocean current about 660 geographical miles. Since this species has a thick, chalky operculum, I removed it, and when it had formed a new membranous one, I immersed it again for fourteen days in seawater. Once again, it recovered and crawled away. Baron Aucapitaine later tried similar experiments. He placed 100 land shells of ten species in a box pierced with holes and submerged it in the sea for two weeks. Of the hundred shells, twenty-seven survived. The presence of an operculum seemed important: of twelve specimens of Cyclostoma elegans, which has one, eleven revived. It's remarkable that while Helix pomatia survived so well in my experiments, not one of fifty-four specimens from four other Helix species survived in Aucapitaine's tests. Still, it's not very likely that land shells have often been transported this way. The feet of birds remain a more probable method.


The Relationship Between Island Inhabitants and the Nearest Mainland

The most striking and important fact for us is that the species inhabiting islands are related to those of the nearest mainland, without being exactly the same. Countless examples could be given. The Galapagos Archipelago, sitting right on the equator, lies between 500 and 600 miles from the coast of South America. Here, almost every product of the land and water bears the unmistakable stamp of the American continent. There are twenty-six land birds. Of these, twenty-one, or perhaps twenty-three, are classified as distinct species and would normally be assumed to have originated there. Yet the close relationship of most of these birds to American species is obvious in every detail -- their habits, gestures, and tones of voice. The same is true of the other animals and of a large proportion of the plants, as Dr. Hooker showed in his excellent study of the archipelago's flora. The naturalist looking at the inhabitants of these volcanic islands in the Pacific, several hundred miles from the continent, feels as if he's standing on American soil. Why should this be? Why should species supposedly created in the Galapagos, and nowhere else, so clearly bear the stamp of kinship with those created in America? There is nothing in the conditions of life, the geological nature of the islands, their height or climate, or the proportions of the different groups that closely resembles conditions on the South American coast. In fact, there's a considerable difference in all these respects. On the other hand, there's a good deal of resemblance in the volcanic soil, climate, height, and size of the islands between the Galapagos and the Cape Verde Archipelagos -- but what a total, absolute difference in their inhabitants! The inhabitants of the Cape Verde Islands are related to those of Africa, just as those of the Galapagos are related to America. Facts like these simply cannot be explained by the theory of independent creation. But on the view I'm presenting here, it's obvious that the Galapagos would be likely to receive colonists from America, whether by occasional means of transport or (though I don't believe it) by a former land connection, and the Cape Verde Islands from Africa. Such colonists would be prone to modification -- with the principle of inheritance still revealing their original birthplace.

Many similar facts could be given. Indeed, it's almost a universal rule that the endemic species of islands are related to those of the nearest continent or nearest large island. The exceptions are few, and most can be explained. For example, although Kerguelen Land lies closer to Africa than to America, its plants are related -- very closely, as we know from Dr. Hooker's account -- to those of America. But on the view that this island was mainly stocked by seeds carried with dirt and stones on icebergs, driven by the prevailing currents, the puzzle disappears. New Zealand's endemic plants are much more closely related to those of Australia, the nearest mainland, than to any other region -- exactly what you'd expect. But New Zealand is also clearly related to South America, which, though the next nearest continent, is so enormously remote that the fact becomes puzzling. This difficulty partly disappears if we accept that New Zealand, South America, and the other southern lands were partly stocked from a nearly intermediate, though distant, point -- namely, the Antarctic islands, when they were covered with vegetation during a warmer Tertiary period, before the last Glacial period began. The affinity between the flora of southwestern Australia and the Cape of Good Hope -- which, though faint, Dr. Hooker assures me is real -- is an even more remarkable case. But this affinity is confined to plants and will no doubt someday be explained.

The same principle that determines the relationship between the inhabitants of islands and the nearest mainland sometimes plays out on a smaller scale, in a most interesting way, within a single archipelago. Each separate island of the Galapagos is home to many distinct species -- a truly marvelous fact -- yet these species are far more closely related to each other than to the inhabitants of the American continent or any other part of the world. This is what you'd expect, since islands so close together would almost inevitably receive immigrants from the same original source, and from each other. But how is it that many of these immigrants have been modified differently, even if only slightly, on islands within sight of one another, with the same geology, the same elevation, the same climate? This long seemed a great difficulty to me. But it arises mainly from the deeply rooted error of treating physical conditions as the most important factor, when in reality the other species each organism has to compete with are at least as important -- and usually far more so. Now, if we look at the Galapagos species that also occur elsewhere in the world, we find that they differ considerably from island to island. This is exactly what we'd expect if the islands were stocked by occasional transport -- one plant's seed brought to one island, another plant's seed to another, though all from the same general source. So when an immigrant first settled on one island, or later spread from one to another, it would encounter different conditions on each island because it would compete with a different set of organisms. A plant, for instance, would find its preferred ground occupied by somewhat different species on different islands, and would face attacks from somewhat different enemies. If it then varied, natural selection would likely favor different varieties on different islands. Some species, however, might spread and keep the same form throughout the group, just as some species spread across an entire continent without changing.

The truly surprising fact about the Galapagos Archipelago -- and to a lesser degree about some similar cases -- is that each new species, after forming on one island, didn't quickly spread to the others. But although the islands are within sight of each other, they're separated by deep ocean channels, in most cases wider than the English Channel, and there's no reason to think they were ever continuously joined. The ocean currents between them are swift and deep, and strong winds are extraordinarily rare, so the islands are far more effectively separated than they appear on a map. Nevertheless, some species -- both those found elsewhere in the world and those confined to the archipelago -- are common to several islands, and from their present distribution we can infer that they spread from one island to another. But I think we often take a mistaken view of how readily closely related species will invade each other's territory when given free access. If one species has any advantage over another, it will quickly replace it, wholly or in part. But if both are equally well adapted to their own niches, both will probably hold their ground for almost any length of time. Because we're familiar with the fact that species introduced by humans have spread with astonishing speed across wide areas, we tend to assume most species would do the same. But we should remember that species that become established in new countries are generally not closely related to the native inhabitants -- they're very different forms, belonging in a large proportion of cases, as Alph. de Candolle has shown, to entirely different genera. In the Galapagos, even many of the birds, despite being well adapted for flying from island to island, differ on the different islands. There are three closely related species of mockingbird, each confined to its own island. Now suppose the Chatham Island mockingbird were blown to Charles Island, which has its own mockingbird. Why should it succeed in establishing itself there? We can safely assume that Charles Island is well stocked with its own species, since every year more eggs are laid and more young birds hatch than can possibly survive. And we can assume that the Charles Island mockingbird is at least as well fitted for its home as the Chatham Island species is for its. Sir Charles Lyell and Mr. Wollaston shared with me a remarkable fact on this point: Madeira and the nearby islet of Porto Santo possess many distinct but closely related species of land shells, some living in rock crevices. Although large quantities of stone are shipped annually from Porto Santo to Madeira, the Porto Santo shell species have not colonized Madeira -- yet both islands have been colonized by some European land shells, which presumably had some advantage over the native species. From these considerations, I think we needn't be too surprised that the endemic species on the various Galapagos islands haven't all spread from island to island. On continents too, prior occupancy has probably played an important role in preventing the mixing of species that live in different districts with nearly identical physical conditions. The southeast and southwest corners of Australia, for example, have almost the same physical conditions and are connected by continuous land, yet they're inhabited by a vast number of distinct mammals, birds, and plants. The same is true, according to Mr. Bates, of the butterflies and other animals in the great, open, continuous valley of the Amazon.

The same principle that governs the general character of oceanic island inhabitants -- the relationship to the source from which colonists could most easily have come, combined with their subsequent modification -- applies throughout all of nature. We see it on every mountaintop, in every lake and marsh. Alpine species, except where they've become widely spread during the Glacial period, are related to those of the surrounding lowlands. In South America, we find alpine hummingbirds, alpine rodents, alpine plants -- all strictly American forms. And obviously, as a mountain was slowly uplifted, it would be colonized from the surrounding lowlands. The same is true for the inhabitants of lakes and marshes, except where easy transport has allowed the same forms to prevail across large parts of the world. We see the same principle in the character of most blind animals inhabiting the caves of America and Europe. Other similar examples could be given. I believe it will prove universally true that wherever two regions, no matter how distant, share many closely related or representative species, some identical species will also be found there. And wherever many closely related species occur, there will be many forms that some naturalists rank as distinct species and others as mere varieties -- these doubtful forms showing us the steps in the process of modification.

The connection between the power and extent of migration in certain species -- whether now or in some former period -- and the existence of closely related species at remote points around the world, shows up in another, more general way. Mr. Gould pointed out to me long ago that in bird genera with worldwide ranges, many of the species individually have very wide ranges. I'm fairly confident this rule is generally true, though it's hard to prove. Among mammals, we see it strikingly in bats, and to a lesser degree in the cat and dog families. The same pattern appears in butterflies and beetles, and in most freshwater organisms, since many genera in very different groups range across the world, and many individual species have enormous ranges. I don't mean that all species in such genera range widely, but that some do. Nor do I mean that species in widely ranging genera have, on average, very wide ranges -- that will largely depend on how far modification has progressed. For instance, two varieties of the same species might inhabit America and Europe, giving the species an immense range. But if variation went a little further, the two varieties would be ranked as distinct species, and their ranges would shrink dramatically. Still less do I mean that species with the ability to cross barriers and range widely -- certain powerful-winged birds, for example -- will necessarily range widely. We should never forget that ranging widely requires not just the power to cross barriers, but the more important power of winning the struggle for life with foreign competitors in distant lands. But according to the view that all species of a genus, though scattered to the most remote points of the world, descend from a single ancestor, we ought to find -- and I believe as a general rule we do find -- that at least some species in such genera range very widely.

We should keep in mind that many genera in all groups are of ancient origin, and in these cases the species have had ample time for dispersal and subsequent modification. There's also geological evidence to suggest that within each major group, lower organisms change more slowly than higher ones. This means they've had a better chance of ranging widely while still keeping the same specific form. This fact, combined with the observation that the seeds and eggs of most simply organized forms are very small and better suited for long-distance transport, probably explains a long-observed law that Alph. de Candolle has recently discussed for plants: the lower any group of organisms stands, the more widely it ranges.


Summary of the Last and Present Chapters

In these two chapters, I've tried to show that if we make proper allowance for our ignorance of the full effects of climate changes and shifts in land level -- which have certainly occurred in the recent period -- along with other changes that have probably occurred; if we remember how little we know about the many curious means of occasional transport; and if we keep in mind (and this is very important) how often a species may have once ranged continuously over a wide area and then gone extinct in the intervening regions -- then the difficulty is not insurmountable in believing that all individuals of the same species, wherever they're found, descend from common parents. We're led to this conclusion -- which many naturalists have reached under the label of "single centers of creation" -- by various general considerations, especially the importance of barriers of all kinds and the patterns in the distribution of subgenera, genera, and families.

As for distinct species within the same genus, which on my theory have spread from a single parent source -- if we make the same allowances for our ignorance and remember that some forms of life change very slowly, with enormous periods of time thus available for their migration -- the difficulties are far from insurmountable, though they are often great, just as with individuals of the same species.

To illustrate the effects of climate change on distribution, I've tried to show how important the last Glacial period was. It affected even the equatorial regions. And during the alternation of cold in the north and south, it allowed organisms from opposite hemispheres to mingle and left some of them stranded on mountaintops all over the world. To show how varied the means of occasional transport are, I've discussed at some length how freshwater organisms disperse.

If the difficulties are not insurmountable in accepting that, over the long course of time, all individuals of the same species -- and likewise all the species within the same genus -- have descended from a single source, then all the grand leading facts of geographical distribution become explicable through the theory of migration, combined with subsequent modification and the multiplication of new forms. We can then understand the great importance of barriers, whether of land or water, in not only separating but apparently creating the various zoological and botanical regions. We can understand why related species are concentrated in the same areas, and how it is that under different latitudes -- in South America, for instance -- the inhabitants of the plains and mountains, the forests, marshes, and deserts, are linked together in such a mysterious way, and are likewise linked to the extinct creatures that once lived on the same continent. Keeping in mind that the relationships between organisms are of the highest importance, we can see why two areas with nearly the same physical conditions should often be inhabited by very different forms of life. Depending on how long ago colonists entered one or both regions; depending on whether the routes of communication allowed certain forms in and kept others out, in greater or lesser numbers; depending on whether those that entered happened to compete more or less directly with each other and with the natives; and depending on how rapidly the immigrants were able to vary -- there would arise, in two or more regions and quite independently of their physical conditions, an almost infinitely diverse array of living conditions. There would be an almost endless amount of interaction and counteraction among organisms, and we would find some groups greatly modified, others only slightly; some flourishing in great numbers, others barely hanging on -- and this is exactly what we do find across the great geographical regions of the world.

On these same principles, we can understand -- as I've tried to show -- why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants, but why a large proportion of these should be endemic. We can understand why, depending on the means of migration, one group of organisms should have all its species unique to the island while another group in the same class should have all its species identical to those on the nearest continent. We can see why whole groups of organisms, like frogs and land mammals, should be absent from oceanic islands, while even the most isolated islands possess their own unique species of bats. We can see why there should be some relationship on islands between the presence of mammals, in more or less modified form, and the depth of the sea between such islands and the mainland. We can clearly see why all the inhabitants of an archipelago, though distinct on the individual islands, should be closely related to each other, and also related -- though less closely -- to those of the nearest continent or other likely source of immigrants. We can see why, if two areas however distant share very closely related or representative species, some identical species will almost always be found there too.

As the late Edward Forbes often emphasized, there is a striking parallel between the laws of life through time and through space. The laws governing the succession of forms in the past are nearly the same as those governing the differences between forms in different areas today. We see this in many facts. The persistence of each species and group of species is continuous in time; the apparent exceptions are so few that they can fairly be attributed to our not yet having found certain forms in intermediate deposits where they're absent but occur both above and below. Similarly in space, the general rule is that the area inhabited by a single species, or by a group of species, is continuous, and the exceptions -- which aren't rare -- can, as I've tried to show, be explained by past migrations under different conditions, by occasional means of transport, or by extinction in the intervening regions. Both in time and space, species and groups of species have their points of maximum development. Groups of species living during the same period of time, or living within the same area, are often characterized by minor shared features, like patterns of surface texture or color. Looking at the long succession of past ages, as at distant regions throughout the world, we find that species in certain classes differ little from each other, while those in another class, or even in a different section of the same order, differ enormously. In both time and space, the simpler organisms in each class generally change less than the more complex ones, though there are striking exceptions to this rule in both cases. According to my theory, all these relationships through time and space make sense. Whether we look at related forms that changed during successive ages or at those that changed after migrating to distant regions, they are connected by the same bond of ordinary generation. In both cases, the laws of variation have been the same, and modifications have been accumulated by the same means -- natural selection.
