XV

Recapitulation and Conclusion


Since this entire book is one long argument, it may help the reader to have the main facts and conclusions briefly summarized.

I don't deny that many serious objections can be raised against the theory of descent with modification through variation and natural selection. I've tried to give these objections their full force. Nothing at first seems harder to believe than that complex organs and instincts were perfected not by some intelligence superior to human reason (though working in an analogous way), but by the accumulation of countless slight variations, each beneficial to the individual that possessed it. Nevertheless, this difficulty, though it seems overwhelmingly great to our imagination, can't be considered a real obstacle if we accept the following propositions: that all parts of an organism's structure and instincts show at least individual differences; that there is a struggle for existence leading to the preservation of beneficial variations in structure or instinct; and lastly, that gradations in the perfection of each organ may have existed, each useful in its own way. The truth of these propositions cannot, I think, be disputed.

It is, no doubt, extremely difficult even to guess by what gradations many structures were perfected, especially among fragmentary and declining groups of organisms that have suffered heavy extinction. But we see so many strange gradations in nature that we should be extremely cautious about saying that any organ, instinct, or whole structure could not have reached its present state through many gradual steps. There are, admittedly, cases of special difficulty for the theory of natural selection. One of the most puzzling is the existence of two or three distinct castes of workers or sterile female ants within the same community. But I've tried to show how these difficulties can be overcome.

Regarding the nearly universal sterility of species when first crossed -- which forms such a remarkable contrast with the nearly universal fertility of varieties when crossed -- I must refer the reader to the summary of facts given at the end of the ninth chapter. These facts seem to me to show conclusively that this sterility is no more a special gift than the inability of two different kinds of trees to be grafted together. Rather, it's an incidental result of differences confined to the reproductive systems of the crossed species. We see the truth of this conclusion in the vast difference in results when the same two species are crossed in opposite directions -- that is, when one species is first used as the father and then as the mother. The analogy from dimorphic and trimorphic plants clearly leads to the same conclusion, because when the forms are illegitimately united, they produce few or no seeds, and their offspring are more or less sterile -- and yet these forms belong to the same undoubted species, differing from each other in nothing except their reproductive organs and functions.

Although many authors have asserted that the fertility of varieties when crossed, and of their hybrid offspring, is universal, this can't be considered entirely correct given the facts reported on the high authority of Gartner and Kolreuter. Most of the varieties that have been tested were produced under domestication, and since domestication (I don't mean mere confinement) almost certainly tends to eliminate the sterility that, judging from analogy, would have affected the parent species if crossed, we shouldn't expect that domestication would also cause sterility in their modified descendants when crossed. This elimination of sterility apparently follows from the same cause that allows our domestic animals to breed freely under varied circumstances -- and this in turn apparently follows from their having been gradually accustomed to frequent changes in their living conditions.

A double and parallel set of facts seems to shed much light on the sterility of species when first crossed and of their hybrid offspring. On one side, there's good reason to believe that slight changes in living conditions give vigor and fertility to all organisms. We also know that crossing between distinct individuals of the same variety, and between distinct varieties, increases the number of offspring and certainly gives them greater size and vigor. This is mainly because the forms being crossed have been exposed to somewhat different conditions of life. I've confirmed through a painstaking series of experiments that if all individuals of the same variety are kept under the same conditions for several generations, the benefit from crossing is often much reduced or disappears entirely. That's one side of the picture. On the other side, we know that species that have long been exposed to nearly uniform conditions, when subjected in confinement to new and greatly changed conditions, either die or, if they survive, become sterile while retaining perfect health. This doesn't happen, or happens only very slightly, with our domesticated animals, which have long been exposed to fluctuating conditions. So when we find that hybrids produced by crossing two distinct species are few in number -- because they die soon after conception or at a very early age, or if they survive are rendered more or less sterile -- it seems highly probable that this result is due to their having been subjected, in effect, to a great change in their conditions of life, from being composed of two distinct biological organizations. Whoever can explain in a definite way why, for instance, an elephant or a fox won't breed in confinement in its native country, while the domestic pig or dog breeds freely under the most varied conditions, will at the same time be able to give a definite answer to why two distinct species when crossed, as well as their hybrid offspring, are generally rendered more or less sterile, while two domesticated varieties when crossed and their hybrid offspring are perfectly fertile.

Turning to geographical distribution, the difficulties for the theory of descent with modification are serious enough. All the individuals of the same species, and all the species of the same genus or even higher group, are descended from common parents. Therefore, in however distant and isolated parts of the world they may now be found, they must over the course of successive generations have traveled from some one point to all the others. We are often completely unable even to guess how this could have happened. Yet since we have reason to believe that some species have retained the same form for very long periods -- immensely long as measured by years -- we shouldn't place too much weight on the occasional wide distribution of the same species. During very long periods there will always have been a good chance for extensive migration by many means. A broken or interrupted range can often be explained by the extinction of the species in the regions between. We can't deny that we are still very ignorant of the full extent of the climatic and geographical changes that have affected the earth during modern periods, and such changes will often have made migration easier. As an example, I've tried to show how powerful the influence of the Glacial period has been on the distribution of the same and related species throughout the world. We are still deeply ignorant of the many occasional means of transport. With respect to distinct species of the same genus inhabiting distant and isolated regions, since the process of modification has necessarily been slow, all means of migration will have been possible over a very long period. Consequently, the difficulty of explaining the wide distribution of species within the same genus is somewhat reduced.

Since, according to the theory of natural selection, an enormous number of intermediate forms must have existed, linking together all the species in each group by gradations as fine as our existing varieties, the question arises: why don't we see these linking forms all around us? Why aren't all organisms blended together in an inextricable chaos? Regarding existing forms, we should remember that we have no right to expect (except in rare cases) to discover directly connecting links between them -- only between each and some extinct, supplanted form. Even across a wide area that has remained continuous for a long period, where climatic and other conditions change gradually as you move from a district occupied by one species into another occupied by a closely related species, we have no right to expect often to find intermediate varieties in the intermediate zones. We have reason to believe that only a few species in a genus ever undergo change, while the other species go completely extinct without leaving modified descendants. Of the species that do change, only a few within the same region change at the same time, and all modifications happen slowly. I've also shown that the intermediate varieties that probably first existed in the intermediate zones would be liable to replacement by the related forms on either side. The latter, existing in greater numbers, would generally be modified and improved at a faster rate than the intermediate varieties, which existed in smaller numbers. So in the long run, the intermediate varieties would be replaced and driven to extinction.

Given this process of extinction of countless connecting links between the living and extinct inhabitants of the world, and at each successive period between the extinct and still older species, why isn't every geological formation packed with such links? Why doesn't every collection of fossil remains offer clear evidence of the gradation and transformation of life forms? Although geological research has undoubtedly revealed many former links, bringing numerous forms of life much closer together, it doesn't yield the infinitely many fine gradations between past and present species that the theory requires -- and this is the most obvious of the many objections that can be raised against it. Why, again, do whole groups of related species appear (though this appearance is often misleading) to have arrived suddenly in successive geological stages? Although we now know that organisms appeared on this globe at an incalculably remote period, long before the lowest bed of the Cambrian system was deposited, why don't we find beneath this system great piles of rock layers stored with the remains of the ancestors of Cambrian fossils? For according to the theory, such layers must somewhere have been deposited at these ancient and utterly unknown epochs of the world's history.

I can answer these questions and objections only on the assumption that the geological record is far more imperfect than most geologists believe. The number of specimens in all our museums is absolutely nothing compared with the countless generations of countless species that have certainly existed. The parent form of any two or more species would not be intermediate in all its features between its modified descendants, any more than the rock pigeon is intermediate in crop and tail between its descendants, the pouter and fantail pigeons. We wouldn't be able to recognize a species as the parent of another modified species, even if we examined the two extremely closely, unless we had most of the intermediate links. And owing to the imperfection of the geological record, we have no right to expect to find so many links. If two or three, or even more linking forms were discovered, they would simply be classified by many naturalists as so many new species, especially if found in different geological layers, however slight their differences. Numerous existing doubtful forms could be named that are probably varieties, but who will claim that in future ages enough fossil links will be discovered for naturalists to decide whether these doubtful forms should be called varieties? Only a small portion of the world has been geologically explored. Only organisms of certain kinds can be preserved as fossils, at least in any great number. Many species, once formed, never undergo any further change but go extinct without leaving modified descendants. And the periods during which species have undergone modification, though long as measured by years, have probably been short compared to the periods during which they retained the same form. It's the dominant and widely distributed species that vary most frequently and vary most, and varieties are often at first local -- both factors making the discovery of intermediate links in any one formation less likely. Local varieties won't spread into other and distant regions until they are considerably modified and improved, and when they have spread and are discovered in a geological formation, they appear as if suddenly created there and will simply be classified as new species. Most formations have been intermittent in their accumulation, and their duration has probably been shorter than the average duration of species. Successive formations are in most cases separated from each other by blank intervals of great length, because fossiliferous formations thick enough to resist future erosion can, as a general rule, accumulate only where much sediment is deposited on a subsiding sea floor. During the alternate periods of elevation and of stationary level, the record will generally be blank. During these latter periods there will probably be more variability in life forms; during periods of subsidence, more extinction.

Regarding the absence of fossil-rich strata beneath the Cambrian formation, I can only return to the hypothesis given in the tenth chapter: that although our continents and oceans have endured for an enormous period in nearly their present relative positions, we have no reason to assume this has always been the case. Consequently, formations much older than any now known may lie buried beneath the great oceans. Regarding the objection that not enough time has passed since our planet solidified for the assumed amount of organic change -- and this objection, as urged by Sir William Thompson, is probably one of the most serious yet advanced -- I can only say, first, that we don't know at what rate species change as measured by years, and second, that many scientists are not yet willing to admit that we know enough about the structure of the universe and the interior of our globe to speculate safely on its past duration.

Everyone will admit that the geological record is imperfect. But few will be inclined to admit that it's imperfect to the degree our theory requires. If we look at long enough intervals of time, geology plainly declares that species have all changed, and they have changed in the manner the theory requires -- slowly and gradually. We see this clearly in the fossil remains from consecutive formations, which are invariably much more closely related to each other than are fossils from widely separated formations.

Such is the sum of the main objections and difficulties that can justly be raised against the theory, and I've now briefly summarized the answers and explanations that, as far as I can see, may be given. I've felt these difficulties far too heavily during many years to underestimate their weight. But it's worth noting that the most important objections relate to questions about which we are admittedly ignorant -- nor do we know how ignorant we are. We don't know all the possible transitional gradations between the simplest and the most perfect organs. No one can claim that we know all the varied means of dispersal over the long course of time, or how imperfect the geological record really is. Serious as these objections are, in my judgment they are by no means enough to overthrow the theory of descent with subsequent modification.


Now let's turn to the other side of the argument. Under domestication we see much variability, caused -- or at least triggered -- by changed conditions of life, but often in such an obscure way that we're tempted to consider the variations spontaneous. Variability is governed by many complex laws: by correlated growth, compensation, the increased use and disuse of parts, and the direct action of surrounding conditions. It's very difficult to determine how extensively our domestic animals and plants have been modified, but we can safely conclude that the changes have been large and that modifications can be inherited for long periods. As long as living conditions remain the same, we have reason to believe that a modification already inherited for many generations may continue to be inherited for an almost infinite number of generations. On the other hand, we have evidence that variability, once it comes into play, doesn't stop under domestication for a very long period -- nor do we know that it ever stops, since new varieties are still occasionally produced by our oldest domesticated animals and plants.

Variability is not actually caused by humans; we only unintentionally expose organisms to new conditions of life, and then nature acts on their organization and causes them to vary. But humans can and do select the variations that nature provides, and accumulate them in any desired direction. We thus adapt animals and plants for our own benefit or pleasure. We may do this methodically, or we may do it unconsciously by preserving the individuals most useful or pleasing to us without any intention of altering the breed. It's certain that we can greatly influence the character of a breed by selecting, in each successive generation, individual differences so slight as to be undetectable except by a trained eye. This unconscious process of selection has been the great force behind the formation of our most distinct and useful domestic breeds. That many breeds produced by humans have largely the character of natural species is shown by the persistent doubts over whether many of them are varieties or originally distinct species.

There is no reason why the principles that have worked so effectively under domestication should not have worked under nature. In the survival of favored individuals and populations, during the constantly recurring struggle for existence, we see a powerful and ever-acting form of selection. The struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high geometric rate of increase common to all organisms. This high rate of increase is proved by calculation, by the rapid increase of many animals and plants during a run of favorable seasons, and when they become established in new countries. More individuals are born than can possibly survive. A tiny advantage may determine which individuals live and which die -- which variety or species increases in number, and which decreases or finally goes extinct. Since individuals of the same species compete with each other in every respect, the struggle will generally be most severe among them. It will be almost equally severe between varieties of the same species, and next in severity between species of the same genus. On the other hand, the struggle will often be severe between organisms far apart on the scale of nature. The slightest advantage in certain individuals, at any age or during any season, over those they compete with -- or better adaptation in however slight a degree to the surrounding physical conditions -- will, in the long run, tip the balance.

In animals with separate sexes, there will in most cases be a struggle between males for possession of the females. The most vigorous males, or those that have most successfully dealt with their conditions of life, will generally leave the most offspring. But success will often depend on the males having special weapons, means of defense, or attractive features -- and a slight advantage will lead to victory.

Since geology plainly shows that every land has undergone great physical changes, we might have expected organisms to vary under nature just as they have under domestication. And if there has been any variability under nature, it would be an inexplicable fact if natural selection had not come into play. It has often been asserted, but the assertion can't be proved, that the amount of variation under nature is strictly limited. Humans, though acting on external characters alone and often capriciously, can produce great results within a short period by adding up mere individual differences in domestic animals and plants -- and everyone admits that species show individual differences. But besides such differences, all naturalists admit that natural varieties exist, considered distinct enough to be recorded in systematic works. No one has drawn any clear line between individual differences and slight varieties, or between more clearly marked varieties and subspecies and species. On separate continents, and on different parts of the same continent when divided by barriers of any kind, and on outlying islands, what a multitude of forms exist that some experienced naturalists rank as varieties, others as geographical races or subspecies, and others as distinct though closely related species!

If, then, animals and plants do vary, however slightly or slowly, why should not variations or individual differences that are in any way beneficial be preserved and accumulated through natural selection, or the survival of the fittest? If humans can patiently select variations useful to them, why, under changing and complex conditions of life, should not variations useful to nature's living creatures often arise and be preserved or selected? What limit can be put to this power, acting over long ages and rigorously scrutinizing the whole constitution, structure, and habits of each creature -- favoring the good and rejecting the bad? I can see no limit to this power, in slowly and beautifully adapting each form to the most complex web of life. The theory of natural selection, even if we look no further than this, seems in the highest degree probable. I've already summarized, as fairly as I could, the opposing difficulties and objections. Now let's turn to the special facts and arguments in favor of the theory.


On the view that species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties, and that each species first existed as a variety, we can see why no line of demarcation can be drawn between species -- commonly supposed to have been produced by special acts of creation -- and varieties, which are acknowledged to have been produced by natural laws. On this same view we can understand why, in a region where many species of a genus have been produced and where they now flourish, these same species should show many varieties. Where the factory of species has been active, we'd expect, as a general rule, to find it still in action -- and this is the case if varieties are emerging species. Moreover, the species of larger genera, which provide the greater number of varieties or emerging species, retain to some degree the character of varieties, for they differ from each other by a smaller amount than do the species of smaller genera. The closely related species of larger genera apparently have restricted ranges, and in their relationships they cluster in little groups around other species -- in both respects resembling varieties. These are strange patterns if each species was independently created, but they make sense if each first existed as a variety.

Since each species tends by its geometric rate of reproduction to increase excessively in number, and since the modified descendants of each species will be able to increase as they become more diversified in habits and structure -- so as to seize on many and widely different places in the natural world -- there will be a constant tendency in natural selection to preserve the most divergent offspring of any one species. So during a long-continued course of modification, the slight differences characteristic of varieties of the same species tend to be amplified into the greater differences characteristic of species of the same genus. New and improved varieties will inevitably replace and drive to extinction the older, less improved, and intermediate varieties. Thus species are rendered largely defined and distinct. Dominant species belonging to the larger groups within each class tend to give rise to new and dominant forms, so that each large group tends to become still larger and at the same time more divergent in character. But since all groups can't keep increasing in size -- the world wouldn't hold them -- the more dominant groups beat the less dominant. This tendency of large groups to keep growing in size and diverging in character, together with the inevitable outcome of much extinction, explains the arrangement of all forms of life in groups subordinate to groups, all within a few great classes, which has prevailed throughout all time. This grand fact -- the grouping of all organisms under what is called the Natural System -- is utterly inexplicable on the theory of creation.

Since natural selection acts solely by accumulating slight, successive, favorable variations, it can produce no great or sudden changes. It can act only by short and slow steps. Hence the principle of "Natura non facit saltum" -- nature does not make leaps -- which every new addition to our knowledge tends to confirm, makes sense under this theory. We can see why throughout nature the same general end is achieved by an almost infinite diversity of means, because every trait, once acquired, is long inherited, and structures already modified in many different ways have to be adapted for the same general purpose. We can, in short, see why nature is lavish in variety yet stingy with innovation. But why this should be a law of nature if each species was independently created, no one can explain.

Many other facts are, it seems to me, explained by this theory. How strange it is that a bird shaped like a woodpecker should prey on insects on the ground; that upland geese, which rarely or never swim, should have webbed feet; that a thrush-like bird should dive and feed on underwater insects; and that a petrel should have the habits and structure fitting it for the life of an auk -- and so on in endless other cases. But on the view that each species is constantly trying to increase in number, with natural selection always ready to adapt the slowly varying descendants of each to any unoccupied or poorly occupied place in nature, these facts stop being strange and might even have been expected.

We can to some extent understand why there is so much beauty throughout nature, for this may be largely attributed to the action of selection. That beauty, as we perceive it, is not universal must be admitted by anyone who will look at some venomous snakes, some fish, and certain hideous bats with a distorted resemblance to the human face. Sexual selection has given the most brilliant colors, elegant patterns, and other ornaments to the males, and sometimes to both sexes of many birds, butterflies, and other animals. In birds it has often made the male's voice musical to the female, as well as to our ears. Flowers and fruit have been made conspicuous by brilliant colors contrasting with green foliage, so that flowers may be easily seen, visited, and fertilized by insects, and seeds spread by birds. How it comes that certain colors, sounds, and forms give pleasure to humans and other animals -- that is, how the sense of beauty in its simplest form was first acquired -- we don't know, any more than we know how certain smells and flavors first became agreeable.

Since natural selection acts through competition, it adapts and improves the inhabitants of each country only in relation to their fellow inhabitants. So we need feel no surprise that the species of any one country, although supposedly created and specially adapted for that country, can be beaten and replaced by introduced species from another land. Nor should we be astonished if all the designs in nature are not, as far as we can judge, absolutely perfect -- as in the case even of the human eye. Or if some of them are disturbing to our ideas of fitness. We need not be astonished at the sting of the bee, when used against an enemy, causing the bee's own death; at drones being produced in such great numbers for one single act and then slaughtered by their sterile sisters; at the astonishing waste of pollen by fir trees; at the instinctive hatred of the queen bee for her own fertile daughters; at parasitic wasps feeding within the living bodies of caterpillars; and at other such cases. The wonder, indeed, on the theory of natural selection, is that more cases of the lack of absolute perfection have not been found.

The complex and little-known laws governing the production of varieties are the same, as far as we can judge, as the laws that have governed the production of distinct species. In both cases, physical conditions seem to have produced some direct and definite effect, but how much we can't say. Thus, when varieties enter any new habitat, they occasionally take on some of the characters typical of the species in that habitat. With both varieties and species, use and disuse seem to have produced considerable effect; it's impossible to resist this conclusion when we look, for instance, at the loggerhead duck, whose wings are incapable of flight in nearly the same condition as in the domestic duck; or at the burrowing tuco-tuco, which is occasionally blind, and then at certain moles, which are habitually blind and have their eyes covered with skin; or at the blind animals inhabiting the dark caves of America and Europe. With both varieties and species, correlated variation seems to have played an important part, so that when one part has been modified, other parts have necessarily been modified too. With both varieties and species, reversions to long-lost characters occasionally occur. How inexplicable on the theory of creation is the occasional appearance of stripes on the shoulders and legs of the various species of the horse family and their hybrids! How simply this fact is explained if we believe that these species are all descended from a striped ancestor, in the same way that the various domestic breeds of pigeon are descended from the blue and barred rock pigeon!

On the conventional view that each species was independently created, why should specific characters -- those by which species of the same genus differ from each other -- be more variable than the generic characters on which they all agree? Why, for instance, should the color of a flower be more likely to vary in any one species of a genus, if the other species possess differently colored flowers, than if all possess the same colored flowers? If species are only well-marked varieties whose characters have become highly stable, we can understand this. They have already varied since branching off from a common ancestor in certain characters, by which they've come to be specifically distinct from each other, and therefore these same characters would be more likely to vary again than the generic characters that have been inherited unchanged for an immense period. It's inexplicable on the theory of creation why a part developed in a very unusual way in one species alone of a genus -- and therefore, as we may naturally infer, of great importance to that species -- should be especially liable to variation. But on our view, this part has undergone, since the several species branched off from a common ancestor, an unusual amount of variability and modification, and therefore we'd expect the part to still be variable. But a part may be developed in the most unusual manner, like the wing of a bat, and yet not be more variable than any other structure, if the part is common to many subordinate forms -- that is, if it has been inherited for a very long period -- because in that case it will have been made stable by long-continued natural selection.

Looking at instincts, marvelous as some are, they offer no greater difficulty than do bodily structures under the theory of natural selection of successive, slight, but beneficial modifications. We can thus understand why nature moves by graduated steps in giving different animals of the same class their various instincts. I've tried to show how much light the principle of gradation throws on the admirable architectural powers of the honeybee. Habit no doubt often plays a role in modifying instincts, but it certainly isn't essential, as we see in the case of sterile worker insects, which leave no offspring to inherit the effects of long-continued habit. On the view that all species of the same genus have descended from a common parent and inherited much in common, we can understand why related species, when placed under widely different conditions of life, still follow nearly the same instincts -- why the thrushes of tropical and temperate South America, for instance, line their nests with mud like our British species. On the view that instincts have been slowly acquired through natural selection, we need not be surprised that some instincts are imperfect and liable to mistakes, and that many instincts cause other animals to suffer.

If species are only well-marked and permanent varieties, we can immediately see why their crossed offspring should follow the same complex laws in their degrees and kinds of resemblance to their parents -- in being absorbed into each other by successive crosses, and in other such points -- as do the crossed offspring of acknowledged varieties. This similarity would be a strange fact if species had been independently created and varieties had been produced through natural laws.

If we accept that the geological record is imperfect to an extreme degree, then the facts the record does provide strongly support the theory of descent with modification. New species have appeared slowly and at successive intervals, and the amount of change after equal intervals of time is widely different in different groups. The extinction of species and of whole groups of species, which has played so conspicuous a part in the history of life, almost inevitably follows from the principle of natural selection, because old forms are replaced by new and improved forms. Neither single species nor groups of species reappear once the chain of ordinary reproduction is broken. The gradual spread of dominant forms, with the slow modification of their descendants, causes life forms, after long intervals of time, to appear as if they had changed simultaneously throughout the world. The fact that fossil remains from each formation are in some degree intermediate in character between fossils from the formations above and below is simply explained by their intermediate position in the chain of descent. The grand fact that all extinct organisms can be classified with all living organisms naturally follows from both the living and the extinct being the offspring of common parents. Since species have generally diverged in character during their long course of descent and modification, we can understand why the more ancient forms, or early ancestors of each group, so often occupy a position somewhat intermediate between existing groups. Recent forms are generally considered to be, on the whole, higher in the scale of organization than ancient forms -- and they must be higher insofar as the later and more improved forms have conquered the older and less improved forms in the struggle for life. They have also generally had their organs more specialized for different functions. This fact is perfectly compatible with many organisms still retaining simple and barely improved structures, suited for simple conditions of life. It's likewise compatible with some forms having declined in organization, by having become at each stage of descent better fitted for new and less demanding ways of life. Lastly, the wonderful pattern of the long persistence of related forms on the same continent -- of marsupials in Australia, of edentates in America, and other such cases -- makes sense, because within the same country the existing and the extinct will be closely related by descent.

Looking at geographical distribution, if we accept that during the long course of ages much migration has occurred from one part of the world to another, owing to former climatic and geographical changes and to the many occasional and unknown means of dispersal, then we can understand, on the theory of descent with modification, most of the great leading facts about distribution. We can see why there should be so striking a parallel between the distribution of organisms throughout space and their geological succession through time -- because in both cases the organisms have been connected by the bond of ordinary reproduction, and the means of modification have been the same. We see the full meaning of the wonderful fact, which has struck every traveler, that on the same continent, under the most diverse conditions -- heat and cold, mountain and lowland, desert and marsh -- most of the inhabitants within each great class are plainly related, because they are the descendants of the same ancestors and early colonists. On this same principle of former migration, combined in most cases with modification, we can understand, with the help of the Glacial period, why some identical plants and many closely related ones occur on the most distant mountains and in the northern and southern temperate zones. Likewise, the close relationship of some sea creatures in the northern and southern temperate latitudes, though separated by the whole tropical ocean. Although two countries may present physical conditions as closely similar as the same species ever require, we need feel no surprise at their inhabitants being widely different, if they have been completely separated from each other for a long period. Since the relationship of organism to organism is the most important of all relationships, and since the two countries will have received colonists at various times and in different proportions -- from some other country or from each other -- the course of modification in the two areas will inevitably have been different.

On this view of migration with subsequent modification, we see why oceanic islands are inhabited by only a few species, but why many of these are peculiar or endemic forms. We clearly see why species belonging to those groups of animals that can't cross wide stretches of ocean, such as frogs and terrestrial mammals, don't inhabit oceanic islands -- and why, on the other hand, new and peculiar species of bats, animals that can cross the ocean, are often found on islands far distant from any continent. Such cases as the presence of peculiar bat species on oceanic islands and the absence of all other terrestrial mammals are utterly inexplicable on the theory of independent acts of creation.

The existence of closely related representative species in any two areas implies, on the theory of descent with modification, that the same parent forms formerly inhabited both areas -- and we almost invariably find that wherever many closely related species inhabit two areas, some identical species are still common to both. Wherever many closely related yet distinct species occur, doubtful forms and varieties belonging to the same groups likewise occur. It's a rule of high generality that the inhabitants of each area are related to the inhabitants of the nearest source from which immigrants might have been derived. We see this in the striking relationship of nearly all the plants and animals of the Galapagos Archipelago, of Juan Fernandez, and of the other American islands, to those of the neighboring American mainland -- and of those of the Cape Verde Archipelago and the other African islands to the African mainland. These facts receive no explanation on the theory of creation.

The fact, as we've seen, that all past and present organisms can be arranged within a few great classes, in groups subordinate to groups, with extinct groups often falling between recent groups, is understandable on the theory of natural selection with its consequences of extinction and divergence of character. On these same principles we see why the mutual relationships of forms within each class are so complex and circuitous. We see why certain characters are far more useful than others for classification; why adaptive characters, though of the highest importance to the organisms, are of hardly any importance in classification; why characters derived from rudimentary parts, though of no use to the organisms, are often of high classificatory value; and why embryological characters are often the most valuable of all. The true relationships of all organisms, as distinct from their adaptive resemblances, are due to inheritance -- to community of descent. The Natural System is a genealogical arrangement, with the acquired degrees of difference marked by the terms varieties, species, genera, families, and so on. And we have to discover the lines of descent by the most stable characters, whatever they may be and however slight their vital importance.

The similar framework of bones in the hand of a human, wing of a bat, fin of a porpoise, and leg of a horse -- the same number of vertebrae forming the neck of the giraffe and of the elephant -- and countless other such facts, explain themselves at once on the theory of descent with slow and slight successive modifications. The similarity of pattern in the wing and leg of a bat, though used for such different purposes -- in the jaws and legs of a crab -- in the petals, stamens, and pistils of a flower -- is likewise, to a large extent, understandable on the view of the gradual modification of parts or organs that were originally alike in an early ancestor in each of these classes. On the principle that successive variations don't always appear at an early age and are inherited at a corresponding period of life, we clearly see why the embryos of mammals, birds, reptiles, and fish should be so closely similar, and so unlike the adult forms. We may stop marveling at the embryo of an air-breathing mammal or bird having gill slits and arteries running in loops, like those of a fish that has to breathe the air dissolved in water with the help of well-developed gills.

Disuse, sometimes aided by natural selection, will often have reduced organs when rendered useless under changed habits or conditions of life, and we can understand on this view the meaning of rudimentary organs. But disuse and selection will generally act on each creature when it has come to maturity and has to play its full part in the struggle for existence, and will thus have little effect on an organ during early life. Hence the organ will not be reduced or rendered rudimentary at this early age. The calf, for instance, has inherited teeth that never cut through the gums of the upper jaw, from an early ancestor that had well-developed teeth. We may believe that the teeth in the adult animal were formerly reduced by disuse, because the tongue and palate, or lips, had become excellently fitted through natural selection to browse without their help -- whereas in the calf, the teeth have been left unaffected and, on the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages, have been inherited from a remote period to the present day. On the view that each organism with all its separate parts was specially created, how utterly inexplicable it is that organs bearing the plain stamp of uselessness -- such as the teeth in the embryonic calf or the shriveled wings under the fused wing covers of many beetles -- should so frequently occur. Nature may be said to have taken pains to reveal her scheme of modification by means of rudimentary organs, embryological and homologous structures -- but we are too blind to understand her meaning.

I have now summarized the facts and considerations that have thoroughly convinced me that species have been modified during a long course of descent. This has been achieved chiefly through the natural selection of numerous successive, slight, favorable variations, aided in an important way by the inherited effects of the use and disuse of parts, and in a less important way -- that is, in relation to adaptive structures, whether past or present -- by the direct action of external conditions, and by variations that in our ignorance seem to arise spontaneously. It appears that I formerly underestimated the frequency and value of these latter forms of variation, as leading to permanent modifications of structure independent of natural selection. But since my conclusions have recently been much misrepresented, and it has been stated that I attribute the modification of species exclusively to natural selection, I may be permitted to point out that in the first edition of this work, and in later editions, I placed in a most prominent position -- namely, at the close of the Introduction -- the following words: "I am convinced that natural selection has been the main but not the exclusive means of modification." This has been to no avail. Great is the power of persistent misrepresentation; but the history of science shows that fortunately this power does not last long.

It can hardly be supposed that a false theory would explain, in so satisfactory a manner as the theory of natural selection does, the several large classes of facts specified above. It has recently been objected that this is an unsafe method of arguing, but it's a method used in judging the ordinary events of life and has often been used by the greatest natural philosophers. The wave theory of light was arrived at in this way, and the belief in the revolution of the earth on its own axis was until recently supported by hardly any direct evidence. It's no valid objection that science so far sheds no light on the far higher problem of the essence or origin of life. Who can explain what the essence of the attraction of gravity is? No one now objects to following out the results of this unknown force of attraction, notwithstanding that Leibniz formerly accused Newton of introducing "occult qualities and miracles into philosophy."

I see no good reason why the views presented in this book should shock anyone's religious feelings. It's reassuring, as a reminder of how fleeting such reactions are, to recall that the greatest discovery ever made by humanity -- the law of the attraction of gravity -- was also attacked by Leibniz "as subversive of natural, and inferentially of revealed, religion." A celebrated author and clergyman has written to me that "he has gradually learned to see that it is just as noble a conception of the Deity to believe that He created a few original forms capable of self-development into other and needful forms, as to believe that He required a fresh act of creation to supply the voids caused by the action of His laws."

Why, it may be asked, did nearly all the most eminent living naturalists and geologists until recently disbelieve in the mutability of species? It can't be asserted that organisms in a state of nature are subject to no variation. It can't be proved that the amount of variation over long ages is limited. No clear distinction has been, or can be, drawn between species and well-marked varieties. It can't be maintained that species when crossed are invariably sterile and varieties invariably fertile, or that sterility is a special gift and sign of creation. The belief that species were immutable was almost unavoidable as long as the history of the world was thought to be short. And now that we've gained some idea of the immensity of time, we're too inclined to assume, without proof, that the geological record is so complete that it would have given us clear evidence of the transformation of species, if they had undergone transformation.

But the chief cause of our natural reluctance to admit that one species has given rise to other and distinct species is that we are always slow to accept any great change whose steps we can't see. The difficulty is the same as that felt by so many geologists when Lyell first argued that long lines of inland cliffs had been formed, and great valleys excavated, by the very forces we still see at work. The mind cannot possibly grasp the full meaning of even a million years; it cannot add up and perceive the full effects of many slight variations accumulated during an almost infinite number of generations.

Although I am fully convinced of the truth of the views given in this book in the form of an abstract, I by no means expect to convince experienced naturalists whose minds are stocked with a multitude of facts all viewed, during a long course of years, from a point of view directly opposite to mine. It's so easy to hide our ignorance under expressions like "the plan of creation," "unity of design," and so on, and to think that we're giving an explanation when we're only restating a fact. Anyone whose disposition leads him to attach more weight to unexplained difficulties than to the explanation of a certain number of facts will certainly reject the theory. A few naturalists, blessed with much flexibility of mind and who have already begun to doubt the immutability of species, may be influenced by this book. But I look with confidence to the future -- to young and rising naturalists, who will be able to view both sides of the question with impartiality. Whoever is led to believe that species are mutable will do good service by conscientiously expressing his conviction, for only in this way can the load of prejudice by which this subject is overwhelmed be removed.

Several eminent naturalists have recently published their belief that a multitude of supposed species in each genus are not real species, but that other species are real -- that is, were independently created. This seems to me a strange conclusion. They admit that a multitude of forms, which until recently they themselves considered special creations, and which are still viewed that way by the majority of naturalists, and which consequently have all the external characteristics of true species -- they admit that these have been produced by variation, but they refuse to extend the same view to other and slightly different forms. Nevertheless, they don't claim that they can define, or even guess, which are the created forms of life and which are those produced by natural laws. They accept variation as a genuine cause in one case; they arbitrarily reject it in another, without pointing to any distinction between the two cases. The day will come when this will be cited as a curious illustration of the blindness of preconceived opinion. These authors seem no more startled by a miraculous act of creation than by an ordinary birth. But do they really believe that at innumerable periods in the earth's history certain atoms were commanded to suddenly flash into living tissue? Do they believe that at each supposed act of creation one individual or many were produced? Were all the infinitely numerous kinds of animals and plants created as eggs or seeds, or fully grown? And in the case of mammals, were they created bearing the false marks of nourishment from the mother's womb? Undoubtedly some of these same questions can't be answered by those who believe in the appearance or creation of only a few forms of life, or of some one form alone. It has been argued by several authors that it's as easy to believe in the creation of a million beings as of one. But Maupertuis's philosophical axiom of "least action" leads the mind more readily to accept the smaller number -- and certainly we ought not to believe that innumerable organisms within each great class have been created with plain but deceptive marks of descent from a single parent.

As a record of a former state of things, I've retained in the preceding paragraphs, and elsewhere, several sentences implying that naturalists believe in the separate creation of each species -- and I've been much criticized for expressing myself this way. But undoubtedly this was the general belief when the first edition of this work appeared. I used to speak to very many naturalists on the subject of evolution and never once met with any sympathetic agreement. It's probable that some did then believe in evolution, but they were either silent or expressed themselves so ambiguously that it was hard to understand their meaning. Now things are wholly changed, and almost every naturalist accepts the great principle of evolution. There are, however, some who still think that species have suddenly given birth, through quite unexplained means, to new and totally different forms. But, as I've tried to show, strong evidence can be brought against the idea of great and abrupt changes. From a scientific standpoint, and as a guide to further investigation, little advantage is gained by believing that new forms suddenly developed in an inexplicable manner from old and widely different forms, compared with the old belief in the creation of species from the dust of the earth.

It may be asked how far I extend the doctrine of the modification of species. The question is difficult to answer, because the more distinct the forms we consider, the fewer and weaker become the arguments for community of descent. But some of the strongest arguments extend very far. All the members of whole classes are connected together by a chain of relationships, and all can be classified on the same principle, in groups subordinate to groups. Fossil remains sometimes tend to fill very wide gaps between existing orders.

Organs in a rudimentary condition plainly show that an early ancestor had the organ in a fully developed state, and this in some cases implies an enormous amount of modification in the descendants. Throughout whole classes, various structures are formed on the same pattern, and at a very early age the embryos closely resemble each other. Therefore I cannot doubt that the theory of descent with modification embraces all the members of the same great class or kingdom. I believe that animals are descended from at most only four or five ancestors, and plants from an equal or lesser number.

Analogy would lead me one step further -- to the belief that all animals and plants are descended from some one prototype. But analogy may be a deceptive guide. Nevertheless, all living things have much in common: their chemical composition, their cellular structure, their laws of growth, and their susceptibility to harmful influences. We see this even in so small a fact as that the same poison often similarly affects plants and animals, or that the poison secreted by the gall fly produces monstrous growths on the wild rose or oak tree. In all organisms, except perhaps some of the very lowest, sexual reproduction seems to be essentially similar. In all, as far as is presently known, the germinal vesicle is the same -- so that all organisms start from a common origin. If we look even to the two main divisions, the animal and vegetable kingdoms, certain low forms are so intermediate in character that naturalists have disputed which kingdom they should be assigned to. As Professor Asa Gray has remarked, "the spores and other reproductive bodies of many of the lower algae may claim to have first a characteristically animal, and then an unequivocally vegetable existence." Therefore, on the principle of natural selection with divergence of character, it does not seem incredible that, from some such low and intermediate form, both animals and plants may have developed. And if we admit this, we must likewise admit that all the organisms that have ever lived on this earth may be descended from some one primordial form. But this inference is chiefly grounded on analogy, and it is immaterial whether or not it be accepted. No doubt it is possible, as Mr. G. H. Lewes has argued, that at the first beginning of life many different forms evolved. But if so, we may conclude that only very few have left modified descendants. For, as I have recently remarked regarding the members of each great kingdom, such as the Vertebrata, Articulata, and so on, we have distinct evidence in their embryological, homologous, and rudimentary structures that within each kingdom all the members are descended from a single ancestor.

When the views advanced by me in this book, and by Mr. Wallace, or when analogous views on the origin of species are generally accepted, we can dimly foresee that there will be a considerable revolution in natural history. Systematists will be able to pursue their work as at present, but they will not be constantly haunted by the shadowy doubt whether this or that form is a true species. This, I feel sure -- and I speak from experience -- will be no small relief. The endless disputes about whether some fifty species of British brambles are good species will cease. Systematists will have only to decide (not that this will be easy) whether any form is sufficiently stable and distinct from other forms to be capable of definition, and if definable, whether the differences are important enough to deserve a species name. This latter point will become a far more essential consideration than it is at present, because differences, however slight, between any two forms, if not bridged by intermediate gradations, are currently considered by most naturalists sufficient to raise both forms to the rank of species.

In the future we shall be compelled to acknowledge that the only distinction between species and well-marked varieties is that the latter are known, or believed, to be connected at the present day by intermediate gradations, whereas species were formerly thus connected. So, without dismissing the importance of intermediate gradations between any two forms, we shall be led to weigh more carefully and value more highly the actual amount of difference between them. It's quite possible that forms now generally acknowledged to be merely varieties may later be thought worthy of species names, and in this case scientific and common language will come into agreement. In short, we shall have to treat species in the same way that those naturalists treat genera who admit that genera are merely artificial groupings made for convenience. This may not be a cheerful prospect, but we shall at least be freed from the futile search for the undiscovered and undiscoverable essence of the term species.

The other and more general branches of natural history will rise greatly in interest. The terms used by naturalists -- affinity, relationship, community of type, paternity, morphology, adaptive characters, rudimentary and aborted organs, and so on -- will cease to be metaphorical and will have a plain meaning. When we no longer look at an organism as a savage looks at a ship, as something wholly beyond his comprehension; when we regard every product of nature as one that has had a long history; when we contemplate every complex structure and instinct as the summing up of many devices, each useful to the possessor, in the same way that any great mechanical invention is the summing up of the labor, the experience, the reason, and even the blunders of numerous workers -- when we view each organism this way, how far more interesting, I speak from experience, does the study of natural history become!

A grand and almost unexplored field of inquiry will be opened, on the causes and laws of variation, on correlation, on the effects of use and disuse, on the direct action of external conditions, and so forth. The study of domestic animals and plants will rise immensely in value. A new variety raised by humans will be a far more important and interesting subject for study than one more species added to the already vast catalog of recorded species. Our classifications will come to be, as far as they can be made, genealogies -- and will then truly give what may be called the plan of creation. The rules for classifying will no doubt become simpler when we have a definite goal in view. We possess no pedigrees or coats of arms; and we have to discover and trace the many diverging lines of descent in our natural genealogies by characters of any kind that have long been inherited. Rudimentary organs will speak unmistakably about the nature of long-lost structures. Species and groups of species that are called aberrant, and which may fancifully be called living fossils, will help us form a picture of the ancient forms of life. Embryology will often reveal to us the structure, somewhat obscured, of the prototypes of each great class.

When we can feel assured that all individuals of the same species, and all the closely related species of most genera, have within a not very remote period descended from one parent and have migrated from some one birthplace; and when we better understand the many means of migration; then, by the light that geology now throws, and will continue to throw, on former changes of climate and of the level of the land, we shall surely be able to trace in a wonderful way the former migrations of the inhabitants of the whole world. Even at present, by comparing the differences between the inhabitants of the sea on the opposite sides of a continent, and the nature of the various inhabitants of that continent in relation to their apparent means of immigration, some light can be shed on ancient geography.

The noble science of geology loses glory from the extreme imperfection of the record. The crust of the earth, with its embedded remains, must not be looked at as a well-filled museum, but as a poor collection made at random and at rare intervals. The accumulation of each great fossiliferous formation will be recognized as having depended on an unusual combination of favorable circumstances, and the blank intervals between the successive stages as having been of vast duration. But we shall be able to gauge with some confidence the duration of these intervals by comparing the preceding and succeeding organic forms. We must be cautious in trying to match up two formations as strictly contemporaneous if they don't share many identical species, relying instead on the general succession of life forms. Since species are produced and driven to extinction by slowly acting and still existing causes, and not by miraculous acts of creation -- and since the most important of all causes of organic change is one that is almost independent of altered, and perhaps suddenly altered, physical conditions, namely the mutual relationship of organism to organism, the improvement of one organism requiring the improvement or the extinction of others -- it follows that the amount of organic change in the fossils of consecutive formations probably serves as a fair measure of the relative, though not actual, passage of time. A number of species, however, staying together as a group might remain unchanged for a long period, while within the same period several of these species, by migrating into new countries and coming into competition with foreign inhabitants, might become modified. So we must not overestimate the accuracy of organic change as a measure of time.

In the future I see open fields for far more important researches. Psychology will be securely based on the foundation already well laid by Mr. Herbert Spencer, that of the necessary acquisition of each mental power and capacity by gradation. Much light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.

Authors of the highest eminence seem to be fully satisfied with the view that each species has been independently created. To my mind it accords better with what we know of the laws impressed on matter by the Creator, that the production and extinction of the past and present inhabitants of the world should have been due to secondary causes, like those determining the birth and death of the individual. When I view all beings not as special creations, but as the lineal descendants of some few beings which lived long before the first bed of the Cambrian system was deposited, they seem to me to become ennobled. Judging from the past, we may safely infer that not one living species will transmit its unaltered likeness to a distant future. And of the species now living, very few will transmit offspring of any kind to a far distant future; for the manner in which all organisms are grouped shows that the greater number of species in each genus, and all the species in many genera, have left no descendants but have become utterly extinct. We can so far take a prophetic glance into the future as to foretell that it will be the common and widely spread species, belonging to the larger and dominant groups within each class, which will ultimately prevail and give rise to new and dominant species. As all the living forms of life are the lineal descendants of those which lived long before the Cambrian epoch, we may feel certain that the ordinary succession by generation has never once been broken, and that no cataclysm has desolated the whole world. Hence we may look with some confidence to a secure future of great length. And as natural selection works solely by and for the good of each being, all corporeal and mental endowments will tend to progress towards perfection.

It is interesting to contemplate a tangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different from each other, and dependent upon each other in so complex a manner, have all been produced by laws acting around us. These laws, taken in the largest sense, being Growth with Reproduction; Inheritance which is almost implied by reproduction; Variability from the indirect and direct action of the conditions of life, and from use and disuse; a Ratio of Increase so high as to lead to a Struggle for Life, and as a consequence to Natural Selection, entailing Divergence of Character and the Extinction of less improved forms. Thus, from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of the higher animals, directly follows. There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being, evolved.
