Lesson 23: Magic with Coins

This Course in Magic would not be complete unless you were taught the famous Miser’s Dream effect. It was a very popular number with the late T. Nelson Downs in his Coin Act. The experiment is very interesting for it permits of many variations. The money can be picked out of the air, from various parts of the performer’s body, from the whiskers of some spectator, from a lady’s coat, or it may be caused to fall in a shower when someone sneezes.

The other effects in the lesson also offer good opportunity for manipulative sleights with coins in vanishing and producing them. I teach you the general principles and I want you to work them out to fit various occasions. In tricks where there is repetition, you must vary the means of producing coins so that you do not lose the punch of the experiment. You must add spice to the effect and keep your audience interested.

The Miser’s Dream

Effect

Performer borrows a derby hat from a spectator and shows it empty. Then he reaches into the air and produces a half dollar, which he tosses into the hat. From then on, in an amazing manner he produces coins from here, there, and everywhere. The supply seems to be endless and the audience is bewildered by the mysterious happenings.

Paraphernalia

1—Two dozen Palming Coins.

2—Three black safety pins from 1⅞ to 2 inches long. (If desired special coin holders may be used such as supplied by magic dealers.)

3—A borrowed derby hat. A derby is preferred because it is stiff and the coins make a noise when they are dropped into it. In case of necessity, use a soft felt hat, although the experiment is not so effective when it is used. Sometimes a performer carries his own derby hat for the experiment.

A saucer or small plate placed in hat acts as a noise maker when coins are dropped into hat.

To Prepare

Place nine coins in your empty left trousers pocket.

Inside the right side of your coat about an inch and three-quarters from the bottom, fasten one of the black safety pins. About one-half inch back of it, attach the second pin, and one-half inch back of that, the third one, Fig. 1.

[Figure afx]

[Figure afy]

Close each pin and into each place five coins. The wire on each side has enough spring to hold the coins securely. You may have to pull the wires apart or push them together a little to adjust them to the coins, but this is an easy matter. Allow a larger section of the coins to extend above the pins and a smaller section below the pins. This is done to make it easier to release the coins when you need them, Fig. 2.

To Perform

Borrow a derby hat. Hold it in right hand, and as you go back to stage, secretly reach into left trousers pocket with left hand. Stack the nine coins and bring them out Finger Palmed—the coins rest at base of fingers and are held in place by tips of second and third fingers. Remove hand from pocket. Be sure that fingers conceal coins, Fig. 3.

[Figure afz]

[Figure aga]

[Figure agb]

As you turn to face audience (right turn), transfer the hat from right to left hand. Grasp hat with thumb and index finger of left hand, Fig. 4.

This position gives you a good grip on hat and completely conceals the coins so the hat may be shown from all sides, Fig. 5.

*“Deep down in our hearts there seems to be the desire to make money fast.* *Almost anyone would rather like to wake up in the morning and find himself a millionaire.* *I have learned, however, that the only safe way to make money fast is the magical way.* *You see there is plenty of money around, but the trick is to get it.* *Are you aware of the fact that the air is full of money and that it lurks in the most unexpected places?* *Now all that a magician needs to make money is his empty right hand.”*

With hand pointing downward, show right hand on both sides, fingers wide apart.

*“And he uses a hat to hold the money in.”*

Show hat empty, even examining it under the hat band. Hold hat up in left hand with opening towards you. Grasp other edge of brim with right hand, Figs. 6 and 7.

Remove left hand from hat and bring the hat over to the right hand. Turn the hat with right hand, Fig. 8.

[Figure agc]

[Figure agd]

[Figure age]

Grasp the hat just above the right hand with fingers of left hand inside the hat and thumb outside. Remove right hand from brim of hat, Figs. 9 and 10.

[Figure agf]

[Figure agg]

[Figure agh]

[Figure agi]

As you bring left hand into position, let the coins arrange themselves along the inside band of the hat and hold them in place with your finger tips. Fig. 11 shows how coins are concealed by fingers of left hand inside the opening of the hat. Nothing is visible to the audience. Fig. 12 shows how coins are arranged along the band of the hat under the fingers.

Fig. 13 shows a detailed view of the arrangement of the coins. They are spread a little apart and overlap each other. The one on top is nearest the finger tips.

[Figure agj]

[Figure agk]

Push the top coin forward a little with fingers so that it is ready to be released. It is now easy for you to allow this coin to fall into the hat at the desired moment, Fig. 14.

With right side of body towards the audience, reach into the air with empty right hand and pretend to pick a coin from nowhere. Close hand as though it holds a coin, then open it slowly and show empty hand as though coin had gone again. Reach up again and take an imaginary coin from the air, Fig. 15.

[Figure agl]

[Figure agm]

Toss this imaginary coin into the hat. As right hand is over the hat, release the top coin under your left fingers and let it drop into the hat. The illusion is perfect. The audience hears the coin fall and it appears that you actually threw a coin into the hat with your right hand, Fig. 16.

*“There’s one coin.”*

Reach into hat and take out coin. Hold it in Finger Clip position and show it to audience on both sides, Fig. 17.

[Figure agn]

[Figure ago]

[Figure agp]

Now apparently toss coin back into hat again, but as right hand travels toward hat, Front Thumb Palm the coin, Figs. 18 and 19.

Continue the movement of right hand to hat as though throwing coin in, Fig. 16.

At the same instant allow another coin to drop from left fingers into hat. Be sure to time the dropping of the coin from left fingers properly with the action of the right hand in pretending to toss the coin into the hat.

*“And another over here.”*

Reach up into the air again at another point and pretend to catch another coin from the air. This time you show the coin. You produce it by forcing out the coin which you have Thumb Palmed to your finger tips and hold it in the Production Clip position. The movement of your hand in reaching up for a coin will cover the movement of producing the coin, Figs. 20 and 21.

[Figure agq]

[Figure agr]

Finger Clip the coin and pretend to throw it into the hat. In reality, Thumb Palm the coin again and at the right instant let another coin drop from left fingers into the hat.

*“I’m beginning to see lots of coins.”*

Produce the next coin from under right knee. Pretend to throw it into the hat, but palm it and drop a fourth coin from left hand.

Now produce a coin from behind your left elbow. Raise hat with left hand and hold right hand with coin Finger Clipped under crown of hat. Fig. 22 shows position of hands.

[Figure ags]

[Figure agt]

Now pretend to throw coin right through the bottom of the hat. As hand goes up to hat, Thumb Palm the coin again and let a fifth coin drop from left hand into hat, Fig. 23.

*“That one went right through.”*

Pretend to pick a coin from the air again, producing coin in Production Clip position from right hand. Pretend to throw it high into the air; in the meantime, palm it again. Hold left arm outstretched. Follow the imaginary coin with your eyes—look upward as though watching it go up and then down to the hat. Pretend to catch it in hat, and at the right instant drop a sixth coin from left hand into hat. Make this as real as possible. Remember that pantomime is very important in illusion.

Reach out for another coin and pretend to drop it into hat, allowing a seventh coin to fall from left hand. Then repeat again and let an eighth coin fall from left hand.

You now have one coin remaining in your left hand and one coin palmed in your right hand.

*“This is called, easy come, easy go.”*

Reach into the air for a coin again, and this time really drop the coin from right hand into hat.

Reach into the air again and pretend to grab a coin in the right hand. Now turn body to the right so that left side is towards audience. Pretend to throw imaginary coin in right hand high up into the air. Follow it with your eyes.

Allow right hand to fall at your side. Curl your fingers up under your coat and release the five coins in the front safety pin. Now pretend to catch coin from the air in the hat and release the last coin from left fingers.

Keep the opening of hat slightly turned from audience so that they can not see the coin fall from left hand. Fig. 24 shows side of hat towards the audience.

To learn how to get coins from the safety pin easily, study the diagrams in Figs. 25 and 26 carefully. Let top edge A of coins come downward.

[Figure agu]

[Figure agv]

[Figure agw]

This brings edge B to the top and turns the bottom edge of coat up with it, Fig. 25. Push edge B down and out of safety pin with thumb. Let coins come into hand in Finger Palm position and close the second, third and fourth fingers over them to conceal them, Fig. 26.

Turn to the left again so that you can hold the back of right hand naturally towards audience.

*“Every man his own mint.”*

Reach up into air after coin, and in doing so, slide a coin from those palmed in right hand into Production Clip position with thumb. Fig. 27 shows coins in Finger Palm position. Put thumb over them and open fingers out as in Fig. 28. Push coin out to end of thumb and index finger and close the other fingers over the rest of coins again, Fig. 29.

[Figure agx]

[Figure agy]

[Figure agz]

Throw this coin into hat. Reach up into the air again and slide a second coin from right hand into Production Clip position. Throw this coin into hat. Continue to reach for coins and toss them, one at a time, into the hat until all five coins have been taken from right hand. Vary the production of the coins by producing from elbow or knee.

*“A fine shower for the first of the month’s bills.”*

Turn the opening of the hat towards the audience. Reach in with right hand and scoop up a good handful. Hold hand above the hat and let coins slide, one by one in rapid succession, into the hat.

*“Just like a miser letting the gold run through his hands.”*

Reach in again and pick up a handful of coins, this time keeping back of hand to audience. In pouring coins back into the hat, hold back a few and palm them. You will have no difficulty in doing this.

*“Money, money everywhere, and to think of the years I had to work for a living.”*

Reach out and produce the next bunch of coins, one at a time, from various places.

Now scoop up a handful of coins from hat with left hand and let them slide back, retaining some in your hand. Produce these coins as you did before with right hand, varying your productions to keep your audience at a high pitch. For instance, you may produce a coin from a spectator’s coat and toss it into the hat. Reach into hat and take out a coin.

*“You see, this is just like the rest, sir.”*

Catch money from here and there—from a spectator’s ear, from a lady’s hair—until the supply in left hand has been exhausted.

Now take hat in left hand again and hold it in front of spectator. Tell him to sneeze, and as audience is watching him, reach up under coat again and release five more coins into right hand. Finger Palm these coins.

*“That’s a poor sneeze. Better blow.”*

Put right hand with coins palmed to spectator’s nose, hold hat underneath, and let coins slide down into hat as though they came out of his nose, Fig. 30.

[Figure aha]

This gets a good laugh and gives you an opportunity to reach under coat again for third load of five coins. Produce these one at a time from various places—a spectator’s chin, or hair, from a coat, or lady’s hat. Toss these into the hat as they are produced. Then reach into hat again, scoop-

ing up a handful of coins, letting them slide back, and retaining a few by palming them in your right hand. Go up to another spectator, and holding hat under his nose, ask him to blow.

*“Blow hard.”* Place right hand on his nose and let coins slide into hat.

*“There now, we have half a hat full of money.”*

Go back to stage and pour the coins out into a bowl.

*“And as parting advice to the ladies, try this sometime with hubby’s hat.”*

Note

The Miser’s Dream offers so much opportunity for variation in production that you need never lack for chances to make this effect especially interesting.

Throwing the money through the hat is always good. Also you may pretend to put a coin in your mouth and blow it into hat, dropping the coin from left hand to complete the illusion.

Here is a good move: Vanish the coin by means of the Back Finger Clip Vanish (Lesson 3, Volume 1) in right hand. You face front with both arms extended to sides. As you vanish coin from right hand, drop a coin into hat from left hand, watching the hat as you do so. Then produce the coin again at right finger tips, Fig. 31.

[Figure ahb]

Another arrangement is to have a safety pin with a load of coins just inside the bottom of your left trousers leg. Boldly reach up and under cover of trousers slip the coins out of pin and produce them. Or you may have a small wire clip, such as is used to hold letters together, under each lapel with a coin in each, which you can produce.

Study the Palms and Vanishes in Volume 1. Many can be used to good advantage. Instead of pretending to place the coin in left hand, pretend to place it in the hat. Use the Invisible Thumb Palm to show the hand apparently empty every once in a while.

Put snap and life into the catching of the coins. Do not let time drag between production of coins. Work fast to keep your audience keyed up to a high pitch of excitement.

Hand to Hand Flight of Four Coins

This is a coin classic which when mastered gives the magician a fine piece of coin magic.

Effect

A gold coin is placed in the left hand. The right hand holds four half dollars. These half dollars pass one by one into the left hand to join the gold coin. After each coin passes, the coins are counted fairly and squarely.

Paraphernalia

1—An imitation gold coin, the size of a half dollar. Such a coin can be obtained in novelty stores. A Canadian copper or English penny piece will also answer the purpose.

2—Five half dollars or palming coins.

To Prepare

Finger palm one half dollar in left hand, Fig. 1. The gold coin and four half dollars are on the table.

To Perform

*“This is a mystery with gold and silver. One gold coin to four silver ones.”*

Pick up the four half dollars one at a time with right hand and hold similar to Fig. 2.

[Figure ahc]

[Figure ahd]

*“One—two—three—four—silver coins.”*

Turn the right hand over to the left and as you do so, press the right thumb against top coin. Drop the three other coins into left hand with

the palmed one already concealed there. But you hold back one coin in the right hand in the Thumb Grip palm, Fig. 3.

*“Four silver coins.”* Show four coins in left hand, Fig. 4.

[Figure ahe]

[Figure ahf]

Pour the coins from left hand to right hand, holding back top coin in Thumb Grip of left hand.

The three coins from left hand added to one concealed in right hand make four coins. This move of pouring coins from hand to hand is very illusive. Show the coins on right hand.

*“Four coins.”*

Close the left hand with coin inside. Place the four half dollars back on table again. Pick up the gold coin with right hand, freely showing hand to let audience see that it holds nothing but the gold coin.

Place gold coin into opening of left fist between thumb and first finger, Fig. 5.

[Figure ahg]

*“We will place the gold coin into the left hand, and the four silver ones into the right hand.”*

Pick up the four half dollars one at a time, then show all four coins lying on right palm, as in Fig. 2.

*“Watch!”* Turn over the right hand to the left and, holding back the top half

dollar with Thumb Grip palm, drop the other three half dollars on the table. Back of the right hand is towards audience.

*“Three coins.”*

Open the left hand showing the gold coin and the silver coin.

*“One silver coin has gone over to the gold coin. That shows the attractiveness of gold.”*

[Figure ahh]

Gold coin is against palm and silver coin is overlapping on top, Fig. 6. Turn left hand over to right and apparently drop the two coins into right hand. What you really do is to hold back the half dollar with Thumb Grip of left hand and show gold coin with the other half dollar in right hand. Place gold coin and half dollar back into left hand. Left hand is not opened far enough so as to expose the palmed coin. Left hand now holds a gold coin and two silver ones. The audience believes that only one gold and one silver coin are in it.

Pick up half dollars from table again with right hand, one at a time, after which you close that hand.

*“One—two—three coins . . . watch again!”*

Give the closed right and left hands a slight jerk inwards and then outwards.

Thumb Grip palm one coin in right hand and drop the two coins on the table. Back of right hand is towards the audience.

*“Two half dollars remain . . . while over here—”*

Open the left hand and show gold coin and two half dollars. Apparently the same half dollar that disappeared in right hand has appeared mysteriously in the left hand.

*“We find the silver coin has jumped across. Again the gold coin has attracted silver.”*

Again drop the coins into right hand, holding back one silver coin in left hand and exposing the coin that was palmed in right hand. Show gold coin and two half dollars freely. Place these on table.

Pick up gold coin and place in left fist as in Fig. 5. Gold coin goes between palm and half dollar.

*“The gold coin.”*

Pick up a half dollar and push it into the opening in left fist but on the other side of the palmed half dollar.

*“A silver coin.”*

Place the other silver coin in front of this one through the opening in fist.

*“Two silver coins.”*

Pick up the two remaining half dollars on table in right hand, one at a time.

*“One—two.”*

Again give the closed hands a bit of an inward and outward jerk. Turn the right hand over and open it, allowing one coin to fall on table. The other coin is held back. Left hand opens, showing gold coin and three silver ones.

*“Three silver coins.”*

Pour them into right hand, again holding back one silver coin in left hand and exposing the coin in right hand with the others.

Count the coins from right hand to left hand holding the coins in left hand between thumb and index finger as in Fig. 7.

[Figure ahi]

[Figure ahj]

[Figure ahk]

*“One—two—three—and the gold coin.”*

Push coins together and down into left fist. Pick up the last silver coin from the table. Hold it between the first and second finger tips of right hand, Fig. 8.

Make a throwing motion towards left hand bringing coin back to Thumb Palm, Fig. 9. If hand is brought up to left breast pocket of coat the palmed coin can be easily dropped into pocket.

Left hand can be freely opened and coins dropped into right hand and counted upon the table one at a time.

*“A gold coin and one—two—three—four—silver ones. That’s the power of gold over silver.”*

In case you just keep coin in right hand instead of disposing of it in pocket, simply go through the routine of holding one silver coin back in left hand and pouring the balance of the coins into the right hand on top of the coin there.

Then count coins onto the table. The coin in left hand can be easily disposed of by dropping into left hand pocket of trousers while coins are counted from right hand.

The above routine can be varied in many ways. For instance, if you do not have a gold or copper coin you can use an extra half dollar and tell how this half dollar had the power of attracting others.

You can also start with three half dollars in each hand, causing the three in right hand to pass one at a time over to the ones in left hand. Of course you use an extra one which is concealed from audience.

In emergency, you can use any coins from pennies to dollars, Chinese coins, tokens, or poker chips.

The Passe Coins and Glasses

This is an excellent effect to work under artificial light and at such a distance from spectators that a fine black silk thread will not be visible.

Effect

Two empty glass tumblers are freely shown. Into one, five palming coins or half dollars are counted one at a time. Performer holds this glass in his left hand and the empty glass in his right hand. Upon his command, a coin leaves the left hand glass and drops into the right one. The coins are then counted and only four remain in the left glass. Magician continues to pass the coins from the left glass to the right until all five have passed over.

Paraphernalia

1—Five palming coins, or half dollars.

2—A special palming coin with small hole in it.

3—A spool of fine black silk thread.

4—Two glass tumblers.

5—A small black safety pin.

To Prepare

Fig. 57 shows how the magician looks as he performs this effect. There must be no unnaturalness to suggest in any way the preparation which you make for the experiment.

[Figure ahl]

[Figure ahm]

[Figure ahn]

Now take the small safety pin and, through the hole in the end, tie one end of a piece of black silk thread. Pin the safety pin up under the left armpit onto your coat, slightly to the rear so that it will not be noticeable. Allow enough thread to reach from the safety pin thus placed to the bottom of your left coat pocket. Then tie the free end of the thread through the hole in the palming coin. Then place the coin in left coat pocket. Length of thread varies with different performers and experience will teach you the length you can work with best, Figs. 58 and 59.

To Perform

Come forward and pick up the two glass tumblers from the table. Show glasses to be empty and set them on the table. From your right coat pocket take five coins and count them, one at a time, into the left glass. As you do this, turn your left side away from audience.

Reach into left pocket with left hand and take out the coin on the thread. Finger Palm this coin, curling your fingers to conceal coin, Fig. 60.

[Figure aho]

[Figure ahp]

Pick up the glass with coins between thumb and first finger of left hand. You will have no difficulty in doing this with coin Finger Palmed in hand. Pour the coins into empty right hand, then set glass down with right hand.

Drop the coins into the left hand on top of the threaded coin. Place them all at base of first finger and hold in place with left thumb, Fig. 61.

Remove the top coin. Curl second, third, and fourth fingers of left hand inwards and place coin in Curled Finger Tip Palm position (Volume 1, Lesson 3). Do this quickly with the aid of your right hand, which also acts as a screen, Fig. 62.

Pick up empty glass at right hand side. Hold it near the bottom between thumb and first finger of right hand. Show palm of hand freely, Fig. 63.

[Figure ahq]

[Figure ahr]

*“I use this glass so that you can see through it.”*

Talk to the people on the right as you say this and show the glass. Now turn towards the left and, as you do so, perform a *Change Over* in this way: Place right hand, back towards audience, with glass in front of the left hand. Under cover of this screen, straighten second and third fingers of left hand with coin and force coin into the palm of right hand. Palm the coin in regular manner, gripping it by its edges, Fig. 64.

[Figure ahs]

[Figure aht]

Right hand continues in its movement to the left without a pause, and the audience is not aware that you have done anything unusual with it. Now say to the people on the left,

*“That is, you can see through the glass, and not the trick.”*

Swing back to face front. Now grip middle of glass with left thumb and forefinger and raise right hand to position shown in Fig. 65. This brings the palmed coin up above the glass.

Release your hold on the glass with left hand and bring the glass over to your right side. Keep back of right hand towards audience.

*“As I said once before, I have five coins. I shall count them again, one at a time, into the glass. One—two—three—four—five.”*

Count the coins out of your left hand, dropping the threaded one last as the fifth coin into the glass. Thread comes up over top of glass on side nearest you.

Pick up glass with left hand over the top of it, getting thread between second and third fingers. Let thread fall over back of hand to bottom edge of sleeve, Fig. 66.

[Figure ahu]

[Figure ahv]

Glass must be held at such distance from the body to allow enough slack in thread so that coin will remain at the bottom. Hold the two glasses about three feet apart in position shown in Fig. 57.

*“Now, watch. Five coins in this glass and none in the one over here. I'll pass one across. One—two—three, Go!”*

Shake the left hand glass up and then down for a few inches. At the same time, move the glass far enough from the body to make the thread taut and to pull the threaded coin up into Finger Palm position. Keep thread taut to hold coin in position, Fig. 67.

Turn and look at right hand glass. Let the palmed coin fall from right hand into glass. The effect is, of course, that one coin has gone from the glass on the left to the one on the right.

Set the right hand glass on the table and reach over, taking the left hand glass at the middle with right hand. Move left hand from top of glass to bottom, now holding it between thumb and first finger. Hold threaded coin firmly in Finger Palm Grip. Now pour the coins into right hand.

Set the glass on table and count the coins, one at a time, into left hand again on top of threaded coin. Be sure to conceal this coin until it is covered with another.

*“One—two—three—four. One coin has passed over into the other glass.”*

Under cover of right hand, adjust the coins as you did before, placing one in Curled Finger Tip Palm position. Pick up right hand glass.

*“If this glass were made of tin, you couldn’t have seen the half dollar pass over.”*

Perform the Change Over now by bringing glass in front of left hand and forcing coin into palm of right hand.

*“That’s the advantage of glass.”*

Bring the glass back to the right side and hold ready to release the coin from palm of hand.

Drop coins, one at a time, from left hand into the other glass. The threaded coin goes in last as the fourth coin.

*“One—two—three—four.”*

Show left hand empty. Bring thread up through fingers again and pick up glass at top.

*“It’s funny what happens when I talk to the coins in Persian. Alley—oop!”*

Shake glass up and down, drawing thread taut and thus getting threaded coin into Finger Palm position again in left hand. Look at right hand glass and let palmed coin fall into glass from right hand.

*“Another coin has passed over.”*

Set the right hand glass on table, then pour coins into right hand as before. Set left hand glass on table and count the three coins into left hand, placing coins on top of threaded one.

*“One—two—three.”*

Under cover of right hand, push the uppermost coin into Curled Finger Tip Palm position and then force it into palm position in right hand. Let right hand drop to side as you count the three coins in left hand into the left hand glass again.

*“One—two—three.”*

Pick up glass in left hand again as before, with thread adjusted. Then pick up right glass.

*“In case I should forget how to talk Persian, I have learned how to talk Chinese to the coins. Sprechen sie Deutsch?”*

Shake glass up and down, drawing thread taut and forcing coin into left hand. Then let palmed coin fall from right hand into glass.

*“There goes another. If you look close enough, you can see them jump over.”*

Repeat the routine of pouring coins from left glass into right hand and then counting them back into left hand.

*“One—two.”*

Do the Change Over and palm the top coin in right hand as before. Count the two coins in left hand into glass. Then pick up left glass with thread in position and right glass in right hand.

*“Parley voo Fransay?”*

Shake glass and the threaded coin again comes up into left hand.

*“Wee—wee.”* Drop coin from right hand into right glass.

*“So that leaves us with one coin in this glass.”*

Pour the one coin into right hand. Hold coin up at finger tips as in Fig. 67A. Set glass on table. Pretend to take coin with left hand. When it is screened with left hand, let it fall into palm position in *right hand*, Fig. 67B.

[Figure ahw]

[Figure ahx]

Carry left hand away as though holding coin. Then open hand and show threaded coin. The audience, of course, thinks that this is the coin which you took out of the glass.

*“I shall drop the last coin into the glass.”*

Drop threaded coin into left hand glass with thread in position between fingers. Pick up right hand glass with right hand.

*“Now watch the last coin closely. Alley—oop!”*

Shake glass and cause coin to come up into hand, leaving the glass empty.

*“Alley—ga—zam!”*

Let coin fall from right hand into right glass. Set the right hand glass on table, then show the left hand glass empty and set it also on table.

*“Traveling this way is better than street cars.”*

Pick up the right hand glass and pour the coins into the empty glass. As you do this, turn right side towards audience. This gives you a chance to drop threaded coin into left coat pocket and thus dispose of the evidence.

Note

For closer work, a human hair may be used instead of the thread. Experiment with a long hair, graciously given to you by some lady friend who still retains her long tresses.

The Passe Coins from Hand to Hand

An especially good effect for close work and entirely impromptu so that you may perform it at the dinner table, at your club, or while entertaining at a party.

Effect

Magician shows four coins in his left hand. His right hand is empty. He then closes both hands and reopens them to show three coins in his left hand and one in his right. Magician continues to close and open his hands, each time showing one less coin in his left hand and one more in his right, until all four coins have passed over into his right hand.

Paraphernalia

1—Four palming coins.

2—A palming coin shell.

This shell fits over a palming coin without changing the appearance of the coin at all. When shell is on coin, it looks like one coin. When shell is taken off coin, it looks like you hold two coins.

This shell has many uses in the vanishing and producing of a coin. As it has the appearance of a coin, the audience believes it to be a coin.

Precaution must be taken, however, not to let audience see the back of the shell.

To Perform

Have a table in front of you on which to lay coins as occasion requires.

Have the four coins in your right hand. Over one of the coins have the shell.

*“This experiment is done with four coins. I think it was originally founded on that famous axiom, ‘You have the money, but can you keep it?’ Anyway, keep your eyes on the four coins.”*

Count coins one at a time into the left hand. Hold them spread out over fingers with thumb on top. Have coin with shell on top with front of shell exposed. Show coins to the spectators, Fig. 68.

Show right hand empty. Take coins in right hand again and then lay three of them on left hand, one at a time, in position shown in Fig. 69. Retain coin with shell in right hand with shell uppermost.

[Figure ahy]

[Figure ahz]

Let the coin rest on second and third fingers of right hand. Grip edge of shell between thumb and first finger. Raise thumb and forefinger, thus lifting the shell free from the coin, Fig. 70.

[Figure aia]

[Figure aib]

[Figure aic]

Place the shell with the other coins on left hand and retain the fourth coin by palming it in right hand. Audience believes that you placed four coins on left hand, Fig. 71.

Close both hands, and in doing so, allow shell to slip over top coin in left hand. Hold hands about two feet apart, Fig. 72.

*“It is difficult for money to stay in one place. First, I have it, then you have it, and then someone else gets it. For instance, I have four coins in my left hand.”*

Open left hand to show only three coins. The placing of the shell over one coin eliminates a coin.

*“That is, I did have four coins until the money began to circulate, and now I have only three.”*

With the left hand count the coins onto the table, one at a time, in a row. Put the coin with shell down first as number one, Fig. 73.

[Figure aid]

*“And it seems, the other has circulated over to my right hand.”*

Place the coin from right hand down on table also.

Pick up the three coins which you placed on table with your left hand, this time taking them up with right hand. Place them one at a time on left palm again. When you pick up coin with shell, however, place it in right hand again as you did before, Fig. 70. Then place shell in left hand as a coin and retain the coin Finger Palmed in right hand.

*“I place the three coins back in my left hand, and pick up the other again in my right hand.”*

Pick up coin on table with right hand. Be careful to keep palmed coin concealed while you take coin from table. Now close both hands again as before. The shell slips down over uppermost coin again, leaving two coins in left hand.

*“Note carefully, and perhaps you will see the next one pass over—that is, you will see, if you have psychic eyes.”* Open left hand and show two coins.

*“It went. And so now we have—one, two.”*

Count coins onto the table again, placing the coin with shell down first as number one. Open right hand. *“And over here—two coins.”*

Lay coins from right hand on table in a row.

With right hand pick up the two coins placed down by left. Place one coin in left hand. Then palm out the coin from shell as before, retaining it in right hand, and place shell in left hand as second coin.

Pick up the other two coins with left hand. Close hands and let shell cover remaining coin in left hand.

*“Now we have a fifty-fifty game—two in my left hand and two in my right. That is, that is what we had before another one slipped away.”*

Open left hand and show single coin. Open right hand and show three coins. Count them out onto the table.

*“One—two—three.”*

Cover the coin in left hand with right hand and lift off shell, carrying it away in right hand. Audience does not suspect anything for they saw one coin in left hand and still see one. Now hold up the coin in left hand and look at both sides.

*“For this last one I take extra precautions.”*

Reach into right coat pocket. Leave shell there and bring out right hand as though holding a pinch of salt in fingers.

*“I put a little salt on his tail. . .”*

Pretend to sprinkle salt on coin. Now apparently secure coin in left hand by closing hand. In reality, Thumb Palm the coin in right hand and close the empty left hand.

*“And keep him by his lonesome over here.”*

Motion to the left hand. Allow Thumb Palmed coin to slip to Finger Palm position. Then pick up the three coins from table with right hand and close your hand over them.

*“I guess the salt wasn’t strong enough.”*

Open left hand and show coin gone.

*“This one, too, has left, and we find it over here with the others.”*

Count the coins out onto table with right hand.

*“One—two—three—four.”*

Coins may now be handled and shown freely as the shell has been disposed of.

The Phantom Coin

The shell coin offers many interesting variations in coin magic. It may be introduced into coin sleights with excellent results. Here are two good effects, using the shell:

Take two coins, one covered with the shell. Show coins freely and show hands empty. To all appearances place both coins in left hand, but in reality place one coin and the shell, retaining the other coin Finger Palmed in right hand (as you did in the preceding effect), Fig. 74.

[Figure aie]

[Figure aif]

Call attention again to the two coins in left hand. Turn back of hand to audience and slip shell over coin in left hand. Now expose palm of hand and show one coin, Fig. 75.

Now reach down behind your knee and produce coin from right hand, or from left elbow. The effect is that the coin vanished from left hand and appeared again at another place.

Another effect is one in which you show a coin and the shell as two coins. Place them in left hand as in Fig. 74. Show them freely, then cover coins with right fingers, pretending to carry one away. In this move slip shell over coin as in Fig. 75. Then vanish the imaginary coin from right hand, and show hand empty.

Now pick up coin with shell in right hand and vanish by Thumb Palming method. Drop coin into upper coat pocket. Open left hand and show that coin has vanished.

If you wish to produce the coins again, do not drop coin with shell into pocket. Keep in right hand and produce it from behind knee as one coin. Place it in left hand, retaining shell in right hand, and produce shell from left elbow as second coin. Place shell also in left hand as a coin.

The Coin in the Magical Envelopes

This experiment is really a coin classic. When skillfully done, its effect is wonderful.

Effect

Performer requests that a spectator mark a half dollar and loan it to him. He wraps this coin in a piece of newspaper and gives it to spectator who is assisting him, to hold. He then waves a piece of sealing wax over the parcel. Spectator opens newspaper and finds that it has been converted into a large newspaper envelope sealed with wax. Upon opening the envelope, he finds that another sealed envelope is enclosed in the first. The second envelope is opened and it contains a third sealed envelope. The third is opened and is found to contain the half dollar.

Magician then offers to show assistant how to do the trick. He repeats it and this time the envelopes are opened and the lender of the coin finds his marked coin in the third envelope.

Performer then suggests that assistant might like to keep the six envelopes as a souvenir. He gives the assistant the envelopes crushed into a ball. A mishap occurs, however. Magician accidentally touches the assistant’s hand with the sealing wax and this causes the envelopes to change back again into the two original pieces of newspaper.

Paraphernalia

1—Three copies of the same newspaper. Select a sheet and remove it from each of the three newspapers. Use single sheets (double sheets cut in half).

2—Two half dollars with the same date. Put small cross marks exactly alike on each.

3—A borrowed half dollar, as nearly like yours as possible.

4—Stick of sealing wax.

[Figure aig]

To Prepare

Take one of the three selected sheets of newspaper and cut it in two, from top to bottom and not across, Fig. 9.

Take one of these half sheets. Cut from it three squares of paper in the following sizes:

1—8½ × 8½ inches

2—7½ × 7½ inches

3—5½ × 5½ inches

From each of these squares you are to make an envelope. Take the largest square. Fold over one corner about three inches, Fig. 10.

Now fold over the corner on the right side, Fig. 11. And finally fold the corner on left side. Paste these corners down to make an envelope. The open corner forms the flap, Fig. 12. Make envelopes of the other two squares also.

[Figure aih]

[Figure aii]

[Figure aij]

[Figure aik]

Fold down the flaps. Through the crease in the top of each cut a slit about an inch and three-quarters long with a sharp knife.

Take one of the half dollars and insert it halfway into the smallest envelope through the slit. Fold down the flap and seal it with some sealing wax, Fig. 13.

Place this envelope in the next largest one with the coin protruding from the slit. Fold over flap and seal with wax. Then insert these two sealed envelopes in the largest one with the coin protruding from the slit. Seal down the flap with sealing wax. You now have a package of three envelopes with a half dollar sticking out halfway through the slits, Fig. 14.

[Figure ail]

[Figure aim]

Be sure that all three slits are even. Now turn half dollar at right angle to slits and press paper against it. Remove the coin and a hole from the outside into the inner envelope remains, Fig. 15.

Fold the bottom up a little and the sides over just enough to keep the three envelopes in position, Fig. 16. Place package of envelopes in right trousers pocket with hole in envelopes up. You will find that you can easily slip a half dollar into this hole and thus into the inner envelope of the three.

[Figure ain]

[Figure aio]

Take the other half sheet of paper and cut it into three squares as you did with the first. Make three envelopes. In the smallest one place the other half dollar. Seal envelope with sealing wax, enclose it in the next largest one. Then place these two in the largest one and seal it. Fig. 17 shows how the three envelopes look when you have the whole package made. Crush this package into a ball.

Take another of the selected sheets and cut it in two as you did with the first. Take the half which matches the envelopes that you just screwed up into a ball. Place this on table with the ball just under it and concealed from the audience. Place the other half sheet nearby. If working with a suitcase, as is common in club work, just have ball of envelopes and paper in case.

Now take the third sheet of paper and cut it in half. Roll the two halves into a compact ball. Place it in right coat pocket.

Have a half dollar handy so that you can get at it easily for Finger Palming. I suggest that you sew a half-inch piece of elastic under vest at lower right side. Insert half dollar in this, and when the time comes you can easily slip right fingers under edge of vest to Finger Palm it, Fig. 18.

[Figure aip]

Or, if you prefer, place the coin in a convenient pocket which you can reach easily when time comes to Finger Palm the coin in right hand. Place stick of sealing wax in left coat pocket.

To Perform

Have a spectator come up to help you. Ask him to be seated a moment and take charge of the stage while you go down into the audience and borrow a half dollar. Take coin from some gentleman in the audience, then return it and ask that he mark it so that he can easily identify it.

“*Mark it well so that you can readily identify it in case you see it again— or rather in case you do not see it again.*”

While he is marking it, get coin from under vest or from pocket and Finger Palm it. Have second, third, and fourth fingers curled around coin so that it cannot be seen by audience. You may grasp your coat lapel with right hand also to dispel any suspicion that you have something in right hand. Take marked coin between thumb and first two fingers of right hand, keeping back of hand uppermost.

Pretend to transfer coin to left hand, but as you toss coin, Front Thumb Palm the marked coin in right hand and let your own coin fall into left hand. Just before doing this bring the marked coin to Finger Tip Clip position so that movement will be easy. When you have disposed of your coin into left hand, let marked coin fall into regular Finger Palm position.

Go back to stage. Have assistant stand at your right as you face audience. Give him your coin from your left hand. The audience thinks, of course, that you have given him the borrowed marked coin. Tell assistant to close his hand over the coin. Now you stand away from him for a moment, your left side toward audience.

“*Now, sir, if in three minutes’ time you were to open your hand and find the half dollar had vanished, you would be surprised, wouldn’t you?*”

Assistant says, “Yes,” or laughs.

“*And so should I.*”

As you talk to assistant, slip right hand into right trousers pocket and let marked half dollar fall through the slit in the envelopes into the smallest one. When you do this, insert your first and second fingers into the slit to make it easy for coin to slide in. Close hole and roll envelopes into a ball. You will have no difficult in doing this without being detected as the audience is laughing at your last remark and there is a slight pause in your performing. Remove hand from pocket.

The important part of the trick is now done. The trick is really over before the audience thinks it has begun.

“*Well, I am not going to do this trick that way. Money disappears easily enough without adding magical influence to it.*”

Go to your table and pick up the newspaper with ball of envelopes behind it. Hold it with right hand, thumb in front towards the audience and rest of hand behind holding ball. Grasp the other end of paper with left hand and fold it over in half. Open paper up, then close it again, Fig. 19.

[Figure aiq]

[Figure air]

“*I am going to ask you to place the half dollar on this piece of paper under my thumb.*”

Hold right hand towards assistant with paper folded over double and the ball concealed under it. Have him place the coin under your thumb, Fig. 20.

Roll the paper into a small ball with coin inside. Be careful to keep ball of envelopes concealed behind it. Hold the two balls together and hold them up as one for the audience to see.

“*Strange thing about paper—the smaller you roll it the smaller it becomes. Just take the half dollar wrapped up in the paper and hold it this way.*”

As you talk, turn the two balls of paper around so that ball of envelopes is on top. Press into left hand with cupped right hand, Fig. 21.

[Figure ais]

[Figure ait]

Curl second, third, and fourth fingers of left hand around ball of paper underneath and palm it.

Lift ball of envelopes away with right hand and hold up so that audience can see it.

Now turn to give this ball to assistant. Extend right hand to him and let left hand come up to grasp right sleeve at elbow. This is a natural movement and helps you to conceal the palmed ball in left hand, Fig. 22. Hand ball to assistant.

“*Hold it tightly while I get some sealing wax.*”

Reach into left coat pocket with left hand and drop palmed ball therein as you bring out stick of sealing wax.

“*Take the sealing wax and touch the back of your hand three times, then open your hand. What has happened? Nothing? Strange! Suppose you open the parcel and show it to the audience. After all, you know we must let them see part of the trick.*”

Take the wax from assistant and replace in left coat pocket. Assistant unfolds paper and finds a large envelope instead of the half sheet of newspaper which he expects.

“*The mystery deepens. What have we? An envelope, securely sealed with wax. I think the wax is still warm. Please open the envelope.*”

Assistant opens the envelope and takes out the second envelope.

“*Another sealed envelope! Take it out. By the way, this is the very latest fashion in envelopes—made of newspaper. Open the second envelope.*”

Assistant opens it and takes out the third envelope.

“*Well, a third one. Open it, please, and you will perhaps find the half dollar.*”

Assistant opens third envelope and takes out half dollar.

“*To show you that this is the same paper we started with, just examine the half dollar. You see it is the same.*”

Half dollar has marks on it and appears to be the same as the borrowed coin.

At this stage the audience thinks the trick is done and will, no doubt, applaud you. Anyway, while assistant is identifying coin and audience is in that frame of mind, you can secretly prepare for the next stage of the trick.

Reach into right trousers pocket and squeeze the envelopes into a ball. Remove the ball Finger Palmed in your right hand. Grasp your right coat lapel with right hand to conceal ball.

“*Will you please take the coin down to the gentleman from whom we borrowed it? Or just a minute—before you return the coin. Will you remember what I did so that you can do it when you get home? First I borrowed a half dollar, had it marked so that the owner would know it when he saw it again and then had it wrapped in a piece of newspaper.*”

Reach over with left hand and pick up newspaper. Turn your right side towards audience. Transfer paper to right hand so that it is held as in the beginning of the experiment with the ball behind it. Now turn to right so that your left side is a little towards the audience.

In performing this repeated version quicken your movements. You are repeating and pretending to explain. As you know, it is not wise to repeat an experiment in magic. In this case, however, it is all right, for you leave the audience just as puzzled as they were after the first showing. Do it with plenty of snap, nevertheless.

“*Place the coin on the paper again. That’s it. Now you remember I rolled the paper into a ball and gave it to you.*”

Roll up paper into ball, exchange it for ball of envelopes in right hand, and give envelope ball to assistant. Palm the other ball in left hand as illustrated in Fig. 21.

“*And then I told you to touch it with a piece of sealing wax.*”

Reach into left coat pocket for wax and leave ball of paper there. Give wax to assistant, requesting him to touch the ball three times. Take back the wax.

“*Now, all you have to do is to open the parcel and there are our envelopes. Open the first. Now the second. Now take the third one down to the owner of the coin and let him open the envelope and remove his half dollar.*”

Assistant takes envelope down to the lender of the coin.

“*Just as soon as the owner has removed his coin, will you please bring the envelope right back to me again?*”

This prevents assistant from examining the coin too closely. While assistant is returning to stage, say to owner of coin,

“*That is your coin, is it not? It is. Thank you.*”

You must impress on your audience the fact that the coin is the one which you borrowed, otherwise much of the effect is lost. While all this is going on, it is easy for you to reach into your left coat pocket and palm out the ball of paper from it. Grasp the lapel of your coat again.

Now gather up the envelopes from the table and place the ball of paper behind them. Say to assistant,

“*Perhaps you would like to have all these envelopes as a souvenir of this little occasion. With the envelopes in your possession, you are sure to know how to do the experiment.*”

Take envelope from assistant and place with the rest. Show them freely, then roll them all up into a ball. Press the palmed ball against it and show both as one.

“*Yours with pleasure.*”

Go through the routine as before, palming the ball of envelopes in left hand and handing ball of paper to assistant.

“*And I suppose you want the magic sealing wax also.*”

Reach into pocket for sealing wax and leave the ball of envelopes there.

“*However, there is just a little warning I want to give you. Be careful when you are holding the envelopes in your hand not to touch your hand with the sealing wax.*”

As you say this, touch his hand with the wax.

“*Or you will find that the envelopes will turn right back to plain paper again. I believe, after all, that I had better keep the sealing wax.*” (Place it in pocket again.) “*Just open the paper now.*”

Assistant opens ball and finds the two half sheets of newspaper instead of the envelopes. Help him to spread them out.

“*Well, anyway you know how it is done—and perhaps some day you will be good enough to tell me so that I can do it myself.*”

Note

You should have no difficulty in getting the coin into the nest of envelopes in pocket. If you desire, however, you may make a little tube of cardboard or tin. This must be large enough to allow a half dollar to slide through easily and must have an opening large enough to find easily.

Have tube made 1½ inches wide by 1¼ inches high by ¼ inch deep. It is open, of course, at top and bottom. Have a piece at back by which to clip tube to envelopes, Fig. 23.

[Figure aiu]

[Figure aiv]

Fig. 24 shows how the tube fits into slits in the three envelopes. This allows an open passage for the coin into the smallest envelope. After the coin has been dropped in, remove the tube and leave it in pocket.
