Lesson 24: Cigarette Magic

This lesson is devoted to sleight of hand with cigarettes. Because the cigarette is in such common use, cigarette magic is popular. It also permits of working with lighted cigarettes and thus makes this kind of magic doubly mysterious.

I must emphasize again the importance of *naturalness*. You must study your moves carefully before the mirror, watching your *angles of visibility* and striving for natural movements.

I might mention here a compliment to my work which pleased me greatly. A college president, in speaking of my work in magic, said, “I hardly know whether to call Dr. Tarbell a magician or not. He doesn’t seem to use trickery. The things he does just seem to happen in a natural manner.”

A reputation like that is worth working for. I want you to work for it, remembering always that you are not a mere trickster but a *magician* performing “miracles” in a natural manner.

The Push-In Vanish

Effect

Cigarette is pushed into closed left hand. When hand is opened, cigarette is found to have vanished.

[Figure aiw]

To Perform

Hold cigarette as in Fig. 1. Thumb and fingers of right hand grasp cigarette and bring it to closed left hand. Push cigarette into left hand, Fig. 2. Bring hands apart. Open left hand and show cigarette in it.

[Figure aix]

Place cigarette against left fist again. Instead of pushing cigarette into hand, however, run first two fingers and thumb of right hand along cigarette towards left hand, Fig. 3.

[Figure aiy]

Slide right fingers over left forefinger, Fig. 4. Place right thumb against cigarette. Draw right hand away from left, concealing cigarette as shown in Fig. 5. If you do these movements properly, the illusion of pushing cigarette into closed left hand is perfect.

[Figure aiz]

[Figure aja]

Now raise left hand, open it, and show that cigarette has vanished. Fig. 6 shows view towards audience.

[Figure ajb]

Produce cigarette from left elbow. To do this, reach behind elbow, get cigarette into position at tips of right fingers, and bring cigarette out, Fig. 7.

[Figure ajc]

The Pick-Up Vanish

Effect

Performer holds a lighted cigarette in right hand. He closes left hand around it and takes it away from right. Suddenly he opens his left hand and cigarette has vanished. It is then produced from left knee.

[Figure ajd]

To Perform

Hold cigarette as in Fig. 8. Lighted end of cigarette is up and it is grasped between first and second fingers of right hand. Hold palm of hand towards audience so that cigarette is plainly visible.

[Figure aje]

Now turn palm of right hand towards yourself. Curl left hand around cigarette, Fig. 9. As you close left hand, supposedly around cigarette, drop cigarette into horizontal position, extending from right fingers, Fig. 10.

[Figure ajf]

Close left hand and draw it away from right. Curve right fingers with cigarette towards right palm. Keep back of right hand to audience and be careful that end of cigarette where you grasp it is not exposed, Fig. 11.

[Figure ajg]

Open left hand and show cigarette has vanished. Produce it from behind right knee.

Note

The smoke coming from the lighted cigarette may give you away if you are not careful. The hand concealing the cigarette should be kept in slight motion to scatter the smoke.

The Pivot Vanish

Effect

Cigarette is patted into the left fingers, and the left hand is closed around it. In a moment the cigarette is found to have disappeared from left hand.

[Figure ajh]

To Perform

Hold cigarette in left hand at tips of first and second fingers and thumb. With tip of second finger of right hand, pat cigarette, pushing it into left hand about half an inch, Fig. 12.

[Figure aji]

Continue patting cigarette into left hand a little at a time until only about a quarter of an inch extends beyond left fingers, Fig. 13.

[Figure ajj]

With second finger tip of right hand, press outward on end of cigarette. This pivots it into right hand, Fig. 14. Cigarette goes just inside crotch of thumb. Place thumb against it to hold in place, Fig. 15.

Hold right hand naturally, back to audience. Close left hand as though it holds the cigarette, then open it and show cigarette has vanished.

[Figure ajk]

Front and Back Hand Palm

Effect

Performer shows both sides of right hand empty. Then suddenly he produces a cigarette at his finger tips.

[Figure ajl]

[Figure ajm]

To Perform

This may be done as a continuation of various cigarette vanishes. If you do it following the Pivot Vanish, allow cigarette to pivot into position shown in Fig. 16. The end of it goes right into crotch of thumb.

[Figure ajn]

Cigarette can then be easily grasped in crotch of right thumb, Fig. 17. Drop right hand to side. Keep back of hand to audience, Fig. 18. Then raise right hand, still keeping back of it to audience. Fig. 19 shows hand as audience sees it.

[Figure ajo]

[Figure ajp]

Fig. 20 shows palm of hand away from audience with concealed cigarette. Now you are to turn hand over quickly to show palm empty to audience. As you turn hand, force end of cigarette between first and second fingers, Fig. 21.

[Figure ajq]

Press tip of right thumb against fingers and other end of cigarette to conceal it. Palm may now be shown empty. Turning of hand must be done quickly and naturally as if you actually had nothing in your hand, Fig. 22.

[Figure ajr]

Turn your hand to show back again, and as you do so, pull cigarette back between first and second fingers to palm of hand again, Fig. 23. Do this back and front movement two or three times. Then as you show palm for the last time, get cigarette to finger tips by pivoting lower end upward, and produce cigarette.

[Figure ajs]

This may be performed with a burning cigarette. Be sure to open fingers wide enough when you pass the burning end between your fingers so that you will not burn yourself.

The Throwing Vanish

Effect

A lighted cigarette is thrown into left hand. Hand is closed, then opened, and cigarette is found to have disappeared.

To Perform

Hold cigarette in right hand between tips of first and second fingers. Have it lighted, Fig. 24. Make a throwing motion towards left hand. As you do so, curl right fingers in to palm and press end of cigarette against crotch of thumb. Use left hand as a screen for these movements, Fig. 25.

[Figure ajt]

[Figure aju]

Close left hand as though holding the cigarette and draw it away from right. Open right fingers, holding cigarette in crotch of thumb, Fig. 26.

[Figure ajv]

Open left hand and show that cigarette has vanished. Then produce cigarette from left elbow. Or you may vary the production by turning back of left hand to audience and producing cigarette from behind it.

The Pull-Away Vanish

Effect

Cigarette is held in closed fist of left hand. Performer pushes it into left hand with his right. Yet when left hand is opened, cigarette is found to have vanished.

To Perform

Pinch one end of cigarette so that it is flat. Place it in closed left fist with pinched end upward, Fig. 27. Place first two fingers of right hand against end of cigarette. Grip pinched end firmly between first and second finger tips, Fig. 28.

[Figure ajw]

[Figure ajx]

Push cigarette into closed left hand. To audience it must appear that you merely push cigarette with right fingers but do not grasp it, Fig. 29.

[Figure ajy]

Draw left hand away as though you held cigarette in it. Cigarette remains gripped in right fingers. Hold it in horizontal position with back of hand to audience. Fig. 30 shows side view away from audience.

[Figure ajz]

Curve right fingers inward to palm. Open left hand and show it to audience. Cigarette has vanished, Fig. 31.

[Figure aka]

To Vanish Cigarette Up the Nose

Performer pushes cigarette up his right nostril and causes it to disappear.

To Perform

Place end of cigarette against right nostril, Fig. 32.

[Figure akb]

Slide first and second finger tips and thumb of right hand up along cigarette to the nose. This gives the illusion that cigarette was slid up into nostril, but in reality it is grasped in right hand, Fig. 33. Remove hand from nose.

[Figure akc]

To Produce Cigarette from Ear

Effect

Performer reaches up with right hand and takes a cigarette out of his right ear.

To Perform

This is a pleasing continuation of the above vanish. With cigarette pressed against first two fingers with thumb of right hand, reach up to opening of right ear, Fig. 34.

[Figure akd]

Slide fingers backward to end of cigarette and bring it out, apparently from the ear, Fig. 35.

[Figure ake]

To Swallow a Cigarette

Effect

Performer pushes cigarette into mouth and apparently swallows it.

To Perform

Place end of cigarette against lips, Fig. 36. Push fingers upward along cigarette as you did in pretending to put cigarette up the nose. Open mouth a little. When cigarette is concealed in right hand, remove hand from lips. Make a swallowing motion. Now produce the cigarette from under your vest.

[Figure akf]

Vanish and Production (Paul Fox)

This is a beautiful effect in the hands of Paul Fox.

[Figure akg]

Effect

Cigarette is placed in left hand and vanished. Both hands are shown empty, then cigarette is produced from behind left hand.

[Figure akh]

[Figure aki]

[Figure akj]

[Figure akk]

To Perform

Hold cigarette between first and second fingers of right hand, Fig. 37. Now place left hand with back to audience over back of right hand to conceal cigarette. Under cover of left hand, make the following moves with the right.

Allow cigarette to fall over second finger, Fig. 38. Place third finger over cigarette, Fig. 39. Release first finger and hold cigarette grasped only between second and third fingers, Fig. 40. Curve fingers inward to palm of hand, Fig. 41.

[Figure akl]

Remove left hand and close it as if it held cigarette. Point right index finger at left hand. Fig. 42 shows hands as audience sees them.

[Figure akm]

Fig. 43 shows view from rear away from audience. Open left hand and show that cigarette has vanished.

Place right hand up behind left, straightening out fingers which grasp cigarette. This is done apparently to show back of right hand, but in reality to manipulate cigarette. Place right forefinger over cigarette again, release third finger, and get cigarette into original position between first and second fingers, Fig. 44.

[Figure akn]

Turn right hand to show empty palm to audience, Fig. 45. Fig. 46 shows view away from audience. Cigarette is held horizontally in back of right hand.

[Figure ako]

[Figure akp]

Separate hands and show them empty, Fig. 47. Turn back of left hand to audience and bring it down over right fingers far enough to conceal movements as you bring cigarette to thumb and finger tips of right hand. Draw right hand away from left and produce cigarette, Fig. 48.

[Figure akq]

[Figure akr]

Note

You may continue showing hands back and front by merely continuing the manipulations taught to you above.

The Multiplying Cigarette

Effect

One cigarette is shown by performer, and suddenly another is produced from the first.

To Perform

Pinch end of a cigarette and conceal it by grasping it in crotch of left thumb—B. Hold another cigarette exposed at tips of thumb and first finger—A, Fig. 49.

[Figure aks]

To audience it appears that you are just holding one cigarette in left hand. Back of hand is exposed. Left side of body is toward audience, Fig. 50.

[Figure akt]

Bring right hand down to left, placing tips of fingers just inside left fingers. Grasp pinched end of concealed cigarette between third and fourth fingers of right hand, Fig. 51.

[Figure aku]

Start moving hands to left and turn body to left. As you do so, grasp cigarette A in right finger tips and remove cigarette B from crotch of left thumb, Fig. 52.

[Figure akv]

As you turn to left, palm of left hand and back of right are exposed to audience. Fingers of right hand are curled into palm sufficiently to conceal cigarette B, Fig. 53.

[Figure akw]

Take cigarette A into left hand again. Raise right hand, getting right thumb under cigarette, Fig. 54.

[Figure akx]

Bring the two hands together so that cigarettes are parallel. Under cover of right hand, pivot cigarette B upward against finger tips. Then produce the second cigarette, pretending to pull it out of the first one. Show both cigarettes freely to audience as you face front, Fig. 55.

[Figure aky]

The Change-Over Palm

[Figure akz]

[Figure ala]

Effect

Both hands are shown empty, and yet a cigarette is concealed in them.

To Perform

Hold cigarette in crotch of left thumb. Left side of body is towards audience and back of left hand is exposed. Palm of right hand is shown freely. Bring right hand down to left and with crotch of right thumb grasp end of cigarette, Figs. 56 and 57.

[Figure alb]

Begin to swing hands to left as you turn body to left. As hands come directly in front of you, keep finger tips together to conceal cigarette, Fig. 58.

[Figure alc]

Continue turning to left so that hands come into position shown in Fig. 59. Holding cigarette in right hand, show palm of left hand freely.

The Change-Over works from crotch of one thumb to crotch of the other. This may be continued from side to side several times if desired. It may be done from left to right or right to left.

A variation of the Change-Over is performed by gripping end of cigarette between first and second fingers instead of in crotch of thumb, Fig. 60.

[Figure ald]

The Burning Cigarette and Silk Handkerchief

Effect

After showing both hands empty, performer places a lighted cigarette into his left hand, closes his hand and suddenly reopens it. The cigarette has been transformed into a silk handkerchief.

Paraphernalia

1—A Thumb Tip.

2—A silk handkerchief, about 13 inches square.

To Prepare

Wrap handkerchief around Thumb Tip. Tuck the free end well in so that handkerchief is secure. Do not have handkerchief too tight for it must be released easily when the time comes, Fig. 61. Have prepared Tip in one of your right pockets.

[Figure ale]

To Perform

Secretly get Tip on right thumb. Hold palm of left exposed to audience and back of right hand to audience. Bring your hands together, Fig. 62.

[Figure alf]

Place right fingers in front of left hand and thumb behind, Fig. 63.

[Figure alg]

Raise right fingers, still keeping thumb behind left hand. This exposes palms of both hands to audience, Fig. 64.

[Figure alh]

Bring right fingers down again, then pull right hand away from left, and show backs of both hands to audience. As you show back of left hand, bring right hand over to it and get Thumb Tip into left palm. Close left hand around Tip and handkerchief.

Take a lighted cigarette from a spectator or one of your own, break it in half, and show it freely. Place it in closed left hand, getting it into Tip, Fig. 65.

[Figure ali]

Push right thumb into Tip. Free Tip from handkerchief and bring Tip out with thumb pointed directly at audience to conceal it. Show palm of right hand empty, then back of hand.

Open left hand gracefully, exposing the silk in it. With movements of left fingers open up the silk and then hold it between your hands to show it to audience, Fig. 66.

[Figure alj]

The Phantom Cigarette

Effect

Performer makes an imaginary cigarette and places it in his mouth. This is all done in pantomime. He takes a box of matches from his pocket, lights a match and brings it up to his mouth. Suddenly a real cigarette appears between his lips and he lights it with the match.

Paraphernalia

1—A cigarette.

2—A small box of matches.

To Prepare

The match box must be prepared to hold a cigarette. One way is to take the drawer of the box and with a piece of playing card or thin cardboard, wall off a space to hold a cigarette. If you get this cardboard the proper length, the ends of the box will hold it in place. Cut a space through one end of the drawer into which a cigarette can be passed easily. Now fill the box with matches, and place a cigarette in the tube for it, Figs. 67 and 68.

[Figure alk]

[Figure all]

An easier way of preparing box is to cut a hole in one end of drawer large enough for the cigarette. Place cigarette in drawer, fill box with matches to cover cigarette completely, and push drawer into cover of box. Figs. 69 and 70.

[Figure alm]

[Figure aln]

I prefer the first method. Because of the partition in the box, the matches cannot slide out of the hole when the cigarette is out of the box. Place box in left coat pocket or have it in some other handy place.

To Perform

The success of this experiment depends on your ability to pantomime the making of a cigarette. Study the motions carefully.

Pretend to take a package of cigarette papers from pocket, take a sheet, and replace package. Make an imaginary trough in paper. Reach into back pocket and produce an imaginary pouch of tobacco, open it, and sprinkle tobacco into paper. Pull strings of imaginary sack with your teeth to close it. Replace sack in pocket. Even up tobacco in paper. Roll cigarette. Wet end of paper and paste down. Fix ends of cigarette and place it in your mouth.

[Figure alo]

Reach into pocket with left hand and bring out box of matches. Keep prepared end of box away from audience so that cigarette will not be exposed.

Open box. This brings cigarette inside of box cover, and box can now be shown freely as you take a match, Fig. 71.

Close box and strike match on side. Holding box in left hand, bring both hands up to mouth as if to light imaginary cigarette. Under cover of hands, grasp cigarette in teeth, Figs. 72 and 73.

[Figure alp]

[Figure alq]

Pull box forward a little to release cigarette. Now light the real cigarette between your lips, remove hands, and show cigarette.

Variation

A good way to vary this effect is to ask someone for a cigarette and pretend to take one from the package he offers. Audience sees that you do not take a cigarette and are surprised when they find that you suddenly get one between your lips.

The Vanishing Cigarette

Effect

Performer places lighted cigarette in closed left hand. He then opens his hand and cigarette is gone.

Paraphernalia

1—A Cigarette Pull.

2—A cigarette—your own or a borrowed one.

To Prepare

The Cigarette Pull is a small metal cylinder with a spring inside. The spring keeps the cigarette tight in place when it is placed in the Pull. The Pull is attached to a length of round black elastic, Figs. 74, 75 and 76.

[Figure alr]

[Figure als]

[Figure alt]

Fig. 77 shows the Pull with a fountain pen clip attached to it. Under the clip articles may be placed, such as silks, for changing lighted cigarettes into other objects. If you wish to do this, show the lighted cigarette, place it in the Pull, release the silk handkerchief from the Pull, and let Pull slide back under cover. Then show the silk.

The Cigarette Pull is affixed to your body in the same manner as a Handkerchief Pull. Keep Cigarette Pull in place by a small ring or pin, Fig. 77 A.

[Figure alu]

To Perform

Place cigarette in mouth and light it. Turn right side of body towards audience. Reach up with left hand and close your fingers over Pull.

[Figure alv]

Face front, bringing left hand with Pull up in front of body. Left hand and arm conceal Pull and elastic, Fig. 78.

[Figure alw]

Show lighted cigarette with right hand. Place it apparently in closed left hand with lighted end down—really in the Pull in left hand. Release Pull and allow it to slide back under coat into original position. Open left hand gracefully and slowly and show that cigarette has vanished.

The Vanishing Pencil

Ed Reno has a favorite impromptu stunt in which he uses the Cigarette Pull to vanish a pencil. He takes his lead pencil from his pocket and says, “*You have perhaps heard about breaking a pencil with a dollar bill. Here is a new way of doing it without a bill.*” While he says this, he is demonstrating by striking pencil on the table. This is merely for misdirection—to get right side of body towards audience and secure Pull in left hand. He then faces front and puts pencil down in left hand, into Pull. Holding top of pencil with right hand, he makes a movement as if to break pencil. As soon as pencil is fully concealed by hands, Pull is released and goes back under coat. Hands are opened and audience sees that pencil has vanished.

“*Yes, sir! I’m the champion pencil breaker of Sangamon County.*”

The Dollar Bill in the Cigarette

Effect

Magician borrows a dollar bill and requests the owner to remember the number. He then takes out a box of cigarettes and has one selected. He places this one in his mouth. Folding the dollar bill he tucks it into his closed left hand. In a moment he opens his hand and the bill has vanished. He lights the cigarette and finds that it does not draw well. Magician then tears the cigarette apart and discovers the dollar bill inside of it. Bill is unfolded and returned to owner to check up on the number and make sure it is his own.

Paraphernalia

1—A package of cigarettes.

2—A dollar bill.

3—A Cigarette Pull.

To Prepare

You must prepare one cigarette. Carefully remove all the tobacco except about one-half to three-quarters of an inch near the end. Do not injure the paper. You will have no difficulty in removing tobacco with a pair of tweezers or a toothpick, or rolling the cigarette, Fig. 79.

[Figure alx]

Take the dollar bill and copy down the last three digits of the number and the series letter after it.

Fold the bill in half lengthwise, then in half the other way. Finally, roll up the bill as tight as possible, Figs. 80, 81, and 82.

Place rolled bill in hollow space in prepared cigarette. Turn cigarette as you insert bill and you will find it easy to do. When bill is well concealed in cigarette, place a little tobacco on top of it to make cigarette look natural, Fig. 83.

[Figure aly]

[Figure alz]

[Figure ama]

[Figure amb]

Take box of cigarettes. Remove all cigarettes but two. Place these two at one end of box and place prepared cigarette next to them towards inside of box. Place box of cigarettes in pocket.

To Perform

Come forward to audience.

“*I should like to borrow a hundred-dollar bill. The gentleman sitting over there says he would, too. Or a fifty-dollar bill—twenty—a ten—a five—or who has a dollar? Just a dollar bill. Ah, here is a gentleman who trusts me. Thank you, sir.*”

Take dollar bill from gentleman. Be sure that it is not too old or too new and resembles the bill you have in cigarette. Should it be too old, say: “*It might fall apart. I need a sturdy, youthful bill.*”

If it is too new, say: “*That is a brand new one and I might soil it. Give me one that has seen service. I want a bill with experience.*”

Holding bill in full sight, go back towards the stage. Suddenly stop as if a thought occurred to you and say:

“*Pardon me, sir, but would you mind just copying down the number on your bill. As you are the owner of it, you would, no doubt, like to identify it again later. Just write the last three digits—7, 6, 4—and the letter A.*”

Assume that those were the numbers on the bill you placed in the cigarette. Whatever those numbers are, call them out to the spectator to mark down. Audience and owner of bill believe that you are actually reading off the numbers from borrowed bill while in reality you are giving the numbers on the bill in the prepared cigarette.

Keep the dollar bill in plain sight. Bring out package of cigarettes from your pocket. Hold box so that cigarettes slide over to right side of box and hand to spectator so that prepared cigarette is nearest him. As a rule, spectator takes this cigarette when you offer the box to him.

“*That's fine. You have selected a cigarette for me, sir.*”

Take cigarette from him and place it in your mouth. Ask spectator to take another for himself. If he did not take the prepared cigarette from you the first time, merely let him keep the first one, and you select the prepared one for yourself.

“*Have one yourself, sir, and we'll have just a little smoke between friends.*”

Replace cigarette box in pocket. Go back to stage. While your back is turned, get Pull in left hand, closing your fingers over it. Hold dollar bill up in right hand all the time.

Now turn and face audience. Spread out dollar bill, holding it between hands.

“*It is said that if a person folds a dollar bill and then puts it in his pocket, when he takes it out again, he finds his money in creases.*”

Fold bill over and crease it down. Continue folding and rolling it a little so that it can be easily tucked into Cigarette Pull. Place bill in Pull under cover of hands and release Pull.

“*However, in folding money so many times, it certainty makes it look small—in fact, so small. . . .*”

Open left hand and show bill has vanished.

“*That it is quite invisible. This, of course, isn’t difficult to do because almost anyone can get rid of money. Now, the production of money is more difficult.*”

Take box of matches from pocket and light the cigarette which has been in your mouth ever since the spectator selected it from the box you offered him. Replace matches.

“*I guess that’s why many fellows light up a cigarette and try to imagine they are rich. But not so good with this cigarette. It doesn’t seem to smoke so well.*”

Take cigarette from mouth and look at it. . . .

“*As we say jokingly, one to another, ‘It would make a poor artist as it doesn’t draw so well.’*”

Break open cigarette and show bill inside. . . . “*There seems to be a cause back of all effects.*”. . . Unfold dollar bill. . . “*There is money in cigarettes.*”

Look at number on bill. . . .“*Ah, sir, I believe it is your dollar. The number is 7, 6, 4, A. Is that correct, sir? I shall let you have the bill so that you can check up for yourself.*”

Return bill to owner, and have him identify it. . . .“*It is your bill? Fine. Lucky I decided to smoke or you might never have gotten your bill back—or, I might say, your greenback.*”

Variation

Another method of doing the Dollar Bill in the Cigarette is to let the man who lends the bill really copy down the number of the bill. In taking bill you casually glimpse the number and memorize as much as possible of it. It is not hard to memorize four or five of the right hand numbers.

In Volume 1, page 106, a handkerchief is described with coins sewed in a small pocket in one corner. You can make up a similar handkerchief with soft paper in pocket instead of coins. Have paper of such texture as to feel like dollar bill through the handkerchief.

Take dollar bill from spectator and apparently place in the center of the handkerchief, from underneath, in reality bringing up the faked corner with paper and placing it in center instead.

Reach into right trousers pocket with palmed bill in right hand and leave the borrowed bill in the pocket. You bring out a rubber band which you wrap around handkerchief just below the paper imitation of bill. Give this wrapped-up fake bill to spectator to hold.

Borrow a cigarette and switch it for the prepared one of your own, which contains a duplicate dollar bill. Light prepared cigarette with matches taken from right coat pocket, leaving borrowed cigarette behind while getting box of matches.

Take handkerchief from spectator by one corner and shake out, showing that bill has disappeared.

Open cigarette and remove dollar bill. Open it and read from it the numbers you memorized on the original dollar bill in pocket.

“*Is this the bill you gave me, sir? It is. Thank you.*”

Put bill in right hand trousers pocket exchanging it for the original bill. Bring latter a bit out of pocket as you say: “*Oh! you just lent it to me—then I’ll pay you back the first of the month. . . .but on second thought you might charge me interest.*”

This adds to the comedy of the situation. Give bill back to owner who can check up on it.

Catching Cigarettes in the Air

Effect

Performer borrows a hat, shows it empty, and then proceeds to catch a number of cigarettes in the air and toss them into the hat. His hands are shown empty all the time and the productions are most mysterious.

Paraphernalia

1—About a dozen cigarettes.

2—A Cigarette Clip.

To Prepare

Clip consists of a flesh-colored piece of metal which clamps onto first phalange of second finger of right hand. To this piece of metal is attached a long pin on which a cigarette is placed. Figs. 84 and 85.

[Figure amc]

[Figure amd]

Place a cigarette on the Cigarette Clip. Take rest of cigarettes with the one on Clip and wrap them in a little bundle with thread or rubber band, Fig. 86.

Place bundle of cigarettes in lower right vest pocket or in special pocket inside right side of coat so that you can get it easily.

To Perform

Borrow hat and hold it in right hand. As you go back to stage, remove bundle of cigarettes from pocket with left hand. Bring hat in front of you for a moment to get bundle under brim as shown in Fig. 87.

[Figure ame]

[Figure amf]

This method of handling is similar to that used in production of silks from a hat or in loading coins for The Miser’s Dream.

Turn to right and face audience. Hat is now held with left hand concealing cigarettes under brim. Show hat empty, then turn it over to show outside with nothing concealed, bringing bundle of cigarettes inside of hat. Turn hat with opening up again and let bundle fall into crown. Reach in with right hand and quickly break thread or remove rubber band from bundle.

Adjust Cigarette Clip on back of second finger of right hand as you do this. Cigarette lies along back of finger, Fig. 88.

[Figure amg]

[Figure amh]

[Figure ami]

Sometimes performer carries prepared cigarette on Clip in his right coat or trouser pocket. While talking to audience, he reaches into his pocket and adjusts Clip on finger.

Remove hand from pocket or hat and be sure to keep back of it away from audience to conceal Clip with cigarette. Turn left side to audience (hat is in left hand), and show empty palm of right hand, Fig. 89.

Now reach into air with right hand. Bend second finger quickly. This brings cigarette into position shown in Fig. 90.

Other fingers are held straight, and the effect is that you reached into the air with fingers wide apart and suddenly produced a cigarette.

Pretend to throw this cigarette into hat. Your hand goes into hat, second finger straightens out to conceal cigarette. You bring hand out apparently empty. Remember the cigarette does not come off the Clip and does not fall into the hat. Your middle finger simply bends to give the effect.

Reach into air again and produce another cigarette in same manner as first one. Pretend to toss this one into hat also. Continue this until eleven cigarettes have been produced and apparently thrown into hat. Audience is not aware that you are producing the same cigarette every time. They believe you have produced eleven different ones. Productions may be varied by taking cigarettes from behind the knee, etc.

Keep palm of right hand to audience to conceal cigarette. Show cigarettes in hat to audience. Pour them out on table. Then reach into air once more with right hand and produce a twelfth cigarette. Remove it from Clip with left hand as though you were merely taking it from right fingers.

Straighten right fingers immediately to conceal Clip and dispose of Clip in pocket at your earliest opportunity. You may continue from this point with manipulations with one cigarette if you desire.

Note

The Cigarette Clip is a handy piece of apparatus. It may be used to perform The Phantom Cigarette. It does away with the use of prepared box of matches.

To do this, first place Clip at base of third finger of left hand with

cigarette extending into palm, Fig. 91. With Clip in this position, back of hand must be held towards audience. Hand and fingers may be moved freely.

[Figure amj]

Go through pantomime of making cigarette and lighting match. Toss match box aside. As you bring hands in front of mouth, get cigarette between your teeth and draw it from Clip. Light it and show the real cigarette.

An Odd Cigarette Vanish

Effect

Performer shows a cardboard box with a number of cigarettes in it. He takes them out one at a time and places them in another cardboard box. Picking up the second box, he causes the cigarettes to vanish. Magician shows the empty box and tears it up to prove that the cigarettes are gone.

Paraphernalia

1—Two cardboard boxes, about 16 inches square.

2—A few cigarettes.

3—A Cigarette Clip.

To Prepare

Place one cigarette on the Clip. Place this cigarette in one of the boxes.

Place the two boxes about two feet apart on the table.

To Perform

Have left side towards audience as you stand near the box with the cigarettes. If the table is small, you may hold this box in left hand.

Show the empty box and replace on table. Show cigarettes in other box. Reach in with right hand, pick up some of the cigarettes, and let them fall back into box. As you do this, adjust Clip on back of second finger of right hand, as in Fig. 88. Show cigarette as in Fig. 90.

Reach over to empty box as if to throw cigarette into it. Place hand inside of box and when it is concealed, merely straighten out second finger and bring hand out apparently empty, Fig. 92.

[Figure amk]

Reach into first box again, pretending to take another cigarette, but in reality merely bending second finger to produce cigarette on Clip. Bring hand out showing cigarette, and go through routine again of apparently dropping cigarette in second box.

Continue this for the same number of times as there are cigarettes in the first box. Audience believes that you are taking cigarettes from the first box and putting them into the second, whereas you are really just carrying one cigarette back and forth.

After last cigarette has been apparently dropped into second box, show right hand empty and drop it to side. Under cover of your body, dispose of cigarette and Clip in your pocket.

With left hand lift second box, presumably containing cigarettes now. Turn box over to show that cigarettes have disappeared, then destroy box by tearing it apart to show that it is not a trick box.

Cardini’s Floating Cigarette

This is a pretty novelty in the hands of this noted magician. It is suitable for the stage or any place where a thread will not be visible to spectators.

Effect

Magician borrows a cigarette or has one of his own examined. He places it in a glass tube which has a screw cap at top and bottom. A hoop is passed over the tube to show that there is no outside connection. Suddenly on command, the cigarette rises and falls inside the tube. Mysteriously, it stops and remains suspended when magician desires it.

Paraphernalia

1—A cigarette.

2—A piece of fine black silk thread, 24 to 30 inches long.

3—A black pin, or needle painted black.

4—A glass toothbrush holder with screw covers at both ends. The covers are of metal with holes punched in them for ventilation. These holders may be purchased at a 5 and 10, or drug store.

5—A wooden or metal hoop, about six to eight inches in diameter.

To Prepare

Take the piece of thread and attach the pin to one end. Run the pin through a hole in one of the metal caps of holder, going from outside to inside. Attach free end of thread to your middle vest button.

Place the threaded screw cap in lower right vest pocket and insert the pin in top of pocket where you can get at it easily. Screw the other metal cap on bottom of glass tube.

To Perform

Come forward and ask spectator for a cigarette. As you go back to stage, get pin from vest pocket between thumb and forefinger of right hand.

[Figure aml]

[Figure amm]

Under pretense of examining cigarette, push pin into one end of it. In this way cigarette is attached to thread, Figs. 93 and 94.

Pick up glass tube with left hand and show it to audience. Transfer cigarette to left hand also. Reach into pocket and get screw cap with right hand. Now drop cigarette in tube and screw on cap, Fig. 95.

[Figure amn]

[Figure amo]

Allow cigarette to fall from end to end of tube to show audience that it is not attached inside. Pick up hoop from table and pass it over threaded tube in same manner as you pass hoop over threaded deck in a glass. (See Lesson 30, Figs. 29 to 38). Place hoop aside.

Now hold tube at bottom in left hand. By moving tube toward or away from body, thread is loosened or tightened, and cigarette rises or falls accordingly. The movement need be only slight to get the effect. As the movement is horizontal to and from body, it is not noticeable at all to audience, Fig. 96.

Make cigarette rise to top of tube, fall to bottom, and remain suspended at different places. Make it rise rapidly and then fall slowly, etc., just to make it interesting.

To finish the trick, have cigarette come to top of tube. Grasp thread with thumb and finger tips of right hand and pull pin out. Insert pin in your vest as you misdirect attention of audience to the tube. Tube and cigarette may now be passed out for examination, or tube opened and cigarette thrown out to audience.

Lighted Cigarette from Box

Effect

Performer takes cigarette box from his pocket, opens it, and produces a lighted cigarette from it. He places cigarette in his mouth and smokes it for a few minutes.

To Prepare

Take a cardboard cigarette box and cut an air hole in each side of it. On the bottom fix some wire, bending it so that it will raise burning cigarette from bottom of box and hold it midway between bottom and cover. Wires can be sewed to bottom of box and attached to other pieces of cardboard to fit into box. If extra pieces are used, sew them to bottom of box, Fig. 97.

[Figure amp]

To Perform

This makes a nice conclusion to The Vanishing Cigarette. After cigarette has disappeared, reach into pocket, take out box, produce lighted cigarette and smoke it.

Note

Light the cigarette in the box just before using it, so that it won’t burn down too much.

[Figure amq]
