Lesson 26: Selected Card Mysteries

The following card mysteries are selected because of the systems and routines which they contain. They are puzzling and entertaining. They are fine for intimate work.

“Any Name Called For”

This is a favorite of Audley Walsh and because of the variety of names that can be asked for can be worked into excellent comedy.

Effect

Spectator, after shuffling a deck of cards, is asked to secretly remove a few cards and hide them in his pocket or some place near-by, then to count off the same number again, look at the “bottom” card of the packet and replace on the deck. Performer then picks up the deck and asks the spectator what his grandmother’s name was, and proceeds to count off the cards to spell out the name. This is continued for two or more other names. The next card is then laid down on the table back up.

Cards are again assembled and spectator asked to place the hidden cards on “top” of the deck. Since the spectator chose any number of cards, it would be almost impossible to know the position of his selected card in the deck. But the spectator repeats the routine of spelling and laying aside the next card, with the result that when card is turned over it proves to be the selected card.

Paraphernalia

A deck of cards.

To Perform

Give the deck of cards to a spectator to shuffle freely.

*“I want you to deal off any number of cards that you want. Five—six—seven—eight—nine—ten—eleven—any number of cards that you want. Do this secretly so I do not know the number of cards, then hide the cards in your pocket or behind something.”*

Spectator counts off a few cards and secretes them out of sight. You can turn your back during this.

*“Have you done that? Now count off the same number of cards again. If you counted off six cards the first time, count off six cards again. Then lay the balance of the pack on the table, backs up.”*

Spectator counts off a duplicate number of cards and places remainder of deck on table, backs up.

*“Shuffle the cards in your hand. Look at the ‘bottom’ card, and remember it, but do not show it to me. Place your cards back on ‘top’ of the deck and even them up.”*

Spectator does this. Your back can be turned to spectator while this is going on. Turn to spectator again.

Pick up the deck and give it a *false shuffle*, such as the Wiggle Woggle Shuffle or Riffle False Shuffle (pages 254-255, Volume 1). These shuffles do not disturb the order of the deck. The trick is effective even if cards are not shuffled, but a false shuffle adds to the mystery. Place deck back on table, backs up.

*“This is a piece of magic that I want you to do yourself and test your own powers as a magician. Take the cards out of your pocket and place on ‘top’ of the deck—but before you do this let me first explain what I want you to do. I want you to think of a name and spell it, putting one card on the table for each letter. For instance JOHN—J-O-H-N.”*

Having picked up the deck, you make pantomimic motions as though dealing cards on the table, without really dealing any.

*“What was your grandmother’s name? Mary? All right. M-A-R-Y.”*

This time you really count down the four cards on table one at a time, backs up.

*“What was your grandfather’s name? Juniper? J-U-N-I-P-E-R.”* You count down seven more cards to fit Juniper.

*“Ever own a dog? You did. What was his name? Towser? All right, T-O-W-S-E-R.”* Count down six more cards.

*“After you have done this, place this next card on the table back up.”*

By way of illustration place this next card on the table, back up. *“Do you understand what you are to do? Fine.”*

Pick up the card from table and place it inside the deck near bottom. Pick up the packet of cards on the table and place on “top” of the deck.

*“Now take the cards you have hidden and place them on ‘top’ of the deck. And by putting these cards on the pack it will upset any kind of a prearrangement you and I might have had in mind. Your card is already lost in the deck but this just makes it ‘more lost.’ The more the mix-up, the greater your power as a magician.”*

Spectator removes packet of cards that has been hidden and places them on “top” of the deck.

*“Pick up the deck and start counting on the table your grandmother’s name.”* Spectator counts down, “M-A-R-Y.”

*“Now your grandfather’s name.”* Spectator counts down, “J-U-N-I-P-E-R.”

*“And your dog’s name.”* Continues to count “T-O-W-S-E-R.”

*“Now take the next card and place on the table face down.”* Card is placed on the table by itself, away from the others.

*“By the way, what was the name of the card you looked at in the deck? The Eight of Hearts? Turn over the card you placed on the table.”*

Spectator turns over the card which proves to be the card selected, and you call it out for the benefit of the company.

Note

This is a mathematical routine that is not affected by the number of cards the spectator counts off in the beginning and duplicates, or by the number of letters in the names. There should be, however, *a greater number of letters than the number of cards counted off.*

There is much chance for comedy by the questions you ask to determine the names. You can ask on almost any subject within reason. For instance:

What is your middle name?

What is your first wife’s maiden name?

Where was your mother born?

Where did you live before your moved here?

What did you have for breakfast?

Who is your favorite movie star?

Name any color, month, street, town, etc.

What kind of an automobile do you drive?

What is your occupation?

Ten Card Color Change

This is another favorite of Audley Walsh. It is a variation of “Follow the Leader,” a clever conception of that card genius, Dai Vernon.

Effect

Performer counts ten black cards down onto the table. Also ten red cards. He places the red cards on the black cards, all cards face up, and shows cards freely:

The “top” card, a black card, is placed on the table face up, and the other nine black cards are counted out in a packet in front of this card. To one side the red cards are counted down in like manner.

Performer changes positions of the red and black indicator cards. He deals three cards off the “black” packet but they turn out to be three red cards, matching the red card on the table. Likewise three black cards are dealt off the “red” packet onto the black card on table.

Now the positions of the packets are changed but instead of red cards, black cards are dealt and instead of black cards, red ones are dealt.

The diagonal packets are changed and cards dealt from the side but cards change color themselves to fit the cards they are dealt upon.

Paraphernalia

A deck of cards.

To Perform

Separate from the deck any ten black cards and place in a pile on table. Also separate ten red cards and place in a pile on table, Fig. 1. The cards should be face up.

[Figure ati]

[Figure atj]

[Figure atk]

[Figure atl]

*“We will use ten black cards and ten red cards.”*

Pick up the black packet and on these place the ten red cards, all face up, Fig. 2. Fan the cards a bit again calling attention to ten black cards and ten red cards.

Square up the cards and in doing so get the left little finger between the outer three (“top”) black cards and the rest of the cards and *reverse* these three cards under cover of the others, Figs. 3 and 4. This is easily done with left fingers. When cards are reversed still keep the left little finger between them and rest of the cards.

Turn the balance of the cards over (Fig. 5) on top of the three cards. Cards are now all face up but the three black cards have been transferred from the black section over in front of the red section. From the audience’s standpoint nothing has happened except that you just turned over the whole packet of cards.

[Figure atm]

The cards are now set up for the various color changes.

Another way to transfer the three cards: If you can make the pass, that sleight will enable you to transfer the three black cards from the “top” of the 20-card packet to the “bottom.”

*“We will put the black cards here. . . . One.”* Turn over the top card and place on table face up, Fig. 6 A.

Turn over the next card and place on table face up about three inches nearer you (Fig. 6 C) as you count, *“Two.”*

[Figure atn]

Continue counting cards onto pile C, Fig. 6, turning them face up on table until you reach “Five,” then turn over these four C cards nearest you so they are backs up and continue dealing the balance to make the ten cards, backs up, onto that packet.

*“Six—seven—eight—nine—ten black cards. Now for the red cards. One—.”*

Place red card face up about three and a half inches on right of the single black card on table, Fig. 6 B.

Turn over the next card and place it, face up, at D (Fig. 6) as you count, “Two.”

As you did with the black cards, turn over red cards and place face up on D until you reach “Five,” then turn the packet over and deal the balance of cards, backs up, onto the D packet.

“*Six—seven—eight—nine—ten. Ten red cards.*”

These moves are perfectly natural and done in such a way that you are merely checking upon the fact that you have ten black cards on one side and ten red cards on the other, Fig. 6.

Pick up packet C and show face of “bottom” card to audience. “Ten black cards on this side.”

Place cards back on table backs up. Pick up packet D and show face of “bottom” card to the audience. “*And ten red cards on this side.*”

Replace the cards on table. . . . “*It is said that there is a sympathy of colors and that like begets like. Suppose I change these two cards, and place the black card where the red is and the red in the black’s place.*”

Pick up black A and red B, single cards, and change places, Fig. 7.

[Figure ato]

[Figure atp]

“*Now since these two colors have changed places these two packets of colors will change places.*”

Pick up packet C and deal off the “top” three red cards one at a time onto red card B. Each card is turned over face up as dealt. . . . “*One—two—three red.*”

Replace packet on the table. Then pick up packet D and deal the top three cards face up on black card A. “*One—two—three black.*”

Replace balance of packet on table and exchange positions of packets C and D, Fig. 8.

“*Or we can changes these packets. It makes no difference.*”

Pick up packet D and deal three red cards face up on red card B. . . . “*One—two—three red.*”

Replace packet D on table and pick up packet C and deal the three top black cards face up on black card A. . . . “*One—two—three black.*”

Now change packets diagonally by changing B with C, Fig. 9. . . . “*Or we can change the packets diagonally. It makes no difference.*”

[Figure atq]

[Figure atr]

Count the remaining three black cards at C, face up, onto the black packet at A, Fig. 10. . . . “*One—two—three black.*”

Pick up remaining three red cards at D and count them, face up, onto the red cards at B, Fig. 10.

“*One—two—three red. Which goes to show that birds of a feather flock together.*”

Double Detection

This is one of Richard Himber’s effects. It is easy, mysterious, and requires but a few moments to perform.

Effect

Performer gives deck of cards to a spectator and requests him to put the deck behind his back. Holding deck backs up, he is requested to cut the deck anywhere he chooses and to reverse the bottom packet so that when deck is squared up, the two packets face each other. Performer names the two cards facing each other in center of deck.

Paraphernalia

A deck of cards.

To Perform

Have deck shuffled and cut. Hold deck in left hand, faces of cards

toward rear, Fig. 1. Left thumb is on upper edge of deck. Secretly note “bottom” card, which we will say is the Three of Diamonds. Pressing edge of “bottom” card with thumb, move it back so you can secretly glimpse the card next to it, Fig. 2. Let us say it is the Six of Clubs. Let card go back to position.

[Figure ats]

[Figure att]

Holding deck on angle of about forty-five degrees, backs towards audience, cover deck with right hand, finger tips on outer narrow edge of deck and thumb on near narrow edge. Under cover of deck and right hand, *reverse* the “bottom” card, the Three of Diamonds, with the left hand.

“*I want you to place this deck of cards behind your back.*”

Give deck, backs up, to spectator. Spectator places deck behind his back.

“*Keep the backs of the cards up. Cut the deck. Now reverse the lower packet of cards and bring the two packets together so that they face each other. Square up the deck. As you cut the deck any place that you chose, naturally I would not know at what cards you cut, neither would you know the cards.*”

Hesitate a moment.

“*But I would say that the two cards facing each other in the center of the deck are the Three of Diamonds and the Six of Clubs. Bring the deck out in front and let us check.*”

[Figure atu]

Spectator brings deck around in front, opens up cards and, true enough, the Three of Diamonds and the Six of Clubs face each other, Fig. 3.

Note

This can also be done as a mental effect by having spectator bring deck out in front and open to the spot where cards face each other. You can turn your back for a moment while this is being done. Then spectator should hold a packet in each hand and concentrate on the two cards facing him. You begin to visualize cards and finally name them.

“*One is a red card—one is a black card. I see a diamond, three diamonds. Yes, it is the Three of Diamonds. I see a club, six clubs. The other card is the Six of Clubs.*”

Another Suggestion

By using two decks of cards you can use this principle for a “You Do as I Do” type of experiment.

After you have “fixed” one deck and have given it to spectator to hold behind his back, you pick up the other deck and in pretending to look for Joker, get the Six of Clubs and Three of Diamonds to the “bottom” of your deck, facing you. You can also remove Joker and place on table. Riffle shuffle your cards but do not disturb position of the two cards at “bottom.” Be sure no one sees these “bottom” cards.

Place deck behind your back and reverse the “bottom” card. Say to spectator. . . .

“*Each of us holds a shuffled deck of cards behind our backs. I am going to cut my deck. I want you also to cut your deck. I am going to reverse the bottom packet. Also reverse yours. Now let the two packets come together face to face. Square the cards and we will each bring our deck out and place on the table before us.*”

Decks are placed on table.

“*Spread your cards and note the two cards that are facing each other in the center of the deck. Remember you had free choice in cutting the deck behind your back.*”

Spectator opens up deck showing two cards facing each other.

“*The Three of Diamonds and the Six of Clubs. Now, sir, I want you to pick up my deck of cards and open them up and see what two cards face each other.*”

Spectator open up deck revealing the Three of Diamonds and the Six of Clubs.

“*The Three of Diamonds and the Six of Clubs. That shows the sympathy between us. For the thing that I have done, you have duplicated.*”

Say to audience, “*Congratulate the man.*”

A Clever Card Discovery

This is a mathematical system in card magic that has been popular with George Kaplan. It is a variation of the Al Baker-Audley Walsh Telephone Mystery.

Effect

A deck of cards is thoroughly shuffled by a spectator. He is asked to look at the “top” card and remember it, then to remove from the “bottom” and place on top of his card the same number of cards as the number of his card. For instance, if the card was a nine spot, he is to move nine cards from the “bottom” to the “top.” The cards are cut by a spectator. The performer spreads cards on the table and picks out the selected card, or is able to find the selected card and produce it as he sees fit.

Paraphernalia

A deck of cards.

To Perform

Give a deck of cards to a spectator, requesting him to “*Give the cards an overhand shuffle. . . .then secretly look at the ‘top’ card, but do not show it to me.*”

Spectator shuffles, looks at the “top” card and replaces it on the deck.

“*Secretly count off the ‘bottom’ of the deck the same number of cards as the number on the card that you looked at. For instance, if you looked at a five spot count off five cards. If you looked at a Queen, count off twelve cards. Place these cards on ‘top’ of your card, on ‘top’ of the deck.*”

Spectator counts cards from the bottom to the “top.” Let us say that his card was the Nine of Hearts and that he counted nine cards.

You can turn your back a bit towards spectator as he makes his count. Turn back again and see if you can glimpse the “bottom” card of the deck. If not, take cards from him and, in a careless gesture, secure a quick secret glimpse so you will know the “bottom” card. Let us say it is the Seven of Clubs. This will be the *key* card. Let deck rest horizontally, backs up, on the outstretched palm of the left hand.

“*No one knows the location of your card except yourself, and so that not even you will know the location—cut the cards.*”

Cards are given a single cut. Square the cards. Spread the cards out

in a row, face up, on the table. Look for the key card, which in this case is the Seven of Clubs, Fig. 1.

[Figure atv]

Starting with the second card at the right as *one*, begin counting secretly (mentally) to the right “*One—two—three—four—five—six—seven—eight—nine—.*”

You will find that when you reach *nine* the card at that number is the Nine of Hearts. The number of the card agrees with the number that you count. You know that the selected card is the Nine of Hearts

But keep on counting up to *thirteen* because through the mixing of the cards there may be another card with a matching number which has nothing to do with the trick. Should two cards appear, or even three cards, you can work out the answer by process of elimination.

One may be a court card, and another a spot card, or one may be an even number, another an odd number. One may be red, another black. Or there may be a difference of suits, or values. There is always a way out.

“*Did your card have a picture on it? It did? I thought so. Your card is the King of Spades.*”

If the spectator says “No,” then say,

“*No? Just think of your card. Of course it had a picture on it; a picture of the Five of Spades.*”

Or to differentiate between a red and black card. . . .

“*Your card was cherry colored, wasn’t it?*”

If he says “Yes,” you reply by naming the red card. If he says “No,” then continue,

“*Black cherries. It was the Ten of Clubs.*”

Suppose one card is the Ten of Hearts and another is the Eight of Hearts, you say,

“*Are you visualizing an eight? You are? Your card is the Eight of Hearts,*” or “*No? Oh, I get it! It has more spots. Your card is the Ten of Hearts.*”

In the set-up of cards in Fig. 1 the Nine of Hearts is the only card that matches to the number called.

“*Concentrate on your card a moment. Just think of it clearly in your mind.*”

Run your finger tips over cards a couple of times and finally stop on the Nine of Hearts, announcing, “*Your card was the Nine of Hearts.*”

Note

As the purpose of this mystery is to locate the selected card, the ending can be brought about in other ways. Instead of spreading cards on the table to find the card, merely spread them in your hands, find the card, cut and bring to the “top” of the deck and produce as you see fit.

Baker-Walsh Telephone Mystery

The principle just described was devised and used as a telephone mystery by Al Baker and Audley Walsh. I will explain it here in a simple form. Immediately following is the subtle presentation of another performer.

Effect

Performer calls a friend by telephone and tells him to take a deck of cards, thoroughly shuffle them and to look at the “bottom” card of the deck, and remember it. Next he is to transfer as many cards from the “top” to the “bottom” of the deck as there are spots on the selected card. Performer now can easily locate his card.

Paraphernalia

1—Telephone, and deck of cards which spectator furnishes from his end.

2—A sheet of paper with list of numbers running downward from 1 to 13.

3—A pencil.

To Perform

Call a friend on the telephone and explain that you want to test your power with his in sending a mental message over the ’phone.

“*We can try the experiment with a deck of cards. Get a deck of cards, any deck of playing cards will do. . . . and come back to the ’phone.*”

“*Shuffle the cards thoroughly. Look at the ‘bottom’ card. Do not tell me what it is, but remember it. Concentrate on the number of spots on the card. Now transfer the same number of cards from the ‘top’ of the deck to ‘bottom’ as there are spots on your card. For instance, if you looked at a three spot, transfer three cards, if a Jack, eleven cards, etc.*”

Friend transfers the cards. Let us say he saw the Eight of Hearts and he transferred eight cards.

“*These cards have been transferred from the ‘top’ to the ‘bottom’ thereby losing your card in the deck. I do not know how far down in the deck your card is, as I do not know the number of cards you brought beneath your card. Turn the cards over so that the faces are upward. Now call off the cards to me one at a time.*”

Let us say the first card called is the Four of Spades. Pay no attention to it. But when the second card is called place it down on your paper after number one. Suppose this card is the Two of Hearts. Just write down Two of Hearts after the 1. Place the third card called at number 2. Do this until your friend has called at least fourteen cards. He may call even more cards for misdirection.

His selected card, the Eight of Hearts, will fall on the number 8.

Should any other cards have the same number of spots as a number on your paper, you must use the elimination process to determine which is the proper card, as already described.

“*Concentrate on your card. It is the Eight of Hearts!*”

McCaffrey’s Variation of the Telephone Mystery

This is an excellent presentation and variation of the Baker-Walsh Telephone Mystery. Bill McCaffrey called me on the ’phone while I was in Los Angeles and performed it for me. It was so effective that I asked for his permission to publish his routine with his own patter in this Course.

Presentation

After calling a friend on the telephone, the magician’s conversation runs somewhat as follows:

“*Hello, Jim! Would you like to see a good card trick? Certainly I can do it for you over the ’phone, if you have a deck of cards handy. I’ll wait while you find them.*

“*Are you ready? First, you shuffle the cards thoroughly and then we’ll proceed. All right? I think you’ll be able* to listen with one hand on the

*receiver and do the trick with the other.* *Like most card tricks this one requires that you select a card, and I think the fairest way probably would be for you to think of some number, let us say between 5 and 25, and then count down and look at the card in that position.* *Would that be a fair choice?* *Very well, let’s do that.* *Wait a minute—perhaps if I succeeded in telling you the name of the card you might think that because of some sort of psychological probability most persons think of the same number between 5 and 25.* *In order to eliminate even that possibility, suppose we leave the choice of the card entirely to chance.*

“*I suppose you would give a Jack a value of 11, a Queen 12, and a King 13.* *Then, instead of thinking of a number, suppose you glance at the “bottom”* *card of the deck which you have just shuffled, and we will allow its denomination to represent the number.* *Don’t remember the card because we are merely trying to arrive at a number that it would be impossible for me to determine by any psychological means.*

“*Now place the deck face down and count off, one by one, into a small heap beside the deck, a number of cards equal to the number you are thinking of.*”

Friend counts down cards onto table.

“*Have you done that? Then I want you to turn over the last card dealt onto the small heap and remember it.*

“*Leave it face down on this small packet and place the rest of the deck on top of the cards just dealt. So you will not forget the name of the card, suppose you jot it down on a piece of paper.*”

Give him time to make the memorandum.

“*Have you done that?* *From now on you must be very careful because I want you to turn over the cards one by one from the “top”* *of the deck, naming each one as you do so, and I shall try to tell you the name of the card you have chosen.* *You must be careful not to use any different tone when naming your card from that used in naming the others.* *You may call them as slowly or as rapidly as you please.* *So start now, turning over the first card and keep on calling until I stop you.*”

As soon as the person names the first card, you stop him by saying,

“*Wait a minute, I may have overlooked something.*”

At the same time you jot down the name of this “top” card on a piece of paper or pad, as it must serve as the *key* card. Let us say this card is the King of Diamonds.

It will be seen that the procedure followed up to this time has placed the chosen card among the thirteen “bottom” cards of the deck and immediately above the chosen card is a card with a denomination exactly equal to the position of the chosen card from the “bottom” of the deck.

For instance, if a ten spot has been on the “bottom” of the deck at the beginning, the person for whom the trick is being performed would have counted ten cards from the “top” of the deck and then placed the rest of the deck on top of these which would have placed the ten spot on top of the chosen card. The ten spot at this point would be the eleventh card from the “bottom.” Consequently, you could find the chosen card by first locating the card that was originally on the “bottom.”

“*You first glanced at the ‘bottom’ card which represented only a number.* *You then counted that many cards in a heap beside the deck, and you remembered the last card dealt.* *You then placed the rest of the deck on top of that small heap.* *After that, did you cut the deck?* *Oh, I was afraid I had forgotten to tell you to do that.* *Replace any cards you just turned over and give the deck a fair cut so that your selected card will be lost somewhere in the center of the pack.*”

The cutting of the deck makes the trick very effective as it apparently destroys all means of location. Such a cut can be permitted only if the performer can obtain knowledge of the “top” card of the deck before the cut. This is accomplished by the ruse of pretending to have overlooked the matter of cutting the deck after hearing the “top” card called. Now, since you have jotted down the name of the “top” card, which becomes your key card, you can permit the deck to be cut because after the cut you know that the chosen card will be somewhere among the thirteen cards immediately above this key card which has just been jotted down.

“*Now go ahead and call them to me one by one.*”

As cards are called you must write down the name of each card which can be done rapidly by using a figure or letter for the denomination and the letters C, D, H and S to represent the four suits.

As your write you listen carefully until you hear the name of the key card. Any time thereafter you may stop the person who is calling the cards, with the question,

“*Have you passed your card yet?*”

You know the card has been passed and all that remains to be done is for you to determine which of the thirteen cards, which were called immediately preceding the key card, is the chosen one.

“*I was afraid you had, and since it is so difficult for you to concentrate on one card while looking at so many, will you please separate your chosen card from those others and turn all the rest of the cards face down?*”

Now to determine the selected card. Let us say the paper you have on table before you looks like this:

[Figure atw]

The simplest method is to count backward from the key card, in this case the King of Diamonds, giving the Six of Diamonds preceding it a designation of zero. The second one, the Nine of Hearts, is called 1, the third one, the Nine of Diamonds, is called 2, and so on up to 13. At some point one of these numbers will agree with the denomination of the card. When this occurs it will indicate that the card that was on the “bottom” of the deck when the trick began has been reached.

In this particular case we find the Ten of Clubs at number 10. No other card matches. But we make a check mark at the card and continue until we have counted to 13, because by chance there may be some other card that also matches. But on this chart only the 10 matches, hence the Ten of Clubs was the original “bottom” card.

We know at once that the selected card is the one which is *one card closer to the key card*, the King of Diamonds. We find this to be the Four of Spades.

*“Now just try to form a mental picture of your card. That’s what I want! I begin to see it clearly. It is the Four of Spades! Is that correct? Fine! Well, I’ve got to run along. Call me up some time. So long!”*

Note

In some charts that you make you may have two or three cards that match with the numbers. Ahead of these must be the selected card. You can determine the correct one by the process of elimination, already taught you in this lesson.

Once in a while you will run across a somewhat stubborn person, who, when you try to feel your way in elimination, will say, “*You tell me.*” They will give no hint. Let us say one card that checks is the Seven of Diamonds and the other is the Three of Clubs. “*Yours was a red card.*” He says, “*You tell me what it is.*” Just come out and say, “*Your card is the Seven of Diamonds.*” If he says, “*Correct,*” you have been successful but if he says, “*Wrong,*” you just continue—“*Of course I gave you the wrong card but I had to give you some card to take away your mental tension for a moment. But it relaxed your conscious mind long enough to let me know that your card was the Three of Clubs!*”

Study how to handle various types of emergencies.

Bill McCaffrey has devised an excellent excuse for asking the assistant to count a small heap of cards equal in number to the denomination of the “bottom” card. By using the “bottom” card only as a counting indicator, it throws off those skeptics who might suspect some mathematical principle. McCaffrey, like Al Baker, watches details closely in order to super-bewilder an audience.

Prophetic Card Discovery

An old principle is employed in this effective variation which E. J. Moore likes to do.

Effect

Performer states that he will write a prophecy on a piece of paper, fold up the paper, and place it in plain view of all. He picks up a deck of cards and, removing a few cards from the “top,” asks a spectator to freely select one and place it on the table face down. A few more cards are lifted off, fanned, and spectator selects another card. This is repeated with a third card.

Spectator is told to take the deck, and, after looking at a card on table to note the number of spots it has and to count enough cards off the deck onto it in order to raise the count to ten. For instance, if a four spot is on table, to add six cards; if a nine spot, to add one; if a ten spot, to add none. This is done with all three cards on table.

Spectator is asked to turn cards on table over which brings the bottom cards face up. Now add the spots together on all three cards now uppermost. Let us say they add to seventeen. Spectator is then told to count down seventeen cards in the deck and note the card at that number. Performer now opens his paper and shows that he predicted the card selected.

Paraphernalia

1—A deck containing 52 cards. Joker is removed.

2—A pencil and paper.

To Perform

Pick up deck and have it thoroughly shuffled by spectator. Take it back from him and hold it with faces towards yourself.

*“I wonder if there is a Joker in this deck?”*

As you fan the cards, apparently looking for a Joker, you secretly count the cards beginning with the “bottom” one, until you come to the twentieth card from the “bottom.” Remember what this card is. Let us say it is the Ten of Hearts. Keep on looking through the remainder of the deck.

*“I think the Joker has been removed. Never mind, I’ll vary the mystery.”* Place cards on table, backs up.

*“I have often been asked, ‘can a magician predict what a person will do?’ Well, let me make a prophecy.”*

Pick up paper and pencil and secretly write on paper the card at number twenty in deck. We are assuming it is the Ten of Hearts. Fold paper and place aside in full view of everyone.

*“I have written something upon this piece of paper. Remember, I do this before I begin this test.”*

Pick up deck of cards in left hand, backs up. Pick up a few cards from “top” with right hand. Spread with faces towards a spectator.

*“Select any one of these cards that you want. Any card except a court card. I want only number cards and no Jacks, Queens or Kings.”*

Spectator freely selects a number card which you instruct him to lay on table, face down. Square up your fan of cards and place on table, backs up.

Take a few more cards off the “top” of deck and fan them. . . . *“Select another number card and place on table, beside the first card.”*

Card is selected. Again fan is closed up and placed on “top” of other cards on table. Pick up a few more cards from “top” of deck and fan.

*“And now for the third selection. Any number card, and place on table near the two others.”*

Card is selected and placed on table near others. Fanned cards are squared and placed on others on table. Then all the cards which you have previously fanned are picked up from table and placed back on “top” of the deck. Give deck to the spectator, backs up.

*“I want you to build each pile up to ten. Look at a card on the table. See how many spots it has. If it is a three spot add seven cards. Three and seven are ten. If a six spot add four cards—a nine spot, one card—a ten spot, none. Do this with each card on the table.”*

Spectator builds up each pile, and is further instructed, *“Now turn over each pile and add together the numbers on the three cards facing you.”*

Let us say the numbers add to seventeen. . . . *“Seventeen. Count down seventeen cards and let me know what the seventeenth card is.”*

With deck held *backs* up, spectator counts down seventeen cards and looks at the seventeenth.

*“What is the card?”* Spectator names the card, which we said in this case was the Ten of Hearts. Let the spectator pick up, open and read the paper you placed on table before test.

*“Isn’t it strange that I wrote the Ten of Hearts on that paper before we began this test!”*

Show the writing on paper which may be tossed out or just dropped onto table.

Note

If using a borrowed deck, you can remove Joker and pretend it whispers in your ear the desired prophecy.

If using a borrowed deck be sure you know how many cards it contains. If deck contains only 51 cards, the card you prophesy will be the nineteenth card from the “bottom.” If deck contains 50 cards, you note and prophesy the eighteenth card from the “bottom.” In other words, you deduct from twenty the difference between 52 and the actual number of cards in the deck.

If you use a deck with Joker, which is a deck of 53 cards, simply note the twenty-first card.

The Conjurer’s Touch

Effect

Performer allows spectator to shuffle deck of cards and to remove one card. Remainder of deck is placed in performer’s right trousers pocket. Magician then asks what suit the selected card is. When the spectator names it, magician produces a card of the same suit from his pocket. Then the spectator is asked the number of the card and as soon as he gives it, magician produces a card of the same number from his pocket. No matter what the suit and number of the selected card, the magician can produce it immediately from his pocket.

Paraphernalia

A deck of cards.

To Prepare

This effect requires a prearrangement of four cards which can be done in a moment. Run through the deck and pick out the following cards: Eight of Clubs, Four of Hearts, Two of Spades, Ace of Diamonds, Fig. 20.

Place these four cards on “top” of the deck of cards in the order designated, with the Eight of Clubs on “top.” All suits are represented in the four cards and any number from one to thirteen can be made by using each card singly or adding one or more of them together, thus:

[Figure atx]

If Selected Card Is — Produce from Pocket:

1 — Ace of Diamonds

2 — Two of Spades

3 — Ace plus Two Spot

4 — Four of Hearts

5 — Four plus Ace

6 — Four plus Two

7 — Four plus Two plus Ace

8 — Eight of Clubs

9 — Eight plus Ace

10 — Eight plus Two

Jack 11 — Eight plus Two plus Ace

Queen 12 — Eight plus Four

King 13 — Eight plus Four plus Ace

To Perform

Hold deck with backs of cards upward. Fan it enough so that little finger of left hand can be easily slipped under the four arranged cards.

Palm the four cards in right hand and reach into right trousers pocket. Push cards up into upper corner of pocket where they are concealed, as taught in Volume 1. Remove handkerchief from pocket and then pull pocket out to show it empty. Replace pocket.

*“Will you please give the deck a thorough shuffle?”* Give deck to spectator who shuffles it.

*“That’s what they call the* (some small town) *shuffle. Now remove any card—just any card you would like—but do not show it to me yet. Now give me the deck of cards. I shall place it here in my pocket.”*

Take deck. Place it in pocket with backs of cards towards audience and in back of cards already there. These four cards are now on “top” of deck which makes them easy to get at.

*“In magic, one develops a very keen sense of touch—so keen that playing cards can be distinguished by a touch of the fingers. To illustrate: The gentleman here thoroughly shuffled a deck of cards and then selected a card from it. I placed the shuffled deck in my pocket.* (To spectator holding card) *Will you please tell me the suit of your card—whether it is a Club, Heart, Spade or Diamond? A Spade?”*

Reach into pocket and produce the third card down, which is the Two of Spades. Show it to the audience so that all can see it.

*“A Spade? And what is the value of the card? An Ace?”* Reach into pocket and bring forth the Ace of Diamonds, calling out its name as you exhibit it. Remove deck from pocket and take card from spectator.

Where speed in performance is necessary, as in stage work, performer does not even bother to take up selected card. It is better to step quickly into the next effect.

Suggestions

Let us assume that the King of Clubs was the selected card. Reach into pocket and remove the Eight of Clubs—this gives the suit. Then say, *“The King? That’s the thirteenth card.”*

Nod your head and show the Eight in your hand, quickly withdrawing the Four and then the Ace from your pocket, as you say,

*“Eight and . . . . four are twelve and . . . . one are thirteen.”*

Sometimes it is necessary to count the card in the hand and sometimes not. I have often varied the effect by using seven arranged cards instead of four, adding a Jack, Queen and King. Then when anyone called out a court card as the selected one, it was easy to produce a duplicate. Have also added four aces so for effect could suddenly produce them one after the other.

Again I have worked with thirteen arranged cards, beginning with the Ace and ending with the King. This method, of course, can be used only when you can arrange the cards secretly in advance. In this method of working, you may have the cards in your pocket when you begin the effect.

A Mysterious Discovery

A favorite effect of Percy Abbott, Australian magician.

Effect

Deck of cards is spread out in a row. Performer turns his back and spectator picks up one to ten cards from one end of row, shuffles them, remembers one, places them on other end of deck, and squares up the whole deck. Magician then spreads cards over the table and shuffles them around with his finger tips. He grasps spectator’s wrist and moves his hand above cards. Suddenly he points spectator’s hand down on one card. Its value is found to be the same as the number of cards which the spectator picked up. Then another card is located in the same manner, and this proves to be the card which spectator selected.

Paraphernalia

Deck of cards.

To Prepare

Arrange thirteen cards of any suits, starting with the Ace on the “bottom” and going up to the King (backs up). The effect depends on numbers only, so disregard suits. Place cards so arranged on “top” of rest of deck. Backs are up and the King is the “top” card.

To Perform

Riffle shuffle the deck, performing a False Shuffle so that you do not disturb the thirteen arranged cards on “top” of deck. Spread pack on table for a distance of about 18 inches from end to end, Fig. 21. Say to spectator:

*“When I turn my back pick up any number of cards that you choose—from one to ten—from this end.”*

Point to end L. Spectator picks up a few cards from this end, Fig. 22. The arranged cards are all at the other end of deck.

[Figure aty]

[Figure atz]

[Figure aua]

*“Have you picked them up? Now shuffle the cards in your hand. . . . Square them up and keep the backs towards me. Notice the card that is facing you and remember it. Now just square up the cards on the table. Place the few cards you have in your hand on ‘top’ of the deck and square them all up.”*

Spectator shuffles and squares up cards in his hand, remembers the one facing him. Then he squares up the remainder of the pack and places the cards he picked up, on “top” of the others. All this is done while you have your back turned, Fig. 23. When spectator is through, turn around and pick up the deck of cards.

*“Let us see whether everyone understands what has been done. I shuffled a pack of cards, spread it out on the table. You picked up a few cards from this end—*(Point to end) *I do not know how many. You remembered one of them, then squared up these cards and placed yours on ‘top’ of them. That is correct, is it not?”*

[Figure aub]

This gives you an opportunity to check up and see whether everything was done as directed.

Deal the cards down on the table one at a time into a row of six, then under this another row of six. Begin laying down a third row, and as you do so, get a secret glimpse of the second card in this row as you lay it down. This is the fourteenth card and is your *key card*, Fig. 24.

The value of this fourteenth card tells you how many cards the spectator transferred from the “bottom” to the “top” of the pack and also indicates which card the spectator selected to remember.

Let us assume that the key card is a Six of Hearts. Six then is your cue number. The spectator transferred six cards and consequently the sixth card which you laid down is the selected card—this is the last card in the first row, Fig. 24. *Keep sight of these two cards.*

Spread the rest of the cards around everywhere—just drop them helter skelter but do not fully cover the two key cards. You must not lose sight of them and must know which is which.

Place tips of right fingers on one key card and tips of left fingers on the other key card and shuffle all the cards around to make it appear that you are mixing them up thoroughly. In this way all the cards are mixed up except the two key cards which you have under your fingers, Fig. 25.

[Figure auc]

[Figure aud]

Remove your fingers from the cards but *remember where you have the fourteenth card and where you have the sixth* so that you can spot them instantly.

*“As one gentleman remarked, ‘It is quite a mixup.’ Sir, have you magnetic hands?”*

Have a spectator come around to side of table so that front view will not be obstructed. You must always be careful to see that audience’s view is good from every side. Grasp gentleman’s right arm at the wrist, Fig. 26.

*“Point your index finger out at the cards while I move your hand around. If you have magnetic fingers, you will attract some cards and repel others.”*

Move his hand slowly over the cards and finally hold it over the fourteenth card. Hesitate a moment, then move it slightly away, then back again as though you were undecided. Then press his finger down on the card. Pick up this card and show it.

*“A six spot.”* To gentleman who transferred cards. *“You transferred six cards from one end of the pack to the other. Correct?”*

Take gentleman’s hand again and hover over the cards, finally pressing it down on the other key card. Lift up the card. Let us assume that it is the Jack of Hearts . . . . *“The Jack of Hearts. That is the card you selected and remembered. Is that right? Correct!”*

“Marvello”

I am indebted to the late T. Nelson Downs, world-famous coin and card mystifier, for this excellent effect with cards.

Effect

Performer shuffles a deck of cards and asks a spectator to think of any number between 5 and 15 and another spectator to think of any number between 20 and 30. Magician deals the cards faces up on the table, telling each spectator to remember the card as it appears at the number each selected. Performer then asks each spectator what his number is. He counts off the cards one at a time on the table, placing the selected cards aside—for instance, the thirteenth and twenty-eighth.

Two cards are then taken from the pack at random and shown and placed in an empty envelope. Performer now takes more cards from the pack and puts with them the two selected cards—these he gives to a spectator to hold. He says that he will cause the cards in the envelope to change places with the selected cards in spectator’s hand. These cards are examined and it is found that the selected cards have vanished and the indifferent cards are there. The selected cards are then taken from the envelope.

Paraphernalia

1—A deck of cards.

2—An ordinary envelope.

3—A small table.

To Perform

You will need two people to help you. For convenience we will call them Smith and Jones. Smith should be at left side and Jones at right. Table should be in front of you. Thoroughly shuffle the deck, preferably giving it a riffle shuffle in your hands.

*“You have perhaps noticed, at one time or other, that when you wished to remember a certain thing, if you associated it with some object, you were able to remember it perfectly. Therefore, I am going to ask you two gentlemen to select a card each; and in order to remember the card exactly, I want you to associate the card with a number.”*

To Smith,

*“I shall ask you to think of a number between 5 and 15.”*

To Jones,

*“And you think of a number between 20 and 30.* *Have you decided upon your numbers?* *Very well.* *I will count the cards down on the table one at a time and when I come to your respective numbers, remember the card at that number.* *If you chose 12, remember the twelfth card; if 26, remember the twenty-sixth card.* *Of course, do not let me know your number, as yet, nor the card at that number.”*

Hold deck, backs up, in left hand and with right hand count them out one at a time onto table, faces up.

Count aloud each card as you lay it down until you have counted 30 cards.

*“Do not forget the card or the number.”*

Pick up cards from table, turn them over, square them up, and place on “top” of packet in left hand. The right hand, now holding all of the deck, instantly moves away from the left hand which, of course, is empty. Turn your right side to audience so that you are looking directly at Smith . . . . *“Now, sir, . . . .”*

As you start to speak to Smith, you bring the pack held in right hand, over the extended fingers of left hand. Those fingers press against and hold back the “bottom” card of pack, as the pack, without any hesitation, moves on until it is over the left palm. The “bottom” card is thus slid into the right palm and may easily and secretly be placed on “top” of the pack.

Deck should now be in left hand with backs of cards up. To audience it looks as though you merely squared the deck.

*“Will you please tell me the number you selected—the number only, not the card?”* Let us assume that he says number 11.

*“I will count the cards down to your selected card. One, two, three . . . ,”* etc. Count the cards down one at a time into a pile, this time with card faces down.

*“Eleven—here is your selected card. I shall place it over here for a moment.”*

Place this card aside towards front of table. Do not let anyone see this card. This, of course, is not the selected card. The one chosen by the spectator is now the twelfth card in the deck instead of the eleventh, since you made the transfer. This card is now the “top” card of the portion of deck which you hold in left hand, Fig. 27.

[Figure aue]

[Figure auf]

Turn to Jones at your right and say,

*“Will you please mention the number you selected—the number only?”* Let us say the number is 28. *“Twenty-eight. To continue our count—twelve . . . .”*

Point to card laid aside and count cards one at a time on the table, *making a new pile.* The twelfth or selected card is the first one in this new pile of cards. Cards are backs up. Continue to count aloud and when you reach 28, say,

*“Twenty-eight. Here is your selected card. I will place it also over here with the first selected card.”*

Place this card near the other one which you placed aside. Then put remainder of deck in left hand on the *second* pile of cards on table. The twenty-ninth card is the second selected card and this is now on “top” of pile No. 2, Fig. 28.

You now have one selected card on the “bottom” and one on the “top” of the second pile of cards.

Pick up the second pile of cards from table and hold it in left hand, backs of cards towards audience so that no one gets a glimpse of selected card on “bottom.”

*“I shall cut the pack once.”*

Hold the pack as you would for the regular pass. Split pack about in the middle at the forward end to allow you to insert the little finger as in the pass.

Lift front section over and place it back of other section, keeping little finger between the two sections but allowing front of cards to come together as you do when a selected card is replaced in the deck and you keep track of it. You are really doing a slow pass but doing it so that everyone can see that a cut is being made.

With right thumb release the “bottom” card of the upper packet, withdraw little finger for a moment and let this card fall on top of other selected card on the lower packet. Then immediately reinsert little finger above the two selected cards.

You now have this arrangement:

Top section of deck.

Little finger.

Two selected cards on top of lower section of deck.

*“Cut it again.”* You do so. This time selected cards come to “top” of pack. Allow both packets to come together as one now.

*“And shuffle.”* Do so in your hands, performing a false shuffle. Be sure that selected cards are left on “top.”

With right hand over the pack, lift up the “top” three cards as one, doing the Double Card Lift, as previously explained.

Show these three cards as one and call out the name of the card exposed. Assume that it is the King of Hearts, Fig. 29.

[Figure aug]

Then with left thumb slip off the “top” card of pack in left hand. Show it to audience and call it aloud. Let us say that it is the Seven of Spades, Fig. 29.

*“The Seven of Spades. I have here just two indifferent cards.”*

Slide Seven of Spades back onto pack and replace the other three cards on top of it. With left thumb push the two “top” cards off to right side and remove them with right hand. These are the two selected cards and you must be very careful not to expose the faces of the cards. Audience believes these two cards to be the two indifferent cards which you just showed.

*“I shall place them in this envelope.”* Place deck on table and pick up envelope with left hand. Give envelope to Smith at your left.

*“First, will you look inside and see that it is empty?”* Take envelope again in left hand and place two cards inside.

*“I shall place these two indifferent cards, the King of Hearts and the Seven of Spades, inside.”* Seal envelope and give it to Smith to hold.

Pick up about a quarter of the cards of the second pile on table with the King and Seven cards on “top.” Fan them with right hand, backs of cards up.

*“I shall take a few cards and place the two selected cards among them. One here and the other there—and shuffle.”*

Pick up the two selected cards. Place them in different parts of the packet which you have fanned in right hand. Audience must not see these two indifferent cards for they think these cards are the selected ones, Fig. 30. Shuffle cards to mix them up.

[Figure auh]

*“And I shall ask you to hold them tightly.”* Give this packet to Jones at your right.

*“Are you interested in rapid transit? I shall show you a method that has even subways and aeroplanes outdone. I shall cause the two indifferent cards in the envelope to jump suddenly over into your hands, sir (to Jones), and the two selected cards to fly over into the envelope. No sooner said than done.* (To Jones) *Will you look through the cards in your hand and see if the card is among them?”*

Jones looks through cards and, of course, does not find his selected card.

*“Run them through for this gentleman* (Smith) *and let him see whether his card is there. No card? See, they have passed. Now, see whether the King of Hearts and the Seven of Spades, the two indifferent cards, are there instead.”*

Gentleman finds the two indifferent cards and shows them to audience,

Jones and Smith are now requested to name their cards—say, the Five of Diamonds and the Queen of Clubs. Smith tears open the envelope and removes the cards. You take them and show them to audience, calling out their names.

[Figure aui]
