Book One, Chapters 1 to 8

Chapter 1

All men of every sort who have done anything worth doing — or at any rate anything that resembles it — ought, if they are truthful and honest, to write down their own lives with their own hand. But nobody should begin so fine an undertaking before he is past the age of forty. That thought has come to me now, when I am walking on past my fifty-eighth year, finished, and am in Florence, my home town; and remembering the many contrary things that happen to anyone who lives, and finding myself with fewer of them on me than I have ever had up to this age — indeed it seems to me I have greater contentment of mind and health of body than I have ever had before; and remembering some pleasant good things and some evils beyond all reckoning, which, when I turn round and look back, frighten me with astonishment that I have got as far as this age of fifty-eight, walking so happily forward, by the grace of God.

Chapter 2

Even though the men who have worked with some smell of skill about them have made themselves known to the world, and that alone ought to be enough for them — having been seen to be a man, and recognised as one — still, a man has to live the way he finds other people living, and so a little worldly swagger comes into it, and that has several heads. The first is to let other people know that your line comes down from men of quality, and of great antiquity.

I am called Benvenuto Cellini, son of Master Giovanni, son of Andrea, son of Cristofano Cellini; my mother was Madonna Elisabetta, daughter of Stefano Granacci; both of them citizens of Florence. We find it written in the chronicles made by our very old Florentines, men to be trusted — and Giovanni Villani writes it too — that the city of Florence was plainly built in imitation of the beautiful city of Rome; and you can still see some traces of the Colosseum and of the Baths. These are near Santa Croce. The Capitol was where the Old Market is now. The Rotonda is standing whole, which was made for the temple of Mars and is now our San Giovanni. That this was so can be seen perfectly well and cannot be denied; but the buildings are much smaller than the ones in Rome. The man who had them built, they say, was Julius Caesar, along with some Roman gentlemen who, when Fiesole had been stormed and taken, put up a city in this place, and each of them took on one of these notable buildings.

Julius Caesar had a first captain of his, a very brave man, called Fiorino of Cellino, which is a castle about two miles from Montefiascone. This Fiorino had made his quarters under Fiesole, where Florence is now, so as to be near the river Arno for the convenience of the army; and all those soldiers, and everyone else who had business with the captain, used to say: "Let's go to Fiorenze" — partly because the captain's name was Fiorino, and partly because the place where he had his quarters was, by the nature of it, extraordinarily rich in flowers. So, at the founding of the city, since this struck Julius Caesar as a very beautiful name, and one that had arrived by chance, and since flowers themselves bring a good omen, he gave the city the name of Fiorenze; and he did it to pay his brave captain that compliment as well, and he was all the fonder of him for having pulled him out of a very humble place, and because so able a man was a creature of his own making. As for the name these learned imaginers and investigators of the descent of names give — that it is because the city is flowing at the Arno — that does not seem to me to hold, because Rome is flowing at the Tiber, Ferrara is flowing at the Po, Lyons is flowing at the Saône, Paris is flowing at the Seine, and yet they all have different names, which came to them by other roads.

That is what we find, and that is what we believe: that we come down from a man of quality. Then we find that there are Cellinis of ours in Ravenna, the most ancient city in Italy, and there are great gentlemen there; and there are some in Pisa too, and I have found them in many parts of Christendom; and in this state as well some of the family are left, still given to arms — for it is not many years ago now that a young man called Luca Cellini, a beardless boy, fought with an experienced soldier and a very brave man, called Francesco da Vicorati, who had fought in the lists more than once before. This Luca, by his own courage, with his sword in his hand, beat him and killed him, with so much valour and skill that he astonished the world, which was expecting exactly the opposite; so that I take glory in tracing my descent from men of quality. As for the small honours I have won for my house, such as they are, under the way we live today and for the reasons everybody knows, and by my art, which is no great matter — I shall speak of those in their proper place; taking far more pride in having been born humble, and having laid some honourable beginning for my house, than if I had been born of great lineage and had stained it or blotted it out with rotten qualities. So I shall make a start by saying how it pleased God that I should be born.

Chapter 3

My people lived in the Val d'Ambra, and they had a great deal of property there, and lived like little lords, having pulled back there because of the factions; they were all men given to arms, and very brave. In that time one of their sons, the youngest, who was called Cristofano, got into a great quarrel with certain neighbours and friends of theirs; and because the heads of the house on both sides had put their hands into it, and because they saw the fire was burning so dangerously that the two families looked likely to be wiped out altogether, the older men, considering this, agreed together: mine took Cristofano away, and the other side took away the other young man who was the origin of the quarrel. They sent theirs to Siena; ours sent Cristofano to Florence, and there they bought him a little house in the Via Chiara, by the convent of Sant'Orsola, and at the Ponte a Rifredi they bought him some very good land. Cristofano took a wife in Florence and had sons and daughters, and when all his daughters had been settled, the rest was divided among the sons after their father's death. The house in the Via Chiara, with a few other small things, went to one of those sons, whose name was Andrea. He too took a wife, and had four male children. The first was called Girolamo, the second Bartolomeo, the third Giovanni, who was afterwards my father, and the fourth Francesco. This Andrea Cellini understood a good deal about the architecture of those days, and lived by it as his trade; Giovanni, who was my father, worked at it harder than any of the others. And because, as Vitruvius says among other things, anyone who wants to do that art properly needs to have some music and good draughtsmanship, Giovanni, having made himself a good draughtsman, began to work at music, and along with it learned to play the viol and the flute very well; and being a very studious person, he seldom went out of the house.

They had a next-door neighbour called Stefano Granacci, who had several daughters, all of them very beautiful. As it pleased God, Giovanni saw one of these girls, whose name was Elisabetta; and he liked her so much that he asked for her as a wife. The two fathers knew each other perfectly well from living so close, and the match was easy to make; and each of them felt he had arranged his affairs very well. First the two good old men settled the match, then they began to talk about the dowry, and there was a little affectionate arguing between them, because Andrea said to Stefano: "My son Giovanni is the ablest young man in Florence and in Italy, and if I had wanted to give him a wife before now I should have had the biggest dowries that are given in Florence to people of our sort." And Stefano said: "You have a thousand reasons on your side; but I find myself with five girls, and so many other children, that when I do my sums this is as far as I can stretch." Giovanni had been listening for a while, hidden from them, and came out on them suddenly and said: "Oh, my father — I have wanted that girl and loved her, and not their money. Bad luck to the men who want to make themselves up out of their wife's dowry. Well then: since you have boasted that I am so clever, shall I not be able to keep my wife, and satisfy her needs, on rather less money than you want? Now I tell you plainly: the woman is mine, and I want the dowry to be yours." At this Andrea Cellini was rather put out, being a bit of an odd character; and a few days later Giovanni brought his wife home, and never asked for any dowry at all.

They enjoyed their youth and their holy love for eighteen years, wanting children very badly all that time; then, in those eighteen years, his wife miscarried twice of male children, through the small understanding of the doctors; then she was pregnant again and gave birth to a girl, and they called her Cosa, after my father's mother. Two years later she was pregnant again; and because the cravings pregnant women have are watched very closely, hers were exactly the same as at the birth before, so that they were sure she was going to have a girl like the first one, and had agreed to call her Reparata, to make up my mother's mother. It happened that she gave birth on the night of All Saints, when All Saints' Day had just finished, at half past four, in exactly the year fifteen hundred. The midwife, who knew they were expecting a girl, when she had cleaned the child up and wrapped it in beautiful white cloths, came very quietly to Giovanni my father and said: "I am bringing you a fine present, which you were not expecting." My father, who was a true philosopher, was pacing up and down, and said: "What God gives me is always dear to me"; and uncovering the cloths, he saw with his own eye the unexpected male child. Putting his old palms together, he lifted his eyes to God with them and said: "Lord, I thank you with all my heart; this is very dear to me, and let him be the Welcome one." All the people who were there asked him cheerfully what name he was going to give me, and Giovanni never answered them anything but: "Let him be the Welcome one." And they settled it, and holy Baptism gave me that name, Benvenuto, and that is how I go on living, by the grace of God.

Chapter 4

Andrea Cellini my grandfather was still alive when I was about three years old, and he was past a hundred. One day they had changed a certain pipe on a sink, and a great scorpion had come out of it, which they had not seen, and it had got down from the sink to the floor and gone under a bench. I saw it, and ran to it, and put my hands on it. It was so big that, when I had it in my little hand, its tail stuck out on one side and both its claws stuck out on the other. They say that I ran to my grandfather in great delight, saying: "Look, grandfather, my lovely little crab!" When he saw that it was a scorpion, he nearly dropped dead of fright and of fear for me; and he asked me for it, coaxing me; and the more he coaxed the tighter I squeezed it, crying, because I would not give it to anybody. My father, who was still in the house, ran in at all this shouting, and stood there stupefied, not knowing what remedy to find that would keep the poisonous creature from killing me. Then he happened to catch sight of a pair of small scissors; and so, flattering me, he cut off its tail and its claws. Afterwards, when he was sure the great harm was past, he took it for a good omen.

At about the age of five, my father was in a little room of ours where they had been doing the washing, and a good fire of oak logs had been left; and Giovanni, with a viol in his arms, was playing and singing to himself by the fire. It was very cold. Looking into the fire, he happened to see, in the middle of the strongest flames, a little creature like a lizard, which was enjoying itself in the most vigorous part of the fire. Realising at once what it was, he had my sister and me called, and showed it to us children; and he gave me a great box on the ear, at which I began to cry my heart out. He quieted me pleasantly and said: "My dear little son, I am not giving you that for any wrong you have done, but only so that you will remember that the lizard you see in the fire is a salamander, which has never been seen by anybody else that we have any true report of." And then he kissed me and gave me some small coins.

Chapter 5

My father began to teach me to play the flute and to sing music; and although I was of the tenderest age, when little children usually take pleasure in a whistle and toys of that sort, I disliked it beyond all reckoning, and only played and sang to obey him. In those days my father was making marvellous organs with wooden pipes, and heavy harpsichords, the best and the most beautiful that were to be seen then, and viols, lutes, and harps of the most beautiful and excellent kind. He was an engineer, and for making instruments — such as ways of throwing bridges, ways of building fulling mills, and other machines — he worked wonders; he was the first man to work ivory well. But because he had fallen in love with the woman who became my mother, and he my father — perhaps on account of that little flute of his, which he was playing much more than he ought to have done — he was asked by the Signory's Pipers to play along with them. He kept it up for a while for his own pleasure, and they worked on him so much that they made him one of their fellow pipers. Lorenzo de' Medici and his son Piero, who were very fond of him, saw afterwards that he was giving himself over entirely to the pipe and leaving his fine talent and his fine art behind, and they had him taken out of that post. My father took it very badly, and thought they had done him a great injury. He went straight back to his art, and made a mirror about an arm's length across, of bone and ivory, with figures and foliage, very finely finished and finely designed. The mirror was made in the shape of a wheel: in the middle was the glass; round it were seven roundels, in which the seven Virtues were carved and inlaid in ivory and black bone; and the whole mirror, and the Virtues with it, was on a balance, so that when you turned the wheel all the Virtues moved; and they had a counterweight at their feet that kept them upright. And because he had some knowledge of Latin, he put a Latin verse round the mirror, which said: "Whichever way Fortune's wheel turns, Virtue stays on her feet":

	Rota sum; semper, quoquo me verto
	stat virtus

Not long afterwards his place among the pipers was given back to him. Some of these things happened before I was born, but since I remember them I have not wanted to leave them out. In those days those players were all highly respected craftsmen, and some of them worked in the greater guilds of silk and wool; which is why my father did not think it beneath him to take up that profession. The greatest wish he had in the world, so far as my affairs went, was that I should become a great player; and the greatest displeasure I could have in the world was when he talked to me about it, telling me that if I wanted to, he could see I was so fit for it that I should be the first man in the world.

Chapter 6

As I have said, my father was a great servant of the house of Medici, and a great friend of theirs, and when Piero was driven out he trusted my father with a great many very important things. Afterwards, when the magnificent Piero Soderini came in, and my father was at his post as a player, Soderini heard about my father's marvellous talent and began to use him for very important work as an engineer; and as long as Soderini stayed in Florence he was as fond of my father as anyone in the world could imagine. And in this time my father used to have me carried on somebody's shoulder, being so young, and made me play the flute; and I took the treble part along with the palace musicians in front of the Signory, and I played from the book, and one of the ushers held me on his shoulder. Afterwards the Gonfalonier — that is, Soderini — took great pleasure in making me chatter, and used to give me sweets and say to my father: "Master Giovanni, teach him those other very beautiful arts of yours as well as the playing." To which my father answered: "I do not want him to do any art but playing and composing; because in that profession I hope to make him the greatest man in the world, if God gives him life." At these words one of the old Signori answered, saying to Master Giovanni: "Do what the Gonfalonier tells you; because would he ever be anything but a good player?"

So the time went by until the Medici came back. As soon as the Medici were back, the cardinal, who was afterwards Pope Leo, made a great deal of my father. While they had been away, the balls had been taken off the arms that were on the Medici palace, and a great red cross had been painted there instead, which were the arms and device of the Commune; so that as soon as they came back the red cross was scraped off, and the red balls were set into the shield, and the field made gold, and the whole thing very beautifully done. My father, who had a little natural vein of poetry in him, quite plain, with something prophetic in it as well — and that in him was certainly divine — as soon as the arms were uncovered, made these four lines underneath them, which went like this:

	These arms, which have been buried so long
	under the meek and holy cross,
	now show their face glorious and glad,
	waiting for the sacred mantle of Peter.

This epigram was read all over Florence. A few days later Pope Julius the Second died. The cardinal de' Medici went to Rome, and against everything anybody in the world believed, he was made Pope — Pope Leo the Tenth, generous and great-souled. My father sent him his four prophetic lines. The Pope sent word that he should come there, and it would be good for him. He would not go; and instead of a reward, his place at the palace was taken away from him by Jacopo Salviati, as soon as he was made Gonfalonier. That is what put me into the goldsmith's trade; and part of the time I was learning that art and part of the time playing, very much against my will.

Chapter 7

When he talked to me like that, I used to beg him to let me draw for so many hours of the day, and I would spend all the rest of it playing, only to keep him happy. And to this he would say: "Then you take no pleasure in playing?" And I told him no, because it seemed to me too low an art for what I had in mind. My good father, in despair over it, put me into the shop of the father of the Cavaliere Bandinello, whose name was Michelagnolo, a goldsmith from Pinzi di Monte, and very able at that art; he had no light of family behind him, but was a charcoal burner's son. That is nothing to blame Bandinello for, since he has made a beginning for his own house — if he had come by it in a good way. Whatever it is, I have no call to say anything about him. After I had been there a few days, my father took me away from Michelagnolo, being a man who could not live without seeing me all the time. So I stayed on, unhappily, at my playing, until I was fifteen. If I wanted to describe the great things that happened to me up to that age, and the great dangers to my own life, I should astonish anyone who read them; but so as not to run on too long, and because I have plenty to say, I shall leave them out.

When I got to fifteen, against my father's wish I put myself into a goldsmith's shop, with a man called Antonio di Sandro, a goldsmith, nicknamed Marcone the goldsmith. He was a very good practical hand, and a very decent man, proud and free in everything he did. My father would not let him give me any wages, as they do with other apprentices, so that, since I was taking up the art of my own free will, I could satisfy my appetite for drawing as much as I liked. And I did it very willingly, and that good master of mine took a marvellous pleasure in it. He had a natural son of his own, an only son, whom he often gave the orders to, so as to spare me. My eagerness was so great — or my natural bent, or both of them together — that in a few months I caught up with the good young men in the trade, indeed with the best of them, and began to draw some profit from my work. For all that, I did not fail now and then to please my good father, playing sometimes on the flute and sometimes on the cornet; and every time he heard me I always made the tears fall from him, with great sighs; and very often, out of pity, I would satisfy him, pretending that I was getting a good deal of pleasure out of it myself.

Chapter 8

At this time I had a brother of my own blood, two years younger than me, very bold and very fierce, who afterwards became one of the great soldiers of the school of that marvellous man Signor Giovannino de' Medici, the father of Duke Cosimo. This boy was about fourteen and I was two years older. It was a Sunday, about two hours before dark, between the Porta a San Gallo and the Porta a Pinti, and there he had challenged a fellow of about twenty, with swords in their hands; and he pressed him so bravely that, having wounded him badly, he was going on further. There were a great many people watching, and among them a good number of the other man's relations; and seeing the thing going the wrong way, they got out a lot of slings, and one of the stones caught my poor young brother on the head. He fell to the ground at once, senseless, like a dead man. I happened to be there, without friends and without weapons, and I was shouting at my brother as loudly as I could to pull back, because what he had done to him was enough — and just then it happened that he fell like that, as good as dead. I ran up at once and took his sword, and stood in front of him; and against several swords and a great many stones I never moved away from my brother, until some brave soldiers came from the Porta a San Gallo and got me out of that great fury, marvelling a good deal that so much courage should be in anyone so young. So I carried my brother home like a dead man, and when we got home he came round again with great difficulty.

When he was better, the Eight, who had already condemned our adversaries and banished them for some years, banished us too for six months, outside a radius of ten miles. I said to my brother: "Come with me"; and so we left our poor father, and instead of giving us any sum of money, because he had none, he gave us his blessing. I went off to Siena to find a certain gallant gentleman called Master Francesco Castoro; and because on another occasion, when I had run away from my father, I had gone to this decent man and stayed with him some days, still working at the goldsmith's trade — when I came to him, Francesco recognised me at once and set me to work. Having put me to work, Francesco gave me a house for as long as I stayed in Siena; and I settled my brother and myself in it, and worked away for several months. My brother had made a beginning in Latin letters, but he was so young that he had not yet tasted the flavour of anything worth doing, and was wasting his time.
