Book One, Chapters 23 to 27

Chapter 23

While I was pressing on with the beautiful Salamanca vessel, I had only one boy to help me, whom I had taken on as an errand boy, half against my will, at the pressing request of friends. This boy was about fourteen; his name was Paulino and he was the son of a Roman citizen who lived on his own income. This Paulino was the best mannered, the most honest and the handsomest boy I ever saw in my life; and for his decent ways and manners, and for his endless beauty, and for the great love he bore me, it came about that I set as much love on him as can be shut up in a man's breast.

This passionate love was the reason why, so as to see that marvellous face clear itself more often — for by its nature it looked serious and melancholy — as soon as I took up my cornet, it broke at once into a smile so honest and so beautiful that I do not wonder in the least at the nonsense the Greeks write about the gods of heaven. If he had been alive in those days, he would perhaps have taken them further off their hinges still.

This Paulino had a sister called Faustina, and I do not believe the Faustina the ancient books make so much noise about was ever so beautiful. Having taken me sometimes to his vineyard, and as far as I could judge, it seemed to me that this decent man, Paulino's father, would have liked to make me his son-in-law. This made me play a great deal more than I had done before.

It happened at this time that a certain Gianiacomo, a piper from Cesena who was with the Pope, a marvellous player, let me know, through Lorenzo the trombonist of Lucca, who is today in the service of our Duke, that they wanted to know whether I would help them at the Pope's Feast of the Assumption, and play the treble on my cornet that day in several motets they had chosen, very beautiful ones. Although I had the greatest wish to finish that beautiful vessel of mine that I had begun, since music is a marvellous thing in itself, and in order partly to satisfy my old father, I was content to keep them company. And for eight days before the Feast we practised together two hours a day, so that on the day of the Assumption we went up to the Belvedere, and while Pope Clement was at dinner we played those well-drilled motets in such a way that the Pope said he had never heard music played more sweetly or better together.

He called Gianiacomo to him and asked him where and how he had come by so good a cornet for the treble, and asked him particularly who I was. Gianiacomo told him my name exactly. At this the Pope said: "Then this is Master Giovanni's son?" He said I was. The Pope said he wanted me in his service among the other musicians. Gianiacomo answered: "Most Blessed Father, I do not undertake that you will get him, because the profession he attends to continually is the goldsmith's art, and he works marvellously in it, and draws far better earnings from it than he would from playing." At this the Pope said: "I want him all the more, having this skill in him besides, which I had not expected. Have the same salary made out for him as for the rest of you; and tell him from me to serve me, and that as time goes on I shall give him plenty to do in the other profession as well." And putting out his hand, he gave him a hundred gold scudi of the Chamber in a handkerchief, and said: "Divide them so that he gets his share."

Gianiacomo, having got away from the Pope, came to us and told us exactly everything the Pope had said to him; and having divided the money among the eight companions that we were, he gave me my share and said: "Now I am going to have you entered on the roll of our company." To which I said: "Let today pass, and I shall answer you tomorrow."

When I had left them, I went along thinking whether I ought to accept such a thing, considering how much it would harm me by turning me aside from the fine studies of my art. The following night my father appeared to me in a dream, and with the most loving tears begged me, for the love of God and of himself, to be content to take up that undertaking; and I thought I answered him that I would not do it in any way. Immediately it seemed to me that he frightened me in a horrible shape and said: "If you do not do it, you will have your father's curse, and if you do it, may you be blessed by me for ever." Waking up, I ran out of fear to have myself entered; then I wrote it to my old father, who out of too much joy had a seizure that brought him close to death; and he wrote at once to say that he too had dreamed almost the same thing that I had.

Chapter 24

It seemed to me, having satisfied my good father's honest wish, that everything ought to come out for me to an honourable and glorious end. So I set to with the greatest urgency to finish the vessel I had begun for Salamanca. This bishop was a very remarkable man, extremely rich, but hard to satisfy: he sent every day to see what I was doing; and any time his messenger did not find me there, Salamanca flew into the greatest fury, saying he meant to have the piece taken away from me and given to somebody else to finish. This was caused by my serving that cursed playing.

Still, with the greatest urgency I had set myself to it night and day, so that when I had brought it to a point where it could be shown to the bishop, I let him see it; at which such a desire grew in him to see it finished that I repented of having shown it to him. In three months I had finished the piece, with as many beautiful little animals, leaves and masks as anyone could imagine.

I sent it at once by my boy Paulino to show to that able man Lucagnolo, mentioned above; and Paulino, with that endless grace and beauty of his, said this: "Messer Lucagnolo, Benvenuto says he sends you his promises and your rubbish, and waits to see your tomfoolery from you." When the words had been said, Lucagnolo took the vessel in his hand and looked at it a long while; then he said to Paulino: "Fine child, tell your master that he is a very able man, and that I beg him to have me for a friend, and let us not go into anything else." That honest and admirable young man brought me the message with the greatest delight.

The vessel was carried to Salamanca, who wanted it valued. This Lucagnolo took part in the valuation, and valued it and praised it so honourably, far beyond what I had expected. Salamanca, taking the vessel, said in his Spanish way: "I swear to God that I shall take as long to pay for it as he has taken to make it." Hearing this, I was left thoroughly unhappy, cursing the whole of Spain and everyone who wished it well.

Among the other beautiful ornaments this vessel had a handle all in one piece, most delicately worked, which by means of a certain spring stood upright over the mouth of the vessel. One day, when monsignor was showing this vessel of mine to certain Spanish gentlemen of his out of vanity, it happened that one of these gentlemen, after monsignor had gone, handling the beautiful handle far too roughly, and the delicate spring not being able to resist his boorish strength, broke it in his hand; and thinking he had done very badly, he begged the butler who had charge of it to take it quickly to the master who had made it, who should mend it at once, and to promise him whatever price he asked, provided it was mended quickly.

So the vessel came into my hands, and I promised to mend it very quickly, and I did. It was brought to me before dinner; at two hours before dark the man who had brought it came back, all in a sweat, because he had run the whole way, seeing that monsignor had asked for it again to show it to certain other lords. So this butler would not let me get a word out, saying: "Quick, quick, bring the vessel." At which I, wanting to take my time and not give it to him, said that I did not want to be quick. The servant flew into such a fury that, making as if to put one hand to his sword, with the other he made a show of forcing his way into the shop; which I immediately prevented with my weapons, together with a good many bold words, saying: "I will not give it to you; and go and tell monsignor your master that I want the money for my labour before it leaves this shop."

Seeing that he had not been able to get it by bullying, he set to begging me as one begs the Cross, telling me that if I gave it to him he would do so much for me that I should be paid. These words did not move me from my purpose at all, and I always told him the same thing. In the end, in despair of the business, he swore he would come back with so many Spaniards that they would cut me to pieces; and he went off at a run. Meanwhile I, believing some part of these murderous threats of theirs, promised myself to defend myself boldly; and having got ready a marvellous gun of mine that I used for shooting, I said to myself: "If a man takes my property and my labour with it, may he still be granted his life?" In the middle of this argument with myself, a number of Spaniards appeared together with their steward, who in their reckless way told the crowd of them to go in and take the vessel and give me a beating.

At these words I showed them the mouth of the gun, ready with its fire, and shouted out loud: "Traitors, renegades, is this how you murder houses and shops in a Rome like this? As many of you thieves as come near this door, so many will I bring down dead with this piece of mine." And turning the mouth of the gun on their steward, and making as if to fire, I said: "And you, thief, who let them do it — I mean you to be the first to die." He immediately put his heel into a jennet he was on and made off at full gallop.

At this great noise all the neighbours had come out; and some Roman gentlemen who were passing said as well: "Kill the renegades, and we will help you." These words had so much force that they went off badly frightened by me; so that, driven by the case, they were forced to tell the whole story to monsignor, who was extremely proud, and who shouted at all his servants and officers, both because they had come to commit such an outrage, and because, having begun it, they had not finished it.

Just then that painter who had been mixed up in the business came by, and monsignor told him to come and tell me on his behalf that if I did not bring him the vessel at once, the biggest piece left of me would be my ears; and that if I did bring it he would pay me for it on the spot. This did not frighten me in the least, and I let him know that I would go and tell the Pope about it straight away. In the meantime his temper cooled and so did my fear; and on the word of certain great Roman gentlemen that he would not hurt me, and with a good guarantee of payment for my labour, I got ready with a big dagger and my good coat of mail and went to monsignor's house, where he had got his whole household drawn up. When I went in I had my Paulino behind me with the silver vessel. It was neither more nor less than going through the middle of the Zodiac: one of them was acting the lion, another the scorpion, another the crab; until at last we came before this ugly priest, who let fly the most priestly, most thoroughly Spanish words that anyone could imagine. And I never lifted my head to look at him, nor answered him a word.

At this his temper seemed to grow; and having writing materials handed to me, he told me to write in my own hand that I was well satisfied and paid by him. At this I lifted my head and told him I would do it very willingly if I had my money first. The bishop's rage grew, and the bullying and the arguments were great. In the end I had the money first, and afterwards I wrote, and went off happy and content.

Chapter 25

Afterwards Pope Clement heard of it — he had seen the vessel before, but had not been told it was by my hand — and he took the greatest pleasure in it, and praised me a great deal, and said in public that he had a very great liking for me. So that monsignor Salamanca greatly repented of having bullied me like that; and to make it up with me he sent word by the same painter that he wanted to give me a great many large pieces to do; to which I said I would do them very willingly, but that I wanted payment for them before I began.

These words too came to the ears of Pope Clement, and they moved him greatly to laughter. Cardinal Cibo was there, and the Pope told him the whole quarrel I had had with this bishop; then he turned to one of his officers and ordered him to keep giving me work for the palace continually. Cardinal Cibo sent for me, and after a good deal of pleasant talk gave me a large vessel to make, bigger than Salamanca's; and so did Cardinal Cornaro, and many others of those cardinals, above all Ridolfi and Salviati. I had work from all of them, so that I earned very well.

Madonna Porzia, mentioned above, told me I ought to open a shop that was entirely my own; and I did so, and never stopped working for that good, well-bred lady, who gave me a very great deal of earnings, and it was almost by her doing that I showed myself to the world as a man worth something.

I formed a great friendship with Signor Gabbriello Ceserino, who was gonfalonier of Rome; I made a great many pieces for this gentleman. One of them, among the rest, was notable: a large gold medal to be worn in a hat, and carved on that medal was Leda with her swan. Being very well satisfied with my work, he said he wanted to have it valued so as to pay me the right price. And because the medal was made with great discipline, the valuers of the trade valued it a great deal higher than he had imagined; so, keeping the medal in his own hands, I got nothing for my labour. The same thing happened with this medal as with Salamanca's vessel. And because these matters must not take up the room where I have things of greater importance to say, I shall pass over them briefly.

Chapter 26

Although I am going somewhat outside my profession, since I mean to describe my life some of these things force themselves on me — not to be described in detail, but at least to be touched on briefly.

One morning of our Saint John's day, I was dining together with a good many of our nation, of various professions, painters, sculptors, goldsmiths; among the notable men there were one called Il Rosso, a painter, and Gianfrancesco, a pupil of Raphael of Urbino, and many others. And because I had brought them there freely, they were all laughing and joking, as a number of men together will, enjoying so marvellous a feast day. A brainless young man happened to pass by, a swaggerer, a soldier of Signor Rienzo da Ceri, and hearing this noise he jeered and said a great many insulting things about the Florentine nation. I, being the host of all these able and decent men, and feeling that I was the one insulted, quietly, without anybody seeing me, came up on this fellow, who was together with a whore of his, and who, to make her laugh, was still going on with that jeering. When I got to him, I asked him whether he was the bold one who was speaking ill of the Florentines. He said at once: "I am the man." At these words I raised my hand, hitting him in the face, and said: "And I am this man." At once we both put our hands boldly to our weapons; but no sooner had the brawl begun than a good many people came in between, taking my side rather than otherwise, having heard and seen that I was in the right.

The next day a written challenge was brought me to fight him, which I accepted very cheerfully, saying that this seemed to me a business I could get through a great deal faster than the ones in that other art of mine; and I went at once to speak to an old man called Il Bevilacqua, who had the name of having been the first sword in Italy, because he had been shut into the lists more than twenty times and had always come out of it with honour. This decent man was a great friend of mine, and knew me through my skill in my art, and had also been mixed up in certain terrible quarrels between me and other people. So he cheerfully said to me at once: "My Benvenuto, if you had Mars himself to deal with, I am sure you would come out of it with honour, because in all the years I have known you I have never seen you take up any quarrel wrongly." So he took my business on, and having brought us to the ground with our weapons in our hands, without any blood being shed, my adversary giving way, I came out of the affair with much honour. I shall not tell the other particulars, because although they would be very fine to hear in that line, I want to keep these words for talking about my art, which is what has moved me to write this; and in that I shall have far too much to say.

Even though I was moved by an honest envy, wanting to make some other work that would come up to and even go past those of that able man Lucagnolo, I never for that moved away from my own beautiful art of jewel setting; so that between the one and the other I brought myself great profit and greater honour, and in both of them I was continually making things unlike other people's.

At this time there was in Rome an extremely able man from Perugia named Lautizio, who worked in one profession only, and in that he was unique in the world. It happens that at Rome every cardinal keeps a seal, on which his title is stamped; these seals are made as big as the whole hand of a small boy of about twelve; and, as I have said above, the cardinal's title is carved on it, with a great many figures. One of these seals, well made, is paid a hundred scudi and more. I felt an honest envy of this able man too, although this art is very much apart from the other arts that belong to the goldsmith's trade; because this Lautizio, making this art of seals, could do nothing else. I set myself to study that art too, and although I found it extremely difficult, I never got tired of the labour it gave me, and kept on continually earning and learning.

There was also in Rome another most excellent and able man, a Milanese called Messer Caradosso. This man worked only in little chased medals made of plate, and many other things; he made some Peaces worked in half relief, and certain Christs a palm high, made of the thinnest sheets of gold, so well worked that I judged him to be the greatest master of such things I had ever seen, and I envied him more than anybody else.

There were also other masters who worked at medals cut in steel, which are the mother and the true guide of anyone who wants to know how to make coins really well. I set myself to learn all these different professions with the greatest study.

There is also the most beautiful art of enamelling, which I never saw anybody do well except a Florentine of ours called Amerigo, whom I did not know, though I knew his most marvellous works well; and I never saw anywhere in the world, or by any man, anything that came within a long way of that divine quality. To this exercise too — most difficult of all, because of the fire, which comes in at the very end of the finished, laborious work, and often ruins it and sends it to wreck — to this different profession too I set myself with all my power; and although I found it very difficult, the pleasure I took in it was so great that those great difficulties seemed to me a rest. And this came from an express gift lent me by the God of nature: a constitution so good and so well proportioned that I freely promised myself I could make it do whatever came into my mind to do. These professions I have named are numerous and very different from one another; so that a man who does one of them well, if he wants to do the others, hardly ever succeeds in them as he does in the one he does well; whereas I have used all my power to work at all these professions equally, and I shall show in its place that I have done it, as I say.

Chapter 27

At this time, when I was still a young man of about twenty-three, there broke out a plague so beyond all reckoning that in Rome many thousands were dying of it every day. Being somewhat frightened by this, I began to take certain pleasures, as my mind dictated, and for another reason too, which I shall tell.

On feast days I liked going to the ancient ruins, copying them, now in wax and now in drawing; and because these ruins are all broken down, and a great many pigeons nest among them, I got the wish to use my gun on them: so that, to keep away from company, being frightened of the plague, I would put a gun on my Paulino's shoulder and the two of us alone would go off to the ruins. Which meant that very often I came back loaded with the fattest pigeons.

I never liked to put anything into my gun but a single ball, and so, by the true skill of that art, I made great bags. I kept a gun that was straight, made by my own hand; and inside and out there was never a mirror like it. I also made with my own hand the finest powder for shooting, in which I discovered the best secrets that anybody has found from that day to this; and of this, so as not to go on at length, I shall give one sign to astonish anyone who is expert in the profession. It is this: with a weight of my powder that was a fifth of the weight of the ball, the ball would carry two hundred paces at point blank.

Although the great pleasure I got out of this gun looked as if it were leading me away from my art and my studies — and though that was the truth — in another way it gave me back much more than it had taken from me; the reason being that every time I went out on this sport of mine my health greatly improved, because the air agreed with me strongly. Being melancholy by nature, as soon as I got into these pleasures my heart lifted at once, and I worked better and with far more power than when I stayed continually at my studies and my exercises; so that in the end the gun stood more to my profit than to my loss.

And through this pleasure of mine I made friends with certain searchers who kept watch on some Lombard peasants who came to Rome in their season to dig the vineyards. These men, digging the ground, were always finding ancient medals, agates, prases, cornelians, cameos; and they also found gems, such as emeralds, sapphires, diamonds and rubies. These searchers sometimes got such things from the peasants for very little money; and I, coming on the searchers sometimes — and very often — would give them as many gold scudi for what they had barely bought for as many giulios. This, quite apart from the great profit I got out of it, which was tenfold or more, also made me welcome to almost all the cardinals in Rome.

I shall only tell of one or two of the notable and rarer of these things. Among many others, there came into my hands the head of a dolphin about as big as a good-sized broad bean. Besides the fact that this head was extremely beautiful, nature here went far beyond the art; because this emerald was of so good a colour that the man who bought it from me for tens of scudi had it made up as an ordinary stone to wear in a ring, and set like that he sold it for hundreds.

Another kind of stone: this was a head in the most beautiful topaz that was ever seen in the world, and in this the art came up to nature. It was as big as a large hazelnut, and the head was as well made as anyone could imagine: it was a Minerva.

Then another stone, different from these: this was a cameo, with a Hercules cut on it binding the three-throated Cerberus. This was so beautiful and made with such skill that our great Michelangelo said he had never seen anything so marvellous.

Among many bronze medals, one came into my hands with the head of Jove on it. This medal was bigger than any I had ever seen: the head was so well made that no such medal was ever seen. It had a beautiful reverse with some little figures on it, made as well as the head.

I could say a great many great things about this, but I do not want to go on at length.
