Book One, Chapters 28 to 31

Chapter 28

As I said above, the plague had begun in Rome. Although I want to go back a little way, I shall not for that go outside my subject.

There came to Rome a very great surgeon called Master Jacomo da Carpi. This able man, among his other treatments, undertook certain desperate cures of the French disease. And because these diseases in Rome are great friends of the priests, and above all of the richest of them, this able man, having made himself known, gave out that by means of certain fumigations he cured such complaints marvellously; but he wanted the bargain made before he began the cure, and the bargains were in hundreds and not in tens.

This able man had a good deal of understanding of design. Passing my shop by chance one day, he happened to see certain drawings I had in front of me, among them a number of odd little vases I had designed for my own pleasure. These vases were very different and unlike any that had ever been seen up to that time. Master Jacomo wanted me to make them for him in silver; which I did with the greatest willingness, since they were according to my own fancy. Although this able man paid me very well for them, the honour they brought me was a hundred times greater; because in the trade of those able goldsmiths they said they had never seen anything more beautiful or better carried out.

I had hardly finished them when this man showed them to the Pope; and the day after he went off with God. He was very learned, and spoke marvellously about medicine. The Pope wanted him to stay in his service; and this man said he did not want to be in anybody's service in the world, and that whoever needed him should go after him. He was a very cunning person, and he did wisely to get out of Rome; because not many months later all the people he had treated became so much worse that they were a hundred times worse than before: he would have been killed if he had stayed.

He showed my little vases to many lords; among them to the most excellent Duke of Ferrara; and he said he had got them from a great lord in Rome, telling that lord that if he wanted to be cured of his complaint, he wanted those two vases; and that the lord had told him they were antiques, and begged him to ask for anything else, which he would not find it hard to give him, as long as he left him those; and he said he had made a show of not wanting to treat him, and so he got them. Messer Alberto Bendedio told me this in Ferrara, and with a great air of importance showed me some clay copies of them; at which I laughed; and when I said nothing else, Messer Alberto Bendedio, who was a proud man, said to me in a rage: "So you laugh at them, eh? And I tell you that in a thousand years there has not been born a man who could so much as copy them." And I, so as not to take that reputation away from them, kept quiet and admired them in astonishment.

Many gentlemen in Rome spoke to me about this work, saying it seemed miraculous and antique to them; some of them were friends of mine; and I, being bold about the business, confessed that I had made them. When they would not believe it, and I wanted to stay truthful with them, I had to give proof of it by making new drawings; because the old ones were not enough, since Master Jacomo had cunningly carried them off with him. In this small piece of work I gained a great deal.

Chapter 29

The plague going on for many months afterwards, I had come through the skirmish, because a good many of my companions had died and I had been left healthy and free.

One evening among others a confederate companion of mine brought home to supper a Bolognese woman of the town called Faustina. This woman was very beautiful, but she was about thirty, and she had with her a little servant girl of thirteen or fourteen. Since Faustina belonged to my friend, I would not have touched her for all the gold in the world. And although she said she was strongly in love with me, I kept faith constantly with my friend; but once they had gone to bed I stole that little servant, who was quite new to it — and woe to her if her mistress had known. So I passed that night pleasantly, and with far more satisfaction to me than I should have had with the mistress Faustina.

Dinner time was coming on, and I, being tired, having walked a good many miles, wanted to eat; and a great pain took me in the head, with a number of swellings in my left arm, and a carbuncle showing itself in the knuckle of my left hand, on the outside. Everybody in the house was terrified, and my friend, the big cow and the little one, all ran off; so that I was left alone with a poor errand boy of mine, who would never leave me. I felt my heart choking and knew for certain that I was a dead man.

At this, the father of this boy of mine passed along the street. He was doctor to Cardinal Iacoacci and was on his salary; and the boy said to his father: "Come, father, and see Benvenuto, who is in bed with a little indisposition." Without considering what the indisposition might be, he came straight to me, and when he had touched my pulse he saw and felt what he would not have wished. Turning at once to his son, he said: "Oh, you traitor of a son, you have ruined me: how can I go in front of the cardinal now?" To which the son said: "This master of mine, father, is worth far more than all the cardinals in Rome."

Then the doctor turned to me and said: "Since I am here, I mean to treat you. Of one thing only I warn you: if you have had intercourse, you are a dead man." To which I said: "I had it this night." At this the doctor said: "With what creature, and how much?" And I told him: "Last night, and with the very youngest little girl." Then, realising the foolish words he had used, he said to me at once: "Both because they are young, in that way, and do not stink yet, and because the remedy is in good time, do not be so frightened, because I hope to cure you by every means."

Having treated me and gone away, there came at once a very dear friend of mine called Giovanni Rigogli, who, being sorry both for my great illness and for my being left so alone by my companion, said: "Do not be afraid, my Benvenuto, because I shall never leave you until I see you well." I told this friend not to come near me, because I was done for. I only begged him to be so kind as to take a certain good sum of scudi which was in a little box there beside my bed, and, after God had taken me out of the world, to send them as a gift to my poor father, writing to him kindly, as I too had done, according to the custom that season of madness required. My dear friend told me he would not leave me in any way, and that whatever happened afterwards, one way or the other, he knew perfectly well what a friend ought to do.

And so we went forward with God's help; and with the marvellous remedies I began to improve very greatly, and I soon came safely out of that very great illness. Still keeping the sore open, with the plug in it and a plaster over it, I went off on a little wild horse of mine that I had. He had hair more than four fingers long; he was exactly as big as a big bear cub, and truly he looked like a bear. On him I went to find Il Rosso the painter, who was outside Rome towards Civitavecchia, at a place belonging to the Count dell'Anguillara called Cervetera; and I found my Rosso, who was overjoyed; and I said to him: "I have come to do to you what you did to me so many months ago." Bursting out laughing, and embracing and kissing me, he told me afterwards to keep quiet about it for the Count's sake. So, happy and cheerful, with good wines and excellent food, and made much of by the Count, I stayed there about a month; and every day I went off alone along the seashore, and got down there and loaded myself with all sorts of little stones, small shells and rare and beautiful conches.

On the last day, after which I did not go there again, I was set upon by a number of men who had disguised themselves and had landed from a Moorish galley; and thinking they had me shut in at a certain narrow place where it seemed impossible to get out of their hands, I got up at once on my little horse, and, having made up my mind at that dangerous place to be either roasted or boiled there, since I saw little hope of escaping one of the two ways, as God willed it the little horse — which was as I described above — made a jump it is impossible to believe; so that, having saved myself, I thanked God. I told the Count: he called to arms: we saw the galleys out at sea. The next day, sound and cheerful, I went back to Rome.

Chapter 30

By now the plague had almost stopped, so that those who found themselves alive were making much of each other very cheerfully. Out of this there was born a company of painters, sculptors and goldsmiths, the best there were in Rome; and the founder of this company was a sculptor called Michelagnolo. This Michelagnolo was of Siena, and was a very able man, such that he could stand up among any others of the profession; but above all he was the most pleasant and the most fleshly man there ever was in the world. Of this company he was the oldest, but the youngest in the strength of his body.

We used to meet often; at the least twice a week. I will not keep quiet about the fact that in this company of ours there were Giulio Romano the painter and Gianfrancesco, marvellous pupils of the great Raphael of Urbino. Having met a good many times, it seemed good to that good leader of ours that on the following Sunday we should meet for supper at his house, and that each of us should be obliged to bring his crow — for that was the name Michelagnolo had given them — and that whoever did not bring one should be obliged to pay for a supper for the whole company. Those of us who had no acquaintance with such women of the town had to provide themselves with one, at no small expense and trouble, so as not to be shamed at that gathering of talent.

I, who thought I was well provided for by a very beautiful young woman called Pantasilea, who was greatly in love with me, was forced to give her up to a very dear friend of mine called Il Bachiacca, who had been and still was greatly in love with her. In this case there stirred a little lovers' resentment, because, seeing that at the first word I gave her up to Bachiacca, it seemed to this woman that I took very little account of the great love she bore me; from which, in the course of time, a very great matter was born, when she wanted to take revenge for the injury she had had from me — which I shall tell in its place.

Well, the hour was beginning to press when each of us was to present himself to that gathering of talent with his crow, and I found myself without one; and it seemed to me too bad a mistake to fall short in such a mad affair; and what held me back most was that I did not want to bring under my own light, among such talent, some plucked little crow. So I thought of a pleasantry to add to the merriment and make the laughing greater.

Having made up my mind, I called a boy of sixteen who lived next door to me: he was the son of a Spanish brass founder. This young man was studying Latin letters and was very studious. His name was Diego. He was beautiful of body, and marvellous in the colour of his skin; the carving of his head was far more beautiful than the ancient one of Antinous, and I had drawn him many times, and had had much honour out of it in my work. He kept company with nobody, so that he was not known; he dressed very badly and anyhow: he was in love only with his marvellous studies.

Having called him into my house, I begged him to let me dress him in the women's clothes that were laid out there. He was easy about it and dressed quickly; and with the most beautiful ways of arranging his hair I soon added great beauty to his beautiful face. I put two little rings in his ears with two large, beautiful pearls in them — the rings were broken, and only pinched the ears, which looked as if they had been pierced. Then I put beautiful gold chains and rich jewels round his neck, and dressed his beautiful hands with rings. Then, taking him pleasantly by an ear, I drew him in front of a large mirror of mine. The young man, seeing himself, said with such boldness: "Good heavens — is that Diego?" Then I said: "That is Diego, from whom I never asked any favour of any kind; and now I only beg that Diego to do me one honest favour: and that is, that in these very clothes" — I wanted him to come to supper with that gathering of talent I had spoken to him about more than once. The young man, honest, able and wise, put off that boldness of his, turned his eyes to the ground, and stood a while like that without saying anything; then all at once he lifted his face and said: "With Benvenuto I will come; now let us go."

Having put on his head a large towel of the kind they call in Rome a summer cloth, when we got to the place everybody had already arrived, and they all came to meet me. Michelagnolo was standing between Giulio and Gianfrancesco. Having taken the towel off the head of that beautiful figure of mine, that Michelagnolo — as I have said before, the drollest and pleasantest man anyone could imagine — took hold with both his hands, one on Giulio and one on Gianfrancesco, and pulled them down as far as he could, and himself, on his knees on the ground, shouted for mercy and called out to all the people, saying: "Look, look how the Angels of Paradise are made! Because, although they are called Angels, look — there are Angelesses among them too." And shouting, he said:

	O Angel beautiful, O Angel true,
	save me, and make me the sign of the cross.

At these words the pleasant creature raised his right hand, laughing, and gave him a papal blessing with many pleasant words. Then Michelagnolo got up and said that one kisses the Pope's feet and Angels' cheeks; and when he had done it, the young man blushed deeply, which increased his beauty enormously.

So we went in, and the room was full of sonnets that each of us had made and sent to Michelagnolo. This young man began to read them, and read them all; which added so much to his endless beauties that it would be impossible to say it. After that there was a good deal of talk and wondering, which I do not want to go into, since I am not here for that; only one remark I must mention, because it was made by that marvellous painter Giulio, who, having run his eye skilfully over everyone who was there, but studying the women more than the rest, turned to Michelagnolo and said: "My dear Michelagnolo, that name of crows of yours suits these women very well today, although they are somewhat less beautiful than crows beside one of the most beautiful peacocks anyone could imagine."

The food being ready and set out, and it being time to sit down at table, Giulio begged as a favour that he should be the one to place us. This being entirely granted him, he took the women by the hand and put them all on the inner side, with mine in the middle; then he put all the men on the outside, and me in the middle, saying that I deserved every great honour. Behind the women there was a screen of natural jasmine, most beautiful, which made such a fine background for those women, and above all for mine, that it would be impossible to say it in words.

So we all went through that rich supper with the greatest goodwill, and it was marvellously abundant. After we had supped, there came a little marvellous music of voices along with instruments; and because they were singing and playing with the books in front of them, my beautiful figure asked to sing her part; and because he did that part of the music almost better than the rest, it caused so much wonder that the talk Giulio and Michelagnolo were making was no longer pleasant in the way it had been before, but was all in grave, solid words full of amazement.

After the music, a certain Aurelio Ascolano, who spoke marvellously without preparation, began to praise the women in divine and beautiful words; and while he was singing, those two women who had my figure between them never stopped chattering: one of them was telling how she had come to grief, and the other was asking my figure how she had done it, and who her friends were, and how long it was since she had come to Rome, and a great many things of that sort. It is true that if I were writing only to describe such pleasantries, I should tell of a good many accidents that happened there, set going by that Pantasilea, who was strongly in love with me; but since it is not to my purpose, I pass them over briefly.

Now this talk of those stupid women became a nuisance to my figure, whom we had named Pomona; and Pomona, wanting to get away from their silly talk, kept twisting about, now to one side and now to the other. She was asked by the woman Giulio had brought whether she felt any discomfort. She said yes, and that she thought she was some months gone, and felt a pain in her womb. At once the two women, who had her between them, moved to pity for Pomona, put their hands on her belly and found that she was male. Snatching their hands back at once, with the insulting words people use to handsome young men, they got up from the table; and the shouting spread at once, with great laughter and great astonishment, and the fierce Michelagnolo asked leave of everybody to give me a penance in his own way. Having got their yes, with the greatest shouting he lifted me off my feet, saying: "Long live the lord! Long live the lord!" and said that that was the sentence I deserved for having played so fine a trick. So ended that most pleasant supper and that day; and each of us went back to his own house.

Chapter 31

If I wanted to describe exactly what and how many were the many pieces I made for different sorts of men, my telling would be far too long. I need say nothing else for the present, except that I attended with every care and diligence to making myself skilled in that variety and difference of arts I have spoken of above. So I worked continually at all of them; and because no occasion has yet come into my mind to describe any notable work of mine, I shall wait to put them in their place, and they will come soon.

Michelagnolo, the Sienese sculptor, was at this time making the tomb of the dead Pope Adrian. Giulio Romano the painter went off to serve the Marquis of Mantua. The other companions withdrew, this one here and that one there, about their business; so that our able company nearly all broke up.

At this time there came into my hands certain little Turkish daggers; and the handle was of iron, like the blade of the dagger, and the sheath was of iron in the same way. These things were carved, by means of tools, with a great many beautiful leaf patterns in the Turkish manner, and most delicately inlaid with gold; which greatly roused in me the wish to try myself in that profession too, so different from the others. And seeing that it came out very well for me, I made several pieces. These pieces were far more beautiful and far more lasting than the Turkish ones, for several reasons. One is that in my steel I cut very deeply and undercut, which is not done in Turkish work. The other is that Turkish leafwork is nothing but arum leaves with a few little sunflower blossoms; and although they have some grace, they do not go on giving pleasure the way our leafwork does.

Though in Italy we have different ways of making leafwork; because the Lombards make very beautiful leaves, copying ivy and traveller's joy with beautiful turnings, which are very pleasant to see; the Tuscans and the Romans have made a much better choice in this line, because they copy acanthus leaves, called bear's-claw, with their stalks and flowers, turning in different ways; and among the leaves it is very well arranged to put a few little birds and different animals, as anyone with good taste can see. Some of it is found naturally in wild flowers, such as the ones called snapdragons, which can be made out in certain blossoms, accompanied by other beautiful inventions of those able craftsmen; which things are called by people who do not know, grotesques.

These grotesques got that name from the moderns, because they were found by students in certain caverns in the earth at Rome, which caverns were anciently rooms, baths, studies, halls and other things of that sort. These students, finding them in those cavernous places — because the ground has been raised since ancient times and they were left down below, and because in Rome the word for those low places is grottoes — from this they got the name of grotesques. Which is not their true name; because just as the ancients enjoyed making up monsters, coupling goats and cows and mares, and when these mixtures were born they called them monsters, so those craftsmen made this sort of monster with their leafwork: and monsters is their true name, and not grotesques.

Making this sort of leafwork inlaid in the way described above, they were much more beautiful to look at than the Turkish. At this time it happened that in certain vessels which were ancient little urns full of ashes, there were found among those ashes certain iron rings inlaid with gold by the ancients themselves, and in each of those rings a little shell was set. When the learned looked into it, they said that these rings were worn by people who wanted to keep steady in their minds through some strange thing that had happened to them, for good or for ill. This moved me, at the request of certain gentlemen who were great friends of mine, to make some of these little rings; but I made them of well-purged steel, and afterwards, when they had been well cut and inlaid with gold, they made a very beautiful show; and it happened sometimes that for one of these little rings, for my labour alone, I had more than forty scudi.

At this time there were in use certain little gold medals, and every lord and gentleman liked to have some fancy or device of his carved on them, and they wore them in their caps. I made a great many of these pieces, and they were very difficult to make. And because that very able man I spoke of, called Caradosso, made some of them, for which, when they had more than one figure on them, he would take nothing less than a hundred gold scudi each — for that reason, not so much because of the price as because of his slowness, I was put forward by certain gentlemen, for whom, among other things, I made a medal in competition with this great able man, and on that medal there were four figures, over which I had laboured hard. It happened that these gentlemen and lords, setting it beside the marvellous Caradosso's, said that mine was much better made and more beautiful, and that I should ask what I liked for my labour, since, having satisfied them so well, they wanted to satisfy me as much. To which I said that the greatest reward for my labour, and the thing I most wanted, was to come up alongside the works of so able a man; and that, if their lordships thought so too, I called myself fully paid. And when I had gone off at once, they sent after me so generous a present that I was content, and it gave me such heart to do well that it was the cause of what will be heard of hereafter.
