Book One, Chapters 32 to 35

Chapter 32

I shall go somewhat away from my profession here, since I want to tell of certain troublesome things that happened in this laborious life of mine. I have already told about that company of talent, and about the pleasantries that came about on account of that woman I spoke of, Pantasilea, who bore me that false and troublesome love; and she, being extremely angry with me over that pleasantry in which the Spaniard Diego took part at that supper, and having sworn to revenge herself on me, an occasion arose which I shall describe, in which my life ran the greatest risk.

It was this. There came to Rome a young man called Luigi Pulci, the son of one of the Pulci who had his head cut off for having lain with his own daughter. This young man had a most marvellous poetic talent and a knowledge of good Latin letters; he wrote well; he was beyond measure handsome in his grace and his figure. He had left the service of some bishop or other, and he was full of the French disease.

When this young man was in Florence, on summer nights in certain parts of the city they used to hold gatherings in the streets themselves, and this young man was among the best of those who sang there without preparation; his singing was so beautiful to hear that the divine Michelangelo Buonarroti, that most excellent sculptor and painter, whenever he knew where he was, went to hear him with the greatest eagerness and pleasure; and a certain man called Il Piloto, a very able goldsmith, and I, went with him. That was how the acquaintance came about between Luigi Pulci and me.

Now, many years later, he showed himself to me in Rome in that bad state, begging me to help him for the love of God. Moved to pity by his great talents, for the love of our country, and because it is my own nature, I took him into my house and had him treated in such a way that, being young as he was, he was soon brought back to health. While he was seeing to that recovery, he studied continually, and I had helped him to a great many books as far as I could manage; so that this Luigi, recognising the great kindness he had had from me, thanked me many times with words and with tears, telling me that if God ever put any good fortune in front of him, he would pay me back for the kindness I had done him. To which I said that I had not done for him what I should have liked, but at least what I could, and that it was the duty of human creatures to help one another; only I reminded him to pay this kindness I had done him to some other man who needed him, as he had needed me; and to be my friend, and consider me his.

This young man began to frequent the Court of Rome, where he soon found a place, and settled with a bishop, a man of eighty, called Bishop Gurgensis. This bishop had a nephew called Messer Giovanni: he was a Venetian gentleman. This Messer Giovanni made a great show of being in love with Luigi Pulci's talents, and under the name of those talents he had made him as familiar with him as if he had been himself. Luigi, having talked to this Messer Giovanni about me and about the great obligation he was under to me, caused Messer Giovanni to want to know me.

Now it happened that one evening among others I had given a little feast for that Pantasilea I have spoken of, and to that supper I had invited a good many able friends of mine; and just as we were going to table Messer Giovanni came up with Luigi Pulci, and after some ceremony they stayed to supper with us. That shameless whore, seeing the handsome young man, immediately set her designs on him; and for that reason, when the pleasant supper was over, I called Luigi Pulci aside and told him that, by all the obligation he had boasted of being under to me, he should not in any way seek out that whore's acquaintance. At which words he said to me: "Good heavens, my Benvenuto, do you take me for a senseless man?" To which I said: "Not senseless, but young"; and I swore to him by God that I had not a thought in the world about her, but that it would hurt me if he broke his neck over her. At which words he swore that he prayed God, if he ever spoke to her, that he might break his neck at once. This poor young man must have made that oath to God with his whole heart, because he did break his neck, as will be told here below.

Messer Giovanni showed himself towards him in a filthy love and not a virtuous one; because the young man was seen every day changing his clothes of velvet and silk, and it was known that he had given himself over entirely to wickedness and had banished his beautiful and admirable talents; and he made a show of not seeing me and not knowing me, because I had rebuked him, telling him that he had given himself as a prey to foul vices which would make him break his neck, as he had said.

Chapter 33

That Messer Giovanni of his had bought him a most beautiful black horse, on which he had spent a hundred and fifty scudi. This horse handled marvellously well, so that Luigi went every day to prance about on this horse round that whore Pantasilea. I, becoming aware of it, took no notice at all, saying that everything acted according to its nature; and I attended to my studies.

It happened one Sunday evening that we were invited to supper by that Sienese sculptor Michelagnolo; and it was summer. At this supper Bachiacca was there, and he had brought with him that Pantasilea, his first acquaintance. So, being at table at supper, she was sitting between me and Bachiacca; and at the very best of the supper she got up from the table, saying she wanted to go about certain conveniences of hers, because she felt a pain in her stomach, and that she would come back at once. While we were talking and supping most pleasantly, she stayed away rather longer than she should have. It happened that, keeping my ears open, I thought I heard a very low sniggering in the street. I had a knife in my hand which I was using at table. The window was so close to the table that, rising a little, I saw in the street that Luigi Pulci along with Pantasilea, and I heard Luigi say: "Oh, if that devil Benvenuto were to see us, woe to us!" And she said: "Do not be afraid; listen to the noise they are making: they are thinking of anything but us."

At these words I, having recognised them, threw myself down from the window to the ground and took Luigi by the cloak, and with the knife I had in my hand I would certainly have killed him; but because he was on a little white horse, which he set spurs to, he left me the cloak in my hand to save his life. Pantasilea ran off into a church close by. The people at table got up at once and all came over to me, begging me not to trouble either myself or them on account of a whore; to which I said that I would not have stirred for her, but I would for that wicked young man, who showed that he thought so little of me. And so I would not be bent by any of the words of those able and decent men; instead I took my sword and went off by myself alone to the Prati, because the house where we were supping was near the Castle gate that leads to the Prati.

Going along towards the Prati, I was not long before, after the sun had gone down, I came back into Rome at a slow pace. It was already night and dark, and the gates of Rome were not shut. When it was getting on for two hours after dark I went past Pantasilea's house, meaning, if Luigi Pulci was there, to do harm to both of them. Seeing and hearing that nobody was in the house but an ugly servant girl called Canida, I went to put down my cloak and the scabbard of my sword, and so came back to the house, which was behind the Banchi on the river Tiber. Opposite this house there was an innkeeper's garden, belonging to a man called Romolo: this garden was shut in by a thick hedge of thorn, in which I hid myself, standing upright, waiting for the woman to come home along with Luigi.

After I had been there a while, that friend of mine called Bachiacca turned up, having either guessed it or been told. He called me in a low voice "gossip" (for that was what we called each other for a joke); and he begged me for the love of God, saying these words almost weeping: "My gossip, I beg you not to do any harm to that poor girl, because she is not at fault in the world." To which I said: "If at this first word you do not get out of my way, I shall give you this sword on the head." My poor gossip, frightened, was taken with a loosening of the bowels at once, and could go so short a distance that he had to obey me.

It was a starry night which gave a very great light. All at once I hear a noise of several horses, and they were coming forward on one side and the other: it was Luigi and Pantasilea accompanied by a certain Messer Benvegnato of Perugia, chamberlain to Pope Clement, and they had with them four very brave Perugian captains, with other very bold young soldiers: there were more than twelve swords among them all. When I saw this, considering that I did not know which way to run, I tried to push myself into that hedge; and because those sharp thorns hurt me, and I was working myself up like a bull, almost resolved to make a jump and run, at this Luigi had his arm round Pantasilea's neck, saying: "I will kiss you once at least, in scorn of that traitor Benvenuto."

At this, being tormented by the thorns and driven on by the young man's words, I sprang out, raised my sword, and said in a great voice: "You are all dead men." At this the blow of the sword fell on Luigi's shoulder; and because those satyrs had put the poor young man all in mail and other things of that sort, the blow was a very great one; and the sword, turning, struck Pantasilea on the nose and on the mouth. Both of them having fallen to the ground, Bachiacca, with his hose half down his legs, was shouting and running away.

Turning boldly on the others with my sword, those brave men, hearing a great noise which had started up in the inn, and thinking there was an army of a hundred men there, although they had put their hands bravely to their swords, two of the little horses among them got frightened and threw them into such disorder that, having knocked two of the best of them head over heels, the rest took to flight. And I, seeing that it was coming out well, got away from that business at a very fast run and with honour, not wanting to try fortune more than I ought.

In that immeasurable disorder some of those soldiers and captains had been wounded by their own swords, and Messer Benvegnato, the Pope's chamberlain, had been knocked over and trampled by a mule of his; and a servant of his, having put his hand to his sword, fell down together with him and wounded him badly in one hand. This injury caused Messer Benvegnato, more than all the others, to swear in that Perugian way of theirs, saying: "By God's — , I mean Benvegnato to teach Benvenuto how to live"; and he gave the commission to one of his captains, perhaps bolder than the others, but being young he had less judgement.

This man came to find me where I had withdrawn, in the house of a great Neapolitan gentleman who, having heard and seen some things of my profession, and besides that the disposition of my mind and body fitted for soldiering, which was what the gentleman was inclined to, so that, seeing myself made much of, and finding myself in my own line as well, I made such an answer to that captain that I believe he greatly repented of having come in front of me.

A few days later, when the wounds of Luigi and the whore and the others had dried up a little, this great Neapolitan gentleman was approached by Messer Benvegnato, whose fury had gone off, to make me make peace with the young man Luigi, and to say that those brave soldiers, who had nothing to do with me at all, only wanted to know me. The gentleman told them all that he would bring me wherever they liked, and would willingly make peace; but on this condition, that neither side should throw words back at each other, because that would be too much against their honour; it was enough to make a show of drinking and kissing, and that he would do the talking, by which he would willingly save them.

And so it was done. On a Thursday evening the gentleman took me to Messer Benvegnato's house, where all those soldiers were who had been at that rout, and they were still at table. With my gentleman there were more than thirty brave men, all well armed; a thing Messer Benvegnato had not expected. When we got into the hall, first the gentleman and then I, he said these words: "God save you, gentlemen. We have come to you, Benvenuto and I, whom I love like a brother of my own blood; and we are here willingly to do whatever you have a mind to do." Messer Benvegnato, seeing the room filling with so many people, said: "We are asking you for peace and nothing else." So Messer Benvegnato promised that the governor of Rome's court would give me no trouble. We made peace; and I went back at once to my shop, not able to be an hour without that Neapolitan gentleman, who either came to find me or sent for me.

In the meantime Luigi Pulci was well again, and every day he was on that black horse of his that handled so well. One day among others, it having been drizzling, and he putting the horse through its paces exactly in front of Pantasilea's door, it slipped and fell, and the horse on top of him; and having broken his right leg clean off, he died a few days later in Pantasilea's house, and fulfilled the oath he had made to God from his heart. So you can see that God keeps account of the good and the bad, and gives each one his deserts.

Chapter 34

By now the whole world was in arms. Pope Clement had sent to ask Signor Giovanni de' Medici for certain bands of soldiers, and when they came they behaved so outrageously in Rome that it was bad to keep an open shop. That was what made me withdraw into a good little house behind the Banchi; and there I worked for all the friends I had won.

My work at this time was nothing of much importance, so I need not talk about it. I took a great deal of pleasure at this time in music and in pleasures of that sort.

Pope Clement, on the advice of Messer Jacopo Salviati, having dismissed those five bands that Signor Giovanni had sent him — Signor Giovanni being already dead in Lombardy — Bourbon, knowing that there were no soldiers in Rome, pushed his army towards Rome with the greatest urgency. On this occasion the whole of Rome took to arms. Now I was a great friend of Alessandro, son of Piero del Bene, and because at the time when the Colonnesi came into Rome he had asked me to guard his house for him, so on this greater occasion he begged me to raise fifty companions to guard the house, and to be their leader, as I had been at the time of the Colonnesi; so I raised fifty very brave young men, and we moved into his house, well paid and well treated.

Bourbon's army had already appeared at the walls of Rome, and Alessandro del Bene begged me to go with him and keep him company; so one of the best of our companions and I went; and on the way a young man called Cecchino della Casa joined us. We got to the walls of the Campo Santo, and there we saw that marvellous army, which was already making every effort to get in. At the place on the walls where we came up there were a number of young men lying dead, killed by those outside: there was fighting there with all their might; there was a fog as thick as anyone can imagine.

I turned to Alessandro and said: "Let us get back home as fast as we can, because there is no remedy in the world here; you see, those are climbing up and these are running away." Alessandro, frightened, said: "Would to God we had never come!" And so, turning about in the greatest hurry to go, I took him up on it, saying: "Since you have brought me here, we must do something like men." And turning my arquebus to where I saw the thickest and closest knot of fighting, I aimed exactly at the middle, at one man I saw raised above the others; on account of which the fog did not let me make out whether he was on horseback or on foot. Turning at once to Alessandro and Cecchino, I told them to fire their arquebuses, and showed them how to do it so as not to get an arquebus shot from those outside. So, having done it twice each, I went up carefully to the wall, and, seeing an extraordinary uproar among them, it turned out that by these shots of ours Bourbon had been killed; and he was that first man I had seen raised above the others, as was understood afterwards.

Leaving there, we went off through the Campo Santo, and came in by Saint Peter's; and coming out behind by the church of Sant'Angelo, we got to the great gate of the Castle with the greatest difficulty, because Signor Renzo da Ceri and Signor Orazio Baglioni were wounding and killing everyone who came away from the fighting at the walls. When we got to the gate, part of the enemy had already entered Rome, and we had them at our backs. The Castle wanting to drop the portcullis of the gate, a little space was made, so that the four of us got inside.

As soon as I was in, Captain Pallone de' Medici took hold of me, because, being one of the Castle's household, he forced me to leave Alessandro; which I did very much against my will. So I went up to the keep, and at the same moment Pope Clement had come into the Castle by the corridors, because he had not wanted to leave the palace of Saint Peter earlier, not being able to believe that they would get in.

After I found myself inside in that way, I went up to certain pieces of artillery which were in the charge of a gunner called Giuliano, a Florentine. This Giuliano, leaning out at the battlement of the Castle, could see his own poor house being sacked and his wife and children abused; so that, for fear of hitting his own, he did not dare fire his guns; and, having thrown the match for firing on the ground, he was tearing his face with great weeping; and certain other gunners were doing the same. So I took one of those matches, getting some who were there to help me who had no such feelings; and I turned certain sakers and falconets where I saw the need, and with them killed a great many of the enemy; and if this had not been done, that party which had entered Rome that morning would have come straight to the Castle, and it is possible that it might easily have got in, because the artillery was giving them no trouble. I went on firing; on account of which some cardinals and lords blessed me and gave me the greatest heart. At which, growing bold, I forced myself to do what I could not; it is enough that I was the cause of saving the Castle that morning, and that those other gunners went back to doing their duty. I went on all that day.

When evening came, while the army was entering Rome by the Trastevere side, Pope Clement having made a great Roman gentleman called Messer Antonio Santacroce head of all the gunners, this great gentleman came to me first of all, making much of me; and he put me with five marvellous pieces of artillery in the highest place in the Castle, the one called the Angel: this place goes right round the Castle and looks towards the Prati and towards Rome. So he gave me so many men under me that I could give orders to, to help me turn my guns; and having had a payment made me in advance, he gave me bread and a little wine, and then begged me to go on as I had begun. And I, who am sometimes more inclined to this profession than to the one I hold as my own, did it so willingly that it came out better for me than the other.

When night came, and the enemy had come into Rome, we who were in the Castle — and above all I, who have always taken pleasure in seeing new things — stood considering this immeasurable strangeness and burning; a thing which those who were anywhere but in the Castle could neither see nor imagine. Therefore I shall not set myself to describe such a thing; I shall only go on describing this life of mine that I have begun, and the things that belong to it exactly.

Chapter 35

Going on working my guns continually, in a whole month that we stayed besieged in the Castle, a great many very great things happened to me, all worth telling; but so as not to be too long, and not to show myself too far outside my profession, I shall leave out most of them, telling only those that force me to it, which will be the fewest and the most notable.

And this is the first. Messer Antonio Santacroce had made me come down off the Angel, so as to fire at certain houses near the Castle where some of the enemy from outside had been seen going in; and while I was firing, a cannon shot came at me which hit the corner of a battlement and carried away so much of it that it was the reason I was not hurt; because the whole greater quantity struck my chest all at once; and, my breath being stopped, I lay stretched on the ground like a dead man, and heard everything the bystanders were saying. Among them Messer Antonio Santacroce was greatly grieved, saying: "Alas, we have lost the best help we had."

Coming up at this noise, a certain companion of mine called Gianfrancesco, a piper — this man was more inclined to medicine than to piping — ran off weeping at once for a little flask of very good Greek wine; and having made a tile red hot, on which he put a good handful of wormwood, he then sprinkled it with that good Greek wine; and when the wormwood was well soaked, he immediately laid it on my chest, where the blow could plainly be seen. There was so much power in that wormwood that it gave me back my lost faculties at once. When I wanted to begin to speak I could not, because some foolish little soldiers had filled my mouth with earth, thinking that with it they were giving me the communion, whereas they had rather excommunicated me, because I could not come round again, this earth giving me a good deal more trouble than the blow. Having escaped this too, I went back to those furies of the artillery, keeping at them with all the skill and urgency I could imagine.

And because Pope Clement had sent to ask help of the Duke of Urbino, who was with the Venetian army, telling the ambassador to tell his Excellency that as long as the Castle held out it would make three fires every evening on top of the Castle, accompanied by three triple shots of artillery, and that as long as this signal lasted it showed that the Castle would not surrender — I had this duty of making these fires and firing these guns. Now, in the daytime I always pointed them at places where they could do some great harm; on account of which the Pope liked me a great deal better, because he saw that I did the work with the care such things call for. The Duke's help never came; and I, who am not here for that, shall describe no more of it.
