Book One, Chapters 36 to 40

Chapter 36

While I was up there at that devilish exercise of mine, some of the cardinals who were in the Castle used to come and see me, but most often Cardinal Ravenna and Cardinal de' Gaddi; and I told them several times not to come in front of me, because those little red caps of theirs could be seen a long way off, and from the neighbouring palaces, like the Torre de' Bini, both they and I ran the greatest danger; so that in the end I had them shut out, and I got a good deal of enmity from them for it.

Signor Orazio Baglioni also came about me often, who was very fond of me. One day among others, when he was talking with me, he saw something going on at a certain inn which was outside the Castle gate, at a place called Baccanello. This inn had for its sign a sun painted between two windows, in red. The windows being shut, Signor Orazio judged that opposite that sun, inside, between the two windows, there was a table of soldiers making merry; and so he said to me: "Benvenuto, if you have the heart to hit an arm's length from that sun with this half-cannon of yours, I think you would do a good piece of work, because there is a great noise to be heard over there, where there must be men of much importance." To which I said: "I can well enough hit the middle of that sun"; but there was a barrel full of stones close to the mouth of the cannon, and the fury of the fire and of the wind the cannon made would have sent it to the ground. To which the gentleman answered: "Do not waste time, Benvenuto: in the first place it is not possible, standing as it does, that the wind of the cannon should make it fall; but even if it did fall and the Pope were underneath it, it would be less harm than you think, so fire, fire."

I, without thinking any further about it, hit the middle of the sun exactly, as I had promised. The barrel fell, as I said, and it fell exactly between Cardinal Farnese and Messer Jacopo Salviati, and would have squashed them both flat; and the reason was that Cardinal Farnese had just then reproached Messer Jacopo with being the cause of the sack of Rome; and, as they were insulting each other, they had moved apart to give room to the insulting words, and that was why my barrel did not squash them both.

Hearing the great noise going on in that lower court, the good Signor Orazio went down in a great hurry; and I, leaning out where the barrel had fallen, heard some of them saying: "It would be a good thing to kill that gunner." At which I turned two falconets on the stairs that came up, with my mind made up that the first man who came up should have one of the falconets fired at him. Some of Cardinal Farnese's servants must have had orders from the cardinal to come and make trouble for me; so I came forward with the fire in my hand. Recognising some of them, I said: "Oh, you cut-throats, if you do not get away from there, and if there is anyone who dares to come inside these stairs, I have two falconets here ready with which I will make powder of you; and go and tell the cardinal that I have done what I was ordered to by my superiors, and that these things are being done and have been done in defence of you priests, and not to hurt you."

When they had gone, up came Signor Orazio Baglioni at a run, and I told him to stay back or I would kill him, because I knew perfectly well who he was. This gentleman stopped a moment, not without fear, and said to me: "Benvenuto, I am your friend." To which I said: "Sir, come up alone, and then come in any way you like." This gentleman, who was extremely proud, stopped a moment and said to me angrily: "I have a mind not to come up any further, and to do the exact opposite of what I had meant to do for you." To this I answered that, just as I had been put in that post to defend other people, so I was fit to defend myself too. He told me he was coming alone; and when he had come up, his face being altered more than it should have been, that was the reason I kept my hand on my sword and looked at him like a dog. At this he began to laugh, and the colour coming back into his face, he said to me most pleasantly: "My Benvenuto, I wish you all the good I have, and when it pleases God the time comes, I shall show it to you. Would to God you had killed those two scoundrels, because one of them is the cause of so much evil, and the other may yet be the cause of worse." And he told me that if I were asked, I should not say he was there with me when I fired that gun; and that as for the rest I should not worry.

The uproar was very great, and the business went on a long time. I do not want to go on any longer about it here: it is enough that I nearly took revenge for my father on Messer Jacopo Salviati, who had done him a thousand pieces of treachery (according to my father's own complaints). At any rate, without meaning to, I gave him a great fright. Of Farnese I will say nothing, because it will be heard in its place how well it would have been if I had killed him.

Chapter 37

I attended to firing my guns, and with them I did something very notable every day; so that I had won a credit and a favour with the Pope beyond all reckoning. Not a day ever passed in which I did not kill some of the enemy outside.

One day among others the Pope was walking about the round keep, and could see in the Prati a Spanish colonel whom he recognised by certain marks, having heard that he had once been in his service; and while he was watching him he talked about him. I, who was up on the Angel and knew nothing of this, but saw a man there having trenches put in order, with a little javelin in his hand, dressed all in rose colour, considering what I could do against him, took a gerfalcon of mine that I had there — this piece is bigger and longer than a saker, almost like a half-culverin. I emptied this piece and then loaded it with a good quantity of fine powder mixed with the coarse; then I aimed it very carefully at this man in red, giving it a marvellous elevation, because he was so far off that the art did not promise a shot at that distance with artillery of that sort. I gave it fire and hit that man in red exactly in the middle, who out of self-importance had put his sword in front of him in a certain Spanish way of his: so that when my cannon ball arrived and struck that sword, the man was seen to be divided in two pieces.

The Pope, who was not expecting such a thing, took great pleasure and wonder in it, both because it seemed impossible to him that a gun could carry so far in aim, and because he could not settle how the man could be in two pieces or how such a thing could be. And he sent for me and questioned me. So I told him all the care I had used in the way of firing; but as for the man being in two pieces, neither he nor I knew the cause. Kneeling down, I begged him to bless me again for the homicide, and for the others I had committed in that Castle in the service of the Church. At which the Pope, raising his hands and making a wide cross over my figure, told me that he blessed me and forgave me all the homicides I had ever committed and all those I ever should commit in the service of the apostolic Church.

Having left him, I went up, and pressing on I never stopped firing, and hardly a shot ever went for nothing. My drawing and my fine studies and my beauty of playing music were all in the playing of those guns; and if I had to tell in detail the fine things I did in that cruel infernal business, I should astonish the world; but so as not to be too long I pass over them. I shall tell only one or two of the more notable ones, which are necessary to me.

And this is one: thinking day and night what I could do for my part in defence of the Church, and having considered that the enemy changed their guards and passed by the gate of Santo Spirito, which was a reasonable shot but came at me across, so that I did not do the great harm I wanted to do — still, a good many were killed every day. So that, seeing that this passage was blocked, the enemy put more than thirty barrels one night on the top of a roof, which cut off that view of mine. And I, who thought about this case a little better than I had before, turned all five of my pieces of artillery, aiming them at those barrels; and I waited for the twenty-second hour, just at the fine moment for changing the guards. And because they, thinking they were safe, came more slowly and much more closely packed than usual, when I gave fire to my blowers I not only threw down those barrels which were blocking me, but with that one blast killed more than thirty men.

For which reason, going on to do it twice more afterwards, the soldiers were thrown into such disorder that — being full of the plunder of the great sack, and some of them wanting to enjoy the fruits of their labours — they several times wanted to mutiny and go off. Still, being held back by their brave captain, called Gian di Urbino, they were forced, at very great inconvenience to themselves, to take another way for the changing of their guards; which inconvenience meant more than three miles, where the first was not half of one.

Having done this piece of work, all those lords who were in the Castle showed me marvellous favours. This particular case, having turned out of so much importance, I have wanted to tell in order to make an end of this subject, because I am not in the profession that moves me to write; for if I wanted to make my life fine with things of that kind, I should have far too many left to tell. There is only one more, which I shall tell in its place.

Chapter 38

Jumping forward a good way, I shall tell how Pope Clement, in order to save the tiaras with all the quantity of the great jewels of the apostolic Chamber, had me called, and shut himself up in a room alone with the Cavalierino and me. This Cavalierino had once been a servant in Filippo Strozzi's stable: he was French, a person of the lowest birth; and because he was a great servant, Pope Clement had made him extremely rich, and trusted him like himself. So the Pope and the Cavaliere and I, shut in that room, they put those tiaras in front of me with all that great quantity of jewels from the apostolic Chamber, and he ordered me to strip them all out of the gold they were set in. And I did so; then we wrapped each of them in a little paper and sewed them into certain pads on the Pope's body and the Cavalierino's. Then they gave me all the gold, which was about two hundred pounds, and told me to melt it down as secretly as I could.

I went off to the Angel, where my room was, which I could shut so that nobody troubled me; and having made myself a little draught furnace of bricks there, and fitted into the bottom of the furnace a good-sized ash tray in the shape of a dish, I threw the gold on top onto the coals, and little by little it fell into that dish. While this furnace was working, I was constantly on the watch for how I could harm our enemies; and because we had the enemy's trenches below us at less than a stone's throw, I did them damage in those trenches with certain old-fashioned quarrels, several stacks of which were among the Castle's old munitions. Having taken a saker and a falconet, both of which were a little broken at the muzzle, I filled these with those quarrels; and when I gave fire to the guns they flew off wildly, doing a great many unexpected injuries in the trenches; so that, keeping these constantly ready while I was melting the gold, a little before vespers I saw come along the edge of the trench a man on horseback, on a mule. The mule was going very fast, and this man was talking to the men in the trenches. I took care to give fire to my gun before he came opposite me; and so, having fired with good judgement, when he came up I caught him with one of those quarrels exactly in the face: the rest of them hit the mule, which fell dead. In the trench a very great uproar was heard; I gave fire to the other piece, not without great harm to them.

This was the Prince of Orange, who was carried along inside the trenches to a certain inn nearby, where in a short time all the nobility of the army hurried.

When Pope Clement heard what I had done, he sent for me at once; and when he had asked me about it, I told him everything, and told him besides that the man must have been of very great importance, because in that inn where they had carried him all the leaders of that army had immediately gathered, as far as one could judge. The Pope, with very good sense, sent for Messer Antonio Santacroce, the gentleman who was head and guide of all the gunners, as I have said, and told him to order all of us gunners to aim all our artillery at that house — and there was an endless number of guns — and that at an arquebus shot every man should give fire; so that, if those leaders were killed, that army, which was almost on props, would all break up; and that perhaps God would have heard their prayers, which they were making so often, and by that road would have freed them from those impious scoundrels.

We had got our artillery in order, according to Santacroce's commission, and were waiting for the signal, when Cardinal Orsini heard of it and began to shout at the Pope, saying that on no account should such a thing be done, because they were on the point of concluding the agreement; and that if those men were killed, the camp without a leader would force its way into the Castle and would finish ruining them altogether: therefore they did not want such a thing done. The poor Pope, in despair, seeing himself murdered inside and out, said he left the matter to them.

So, our orders having been taken off us, I, who could not keep still, when I heard that they were coming to give me the order not to fire, gave fire to a half-cannon I had, which struck a pillar in the courtyard of that house, where I could see a great many people leaning. This shot did the enemy such great harm that it nearly made them abandon the house. Cardinal Orsini wanted me either hanged or killed at all costs; at which the Pope defended me boldly. The great words that passed between them, although I know them, since I do not profess to write histories, I need not tell; I shall only attend to my own affair.

Chapter 39

When I had melted the gold, I took it to the Pope, who thanked me a great deal for what I had done, and ordered the Cavalierino to give me twenty-five scudi, excusing himself to me that he had no more to give. A few days later the agreement was made.

I went off with Signor Orazio Baglioni, along with three hundred companions, towards Perugia; and there Signor Orazio wanted to hand me over the company, which for the time being I did not want, saying that I wanted to go and see my father first, and to buy off the sentence of banishment I had from Florence. This gentleman told me that he had been made captain of the Florentines; and there was Ser Pier Maria di Lotto, sent by the Florentines, to whom Signor Orazio strongly recommended me as his own man.

So I came to Florence with several other companions. The plague was very great, beyond all reckoning. When I got to Florence, I found my good father, who thought either that I was dead in that Sack or that I would come back to him with nothing. Which turned out entirely the other way: I was alive, and with a good deal of money, with a servant, and well mounted. When I came to my old man, the joy I saw in him was so great that I certainly thought, while he was embracing and kissing me, that he would die of it on the spot. I told him all those devilries of the Sack, and put a good quantity of scudi into his hand, which I had earned in a soldierly way; and after we had made much of each other, the good father and I, he went off at once to the Eight to buy off my sentence; and it happened that one of the Eight was one of the men who had given it me, and it was the one who had so tactlessly told my father that time that he meant to send me out to the farm with lances; on account of which my father used some sharp words by way of revenge, brought on by the favours Signor Orazio Baglioni had shown me.

As things stood, I told my father how Signor Orazio had chosen me for a captain, and that I ought to start thinking about raising the company. At these words my poor father was immediately upset, and begged me for the love of God not to take up such a business, although he knew I should be fit for it and for more; telling me besides that he had his other son, my brother, who was so extremely brave at war, and that I ought to attend to that marvellous art in which I had laboured so many years and with such great study.

Although I promised to obey him, being a wise man he thought that if Signor Orazio came, both because I had promised him and for other reasons, I should never be able to help going on with the business of the war; so he thought of a good way to get me out of Florence, saying: "Oh, my dear son, the plague here is very great, beyond all reckoning, and I keep thinking I see you come home with it. I remember, when I was a young man, that I went off to Mantua, where they made a great deal of me, and I stayed there several years. I beg you and I command you, for love of me, to get away from here and go there — today rather than tomorrow."

Chapter 40

Since it has always given me pleasure to see the world, and having never been to Mantua, I went willingly, taking the money I had brought; and the greater part of it I left with my good father, promising him to help him always, wherever I might be, and leaving my elder sister to look after my poor father. Her name was Cosa, and, never having wanted a husband, she had been accepted as a nun at Santa Orsola, and so she stayed on to help and manage my old father and to look after my other, younger sister, who was married to a certain sculptor called Bartolomeo. So I set off with my father's blessing, took my good horse, and went off on it to Mantua.

I should have far too many great things to tell if I wanted to write this little journey in detail. The world being darkened with plague and war, it was with the greatest difficulty that I got at last to Mantua; and when I got there I looked for work, and was set to work by a certain Master Nicolò of Milan, who was goldsmith to the Duke of Mantua. When I had been set to work, two days later I went off to visit Messer Giulio Romano, that most excellent painter I have spoken of, a great friend of mine, who made much of me beyond all reckoning and was very put out that I had not gone to dismount at his house. He lived like a lord, and was doing a work for the Duke outside the gate of Mantua, at a place called the Te. This work was great and marvellous, as perhaps can still be seen.

Messer Giulio at once spoke to the Duke about me with many honourable words; and the Duke ordered me to make him a model for holding the relic of Christ's blood which they have there, and which they say was brought there by Longinus. Then he turned to Messer Giulio, telling him to make me a drawing for the reliquary. At this Messer Giulio said: "My lord, Benvenuto is a man who has no need of other people's drawings, and your Excellency will judge that very well when you see his model."

Setting my hand to this model, I made a design for the reliquary in which the phial could be very well placed; then I made a little wax model for the top. This was a Christ seated, who in his raised left hand held his great Cross, with the action of leaning on it; and with his right hand he made a sign with his fingers as if to open the wound in his breast. When this model was finished, the Duke liked it so much that his favours were beyond all reckoning, and he let me know that he would keep me in his service on such terms that I could live richly there.

In the meantime, having paid my respects to his brother the Cardinal, the Cardinal begged the Duke to be so good as to let me make the pontifical seal for his most reverend lordship; which I began. While I was working on this piece, the quartan fever came on me; and when this fever took me it drove me out of my senses, so that I cursed Mantua and whoever was master of it and whoever liked being there. These words were repeated to the Duke by that Milanese goldsmith of his, who saw perfectly well that the Duke wanted to make use of me. When the Duke heard those sick words of mine, he was badly angered with me; so that, since I was angry with Mantua, we were equal in our tempers.

When my seal was finished, which took four months, with several other little pieces made for the Duke in the Cardinal's name, I was well paid by the Cardinal; and he begged me to go back to Rome, that marvellous city where we had come to know each other.

Having left Mantua with a good sum of scudi, I got to Governo, the place where that most brave man Signor Giovanni was killed. There a short bout of fever took me, which did not hinder my journey at all, and it stayed behind at that place, and I never had it again.

Then, arriving in Florence, and thinking to find my dear father, I knocked at the door, and a certain furious hunchbacked woman came to the window and drove me off with a good deal of rudeness, telling me I made her sick. To which hunchback I said: "Oh, tell me, you crooked hunchback, is there any other face in this house but yours?" "No, and bad luck to you." At which I said loudly: "May this not last you two hours." At this argument a neighbour came out, who told me that my father and everybody in my house were dead of the plague; and since I had partly guessed it, that was why the grief was less. Then she told me that only my younger sister was left alive, whose name was Liperata, and that she had been taken in by a holy woman called Monna Andrea de' Bellacci.

I left there to go to the inn. By chance I ran into a very great friend of mine, called Giovanni Rigogli. Having dismounted at his house, we went off to the square, where I had news that my brother was alive; and I went to find him at the house of a friend of his called Bertino Aldobrandi. When I found my brother, and we had made endless fuss over each other — the reason it was so extraordinary being that he had been given news of my death and I of his — then, after a great burst of laughter, he took me by the hand in astonishment and said: "Come, brother, and I will take you to a place you would never imagine: I have married off our sister Liperata again, and she is quite certain you are dead."

While we were going there we told each other a great many fine things that had happened to us; and when we got to the house where my sister was, she was so overcome by the unexpected strangeness that she fell into my arms in a faint; and if my brother had not been there, the thing was such, and without a word said, that at first her husband did not think I was her brother. Cecchino my brother, speaking and helping the fainting woman, soon brought her round; and having wept a little for our father, our sister, her husband and a little son of hers, orders were given for supper; and at that pleasant wedding party nobody talked any more of the dead all evening, but only of wedding matters. So we finished supper cheerfully and with great pleasure.
