Book One, Chapters 41 to 45

Chapter 41

Forced by the entreaties of my brother and my sister, I stayed in Florence, because my own wish was to go back to Rome. And that dear friend of mine as well — the one I spoke of before, who helped me so much in certain of my troubles, that is, Piero di Giovanni Landi — this Piero too told me that I ought to stay in Florence a while; because the Medici had been driven out of Florence, that is Signor Ippolito and Signor Alessandro, who were afterwards one a Cardinal and the other Duke of Florence, and Piero told me I ought to stay a little and see what happened.

So I began to work in the Mercato Nuovo, and set a great quantity of jewels, and earned well. At this time there came to Florence a Sienese called Girolamo Marretti: this Sienese had been a long time in Turkey and was a person of lively wit. He came to my shop and gave me a gold medal to make, to be worn in a hat; he wanted me to make on this medal a Hercules forcing open the lion's mouth. So I set to work at it; and while I was working on it Michelangelo Buonarroti came several times to see it; and because I had laboured hard over it, the action of the figure and the fierceness of the animal being very different from anything anyone had made in that line up to then — and also because that way of working was entirely unknown to the divine Michelangelo — he praised this work of mine so much that my spirit for doing well rose beyond all reckoning.

But because I had nothing else to do except set jewels, which, although it was the greatest earning I could get, did not satisfy me, since I wanted to make works of some other skill than setting jewels — at this point there came along a certain Federigo Ginori, a young man of very lofty spirit. This young man had been at Naples many years, and because he was very handsome in body and presence, he had fallen in love at Naples with a princess; and so, wanting to make a medal in which there should be an Atlas with the world on his back, he asked the great Michelangelo to make him a little drawing of it. Who said to Federigo: "Go and find a certain young goldsmith called Benvenuto; he will serve you very well, and certainly he does not need a drawing from me. But so that you may not think I want to run away from the labour of so small a thing, I shall very willingly make you a little drawing; meanwhile speak to this Benvenuto and let him make a little model of it too; and afterwards the better of the two can be put into work."

Federigo Ginori came to find me and told me what he wanted, and afterwards how much that marvellous Michelangelo had praised me; and that I should make a little wax model of it too, while that admirable man had promised him a drawing. Those words of that great man gave me such heart that I set myself at once with the greatest urgency to make the model; and when I had finished it, a certain painter, a great friend of Michelangelo's, called Giuliano Bugiardini, brought me the drawing of the Atlas. At the same moment I showed Giuliano my wax model, which was very different from Michelangelo's drawing; so that Federigo and Bugiardini too concluded that I should make it according to my own model.

So I began it, and the most excellent Michelangelo saw it and praised it so much that it was beyond all reckoning. It was a figure, as I have said, chased out of plate; it had the heavens on its back, made into a ball of crystal, with the zodiac cut into it, on a ground of lapis lazuli; and together with the figure it made so fine a show that it was beyond all reckoning. Underneath was a motto in letters that said "Summa tulisse juvat" — it is a joy to have borne the highest. Federigo, being satisfied, paid me most generously.

Since Messer Luigi Alamanni was in Florence at this time, and was a friend of Federigo Ginori's, he brought him several times to my shop, and by his kindness he became a very familiar friend of mine.

Chapter 42

When Pope Clement made war on the city of Florence, and the city prepared to defend itself, and had the militia of the people arranged by every quarter, I too was called out for my part. I got myself richly equipped; I kept company with the greatest nobility of Florence, who were seen to be very much of one mind about wanting to serve in that defence; and those speeches were made in every quarter that are well known. Besides that, the young men came together more than usual, and nothing was ever talked about but this.

One day about noon, when there was a crowd of the leading men and young men of the city in my shop, a letter was brought to me from Rome, which came from a certain man known in Rome as Master Jacopino della Barca. His name was Jacopo dello Sciorina, but della Barca in Rome, because he kept a boat that crossed the Tiber between the Ponte Sisto and the Ponte Sant'Angelo. This Master Jacopo was a very ingenious person, and had pleasant and very fine conversation; he had once been in Florence a designer of patterns for the silk weavers. This man was a great friend of Pope Clement's, who took great pleasure in hearing him talk.

Being one day in such talk, they came round to the subject of the Sack and of the action at the Castle; on which account the Pope, remembering me, said as much good of me as anyone can imagine; and he added that if he knew where I was, he would be glad to have me back. Master Jacopo said that I was in Florence; so the Pope ordered him to write to me to come back to him. This letter said that I should come back to Clement's service, and that it would be good for me. The young men who were there wanted to know what the letter contained; so I hid it as well as I could, and afterwards wrote to Master Jacopo begging him on no account whatever to write to me again, for good or ill.

He, his appetite growing greater, wrote me another letter, which went so far beyond all bounds that if it had been seen I should have come off badly. It said that, on the Pope's behalf, I should come at once, since he wanted to use me for things of the greatest importance; and that if I wanted to do well I should leave everything at once, and not stay to set myself against a pope, along with those raving madmen.

When I saw the letter it put me in such fear that I went to find that dear friend of mine called Pier Landi; who, seeing me, at once asked me what news I had, since I looked so troubled. I told my friend that what I had that gave me that great trouble I could not tell him in any way; I only begged him to take the keys I was giving him, and to give back the jewels and the gold to this man and that, whom he would find written in a little book of mine; then to take the goods in my house and look after them a little with his usual kindness, and that in a few days he would know where I was. This wise young man, having perhaps roughly guessed the thing, said: "My brother, go away quickly, then write, and do not give a thought to your own affairs." So I did. He was the most faithful friend, the wisest, the most decent, the most discreet, the most loving I have ever known. Having left Florence, I went to Rome, and wrote from there.

Chapter 43

As soon as I got to Rome, having found some of my friends, by whom I was very well received and made much of, I set at once to work on pieces that were all for earning and not for a name worth describing.

There was a certain old goldsmith called Raffaello del Moro. He was a man of much reputation in the trade, and in other respects a very decent man. He begged me to be so kind as to come and work in his shop, because he had some pieces of importance to do which would earn very well: so I went willingly.

More than ten days had passed without my letting myself be seen by that Master Jacopino della Barca; who, seeing me by chance, gave me the greatest welcome, and having asked me how long it was since I had arrived, I told him it was about a fortnight. This man took it very badly, and told me that I took very little account of a pope, who had already had him write three times for me with great urgency. And I, who had taken it much more badly than he had, never answered him anything, but swallowed my temper. This man, who was extremely full of words, got onto a beaten track and said so much that at last, when I saw he was tired, I said nothing to him except that he should take me to the Pope at his convenience; to which he answered that there was always time; at which I said: "And I am always ready."

He began to make his way towards the palace with me (this was Maundy Thursday), and when we got to the Pope's rooms, he being known and I being expected, we were let in at once. The Pope was in bed, a little unwell, and with him were Messer Jacopo Salviati and the Archbishop of Capua. When the Pope saw me, he was extraordinarily glad; and I, having kissed his feet, went up to him as modestly as I could, showing that I wanted to tell him some things of importance. He immediately made a sign with his hand, and Messer Jacopo and the Archbishop withdrew a good way from us.

I began at once, saying: "Most Blessed Father, since the Sack I have not been able to confess or take communion, because they will not absolve me. The case is this: when I melted the gold and did that work of getting those jewels out, your Holiness gave orders to the Cavalierino that he should give me some little reward for my labour, which I had none of — indeed he gave me rudeness instead. When I went upstairs, where I had melted the gold, and lifted the ashes, I found about a pound and a half of gold in little grains like millet; and because I had not enough money to get myself home respectably, I thought I would make use of it, and give it back afterwards when I had the chance. Now I am here at the feet of your Holiness, who are the true confessor: be so good as to give me leave so that I can confess and take communion, and by the grace of your Holiness get back the grace of my Lord God."

Then the Pope, with a little sigh of modesty, perhaps remembering his own troubles, said these words: "Benvenuto, I am quite certain of what you say, and I can absolve you of any impropriety you may have committed, and more than that, I mean to; so say everything with a completely free and good mind, because if you had had the value of one of those whole tiaras, I am fully disposed to pardon you." Then I said: "I had nothing else, most Blessed Father, than what I have said; and this did not come to the value of a hundred and forty ducats, which is what I had for it from the mint at Perugia, and with it I went to comfort my poor old father."

The Pope said: "Your father was as able, good and decent a man as was ever born, and you do not fall short of him at all: I am very sorry the money was so little; so that as for this which you say there was, I make you a present of it, and I forgive you everything; testify of this to your confessor, if there is nothing else that concerns me; then, when you have confessed and taken communion, let yourself be seen again, and it will be good for you."

When I had left the Pope, and Messer Jacopo and the Archbishop had come up, the Pope said as much good of me as could be said of any man in the world; and he said that he had confessed and absolved me. Then he added, saying to the Archbishop of Capua, that he should send for me and ask me whether anything else was needed about that case, that he should absolve me of everything, that he gave him full authority; and besides that, he should make as much of me as he could.

While I was going off with Master Jacopino, he asked me most inquisitively what that long, close conversation was that I had had with the Pope; and when he had asked me more than twice, I told him I did not want to tell him, because they were not things that concerned him; therefore he should not ask me again. I went and did everything I had agreed with the Pope; then, when the two feast days had passed, I went to visit him; and he, making more of me than before, said: "If you had come to Rome a little sooner, I should have had you remake those two tiaras of mine that we spoiled in the Castle. But because they are things of little skill apart from the jewels on the outside, I shall use you for a work of the greatest importance, where you will be able to show what you can do. And this is the clasp for my cope" — which is made round in the shape of a trencher, and as big as a small trencher, a third of an arm across — "and on this I want a God the Father made in half relief, and in the middle of it I want to fit this beautiful great point of a diamond with a great many other jewels of the greatest importance. Caradosso began one and never finished it; I want this one finished quickly, because I want to enjoy it a little myself. So go and make a fine little model." And he had all the jewels shown to me; at which I went off at once with my heart in my mouth.

Chapter 44

While the siege was round Florence, that Federigo Ginori for whom I had made the medal of the Atlas died of consumption, and the medal came into the hands of Messer Luigi Alamanni, who a short time later took it himself to give to King Francis, King of France, with some very beautiful writings of his own. The King liking this medal beyond measure, that most accomplished man Messer Luigi Alamanni said a few words to his Majesty about my qualities, over and above the art, with such favour that the King showed he wanted to know me.

Pressing on with all the urgency I could with that little model, which I was making exactly the size the work was to be, a good many people in the goldsmiths' trade were roused, who thought themselves fit to do such a thing. And because there had come to Rome a certain Micheletto, a very able man at cutting cornelians, and also a most knowledgeable jeweller — he was an old man and of much reputation, and he had had a hand in looking after the Pope's two tiaras — while I was making this model he wondered a great deal that I had not applied to him, being a knowledgeable man and much in the Pope's credit. At last, seeing that I did not come to him, he came to me, asking what I was doing. "What the Pope has ordered me," I answered. Then he said: "The Pope has ordered me to see all these things that are made for his Holiness." To which I said that I would ask the Pope first, and then I should know what I had to answer him. He told me I would repent of it; and having gone off from me in a rage, he got together with all those of the trade, and, talking about this business, they all gave the charge of it to Michele; who, with that good wit of his, had more than thirty drawings made by certain able draughtsmen, all different from each other, for this piece of work.

And because he had the Pope's ear at his convenience, having come to an understanding with another jeweller called Pompeo, a Milanese (who was much favoured by the Pope, and was a relation of Messer Traiano, the Pope's first chamberlain), these two, that is Michele and Pompeo, began to tell the Pope that they had seen my model, and that it seemed to them I was not an instrument fit for so wonderful a piece of work. At this the Pope said that he had to see it too; and then, if I was not fit, a man would be looked for who was. They both said they had several wonderful drawings on the subject; at which the Pope said he was very glad, but that he did not want to see them before I had finished my model; then he would see everything together.

Within a few days I had finished my model, and taking it up one morning to the Pope, Messer Traiano made me wait, and meanwhile sent in a hurry for Micheletto and Pompeo, telling them to bring their drawings. When they had come, we were let in; on which Michele and Pompeo at once began to spread out their drawings, and the Pope to look at them. And because draughtsmen outside the jeweller's trade do not know the placing of jewels, nor had those who were jewellers taught them — for a jeweller, when figures come in among his jewels, must be able to draw, or nothing good comes of it — so all those drawings had stuck that marvellous diamond in the middle of God the Father's chest.

The Pope, who was of very good wit, seeing such a thing, did not like it at all; and when he had seen ten of them, he threw the rest on the ground and said to me, who was standing at one side: "Show me your model here a moment, Benvenuto, so that I can see whether you are in the same error as these men." I came forward and opened a little round box, and it seemed as if a brightness struck the Pope right in the eyes; and he said in a great voice: "If you had been inside my body you could not have made it otherwise than I see it: these men could not have found any other way of disgracing themselves."

Many great lords came up, and the Pope showed them the difference between my model and their drawings. When he had praised it a good deal, and they stood there frightened and looking foolish, he turned to me and said: "I see one trouble here that is of very great importance. My Benvenuto, wax is easy to work; the whole thing is to do it in gold." To these words I answered boldly: "Most Blessed Father, if I do not do it ten times better than this model of mine, let it be agreed that you do not pay me for it." At these words a great uproar rose among those lords, saying that I was promising too much. There was one of these lords, a very great philosopher, who said in my favour: "From the fine physiognomy and symmetry of body that I see in this young man, I promise myself everything he says, and more." The Pope said: "And so do I believe it too."

Calling that chamberlain of his, Messer Traiano, he told him to bring five hundred gold ducats of the Chamber there. While the money was being waited for, the Pope again considered more slowly the fine way in which I had fitted the diamond with the God the Father. This diamond I had put exactly in the middle of the work, and above the diamond I had fitted God the Father sitting, in a certain fine turned attitude which gave the most beautiful harmony, and did not crowd the stone at all: raising his right hand he was giving the blessing. Under the diamond I had fitted three little boys, who with their arms raised held the diamond up. One of these boys, the middle one, was in full relief; the other two were in half. Round about there were a good number of different boys, fitted in with the other beautiful jewels. The rest of God the Father had a mantle that floated out, out of which came a great many boys, with many other fine ornaments, which made a most beautiful show. This work was made of a white stucco on a black stone.

When the money came, the Pope gave it me with his own hand, and begged me with the greatest pleasantness to manage so that he should have it in his own lifetime, and that it would be good for me.

Chapter 45

Having carried the money and the model away, it seemed to me a thousand years before I could set my hands to it. Having begun at once to work with great urgency, at the end of a week the Pope sent word to me by a chamberlain of his, a very great Bolognese gentleman, that I should come to him and bring what I had worked on. While I was going, this chamberlain, who was the most well-bred person in that Court, told me that the Pope did not only want to see that work, but wanted to give me another of very great importance; and this was the dies for the coins of the mint of Rome; and that I should arm myself to be able to answer his Holiness — that was why he had warned me of it.

I came to the Pope, and spread out before him that plate of gold on which God the Father alone had already been carved, which, sketched out like that, showed more skill than that little wax model; so that the Pope, astonished, said: "From now on I mean to believe everything you say." And having done me a great many extravagant favours, he said: "I want to give you another piece of work, which would be as dear to me as this and dearer, if you have the heart to do it." And having told me that he would be glad to have the dies of his coins made, and asking me whether I had made any before, and whether I had the heart to make them, I said that I very well had the heart for it, and that I had seen how they were made, but that I had never made any.

There being present a certain Messer Tommaso da Prato, who was his Holiness's datary, being a great friend of my enemies, he said: "Most Blessed Father, the favours your Holiness does this young man, and his being extremely bold by nature, are the reason he would promise you a new world; because, having given him a great piece of work, and now adding a greater one to it, they will be the cause of one getting in the way of the other." The Pope turned on him angrily and said that he should attend to his own office; and he ordered me to make a model of a broad gold doubloon on which he wanted a naked Christ with his hands bound, with letters saying "Ecce Homo"; and on the reverse a pope and an emperor together propping up a cross that looked as if it were falling, with letters saying "Unus spiritus et una fides erat in eis" — there was one spirit and one faith in them.

The Pope having ordered me this fine coin, Bandinello the sculptor came up, who had not yet been made a knight, and with his usual presumption dressed up as ignorance said: "These goldsmiths have to be given drawings for such fine things." I turned to him at once and said that I had no need of his drawings for my art; but that I hoped in time to give his art trouble with my drawings. The Pope showed that he was as pleased with these words as anyone can imagine, and turning to me, said: "Go, my Benvenuto, and attend to serving me with a good spirit, and do not lend an ear to the words of these madmen."

So I went off, and very quickly made two dies; and having struck a coin in gold, I took the coin and the dies to the Pope one Sunday after dinner, and when he saw it he was left astonished and pleased — not so much at the fine work, which pleased him beyond measure, but he was made to marvel still more by the speed I had used. And to increase the Pope's satisfaction and wonder, I had brought with me all the old coins that had been made before by those able men who had served Pope Julius and Pope Leo; and seeing that mine gave far more satisfaction, I pulled out of my breast a petition asking for that office of master of the dies of the mint, which office gave six gold scudi a month in salary, quite apart from the dies being paid for by the mint master, who gave three of them to the ducat.

The Pope took my petition and, turning, put it into the datary's hand, telling him to dispatch it for me at once. The datary took the petition, and, wanting to put it in his pocket, said: "Most Blessed Father, your Holiness should not run at it so furiously; these are things that deserve some consideration." Then the Pope said: "I have understood you; give that petition here." And having taken it, he signed it at once with his own hand; then, giving it back to him, he said: "Now there is no more to be said; dispatch it for him now, because that is what I want; and Benvenuto's shoes are worth more than the eyes of all these other blockheads." And so, having thanked his Holiness, I went off to work overjoyed.
