Book One, Chapters 46 to 52

Chapter 46

I was still working in the shop of that Raffaello del Moro I mentioned. This decent man had a beautiful young daughter, and he had designs on me for her; and I, having partly noticed it, wanted such a thing myself. But while I had this wish I never showed it in the world at all; on the contrary I behaved so properly that I made them wonder.

It happened that this poor girl got a disease in her right hand which had rotted those two little bones next to the little finger and the one beside it. And because the poor girl was being treated, through her father's carelessness, by an ignorant quack, who said that the poor girl would be left crippled in the whole of her right arm if nothing worse happened to her — seeing the poor father so dismayed, I told him not to believe everything that ignorant doctor said. At which he told me he had no acquaintance with any doctors or surgeons, and begged me, if I knew any, to put him in the way of one.

I at once sent for a certain Master Jacomo of Perugia, a most excellent man in surgery; and when he had seen this poor girl, who was dismayed because she must have got wind of what that ignorant doctor had said, this knowledgeable man said she would have nothing wrong with her and would use her right hand perfectly well, although those two last fingers might be a little weaker than the others; that would give her no trouble in the world.

And having set his hand to treating her, a few days later, when he wanted to eat away a little of the rot on those little bones, the father called me to come and see something too of the operation that had to be done on this girl. So, Master Jacomo having taken certain thick tools, and seeing that with them he was doing very little good and very great pain to the girl, I told the master to stop and to wait for me an eighth of an hour. Running to the shop, I made a little tool of the finest steel, curved, and it scraped. Coming back to the master, he began to work so gently that she felt no pain at all, and in a short time he had finished. For this, among other things, this decent man came to love me more than his two sons; and so he set about curing his beautiful daughter.

I had a very great friendship with a certain Messer Giovanni Gaddi, who was a clerk of the Chamber. This Messer Giovanni took a great delight in the arts, although he had none of them in himself. There lived with him a certain Messer Giovanni, a Greek, a very great scholar; a Messer Lodovico da Fano, a scholar like him; Messer Antonio Allegretti; and at that time Messer Annibal Caro, a young man. From outside there were Messer Bastiano the Venetian, that most excellent painter, and I; and almost every day we saw each other once at Messer Giovanni's. On account of this friendship that decent man Raffaello the goldsmith said to Messer Giovanni: "My dear Messer Giovanni, you know me; and since I should like to give that little daughter of mine to Benvenuto, and can find no better go-between than your lordship, I beg you to help me in it, and yourself to settle out of my means whatever dowry you please."

This scatterbrained man hardly let the poor decent fellow finish before he said to him, without any sense in the world: "Say no more about it, Raffaello, because you are further from it than January is from blackberries." The poor man, much cast down, quickly looked for someone else to marry her to; and the girl's mother and all of them went about sulking at me, and I did not know why. And feeling that they were paying me in bad money for the many kindnesses I had done them, I looked about to open a shop near them. Messer Giovanni said nothing until the girl was married, which happened several months later.

I attended with great urgency to finishing my work and to serving the mint, for the Pope commissioned me again with a coin worth two carlins, on which was a portrait of the head of his Holiness, and on the reverse a Christ on the sea, holding out his hand to Saint Peter, with letters round it saying "Quare dubitasti?" — why did you doubt? This coin pleased so far beyond measure that a certain secretary of the Pope, a man of very great ability, called Il Sanga, said: "Your Holiness may take glory in having a kind of coinage which is not to be seen among the ancients, with all their pomp." To this the Pope answered: "And Benvenuto may take glory in serving an emperor like me, who knows him."

Going on with the great work in gold, I showed it often to the Pope, who kept urging me to see it, and every day he wondered at it more.

Chapter 47

I had a brother in Rome in the service of Duke Alessandro, for whom at this time the Pope had procured the dukedom of Penna. In this Duke's service there were a great many soldiers, decent, brave men from the school of that very great man Signor Giovanni de' Medici, and my brother among them, and the Duke thought as much of him as of any of the bravest of the others.

One day after dinner this brother of mine was in the Banchi, in the shop of a certain Baccino della Croce, where all those bravoes used to take shelter; he had got himself into a chair and was asleep. Just then the sheriff's guard passed by, taking a certain Captain Cisti, a Lombard, to prison — he was also from the school of that great Signor Giovannino, but he was not in the Duke's service. Captain Cattivanza degli Strozzi was in the shop of Baccino della Croce. Captain Cisti, seeing Captain Cattivanza degli Strozzi, said to him: "I was bringing you those few scudi I owed you; if you want them, come and get them before they go to prison with me."

This captain was willing to put other people up to the mark, without caring to try himself; so, finding present there certain very bold young men, more willing than strong for so great an undertaking, he told them to go up to Captain Cisti and get that money of his handed over, and that if the guard resisted they should use force on them, if they had the nerve for it. These young men were only four, all four of them beardless; and the first was called Bertino Aldobrandi, the next Anguillotto of Lucca; of the others I do not remember the names. This Bertino had been brought up as a true pupil of my brother, and my brother loved him as immeasurably as anyone can imagine.

So the four bold young men went up to the sheriff's guard, who were more than fifty constables, with pikes, arquebuses and two-handed swords. In a few words hands were put to weapons, and those four young men pressed the guard so marvellously that if Captain Cattivanza had only shown himself a little, without putting his hand to a weapon, those young men would have put the guard to flight; but they stood too long, and Bertino got certain serious wounds which knocked him to the ground; at the same moment Anguillotto also got a wound in the right arm, so that, not being able to hold his sword any longer, he pulled back as well as he could; the others did the same; Bertino Aldobrandi was picked up off the ground badly wounded.

Chapter 48

While these things were going on, we were all at table, because that morning we had dined more than an hour later than usual. Hearing this noise, one of the sons, the elder, got up from the table to go and see the fight. His name was Giovanni, and I said to him: "Please do not go, because in things like this one always sees a certain loss with nothing to gain." His father said the same to him: "Ah, my son, do not go."

This young man, without listening to anybody, ran down the stairs. When he got to the Banchi, where the great fight was, and saw Bertino picked up off the ground, he ran back; and coming back he met Cecchino my brother, who asked him what it was. Giovanni, having been signalled by some of them not to tell Cecchino, said in his stupidity how it was that Bertino Aldobrandi had been killed by the guard. My poor brother let out such a bellow that it could have been heard ten miles off; then he said to Giovanni: "Alas, could you tell me which of them killed him for me?" Giovanni said yes, and that it was one of them who had a two-handed sword, with a blue feather in his cap.

My poor brother going forward, and having recognised the killer by that mark, threw himself with that marvellous quickness and boldness of his into the middle of the whole guard, and, before anything at all could be done about it, put a thrust into his belly and ran him through to the other side, and with the hilt of his sword pushed him to the ground; then he turned on the others with such skill and daring that he alone put them all to flight. Except that, turning to strike an arquebusier, that man, out of sheer necessity, fired his arquebus and caught the brave, unlucky young man above the knee of his right leg. When he was down on the ground, the guard, half in flight, hurried to get away, so that another like him should not come up.

Hearing the uproar going on, I too got up from the table, and put my sword at my side, which everybody carried in those days; and when I got to the bridge of Sant'Angelo I saw a knot of many men; so I went forward, and being known by some of them, room was made for me, and they showed me what I would least have wanted to see, though I showed great eagerness to see it. At first I did not know him, because he was dressed in clothes different from the ones I had seen him in a little while before; so that, having known me before I knew him, he said: "Dearest brother, do not let my great injury upset you, because my trade promised me such a thing; have me carried away from here quickly, because there are only a few hours of life left."

Being told the case while he was speaking to me, with the shortness such accidents allow, I answered him: "Brother, this is the greatest grief and the greatest sorrow that could come to me in all my life; but be of good heart, because before you lose your sight you shall see your revenge taken by my hands on the man who has hurt you." Our words to each other were of this substance, but very short.

Chapter 49

The guard was fifty paces away from us, because Maffio, their sheriff, had made part of them come back to carry off the corporal my brother had killed; so that, having walked those few paces very fast, wrapped and shut up in my cloak, I had got right beside Maffio, and I should certainly have killed him, because there were plenty of people about and I had got in among them. Already, with as much quickness as anyone can imagine, having half drawn my sword, Berlinghier Berlinghieri, a very brave young man and a great friend of mine, threw himself on me from behind, on my arms; and with him were four other young men like him, who said to Maffio: "Get away, because this man alone was going to kill you." Maffio asked, "Who is this?" And they said: "This is the brother of the man you see there, his own brother." Not wanting to hear any more, he withdrew hastily to the Torre di Nona; and they said to me: "Benvenuto, this hindrance we have put on you against your will has been done for the best; now let us go and help the man who has not long to live."

So, having turned about, we went to my brother, whom I had carried into a house. A council of doctors was called at once and they treated him, not deciding to take the leg right off, which might have saved him.

As soon as he had been treated, Duke Alessandro appeared there and made much of him; and my brother, being still in his senses, said to Duke Alessandro: "My lord, I am sorry for nothing except that your Excellency is losing a servant, than whom you might perhaps find abler men in this profession, but not men who would serve you with as much love and faith as I did." The Duke told him to try to live; as for the rest, he knew him perfectly well for a decent and brave man. Then he turned to certain of his people, telling them that nothing should be wanting to that brave young man.

When the Duke had gone, the abundance of blood, which could not be stopped, was the cause of driving him out of his mind; so that the whole of the following night he raved, except that when they wanted to give him communion he said: "You did well to confess me before; now it is not possible for me to receive this divine sacrament in this instrument that is already spoiled; only be content that I taste it with the divinity of my eyes, by which it will be received by my immortal soul, and that alone asks him for mercy and pardon." When these words were finished and the Sacrament had been taken away, he went straight back to the same madness as before, which was made up of the greatest furies and the most horrible words we could ever imagine; and it never stopped all night until day.

When the sun was out of our horizon, he turned to me and said: "Brother, I do not want to stay here any longer, because these men would make me do something great, and they would repent of having troubled me." And kicking out with both legs, which we had put into a very heavy box, he shifted it as if to get on horseback; and turning his face to me, he said three times: "Goodbye, goodbye" — and with the last word that most valiant soul went away.

At the proper hour, which was late, two hours before dark, I had him buried with the greatest honour in the church of the Florentines; and afterwards I had a very beautiful marble slab made for him, with certain trophies and banners carved on it.

I do not want to leave out that when one of his friends asked him who had given him that arquebus shot, and whether he would recognise him, he said yes, and gave him the marks; and although my brother had been on his guard against my hearing such a thing, I had heard it perfectly well; and what followed will be told in its place.

Chapter 50

To come back to the slab: certain marvellous scholars who knew my brother gave me an epigram, telling me that it was what that admirable young man deserved. It said this: "Francisco Cellino Fiorentino, qui quod in teneris annis ad Ioannem Medicem ducem plures victorias retulit et signifer fuit, facile documentum dedit quantae fortitudinis et consilii vir futurus erat, ni crudelis fati archibuso transfossus quinto aetatis lustro jaceret, Benvenutus frater posuit. Obiit die XXVII Maii MDXXIX." Which is to say: to Francesco Cellini of Florence, who, because in his tender years he won several victories under Giovanni de' Medici his commander, and was his standard-bearer, easily gave proof of what a man of courage and counsel he would have been, had he not been shot through by the arquebus of a cruel fate and lain here in his twenty-fifth year: Benvenuto his brother set this up. He died on the twenty-seventh day of May, 1529.

He was twenty-five; and because he was called among the soldiers Cecchino del Piffero, the piper's boy, when his own name was Giovanfrancesco Cellini, I wanted to put that name he was known by under our arms. I had this name cut in the most beautiful ancient letters; and I had them all made broken, except the first and the last letter. Being asked about those broken letters by the scholars who had made me that fine epigram, why I had done it so, I told them that the letters were broken because that marvellous instrument of his body was spoiled and dead; and that those two whole letters, the first and the last, were: the first, in memory of that great gift God gives us of this soul of ours kindled by his divinity, which is never broken; the other, the last whole one, was for the glorious fame of his brave qualities. This pleased them a great deal, and since then somebody else has made use of this device.

Next I had our Cellini arms carved on the slab, which I altered from what they properly are; because at Ravenna, which is a most ancient city, our Cellini are to be seen as much honoured gentlemen, who have for arms a rampant lion, gold on a blue field, with a red lily set in the right paw, and above it a bar with three little gold lilies. That is the true arms of the Cellini. My father showed me ours, which was the paw alone, with all the rest of those things; but I should prefer that the arms of the Cellini of Ravenna were kept to.

To come back to the one I made on my brother's tomb: it was the lion's paw, and instead of the lily I made it hold an axe, with the field of the arms divided into four quarters; and I made that axe only so that I should not forget to take his revenge.

Chapter 51

I attended with the greatest urgency to finishing that gold work for Pope Clement, which the Pope greatly wanted, and he had me called two and three times a week, wanting to see the work, and it pleased him more every time. And several times he rebuked me, almost shouting at me, for the great sadness I carried about over this brother of mine; and once among others, seeing me more cast down and haggard than I should have been, he said: "Benvenuto, well now — I did not know you were mad. Have you not known before this that there is no remedy for death? You are trying to go after him."

Leaving the Pope, I went on with the work and with the dies for the mint; and for my sweetheart I had taken up the courting of that arquebusier who had shot my brother. This man had once been a light horseman, and afterwards had put himself among the corporals of arquebusiers with the sheriff; and what made my temper rise the most was that he had boasted in this way, saying: "If it had not been for me, who killed that brave young man, at the least delay he alone would have put us all to flight, to our great loss."

Knowing that this passion of seeing him so often was taking away my sleep and my food and was leading me down a bad road, not caring that it was so low an undertaking and not much to be praised, one evening I set myself to get out of so much trouble.

This man lived in a house near a place called Torre Sanguigna, next to a house where there lodged one of the most favoured courtesans of Rome, called Signora Antea. The twenty-fourth hour had just struck, and this arquebusier was standing at his door with his sword in his hand, and had had supper. I came up to him very deftly with a great Pistoja dagger, and swinging a backhand at him, meaning to take his head off clean, he turned very fast as well, and the blow landed on the point of his left shoulder; and having broken the whole bone, he got up, dropped his sword, lost his wits from the great pain and set off running. So, following him, in four paces I caught him, and raising the dagger above his head, he ducking his head hard, the dagger caught exactly the bone of his neck and the middle of the nape, and went into it on both sides so deep that although I made a great effort to get it back I could not; because out of Antea's house four soldiers jumped with their swords drawn in their hands, so that I was forced to put my hand to my sword to defend myself against them.

Leaving the dagger, I got away from there, and for fear of being recognised I went to the house of Duke Alessandro, which was between the Piazza Navona and the Rotonda. When I got there I had word taken to the Duke, who let me know that if I had been alone I should keep quiet and not worry about anything, and that I should go and work on the Pope's piece, which he wanted so much, and work indoors for a week — especially since those soldiers had come up who had hindered me, and had that dagger in their hands, and were telling the thing as it had happened, and the great trouble they had had getting that dagger out of the neck bone and the head of the man, who they did not know who he was. Giovanni Bandini, coming up at this, said to them: "That dagger is mine, and I had lent it to Benvenuto, who wanted to take revenge for his brother." The soldiers had a great deal to say, being sorry they had hindered me, although the revenge had been done by the shovelful.

More than a week went by; the Pope did not send for me as he usually did. Afterwards, having sent for me by that Bolognese gentleman, his chamberlain, whom I have already spoken of, this man with great modesty gave me to understand that the Pope knew everything, and that his Holiness had a very great liking for me, and that I should attend to my work and keep quiet. When I got to the Pope, he looked at me with the eye of a pig, and with his looks alone gave me a frightening scolding; then, having turned his attention to the work, his face began to clear, and he praised me beyond measure, telling me I had done a great deal of work in so short a time; then, looking me in the face, he said: "Now that you are cured, Benvenuto, attend to living." And I, understanding him, said that I would do so.

I opened a very beautiful shop at once in the Banchi, opposite that Raffaello, and there I finished the work a few months afterwards.

Chapter 52

The Pope having sent me all the jewels except the diamond, which for certain needs of his he had pawned to certain Genoese bankers, I kept all the others, and of the diamond I only had the shape.

I kept five very good workmen, and outside this work I did a great deal of business; so that the shop was loaded with a great value of work and of jewels, of gold and of silver. I kept in the house a large, beautiful shaggy dog, which Duke Alessandro had given me; and although this dog was good for hunting, because he brought me every sort of bird and other animal I had killed with the arquebus, he was also most marvellous for guarding a house.

It happened at this time — the season of life I was in promising it, being twenty-nine years old — that I had taken as my servant a young woman of a most beautiful form and grace; and I used her for drawing from, to the purpose of my art, and she also gratified my youth in the delight of the flesh. On that account my room was well away from those of my workmen, and a long way from the shop, and joined by a little closet to a small room of this young servant's; and I very often enjoyed her. And although I have had the lightest sleep that any man in the world ever had, on such occasions of the works of the flesh it sometimes becomes very heavy and deep.

So it happened that one night among others, having been spied on by a thief who, under cover of saying he was a goldsmith, had had his eye on those jewels and planned to steal them from me, he broke into my shop and found a good many little pieces of gold and silver; and while he stood there prising open some boxes to find the jewels he had seen, that dog jumped on him, and he defended himself against him badly with a sword; so that several times the dog ran through the house and into the rooms of my workmen, which were open, it being summer. When they would not hear that great barking of his, he pulled the covers off them; and still not being heard, he took first one and then another by the arm and woke them by force, and barking in that horrible way of his, showed them the way, going on in front of them. And when he saw that they would not follow him, and became a nuisance to these traitors, who threw stones and sticks at the dog — and they could do it, because it was by my orders that they kept the lamp lit all night — at last, having shut their doors tight, the dog, having lost hope of any help from these scoundrels, took the business on all by himself; and running down, and not finding the thief in the shop, he caught up with him; and fighting with him, he had already torn his cloak off him and taken it; and if it had not been that he called for help from some tailors, telling them for the love of God to help him defend himself from a mad dog, and they, believing it was true, jumped out and drove the dog off with great difficulty, it would have gone hard with him.

When day came, my men went down to the shop and saw it broken into and open, and all the boxes broken. They began to shout at the top of their voices: "Alas, alas!" At which, waking up, frightened by that noise, I came out. Coming up to me, they said: "Oh, unlucky us — we have been robbed by a man who has broken open and taken everything!"

These words had such power that they did not let me go to my chest to see whether the Pope's jewels were in it; but out of that anxiety I almost entirely lost the light of my eyes, and told them to open the chest themselves and see how many of the Pope's jewels were missing. These young men were all in their shirts; and when they had opened the chest and saw all the jewels and the gold work along with them, they said to me joyfully: "There is no harm done, since the work and the jewels are all here; although this thief has left us all in our shirts, because last night, with the great heat, we all undressed in the shop and left our clothes there."

My powers coming back at once to their place, and having thanked God, I said: "Go and all of you get dressed again, and I will pay for everything, when I have heard at more leisure how the thing happened."

What grieved me most, and what made me so bewildered and frightened, so far out of my nature, was that the world might have thought that I had made up that pretence of a thief only in order to steal the jewels myself; because Pope Clement had been told by one of his most trusted men and by others — who were Francesco del Nero, Zana de' Biliotti his accountant, the Bishop of Vaison and a good many others of that sort — "How can you trust so great a value of jewels, most Blessed Father, to a young man who is all fire, and is more sunk in weapons than in his art, and is not yet thirty?" To which the Pope answered, did any of them know that I had ever done anything to give them such a suspicion? Francesco del Nero, his treasurer, answered quickly, saying: "No, most Blessed Father, because he has never had such an opportunity." At this the Pope answered: "I hold him for an entirely decent man, and if I saw an evil in him I would not believe it." This was what gave me the greatest trouble, and it came back into my memory at once.

When I had given orders to my young men to get dressed again, I took the work along with the jewels, fitting them into their places as well as I could, and with them I went at once to the Pope, who had been told by Francesco del Nero part of that noise that had been heard in my shop, and had immediately put suspicion into the Pope. The Pope, imagining harm rather than anything else, gave me a terrible look and said in a haughty voice: "What have you come to do here? What is it?" "Here are all your jewels and the gold, and nothing is missing." Then the Pope, his face clearing, said: "So be you welcome."

I showed him the work, and while he was looking at it I told him all the incidents of the thief and of my distress, and what had given me the greatest sorrow. At which words he several times turned to look me hard in the face; and Francesco del Nero was present, on account of which he seemed to be half sorry that he had not been right. At last the Pope, bursting out laughing at all the things I had told him, said to me: "Go, and attend to being a decent man, as I knew you were."
