Book One, Chapters 53 to 60

Chapter 53

Pressing on with that work of mine and working continually for the mint, there began to be seen about Rome certain false coins struck with my own dies. They were taken at once to the Pope; and, suspicion having been put on me, the Pope said to Jacopo Balducci, the master of the mint: "Use the greatest diligence to find the criminal, because we know that Benvenuto is a decent man." This treacherous mint master, being an enemy of mine, said: "God grant, most Blessed Father, that it turns out as you say, because we have one or two things that point elsewhere." At this the Pope turned to the governor of Rome and told him to use a little diligence in finding this criminal.

In those days the Pope sent for me; then, with a neat conversation, he came round to the coins, and very much to the point said to me: "Benvenuto, would you have the heart to make false coins?" To which I answered that I believed I could make them better than any of the men who attended to such a low business; because those who attend to such laziness are not men who know how to earn, nor are they men of great talent; and if I with my little talent earned so much that I had a surplus — for when I put dies into the mint, every morning before I dined it fell to me to earn three scudi at the least (for that had always been the custom of paying for the coining dies, and that fool of a mint master hated me because he would have liked to have them cheaper) — what I earned by the grace of God and of the world was quite enough for me; and I should not have earned so much by making false coins.

The Pope took the words in perfectly; and, whereas he had given orders that they should carefully take care that I did not leave Rome, he told them to search diligently and not to bother about me, because he would not have liked to anger me, which might have been the cause of losing me. The men he warmly commissioned were certain clerks of the Chamber, who, having made the proper searches, since it fell to them, found him at once. It was a die-stamper of the mint itself, called by name Cesare Macheroni, a Roman citizen; and along with him a moulder of the mint was taken.

Chapter 54

On this same day, as I was going through the Piazza Navona with that beautiful poodle of mine, when I came in front of the sheriff's door my dog with the greatest violence, barking loudly, threw himself inside the door of the sheriff's house onto a young man who had been held there a while at the instance of a certain Donnino, a goldsmith of Parma, once a pupil of Caradosso, on suspicion of having robbed him. This dog of mine made such an effort to tear this young man to pieces that the constables were moved to pity — above all as the young man boldly defended his own case, and Donnino did not say enough to be convincing, all the more so as one of the corporals of the constables was a Genoese who knew the young man's father; so that, between the dog and these other circumstances, they were behaving as if they meant to let the young man go at all costs.

When I had come up, the dog, knowing no fear of sword or stick, threw himself on the young man again; and they told me that if I did not do something about my dog they would kill him for me. Having got hold of the dog as well as I could, as the young man pulled his cloak round him, certain little papers fell out of the hood; by which Donnino recognised them as his own things. I also recognised a little ring; so I said at once: "This is the thief who broke into and robbed my shop; that is why my dog knows him." And letting the dog go, he threw himself on him again; at which the thief begged my mercy, telling me he would give me back what he had of mine. Having got hold of the dog again, the man gave me back in gold and silver and little rings what he had of mine, and twenty-five scudi over and above; and then he begged my mercy. At which words I told him to beg God's mercy, because I would do him neither good nor harm.

And going back to my business, a few days later that Cesare Macheroni of the false coins was hanged in the Banchi in front of the mint door; his companion was sent to the galleys; the Genoese thief was hanged in the Campo di Fiore; and I was left with a greater name for being a decent man than I had before.

Chapter 55

Having my work almost finished, there came that very great flood which overflowed the whole of Rome with water. I was standing watching what it was doing; the day was already spent, the twenty-second hour had struck, and the waters were rising beyond measure. And because the front of my house and shop was in the Banchi and the back rose several arms' lengths, since it came out towards Monte Giordano, so that, thinking first of the safety of my life and then of my honour, I put all those jewels on me and left the gold work with my workmen to guard; and so, barefoot, I got down out of my back windows, and as well as I could I went through those waters until I got to Monte Cavallo, where I found Messer Giovanni Gaddi, clerk of the Chamber, and Bastiano the Venetian, the painter. Going up to Messer Giovanni, I gave him all those jewels to keep for me; and he looked after me as if I had been his brother.

Then, a few days later, when the fury of the water had passed, I came back to my shop and finished the work with such good fortune, by the grace of God and my own great labours, that it was held to be the most beautiful work that had ever been seen in Rome; so that when I took it to the Pope he could not have enough of praising it, and said: "If I were a rich emperor, I would give my Benvenuto as much land as his eye could travel over; but since these days we are poor bankrupt emperors, all the same we shall give him enough bread to satisfy his small appetites."

When I had let the Pope finish that fit of words, I asked him for a mace-bearer's place that had fallen vacant. At which words the Pope said he wanted to give me something of much greater importance. I answered his Holiness that he should give me that little one meanwhile, as an earnest. Bursting out laughing, he said he was content, but that he did not want me to serve, and that I should come to an agreement with my fellow mace-bearers not to serve, by giving them some favour they had already asked the Pope for, which was to be able to collect their income with authority. That was done. This mace-bearer's place brought me in a little less than two hundred scudi a year of income.

Chapter 56

Going on afterwards to serve the Pope, now with one small piece and now with another, he ordered me to make him a design for a very rich chalice; which I made, the design and the model. This model was of wood and wax; instead of the knop of the chalice I had made three little figures of a good size, in the round, which were Faith, Hope and Charity; then on the foot I had made three matching scenes in three roundels in low relief: in one was the Nativity of Christ, in the other the Resurrection of Christ, in the third Saint Peter crucified head downward; for so I had been ordered to make it.

While I was carrying this work forward, the Pope very often wanted to see it; so that, noticing that his Holiness had never remembered afterwards to give me anything, when a friar of the Piombo's place fell vacant I asked him for it one evening. The good Pope, no longer remembering the fit he had had at the end of that other work, said to me: "The office of the Piombo brings in more than eight hundred scudi, so that if I gave it to you, you would attend to scratching your belly, and that fine art you have in your hands would be lost, and I should have the blame for it."

I answered at once that cats of a good sort catch better when they are fat than when they are hungry: "And so that sort of decent men who are inclined to skill put it into practice much better when they have abundant means to live on; so that those princes who keep such men in abundance, your Holiness should know, are watering their skills; and the other way about, skills are born starved and mangy. And your Holiness should know that I did not ask for it meaning to get it. I was lucky enough to get that poor mace-bearer's place! I imagined as much about this. Your Holiness will do well, not having wanted to give it me, to give it to some able man who deserves it, and not to some great ignoramus who will attend to scratching his belly, as your Holiness said. Take an example from the good memory of Pope Julius, who gave such an office to Bramante, that most excellent architect." And having at once made him a bow, I went off in a fury.

Bastiano the Venetian, the painter, came forward and said: "Most Blessed Father, may your Holiness be pleased to give it to someone who works hard at skilful things; and because, as your Holiness knows, I too willingly work hard at them, I beg you to make me worthy of it." The Pope answered: "This devil Benvenuto will not listen to a reproof. I was disposed to give it to him, but it is not right to be so proud with a Pope; so I do not know what I shall do."

The Bishop of Vaison at once came forward and pleaded for Bastiano, saying: "Most Blessed Father, Benvenuto is young, and a sword suits him much better at his side than a friar's habit; may your Holiness be pleased to give it to this able man Bastiano; and to Benvenuto you can give something good another time, which will perhaps suit him better than this."

Then the Pope, turning to Messer Bartolomeo Valori, said to him: "When you meet Benvenuto, tell him from me that he himself has got the Piombo for Bastiano the painter; and that he should take notice that the first better thing that falls vacant shall be his; and that meanwhile he should attend to doing well, and finish my works."

The next evening, at two hours of the night, I met Messer Bartolomeo Valori on the corner of the mint: he had two torches in front of him and was going in a hurry, having been sent for by the Pope; and when I had bowed to him he stopped and called me, and told me with the greatest affection everything the Pope had told him to say to me. To which words I answered that I would finish my work with greater diligence and study than any of the others; but with no hope at all of ever getting anything from the Pope. Messer Bartolomeo rebuked me, telling me that one should not answer a Pope's offers like that. To whom I said that, putting my hope in such words when I knew I should not get anything anyway, I should be mad to answer otherwise; and, leaving him, I went off to attend to my business.

Messer Bartolomeo must have repeated my bold words to the Pope, and perhaps more than I said, so that the Pope let more than two months go by without calling me, and I in all that time would not go up to the palace for anything. The Pope, who was eating his heart out over that work, ordered Messer Roberto Pucci to keep an eye on what I was doing. This good big man came to see me every day, and always said some affectionate word to me, and I to him.

The Pope being about to leave for Bologna, at last, seeing that I would not go there of my own accord, he let me know through Messer Roberto that I should bring the work up, because he wanted to see how far I had got. So I brought it, showing that the important part of it was all done, and I begged him to let me have five hundred scudi, partly on account and partly because I was a good deal short of the gold to finish the work with. The Pope said to me: "Attend, attend to finishing it." I answered as I left that I would finish it if he let me have money. And so I went off.

Chapter 57

The Pope, having gone off to Bologna, left Cardinal Salviati as legate of Rome, and left him orders to press me about this work, and said to him: "Benvenuto is a person who thinks little of his own skill, and less of Us; so see that you press him, so that I find it finished."

This beast of a cardinal sent for me at the end of a week, telling me to bring the work up; and I went to him without the work. When I got there, this Cardinal said to me at once: "Where is this onion stew of yours? Have you finished it?" To which I answered: "Most reverend monsignor, I have not finished my onion stew, and I shall not finish it unless you give me some onions to finish it with."

At these words the Cardinal, who had more the face of an ass than of a man, became half as ugly again; and coming at me at once with half a sword, he said: "I shall put you in a galley, and then it will be a favour to you to finish the work." I too became a beast with this beast, and said to him: "Monsignor, when I commit sins that deserve the galleys, then you shall put me there; but for these sins I am not afraid of your galleys; and I tell you more, that on account of your lordship I do not ever mean to finish it; and do not ever send for me again, because I shall never come in front of you again, unless you have me brought by the constables."

The good Cardinal tried several times, affectionately, to let me know that I ought to work and ought to bring it to show him; so that to such messengers I said: "Tell monsignor to send me some onions, if he wants me to finish the onion stew." And I never answered them any other words; so that he gave up that hopeless charge.

Chapter 58

The Pope came back from Bologna and asked for me at once, because that Cardinal had already written him the worst he could about my affairs. The Pope being in the greatest fury anyone can imagine, he let me know that I should come with the work. So I did.

During the time the Pope was at Bologna, a rheum had come on me with so much trouble in my eyes that I could hardly live for the pain; so that this was the first reason why I did not carry the work forward. And the trouble was so great that I certainly thought I should be left blind; so that I had made my reckoning of what would be enough to live on as a blind man.

While I was going to the Pope, I was thinking of the way I ought to take to make my excuse for not having been able to carry the work forward. I thought that while the Pope was looking at it and considering it I could tell him how things were; which did not come about, because when I got to him he said at once, in coarse words: "Give me that work here; is it finished?" I uncovered it; at once, in a greater fury, he said: "In God's truth I tell you, who make a profession of taking account of nobody, that if it were not for the honour of the world I would have you thrown out of those windows together with that work."

At which, seeing the Pope turned into such a very bad beast, I made haste to get out of his sight. While he was going on with his bullying, having put the work under my cloak, I muttered: "The whole world could not make a blind man work at such things." Raising his voice louder, the Pope said: "Come here; what are you saying?" I stood in two minds about setting off running down those stairs; then I made up my mind, and threw myself on my knees, shouting loudly, because he did not stop shouting, and said: "And if I have gone blind through an illness, am I obliged to work?" At this he said: "You saw well enough to come here, and I do not believe any of these things you say are true." To which I said, hearing him lower his voice somewhat: "Let your Holiness ask his own doctor, and he will find the truth." He said: "We shall hear at more leisure whether it is as you say."

Then, seeing that I was being given a hearing, I said: "I do not believe that this great illness of mine was caused by anyone but Cardinal Salviati, because he sent for me as soon as your Holiness had gone; and when I came to him he called my work an onion stew, and told me he would have me finish it in a galley; and there was so much power in those indecent words that out of the extreme passion I felt my face take fire at once, and there came into my eyes so immeasurable a heat that I could not find my way home; and a few days later two cataracts fell over my eyes, so that I could not see any light at all, and since your Holiness left I have never been able to work at anything."

Getting up off my knees, I went off with God; and it was reported to me that the Pope said: "If offices are given, discretion cannot be given with them. I did not tell the Cardinal to lay on so hard: if it is true that he has trouble with his eyes, which I shall hear from my doctor, one ought to have some compassion for him."

There was present a great gentleman, a great friend of the Pope's and a very able man. The Pope having asked him what person I was, he said: "Most Blessed Father, I ask you, because it has seemed to me that you have come in one and the same moment into the greatest anger I ever saw and the greatest compassion; so that for this reason I ask your Holiness who he is; because if he is a person who deserves to be helped, I would teach him a secret to cure him of that illness." At these words the Pope said: "That is the greatest man who was ever born in his profession; and one day when we are together I will show you some of his marvellous works, and him with them; and I shall be glad to see whether he can be done any good."

Three days later the Pope sent for me one day after dinner, and this gentleman was there. As soon as I had arrived, the Pope had that clasp of mine for the cope brought. In the meantime I had taken out that chalice of mine; on account of which that gentleman said he had never seen so marvellous a work. When the clasp came up, his wonder grew much greater; and looking me in the face he said: "He is young indeed to know so much, and very fit to gain more." Then he asked me my name. To which I said: "Benvenuto is my name." He answered: "I shall be a Benvenuto — a welcome one — to you this time. Take cornflowers with the stalk, the flower and the roots all together, then have them distilled over a gentle fire, and with that water bathe your eyes several times a day, and you will certainly be cured of that illness; but have yourself purged first, and then go on with the water."

The Pope used some affectionate words to me: and so I went off half content.

Chapter 59

It was true that I had the illness, but I believe I had earned it by means of that beautiful young servant I kept at the time I was robbed. The French disease waited more than four whole months before showing itself to me, and then it covered me all over, all at once: it was not in the way of the other kind you see, but it seemed as if I were covered with certain little blisters, as big as farthings, and red. The doctors would never baptise it a French disease for me; and I kept telling them the causes I believed it came from. I went on treating myself in their way, and nothing did me any good; until at last, having made up my mind to take the wood against the wishes of those first doctors of Rome, I took this wood with all the discipline and abstinence anyone can imagine, and in a few days I felt the greatest improvement; so that at the end of fifty days I was cured and as sound as a fish.

Afterwards, to give myself some refreshment after the great labour I had gone through, winter coming on, I took to shooting for my pleasure, which made me go out in the wet and the wind and stand about in the marshes; so that in a few days there came back on me a trouble a hundred times greater than the one I had had before. Having put myself back in the doctors' hands, and being continually treated, I always got worse. When the fever jumped on me, I decided to take the wood again: the doctors would not have it, telling me that if I went into it with a fever I should die in a week. I decided to go against their wishes; and keeping the same regime I had kept the other time, when I had drunk four days of this holy water of the wood the fever went away entirely.

I began to take a very great improvement; and while I was taking the wood I always carried forward the models for that work; and in that abstinence I made the most beautiful things and the rarest inventions I ever made in my life. At the end of fifty days I was thoroughly cured, and afterwards I attended with the greatest diligence to making my health secure. When I had come out of that great fasting, I found myself as clean of my illnesses as if I had been born again. Although I took pleasure in making that health of mine that I so wanted secure, I did not stop working either; so that in that work and in the mint I certainly gave each of them its proper share.

Chapter 60

It happened that that Cardinal Salviati, who had that great hatred of me I have mentioned, was made legate of Parma. In Parma a certain Milanese goldsmith was taken who was a forger of coins, whose name was Tobbia. Having been sentenced to the gallows and the fire, the Legate was spoken to about it, and he was put in front of him as a very able man. The Cardinal had the execution of the sentence held over, and wrote to Pope Clement, telling him that there had come into his hands one of the greatest men in the world in the profession of the goldsmith's art, and that he had already been condemned to the gallows and the fire for being a forger of coins; but that this man was simple and good, because he said he had asked the opinion of a confessor of his, who, he said, had given him leave to make them. And more than that he said: "If you have this great man come to Rome, your Holiness will be the cause of taking down that great haughtiness of your Benvenuto's; and I am quite certain that this Tobbia's works will please you far more than Benvenuto's."

So that the Pope had him come to Rome at once. And when he had come, he called us both and had each of us make a design for a unicorn's horn, the most beautiful that was ever seen: it had been sold for seventeen thousand ducats of the Chamber. The Pope wanting to give it to King Francis, he wanted it richly mounted in gold first, and ordered both of us to make the designs.

When we had made them, each of us took his to the Pope. Tobbia's design was in the shape of a candlestick, where, like a candle, that beautiful horn was fitted in; and for the foot of this candlestick he made four little unicorn heads, with the simplest invention: so that when I saw such a thing I could not help sniggering a little in a neat way. The Pope noticed it and said at once: "Show your design here." Mine was a single unicorn's head, matching the horn. I had made the finest sort of head that could be seen, and the reason was that I had taken part of the make of a horse's head and part of a stag's, enriched with the finest sort of mane and other elegances; so that as soon as mine was seen everybody gave it the palm.

But because there were present at this dispute certain Milanese of very great authority, they said: "Most Blessed Father, your Holiness is sending this great present into France; you should know that the French are coarse men and will not recognise the excellence of this work of Benvenuto's; but this ciborium sort of thing will please them well enough, and it will also be made sooner; and Benvenuto will attend to finishing your chalice, and you will get two works done at the same time; and this poor man whom you have had come here will get employed as well."

The Pope, wanting his chalice, very willingly caught at the advice of those Milanese; so the next day he assigned the work on that unicorn's horn to Tobbia, and let me know by his wardrobe keeper that I should finish his chalice for him. To which words I answered that I wanted nothing else in the world but to finish that beautiful work of mine; but that if it had been of any other material than gold, I could very easily have finished it myself; but since it was of gold as it was, his Holiness would have to give me some, if he wanted me to be able to finish it. At these words this vulgar courtier said: "Good heavens, do not ask the Pope for gold, because you will put him in such a rage that it will go badly, badly with you." To which I said: "Oh, sir, will your lordship teach me a little how one can make bread without flour? Just so, without gold that work will never be finished." This wardrobe keeper, thinking somewhat that I had made fun of him, told me he would report everything I had said to the Pope; and so he did.

The Pope, going into a bestial fury, said he wanted to see whether I was such a madman as not to finish it. So more than two months went by; and although I had said I did not want to lift a finger to it, I had not done that, but on the contrary had worked at it continually with the greatest love. Seeing that I did not bring it, he began to show me a great deal of disfavour, saying he would punish me at all costs.

There was present at these words a Milanese jeweller of his called Pompeo, who was a close relation of a certain Messer Traiano, the most favoured servant Pope Clement had. These two agreed together and said to the Pope: "If your Holiness were to take the mint away from him, perhaps you would give him the wish to finish the chalice." Then the Pope said: "On the contrary, there would be two evils: one, that I should be badly served in the mint, which matters so much to me; and the other, that I should certainly never get the chalice."

These two Milanese, seeing the Pope ill disposed towards me, in the end had so much power that he did take the mint from me and gave it to a certain young Perugian called Fagiuolo for a nickname. Pompeo came to tell me, on the Pope's behalf, that his Holiness had taken the mint from me, and that if I did not finish the chalice he would take other things from me. To this I answered: "Tell his Holiness that he has taken the mint from himself and not from me, and that the same would happen with those other things; and that when his Holiness wants to give it back to me, I shall not want it back in any way."

This graceless and unlucky man thought a thousand years had gone by before he could get to the Pope to repeat all these things to him, and he put something in out of his own mouth. A week later the Pope sent by this same man to tell me that he no longer wanted me to finish that chalice for him, and that he wanted it back exactly in the way and at the point to which I had brought it. To this Pompeo I answered: "This is not like the mint, that he can take from me; but the five hundred scudi I had are his Holiness's, and I shall give them back at once; and the work is mine, and I shall do with it what I please." Pompeo ran off to report that, with some other biting words which I had said to him, and with good reason.
