Book One, Chapters 61 to 65

Chapter 61

Three days later, on a Thursday, two of his Holiness's most favoured chamberlains came to me — one of them is still alive today and is a bishop, and was called Messer Pier Giovanni, and was his Holiness's wardrobe keeper; the other was of even greater family than he, but I do not remember his name. When they came to me they said: "The Pope sends us, Benvenuto: since you would not understand him by the easier road, he says either that you give us his work, or that we take you to prison."

Then I looked them in the face very cheerfully and said: "Gentlemen, if I gave the work to his Holiness, I should be giving him my work and not his; and I do not want to give him my work either, because, having brought it a long way forward with my great labour, I do not want it to go into the hands of some ignorant beast who will spoil it for me with little trouble." There was present, while I said this, that goldsmith called Tobbia I have mentioned, who recklessly asked me for the models of the work as well: the words I said to such a wretch, worthy of him, need not be repeated here.

And because those gentlemen chamberlains were pressing me to make up my mind what I wanted to do, I told them I had made it up. Having taken my cloak, and before I went out of my shop, I turned to an image of Christ with great reverence and with my cap in my hand, and said: "O our kind and immortal, just and holy Lord, everything you do is according to your justice, which is without equal. You know that I am just arriving at the age of thirty in my life, and that never until now has prison been promised me for anything: since now you are content that I should go to prison, I thank you for it with all my heart."

Then, turning to the two chamberlains, I said this, with a certain rather ruffled look of mine: "A man like me did not deserve constables of less worth than you gentlemen; so put me between you and take me as a prisoner where you like." Those two most well-bred men burst out laughing, put me between them, and, talking pleasantly the whole way, took me to the Governor of Rome, who was called Il Magalotto.

When I got to him, the fiscal Procurator was there with him, and they were waiting for me; and those gentlemen chamberlains, still laughing, said to the Governor: "We hand you over this prisoner, and take good care of him. We have been very glad to take the office from your officers, because Benvenuto has told us that since this is his first arrest, he did not deserve constables of less worth than we are." As soon as they had gone they came to the Pope; and having told him precisely everything, at first he made as if to fly into a fury, and afterwards forced himself to laugh, because there were present some lords and cardinals who were friends of mine and who greatly favoured me.

Meanwhile the Governor and the Fiscal partly bullied me, partly exhorted me and partly advised me, telling me that reason required that a man who has a work made by another can take it back at his pleasure, and in any way he likes. To which things I said that this was not what justice promised, and that a pope could not do it; because he was not a pope of the sort those little tyrant lordlings are, who do the worst they can to their people, keeping neither law nor justice: therefore a Vicar of Christ cannot do any of these things.

Then the Governor, with certain constable-like ways and words, said: "Benvenuto, Benvenuto, you are asking me to do to you what you deserve." "You will do me honour and courtesy if you do to me what I deserve." Again he said: "Send for the work at once, and see that you do not wait for a second word." To this I said: "Gentlemen, do me the favour of letting me say four more words about my case."

The Fiscal, who was a much more discreet constable than the Governor, turned to the Governor and said: "Monsignor, let us do him the favour of a hundred words; as long as he gives up the work, that is quite enough for us."

I said: "If there were any sort of man who was having a palace or a house built, he could justly say to the master who was building it, 'I do not want you to work on my house or my palace any more'; and paying him justly for his labour, he can send him away. Again, if there were a lord who was having a jewel of a thousand scudi set, and saw that the jeweller was not serving him according to his wish, he can say, 'Give me my jewel, because I do not want your work.' But in this present business there is none of these heads; because it is neither a house nor a jewel; nothing else can be said to me except that I should give back the five hundred scudi I have had. So, monsignori, do everything you can, because you will get nothing else from me but the five hundred scudi. And so you may tell the Pope. Your threats do not frighten me in the world at all; because I am a decent man, and I am not afraid of my sins."

The Governor and the Fiscal stood up and told me they were going to the Pope, and that they would come back with orders, and that it would go badly with me. So I was left under guard. I walked about a hall, and they were nearly three hours coming back from the Pope. In the meantime all the nobility of our nation of merchants came to visit me, begging me urgently not to stand and argue with a Pope, because it might be my ruin. To whom I answered that I had quite made up my mind about what I wanted to do.

Chapter 62

As soon as the Governor and the Fiscal had come back from the Palace, having had me called, he spoke in this strain: "Benvenuto, certainly I am sorry to have come back from the Pope with such orders as I have; so either you find the work at once, or you look to your own affairs." Then I answered that, since I had never believed until that hour that a holy Vicar of Christ could do an injustice, "I want to see it before I believe it; so do what you can."

Again the Governor spoke, saying: "I have two more words to say to you from the Pope, and then I shall carry out the orders given me. The Pope says that you should bring the work here to me, and that I should see it put in a box and sealed; then I am to take it to the Pope, who promises on his faith not to move it from its seal, but to keep it shut, and will give it straight back to you; but he wants it done this way so that he too may have his share of the honour."

At these words I answered, laughing, that I would very willingly give him my work in the way he said, because I wanted to be able to say what a Pope's faith is made of. And so, having sent for my work and sealed it up in the way he said, I gave it him.

The Governor having gone back to the Pope with the work in that way, the Pope took the box — according to what the Governor told me — and turned it over several times; then he asked the Governor whether he had seen it, and he said he had seen it and that it had been sealed like that in his presence; then he added that it had seemed to him a very marvellous thing. At which the Pope said: "You will tell Benvenuto that Popes have authority to loose and to bind much greater things than this." And while he was saying these words, with some little indignation he opened the box, taking off the cords and the seal it had been tied with; then he looked at it a long while, and as far as I gathered he showed it to that goldsmith Tobbia, who praised it a great deal. Then the Pope asked him whether he had the nerve to make a work in that way; the Pope told him to follow exactly that arrangement; then he turned to the Governor and said to him: "See whether Benvenuto will give it to us; because if he gives it us like this he shall be paid everything it is valued at by able men; or else, if he really wants to finish it himself, let him name a term; and if you see that he wants to do it, let him be given the reasonable facilities he asks for."

Then the Governor said: "Most Blessed Father, knowing the terrible quality of that young man, give me authority to give him a good dressing-down in my own way." At this the Pope said he should do what he liked with words, although he was sure he would make it worse; then, when he saw he could do nothing else, he should tell me to take his five hundred scudi to that Pompeo, his jeweller mentioned above.

The Governor came back and had me called into his room, and with a constable's look he said: "Popes have authority to loose and to bind the whole world, and it is immediately confirmed in Heaven as well done: there is your work, loosed and seen by his Holiness." Then I raised my voice at once and said: "I thank God, for now I know what a Pope's faith is made of." Then the Governor said and did a great deal of extravagant bullying; and afterwards, seeing that it came to nothing at all, quite despairing of the business, he took up a somewhat sweeter manner and said to me: "Benvenuto, I am very sorry that you will not understand your own good; so go, and take the five hundred scudi when you like to the Pompeo I mentioned."

Having taken my work, I went off and at once took the five hundred scudi to Pompeo. And because the Pope, perhaps thinking that through inconvenience or some other occasion I should not bring the money so soon, wanting to tie up the thread of my service again — when he saw that Pompeo came before him smiling with the money in his hand, the Pope spoke rudely to him and was very sorry that the thing had turned out that way; then he said to him: "Go and find Benvenuto in his shop, and make as much of him as your ignorant beastliness can; and tell him that if he will finish that work for me to make a reliquary of it, to carry the Corpus Domini in when I go in procession with it, I shall give him the facilities he wants to finish it; as long as he works."

Pompeo came to me, called me out of the shop, and made me the sickliest donkey's caresses, telling me everything the Pope had ordered him. To which I answered at once that the greatest treasure I could wish for in the world was to have got back the favour of so great a Pope, which had been lost by me not through my own fault, but through the fault of my immeasurable illness, and through the wickedness of those envious men who take pleasure in doing harm; "and since the Pope has plenty of servants, let him not send you round me any more, for your own health's sake; so mind your own business. I shall never fail, night or day, to think of and do everything I can in the Pope's service; and remember well that when you have told this about me to the Pope, you must in no way mix yourself up in any of my affairs, because I shall make you know your errors by the penance they deserve."

This man reported everything to the Pope in a much more beastly way than I had put it to him. So the business stood for a while, and I attended to my shop and my own affairs.

Chapter 63

That goldsmith Tobbia mentioned above attended to finishing that setting and ornament for the unicorn's horn; and besides that the Pope had told him to begin the chalice in the way he had seen mine. And when he began to have Tobbia show him what he was doing, finding himself badly satisfied, he was very sorry to have broken with me, and blamed that man's works and the men who had put him forward; and several times Baccino della Croce came to speak to me on the Pope's behalf, that I should make that reliquary. To whom I said that I begged his Holiness to let me rest after the great illness I had had, of which I was not yet quite out of danger; but that I would show his Holiness that in the hours in which I could work, I would spend them all in his service.

I had set myself to take his portrait, and I was making him a medal in secret; and those steel dies to strike the medal I made at home; and in my shop I kept a partner who had been my apprentice, called Felice.

At this time, as young men do, I had fallen in love with a little Sicilian girl who was very beautiful; and because she too showed that she was very fond of me, her mother, noticing it, and suspecting what might come of it — for I had arranged to run away with the girl for a year to Florence, in the greatest secrecy from her mother — noticing it, she left Rome secretly one night and went off towards Naples; and she gave out that she had gone from Civitavecchia, and she went from Ostia. I went after her to Civitavecchia and did unreckonable mad things to find her. It would be too long to tell such things exactly: it is enough that I was on the point either of going mad or of dying. At the end of two months she wrote to me that she was in Sicily and very unhappy. In this time I had attended to all the pleasures anyone can imagine, and had taken up another love, only to put out the first one.

Chapter 64

It happened to me, through certain odd chances, that I made friends with a certain Sicilian priest, who was of the loftiest wit and had a very good knowledge of Latin and Greek letters. Coming once to the point in a conversation where we happened to speak of the art of necromancy, I said: "I have had the greatest wish all my life to see or hear something of this art." At which words the priest added: "A man who sets himself to such an undertaking must have a strong and steady mind." I answered that I should have more than enough strength and steadiness of mind, if only I could find a way to do such a thing. Then the priest answered: "If you have the nerve for that, I shall satisfy you fully as to all the rest." And so we agreed to make a beginning of the business.

One evening among others the priest got himself in order, and told me to find a companion or two. I called Vincenzio Romoli, a very great friend of mine, and he brought with him a man of Pistoia who also went in for necromancy. We went off to the Colosseum, and there the priest, having dressed himself in the manner of a necromancer, set about drawing circles on the ground with the finest ceremonies anyone in the world could imagine; and he had made us bring precious perfumes and fire, and foul perfumes too. When he was ready, he made the door to the circle; and taking us by the hand, he put us into the circle one by one; then he shared out the duties: he gave the pentacle into the hand of that other companion of his, the necromancer, and to the others he gave the care of the fire for the perfumes; then he set his hand to the conjurations.

This thing lasted more than an hour and a half; several legions appeared, so that the Colosseum was quite full. I, who was attending to the precious perfumes, when the priest knew there was so great a quantity of them, turned to me and said: "Benvenuto, ask them for something." I said they should bring it about that I might be with my Sicilian Angelica. That night we had no answer at all; but I had very great satisfaction from what I had wanted of such a thing.

The necromancer said we must go there another time, and that I should be satisfied in everything I asked for, but that he wanted me to bring a virgin boy with me. I took an errand boy of mine of about twelve, and called that Vincenzio Romoli again with me; and, a certain Agnolino Gaddi being a familiar companion of ours, we brought him too to this business.

Having got to the appointed place again, the necromancer having made the same preparations with the same arrangement and even more marvellous, he put us into the circle, which he had made again with more admirable art and more admirable ceremonies; then he gave my Vincenzio the care of the perfumes and the fire, and Agnolino Gaddi took it with him; then he put the pentacle into my hand, which he told me to turn according to the places he signalled to me, and under the pentacle I held that little errand boy of mine.

The necromancer began to make those most terrible invocations, calling by name a great quantity of those demons who are heads of the legions, and commanding them by the power and might of the uncreated, living and eternal God, in Hebrew words, and a good many Greek and Latin ones as well; so that in a short space of time the whole Colosseum was filled a hundred times more than they had been that first time. Vincenzio Romoli attended to making fire together with Agnolino, and a great quantity of precious perfumes.

I, by the necromancer's advice, again asked to be able to be with Angelica. The necromancer turned to me and said: "Do you hear what they have said? That within a month you will be where she is." And again he added that he begged me to hold him firm, because the legions were a thousand times more than he had asked for, and were the most dangerous; and that now they had settled what I had asked for, it was necessary to make much of them and dismiss them patiently.

On the other side the boy, who was under the pentacle, said in the greatest terror that there were a million of the fiercest men in that place, all threatening us; and besides that he said that four measureless giants had appeared, who were armed and were making as if to come in among us. At this the necromancer, who was trembling with fear, attended as best he could, in a sweet and gentle way, to dismissing them. Vincenzio Romoli, who was shaking like a reed, attended to the perfumes. I, who was as frightened as they were, made an effort to show it less, and gave them all the most marvellous heart; but certainly I had given myself up for dead, from the fear I saw in the necromancer.

The boy had stuck his head between his knees, saying: "I want to die this way, because we are dead men." Again I said to the boy: "These creatures are all beneath us, and what you see is smoke and shadow; so lift up your eyes." When he had lifted his eyes, he said again: "The whole Colosseum is burning, and the fire is coming at us"; and putting his hands over his face, he said again that he was dead, and that he would not look any more.

The necromancer commended himself to me, begging me to hold him firm, and to have perfumes of asafoetida made; so, turning to Vincenzio Romoli, I told him to perfume with asafoetida quickly. While I was saying this, looking at Agnolino Gaddi, who was so terrified that the light of his eyes had gone out of focus, and he was more than half dead, I said to him: "Agnolo, in places like this one must not be afraid, but must set about doing something and helping oneself; so put some of that asafoetida on quickly." As Agnolo was about to move, he let off a blast of wind with such an abundance of shit that it had more power than the asafoetida. The boy, at that great stink and that noise, lifted his face a little, and hearing me laugh a bit, was reassured a little in his fear and said that they were beginning to go off in a great hurry.

So we stayed on until the bells began to ring for matins. Again the boy told us that few of them were left, and far off. When the necromancer had done all the rest of his ceremonies and had undressed and packed up a great bundle of books he had brought, we all came out of the circle together with him, sticking one under another; above all the boy, who had got into the middle and had taken hold of the necromancer by his robe and of me by my cloak. And all the time, while we were going home towards the Banchi, he kept telling us that two of the ones he had seen in the Colosseum were skipping along in front of us, now running along the roofs and now on the ground.

The necromancer said that of all the times he had gone into circles, so great a thing had never happened to him; and he tried to persuade me to be willing to be with him in consecrating a book, from which we should draw endless riches, because we should ask the demons to teach us where the treasures are that the earth is full of, and in that way we should become extremely rich; and that these things about love were vanities and follies which came to nothing.

I told him that if I knew Latin letters I would very willingly do such a thing. Still he tried to persuade me, telling me that Latin letters would be no use to me at all, and that if he had wanted he could have found plenty of men with good Latin letters; but that he had never found anyone with as steady a mind as mine, and that I ought to follow his advice. With this talk we got home, and each of us dreamed of devils all that night.

Chapter 65

Seeing each other afterwards day by day, the necromancer pressed me to attend to that undertaking; so I asked him how much time it would take to do such a thing, and where we should have to go. To this he answered that in less than a month we should come out of the business, and that the most suitable place was in the mountains of Norcia; although a master of his had consecrated one near a place called the Abbey of Farfa; but that he had had some difficulties there which would not arise in the mountains of Norcia; and that those Norcian peasants are men to be trusted, and have some practice in this thing, so that at need they can give marvellous help.

This priest necromancer had certainly persuaded me so much that I had willingly disposed myself to do such a thing; but I said I wanted first to finish those medals I was making for the Pope, and I had spoken about them to him and to nobody else, begging him to keep them secret for me.

All the same, I kept asking him whether he believed that by that time I should be with my Sicilian Angelica; and seeing the time coming very close, it seemed a very great thing to me that I heard nothing of her. The necromancer told me that I should certainly find myself where she was, because they never fail when they promise in the way they had then; but that I should keep my eyes open and guard against some scandal that might come to me because of that case; and that I should force myself to put up with something against my nature, because he saw a very great danger in it; and that it would be good for me if I went with him to consecrate the book, because by that road that great danger of mine would pass over, and I should be the cause of making him and me extremely happy.

I, who was beginning to have more appetite for it than he had, told him that a certain Master Giovanni da Castel Bolognese had come to Rome, a very able man at making medals of the sort I made, in steel, and that I wanted nothing else in the world but to compete with this able man and come out on the world with such a piece of work, by which I hoped with that skill, and not with the sword, to kill those several enemies of mine.

This man still went on at me, saying: "For pity's sake, my Benvenuto, come with me and escape a great danger which I see in you." Having disposed myself in every way to want to finish my medal first, we were already near the end of the month; and by then, being so taken up with the medal, I no longer remembered either Angelica or anything else of that sort, but was entirely intent on my work.
