Book One, Chapters 66 to 72

Chapter 66

One day among others, near the hour of vespers, an occasion came for me to go out of my usual hours from my house to my shop; because I had my shop in the Banchi and kept a little house behind the Banchi, and I seldom went to the shop, since I left all the business to that partner of mine called Felice.

Having been in the shop a little while, I remembered that I had to go and speak to Alessandro del Bene. Getting up at once and arriving in the Banchi, I ran into a certain great friend of mine, whose name was Ser Benedetto. He was a notary and had been born in Florence, the son of a blind man from Siena who used to recite prayers. This Ser Benedetto had been at Naples many and many years; then he had come back to Rome and did business for certain Sienese merchants, the Chigi.

And because that partner of mine had asked him again and again for certain money he was owed for some little rings he had let him have on trust, this day, meeting him in the Banchi, he asked him for his money in a somewhat rough way, which was his habit; and Ser Benedetto was with his masters, so that, seeing such a thing done in such a way, they shouted at Ser Benedetto a great deal, telling him they wanted to use somebody else, so as not to have to hear any more of such rubbish. This Ser Benedetto defended himself with them as well as he could, and said that he had paid that goldsmith, and that he was not able to bridle the fury of madmen. The Sienese took that remark badly and dismissed him at once.

Having got away from them, he went off in a hurry to my shop, perhaps to do Felice some harm. It happened that we met exactly in the middle of the Banchi; and I, who knew nothing about it, greeted him most pleasantly in my usual way, and he answered me with a great many rude words. At which everything the necromancer had told me came back to me; so, holding the rein as hard as I could on what his words were forcing me to do, I said: "Ser Benedetto, brother, do not be angry with me, because I have done you no harm, and I know nothing about these affairs of yours; and whatever you have to do with Felice, go and settle it with him, if you please; he knows perfectly well what he has to answer you. So, as I know nothing about it, you do me wrong to bite at me like this, all the more knowing that I am not a man who puts up with insults."

At this he said that I knew all about it, and that he was a man fit to make me carry a heavier load than that, and that Felice and I were two great scoundrels. By now a good many people had gathered to see the argument. Driven on by his ugly words, I quickly stooped to the ground and took a lump of mud, because it had been raining, and with it I quickly swung my hand up to give it him in the face. He ducked his head, so that I got him with it in the middle of his head. In this mud there was a stone of hard rock with many sharp corners, and catching him with one of those corners in the middle of the head, he fell down senseless like a dead man; and, seeing such an abundance of blood, all the bystanders judged that he was dead.

Chapter 67

While he was still on the ground, and some people were setting about carrying him away, that Pompeo the jeweller I mentioned above came by. The Pope had sent for him about some business of jewels. Seeing that man in that bad state, he asked who had done it to him. He was told: "Benvenuto has done it, because this beast asked for it."

Pompeo, having got quickly to the Pope, said to him: "Most Blessed Father, Benvenuto has this very minute killed Tobbia; I saw it with my own eyes." At this the Pope in a fury ordered the Governor, who was there present, to take me and hang me at once in the place where the homicide had been done, and to use every diligence to get me, and not to come before him until he had hanged me.

When I had seen that unlucky man on the ground, I thought at once about my own affairs, considering the power of my enemies and what such a thing might bring forth. Leaving there, I withdrew to the house of Messer Giovanni Gaddi, clerk of the Chamber, wanting to get myself ready as quickly as I could to go off with God. At which Messer Giovanni advised me not to be in such a fury to leave, since it might be that the harm was not as great as it seemed to me; and having sent for Messer Annibal Caro, who lived with him, he told him to go and find out about the case.

While these orders were being given, there appeared a Roman gentleman who was with the Cardinal de' Medici and had been sent by him. This gentleman, having called Messer Giovanni and me aside, told us that the Cardinal had told him the words he had heard the Pope say, and that he had no remedy at all to be able to help me, and that I should do everything in my power to escape this first fury, and that I should not trust myself in any house in Rome.

As soon as the gentleman had gone, Messer Giovanni, looking me in the face, made as if to weep, and said: "Alas, wretched me, that I have no remedy at all to be able to help you!" Then I said: "By the help of God, I shall help myself well enough; I only ask you to lend me one of your horses." A black Turkish horse was already got ready, the most beautiful and the best in Rome. I mounted him with a wheel-lock arquebus in front of the saddle bow, ready to defend myself with it.

When I got to the Ponte Sisto, I found there the whole of the sheriff's guard, on horseback and on foot; so, making a virtue of necessity, boldly urging my horse on quietly, by God's mercy their eyes were darkened, and I passed free; and with as much haste as I could I went off to Palombara, a place belonging to Signor Giovanbattista Savelli, and from there I sent the horse back to Messer Giovanni, and would not even let him know where I was.

Signor Giambattista, when he had made much of me for two days, advised me that I ought to get away from there and go off towards Naples, until this fury had passed; and having given me company, he set me on the road to Naples, on which I found a sculptor friend of mine who was going to San Germano to finish Piero de' Medici's tomb at Monte Cassino. His name was Il Solosmeo. He gave me news of how that very evening Pope Clement had sent a chamberlain of his to find out how Tobbia was; and, having found him at work, and that nothing at all had happened to him, and that he did not even know anything about it, when this was reported to the Pope, he turned to Pompeo and said to him: "You are a wretch; but I tell you plainly, you have stirred up a snake that will bite you and serve you right." Then he turned to Cardinal de' Medici and ordered him to take some care of me, because he would not have wanted to lose me for anything.

So Solosmeo and I went off singing towards Monte Cassino, to go on to Naples together.

Chapter 68

When Solosmeo had gone over his business at Monte Cassino, we went off together towards Naples. When we had got to within half a mile of Naples, an innkeeper came to meet us who invited us to his inn, and told us that he had been in Florence many years with Carlo Ginori; and that if we went to his inn he would make a great deal of us, since we were Florentines. We told this innkeeper several times that we did not want to go with him. This man kept going on ahead of us and then dropping behind, saying the same things over and over, that he would like us at his inn.

So, becoming a nuisance to me, I asked him whether he could tell me of a certain Sicilian woman called Beatrice, who had a beautiful young daughter called Angelica, and they were courtesans. This innkeeper, thinking I was making fun of him, said: "God send bad luck to courtesans and to those who like them"; and, giving his horse his heel, he made as if to go off from us for good.

Thinking I had got that beast of an innkeeper off my back in a good way — although I got no capital out of it, because that great love I bore Angelica had come back to me, and I was talking about it to Solosmeo, not without some lover's sighs — we see the innkeeper come back to us in a great hurry; and when he got to us he said: "It is either two or three days since a woman and a young girl came to lodge next to my inn, who have those names; I do not know whether they are Sicilians or from some other country." Then I said: "That name Angelica has such power over me that I want to come to your inn at all costs."

We went off together with the innkeeper into the city of Naples, and dismounted at his inn; and it seemed to me a thousand years before I could get my things in order, which I did very quickly; and going into the house next to the inn, I found there my Angelica, who made the most immeasurable fuss of me that anyone in the world can imagine. So I stayed with her from that hour, the twenty-second, until the following morning, with such pleasure as I never had the like of. And while I was rejoicing in this pleasure, I remembered that that very day the month expired which had been promised me in the circle of necromancy by the demons. So let every man who meddles with them consider the unreckonable dangers I have been through.

Chapter 69

I happened to have a diamond in my purse, which I showed among the goldsmiths; and although I was still young, I was so well known in Naples as a man worth something that a great deal was made of me. Among the others was a certain most gallant jeweller called Messer Domenico Fontana. This decent man left his shop for the three days I was in Naples, and never left my side, showing me a great many beautiful antiquities that were in Naples and outside Naples; and more than that, he took me to pay my respects to the Viceroy of Naples, who had let him know that he had a fancy to see me.

When I got to his Excellency, he gave me a very honourable welcome; and while we were doing this, that diamond caught his Excellency's eye; and having had it shown to him, he said that if I had to part with it, I should not exchange it with anyone else, if I pleased. To which I, having taken the diamond back, handed it to his Excellency again, and told him that the diamond and I were both at his service. Then he said that he liked the diamond very much, but that it would please him far more if I stayed with him; that he would make me such terms that I should have reason to praise him. We used a good many courteous words to each other; but coming afterwards to the merits of the diamond, and his Excellency ordering me to name a price for it, whatever seemed right to me, in a single word, I told him that two hundred scudi was exactly its price.

At this his Excellency said that it seemed to him I was not at all far from what was right; but that, being set by my hand, since he knew me for the first man in the world, it would not turn out, if somebody else set it, with the excellence it showed. Then I said that the diamond was not set by my hand, and that it was not well set; and that what it did, it did by its own goodness; and that if I reset it for him I should improve it a great deal from what it was. And putting my thumbnail to the edges of the diamond, I drew it out of its ring, and having cleaned it a little I handed it to the Viceroy; who, satisfied and astonished, made me out an order that I should be paid the two hundred scudi I had asked for.

Coming back to my lodging, I found letters from Cardinal de' Medici, telling me to come back to Rome with great diligence, and to go straight to dismount at his most reverend lordship's house. Having read the letter to my Angelica, with little loving tears she begged me to be so good as to stay in Naples, or else to take her with me. To whom I said that if she wanted to come with me I would give her those two hundred ducats I had had from the Viceroy to keep.

Her mother, seeing us in this close conversation, came up to us and said: "Benvenuto, if you want to take my Angelica to Rome, leave me fifteen ducats so that I can have my baby, and then I will come along too." I told the old bawd that I would leave her thirty willingly if she was content to give me my Angelica. So, having settled it, Angelica begged me to buy her a gown of black velvet, because velvet was cheap in Naples. I was content about it all; and having sent for the velvet and made the bargain and everything, the old woman, who thought I was more cooked than raw, asked me for a gown of fine cloth for herself, and a great many other expenses for her children, and a good deal more money than I had offered her. To whom I turned pleasantly and said: "My dear Beatrice, is what I have offered you enough?" She said no. Then I said that what was not enough for her would be enough for me; and having kissed my Angelica, she with tears and I with laughter, we parted, and I went straight back to Rome.

Chapter 70

Leaving Naples at night with the money on me, so as not to be waylaid or murdered, as is the custom of Naples, when I got to the Selciata, with great cunning and bodily courage I defended myself against several riders who had come to murder me. Then, some days later, having left Solosmeo to his business at Monte Cassino, I arrived one morning for dinner at the inn at Anagni.

Being near the inn, I fired at some birds with my arquebus and killed them; and a little iron pin that was in the lock of my gun tore my right hand. Although the injury was of no importance, it looked a good deal, because of the great quantity of blood my hand poured out.

Having gone into the inn and put my horse in its place, and having gone up onto a rough gallery, I found a number of Neapolitan gentlemen who were about to sit down at table; and with them was a young gentlewoman, the most beautiful I ever saw. When I came up, behind me came a very bold young servant of mine with a great partisan in his hand: so that we, the weapons and the blood, put such terror into those poor gentlemen — above all because that place was a nest of murderers — that, getting up from the table, they prayed God in great fright to help them. To whom I said, laughing, that God had helped them, and that I was a man to defend them from anyone who wanted to hurt them; and asking them for a little help to bandage my hand, that most beautiful gentlewoman took a handkerchief of hers richly worked in gold, meaning to bandage me with it; I would not have it: at once she tore it across the middle, and with the greatest gentleness bandaged me with her own hand.

So, being somewhat reassured, we dined very cheerfully. After dinner we mounted and went along in company. Their fright was not yet over; and those gentlemen cunningly had me entertain that gentlewoman, dropping some way behind; and I rode beside her on a fine little horse of mine, having signalled my servant to keep a little away from me; so that we talked of those things the apothecary does not sell. And in that way I came to Rome with the greatest pleasure I ever had.

When I got to Rome, I went off to dismount at the Cardinal de' Medici's palace; and, finding his most reverend lordship, I greeted him and thanked him for having had me come back. Then I begged his lordship to make me safe from prison, and if possible from the fine as well. He was very glad to see me; he told me not to worry about anything; then he turned to a gentleman of his called Messer Pierantonio Pecci, a Sienese, telling him to tell the sheriff on his behalf not to dare touch me.

Then he asked him how the man was whose head I had hit with the stone. Messer Pierantonio said he was ill, and would be worse still, because, having heard that I was coming back to Rome, he said he wanted to die in order to spite me. At which words the Cardinal said with great laughter: "That man could not have found any other way than this to let us know that he was born of Sienese." Then he turned to me and said: "For our own honour and yours, have patience for four or five days and do not go about in the Banchi; after that go where you like, and let the madmen die at their convenience."

I went home and set myself to finish the medal I had already begun, of the head of Pope Clement, which I made with a reverse figuring a Peace. This was a little female figure dressed in the thinnest clothes, girt up, with a torch in her hand burning a heap of weapons tied together like a trophy; and there was figured the wall of a temple, in which Fury was figured bound with many chains; and round about was a motto in letters saying "Clauduntur belli portae" — the gates of war are shut.

While I was finishing the medal, the man I had struck got better, and the Pope did not stop asking for me; and because I avoided going about the Cardinal de' Medici — since every time I came before him his lordship gave me some important work to do, which greatly hindered the finishing of my medal — it happened that Messer Pier Carnesecchi, a great favourite of the Pope's, took on the care of looking after me: so in a neat way he told me how much the Pope wanted me to serve him. To whom I said that in a few days I would show his Holiness that I had never moved away from his service.

Chapter 71

A few days later, having finished my medal, I struck it in gold and in silver and in brass. Having shown it to Messer Piero, he brought me in to the Pope at once. It was a day after dinner in the month of April, and it was fine weather: the Pope was in the Belvedere.

When I came before his Holiness, I put the medals into his hands together with the steel dies. Having taken them, and having at once recognised the great force of art that was in them, looking Messer Piero in the face he said: "The ancients were never so well served with medals." While he and the others were considering them, now the dies and now the medals, I began most modestly to speak, and said:

"If the power of my perverse stars had not had a greater power to hinder what they violently showed me they meant to do, your Holiness would have lost, without any cause on your part or mine, a faithful and loving servant. Therefore, most Blessed Father, there is no error at all in those cases where everything is at stake in using the way certain poor simple men speak of, saying that one should mark seven and cut one. Since a wicked, lying tongue of a most evil adversary of mine had so easily made your Holiness angry that you came into such a fury, ordering the Governor to take me at once and hang me — seeing afterwards such an impropriety, doing so great a wrong to yourself in depriving yourself of a servant of yours such as your Holiness yourself says he is, I am quite sure that, both before God and before the world, your Holiness would afterwards have felt no small remorse. Therefore good and virtuous fathers, and masters of that kind too, ought not so hastily to let their arm fall on their sons and their servants; seeing that being sorry for it afterwards is no use at all. Since God has hindered this malignant course of the stars, and has saved me for your Holiness, I beg you once more not to be so easily angered with me."

The Pope, having stopped looking at the medals, listened to me with great attention; and because there were present a good many lords of the greatest importance, the Pope, blushing somewhat, showed that he was ashamed; and not knowing any other way of getting out of that tangle, he said he did not remember ever having given such an order. Then, seeing this, I went into other talk, so as to turn aside that shame he had shown.

His Holiness, having got onto the subject of the medals again, asked me what way I had used to strike them so marvellously, being so large; which he had never seen among the ancients, medals of such size. We talked about that a good while; and he, being afraid I would make him another little speech worse than that one, told me that the medals were most beautiful and that they were very welcome to him, and that he would have liked to make another reverse of his own fancy, if such medals could be struck with two reverses. I said they could. Then his Holiness ordered me to make the story of Moses when he strikes the rock and the water comes out of it, with a motto above saying "Ut bibat populus" — that the people may drink. And then he added: "Go, Benvenuto, for you will not have finished it before I have thought about your affairs."

When I had gone, the Pope boasted in front of everybody that he would give me so much that I should be able to live richly without ever having to work for anybody else again. I attended urgently to finishing the reverse of the Moses.

Chapter 72

In the meantime the Pope fell ill; and, the doctors judging that the illness was dangerous, that adversary of mine, being afraid of me, ordered certain Neapolitan soldiers to do to me what he was afraid I would do to him. So I had a great deal of trouble to defend my poor life.

Going on, I finished the reverse entirely; and having taken it up to the Pope, I found him in bed in a very bad way. All the same he made much of me, and wanted to see the medals and the dies; and having spectacles and lights brought, he could not make out anything at all. He set himself to grope over them a little with his fingers; then, having done that a while, he heaved a great sigh and said to some of them that he was sorry for me, but that if God gave him back his health he would settle everything.

Three days later the Pope died; and I, finding that I had lost my labour, put a good heart into myself and said to myself that by means of those medals I had made myself so well known that by any pope who came I should be employed, perhaps with better fortune. So I put heart into myself, cancelling entirely and completely the great injuries Pompeo had done me; and having put on my armour and my sword, I went off to Saint Peter's and kissed the dead Pope's feet, not without tears; then I came back into the Banchi to consider the great confusion that comes about on such occasions.

And while I was sitting in the Banchi with a good many friends of mine, Pompeo came by in the middle of ten very well armed men; and when he was exactly opposite where I was, he stopped a moment in the attitude of wanting to pick a quarrel with me. Those who were with me, bold and willing young men, signalled to me that I should put my hand to my sword; at which I immediately considered that if I put my hand to my sword some very great harm would follow to men who had not a fault in the world; therefore I judged it better that I alone should put my own life at risk. Having stood there for as long as it takes to say two Hail Marys, Pompeo laughed at me scornfully; and, going off, his men laughed too, shaking their heads; and with gestures of that sort they did a great deal of bullying. My companions wanted to put their hands to the quarrel; to whom I said angrily that I was a man to know how to finish my own quarrels by myself, and that I did not need braver men than I was; so let everybody mind his own business.

My friends, offended, went off from me grumbling. Among them was my dearest friend, whose name was Albertaccio del Bene, own brother of Alessandro and of Albizzo, who is today in Lyons and extremely rich. This Albertaccio was the most admirable young man I ever knew, and the most spirited, and he loved me as he loved himself; and because he knew perfectly well that that act of patience had not been out of smallness of spirit but out of the boldest courage — for he knew me very well — he came back to the point and begged me to do him the favour of calling on him to be with me in whatever I had a mind to do. To whom I said: "My Albertaccio, dearest to me of all the rest: the time will certainly come when you will be able to help me; but in this case, if you love me, do not look at me, and mind your own business, and get away quickly as the others have done, because this is no time to lose." These words were said quickly.
