Book One, Chapters 73 to 78

Chapter 73

Meanwhile my enemies had made their way at a slow pace from the Banchi towards the Chiavica, as the place is called, and had arrived at a crossing of streets which go off in different directions; but the one where my enemy Pompeo's house was, was the street that leads straight to the Campo di Fiore. And for some business of his, Pompeo had gone into the apothecary's shop on the corner of the Chiavica, and had stayed there with the apothecary a while over some affairs of his; although I was told that he had been boasting about that piece of bullying he thought he had done me. But at all events it was his bad fortune; because when I got to that corner he was just coming out of the apothecary's, and his bravoes had opened out and had already taken him into the middle of them.

I put my hand to a small sharp dagger, and forcing the line of his bravoes, I laid my hands on his chest with such quickness and steadiness of mind that none of them could do anything about it. Having drawn to give it him in the face, the fright he took made him turn his face away, so that I pricked him exactly under the ear; and there I struck home two blows only, at the second of which he fell dead out of my hands — which was never my intention; but, as they say, blows are not given by agreement.

Having taken the dagger back in my left hand, and with my right drawn my sword to defend my life, all those bravoes ran to the dead body and made no move at all against me; and so, all alone, I withdrew along the Strada Giulia, thinking where I could save myself.

When I had gone three hundred paces, Il Piloto the goldsmith, a very great friend of mine, caught up with me and said: "Brother, since the harm is done, let us see about saving you." To whom I said: "Let us go to Albertaccio del Bene's house, because a little while ago I told him the time would soon come when I should need him."

When we got to Albertaccio's house the fuss made of me was beyond all reckoning, and soon the noblest of the young men of the Banchi of every nation appeared, except the Milanese; and they all offered to lay down their lives for the saving of mine. Messer Luigi Rucellai also sent to offer me marvellously that I should make use of anything of his, and so did many other great men like him; because they all agreed in blessing my hands, thinking that man had murdered me too far, and wondering a great deal that I had put up with so much.

Chapter 74

At this moment Cardinal Cornaro, having heard of the thing, sent thirty soldiers of his own accord, with as many partisans, pikes and arquebuses, to take me to his own rooms for greater safety; and I accepted the offer and went with them, and more than as many again of those young men kept me company.

In the meantime Messer Traiano, that relation of his, the Pope's first chamberlain, heard of it and sent to Cardinal de' Medici a great Milanese gentleman to tell the Cardinal of the great harm I had done, and that his most reverend lordship was bound to punish me. The Cardinal answered at once and said: "He would have done great harm if he had not done this smaller harm: thank Messer Traiano on my behalf for having informed me of what I did not know." And turning at once, in the presence of the gentleman, to the Bishop of Forlì, a gentleman and member of his household, he said: "Look diligently for my Benvenuto, and bring him here to me, because I mean to help and defend him; and whoever acts against him will be acting against me."

The gentleman went off very red in the face, and the Bishop of Forlì came to find me at Cardinal Cornaro's house; and, having found the Cardinal, he said that Cardinal de' Medici was sending for Benvenuto, and that he wanted to be the one to keep him. Cardinal Cornaro, who was as odd-tempered as a bear cub, answered the bishop very angrily, telling him that he was as fit to keep me as Cardinal de' Medici was. At this the bishop said that he begged him to let him speak one word to me about something apart from that affair, on other business of the Cardinal's. Cornaro told him that for that day he should consider that he had spoken to me.

Cardinal de' Medici was very offended; but all the same I went the following night, without Cornaro's knowledge, very well accompanied, to visit him; and then I begged him to do me the favour of leaving me in Cornaro's house, and I told him of the great courtesy Cornaro had shown me; so that, if his most reverend lordship let me stay with Cornaro, I should come to have one more friend in my necessities; or else that he should dispose of me in whatever way pleased his lordship. He answered that I should do whatever seemed good to me.

Having gone back to Cornaro's house, a few days later Cardinal Farnese was made Pope; and, having at once given orders about matters of more importance, the Pope asked for me, saying he did not want anybody but me to make his coins. To these words a certain gentleman of his household, very close to him, called Messer Latino Juvinale, answered his Holiness, and said that I was a fugitive for a homicide committed on the person of a Milanese called Pompeo; and he added all my reasons very favourably. At which words the Pope said: "I did not know of Pompeo's death, but I did know Benvenuto's reasons; so let him have a safe conduct made out at once, with which he may be perfectly safe."

There was present a great friend of that Pompeo's, and very close to the Pope, who was called Messer Ambrogio and was a Milanese, and he said to the Pope: "In the first days of your papacy it would not be well to grant favours of this sort." To whom the Pope turned and said: "You do not know the case as well as I do. Know that men like Benvenuto, unique in their profession, ought not to be bound by the law; and this man all the more so, because I know how much right he has on his side." And having had the safe conduct made out for me, I began at once to serve him with the greatest favour.

Chapter 75

That Latino Juvinale came to find me and ordered me to make the Pope's coins. At which all those enemies of mine were roused: they began to hinder me from making them. At which the Pope, becoming aware of the thing, shouted at them all, and insisted that I should make them.

I began to make the dies for the scudi, on which I made a half figure of Saint Paul, with a motto in letters saying "Vas electionis" — a chosen vessel. This coin pleased far more than the ones by those who had made them in competition with me; so that the Pope said that nobody else should ever speak to him about coins again, because he wanted me to be the one who made them and nobody else.

So I attended to working freely; and that Messer Latino Juvinale brought me in to the Pope, because the Pope had given him that duty. I wanted to get back the grant of the office of striker of the mint. The Pope let himself be advised about this, saying that first I must have the pardon for the homicide, which I should get on the Feast of the Assumption in August by order of the wardmasters of Rome — for that is the custom every year at this solemn feast, to give these wardmasters twelve banished men; meanwhile another safe conduct would be made out for me, by which I could be safe until that time.

My enemies, seeing that they could in no way manage to keep me from the mint, took another course. Pompeo, when he was killed, had left three thousand ducats of dowry to a little bastard daughter of his; and they arranged that a certain favourite of Signor Pier Luigi, the Pope's son, should ask for her in marriage through that lord: and so it was done. This favourite was a little peasant brought up by that lord, and, from what was said, very little of that money came to him, because the lord laid his hands on it and meant to use it himself.

But because this husband of the young girl, to please his wife, had several times begged the lord to have me taken, which lord had promised to do it as soon as he saw the favour I had with the Pope fall off a little — things standing so for about two months, because that servant of his was trying to get his dowry, the lord did not answer him to the purpose, but let his wife know that he would take revenge for her father at all costs.

Although I knew something of it, and had presented myself several times before that lord, who made a show of doing me the greatest favours, on the other side he had arranged one of two ways: either to have me killed or to have me taken by the sheriff. He gave the commission to a certain little devil of a Corsican soldier of his, to do it as cleanly as he could; and those other enemies of mine, above all Messer Traiano, had promised to make this little Corsican a present of a hundred scudi; who said he would do it as easily as drinking a fresh egg.

I, hearing of such a thing, went about with my eyes open and in good company and very well armed with a coat of mail and sleeves, which I had licence for. This little Corsican, out of greed, thinking to get all that money safely for himself, believed he could do the business by himself alone; so that one day, after dinner, they had me called on Signor Pier Luigi's behalf; at which I went at once, because the lord had talked to me about wanting to make several large silver vessels.

Having left home in a hurry, still with my usual armour, I went quickly along the Strada Giulia, thinking I should meet nobody at that hour. When I was at the upper end of the Strada Giulia, to turn towards the Farnese palace, it being my habit to turn wide at corners, I saw that little Corsican get up from where he was sitting and come out into the middle of the street; so that I was not put out at all, but stood ready to defend myself; and slowing my pace somewhat, I went close to the wall to leave a wide road for the Corsican. He too came close to the wall; and, when we had already come well up to each other, having recognised expressly by his behaviour that he had a mind to do me harm, and seeing me alone like that, thinking it would come off for him — so that I began to speak and said: "Brave soldier, if it were night you might say you had taken me for somebody else; but because it is day, you know perfectly well who I am, and I have never had anything to do with you, and never did you any harm; but I should be quite ready to do you a good turn."

At these words he, in a bullying attitude, not getting out of my way, told me he did not know what I was talking about. Then I said: "I know perfectly well what you want and what you are saying; but the business you have undertaken to do is more difficult and dangerous than you think, and it might turn out backwards; and remember that you have to do with a man who would defend himself against a hundred. And this is not an honourable business for brave men, such as you are."

Meanwhile I too was looking at him like a dog, and both of us had changed colour. By now people had come up, who had already realised that our words were of iron; so that, not having the nerve to lay hands on me, he said: "We shall see each other again another time." To whom I said: "I always see decent men again, and men who look like it."

Having gone off, I went to the lord's house, and he had not sent for me. Coming back to my shop, that little Corsican let me know, through a very great friend of his and of mine, that I should not be on my guard against him any more, and that he wanted to be a good brother to me; but that I should be well on my guard against others, because I was in the greatest danger, since men of much importance had sworn my death. Having sent to thank him, I guarded myself as best I could.

Not many days later I was told by a great friend of mine that Signor Pier Luigi had given express orders that I should be taken that evening. This was told me at twenty hours; so I spoke about it with some friends of mine, who urged me to go away at once. And because the order had been given for one hour of the night, at twenty-three hours I got into the post saddle and rode off to Florence: because, since that little Corsican had not had the heart to do the business he had promised, Signor Pier Luigi had on his own authority given orders that I should be taken, only in order to quiet a little that daughter of Pompeo's, who wanted to know where her dowry was. Not being able to satisfy her with revenge in either of the two ways he had arranged, he thought of another, which we shall tell in its place.

Chapter 76

I got to Florence and paid my respects to Duke Alessandro, who made marvellous fuss of me and asked me to stay with him.

And because there was in Florence a certain sculptor called Il Tribolino, and he was my gossip, since I had stood godfather to a son of his, talking with him he told me that a certain Jacopo del Sansovino, once his first master, had sent for him; and because he had never seen Venice, and for the earnings he expected, he was going very willingly; and asking me whether I had ever seen Venice, I said no; so he begged me to go with him for a jaunt, which I promised him. So I answered Duke Alessandro that I wanted to go as far as Venice first, and afterwards I would willingly come back to serve him; and he made me promise it, and ordered me to speak to him before I left.

The next day, having got myself ready, I went to take leave of the Duke, whom I found in the Pazzi palace, at the time when the wife and daughters of Signor Lorenzo Cibo were lodged there. Having let his Excellency know that I wanted to go to Venice with his good favour, Cosimino de' Medici, today Duke of Florence, came back with the answer, telling me to go and find Niccolò da Monte Aguto, who would give me fifty gold scudi, which money his Excellency the Duke gave me, that I should enjoy them for love of him; and afterwards come back and serve him.

I had the money from Niccolò, and went to the house for Tribolo, who was ready; and he asked me whether I had tied up my sword. I told him that a man on horseback going on a journey ought not to tie up his sword. He said that in Florence that was the custom, because there was a certain Ser Maurizio who for the least thing would have given Saint John the Baptist himself the rope; so one had to carry one's sword tied until one was outside the gate. I laughed at it, and so we went off.

We joined up with the Venice courier, whose nickname was Lamentone. We went in company with him, and, having passed Bologna, one evening among others we arrived at Ferrara; and, having lodged at the inn on the Piazza, Lamentone went off to find some of the exiles to bring them letters and messages from their wives; for it was so by the Duke's consent that only the courier could speak to them, and nobody else, on pain of the same banishment they were under.

In the meantime, it being a little past twenty-two hours, Tribolo and I went off to see the Duke of Ferrara come back, who had gone to Belfiore to watch a joust. On his way back we met a good many exiles, who looked at us hard, almost forcing us to speak with them. Tribolo, who was the most fearful man I ever knew, kept telling me: "Do not look at them and do not speak with them, if you want to go back to Florence."

So we stayed to watch the Duke come back; then, having gone back to the inn, we found Lamentone there. And when it was getting on for one hour of the night, Niccolò Benintendi appeared with his brother Piero, and another old man, who I think was Jacopo Nardi, along with several other young men; and as soon as they came they asked the courier, each of them, about his own family in Florence. Tribolo and I stood some way off, so as not to speak with them.

After they had talked a while with Lamentone, that Niccolò Benintendi said: "I know those two perfectly well; why do they make such a fuss about not wanting to speak to us?" Tribolo kept telling me to keep quiet. Lamentone told them that the licence which had been given to him had not been given to us. Benintendi went on and said that it was asinine, and sent us cankers and a thousand fine things.

Then I raised my head as modestly as I could and knew how, and said: "Dear gentlemen, you can do us a great deal of harm, and we can do you no good at all; and although you have said some words to us which are not fitting, we do not for that wish to be angry with you." That old man of the Nardi said that I had spoken like the decent young man I was.

Niccolò Benintendi then said: "I have them and the Duke in my backside." I answered that he was in the wrong with us, that we had nothing to do with his affairs. That old man of the Nardi took our side, telling Benintendi that he was in the wrong; at which he still went on saying insulting words. So I told him that I would say and do things to him that he would not like; so let him mind his own business and leave us alone. He answered that he had the Duke and us in his backside again, and that we and he were a heap of asses.

At which words, giving him the lie in his throat, I drew my sword; and the old man, who wanted to be first at the stairs, fell a few steps down, and all of them on top of him, one on another. At which, jumping forward, I swung my sword along the walls in the greatest fury, saying: "I shall kill you all" — and I took very good care not to do them any harm, when I could have done far too much.

At this noise the innkeeper shouted; Lamentone said, "Do not do it"; some of them said, "Alas, my head!", others, "Let me get out of here." It was an unreckonable beating: they looked like a herd of pigs. The innkeeper came with a light; I went back up and put away my sword.

Lamentone told Niccolò Benintendi that he had done wrong; the innkeeper said to Niccolò Benintendi: "It is a matter of life to put your hand to a weapon here, and if the Duke knew of these insolences of yours he would have you hanged by the throat; so I will not do to you what you deserve; but never come to this inn again, or it will go badly with you." The innkeeper came up to me, and when I wanted to excuse myself he would not let me say anything, telling me that he knew I had a thousand reasons on my side, and that I should be well on my guard against them on the journey.

Chapter 77

When we had supped, a boatman came up to take us to Venice. I asked him whether he would give me the boat to ourselves; and he was content, and we made an agreement on it.

Very early in the morning we took horses to go to the port, which is I do not know how many miles from Ferrara; and when we got to the port we found there Niccolò Benintendi's brother with three other companions, waiting for me to arrive: among them were two shafted weapons, and I had bought a fine javelin in Ferrara. Being also very well armed, I was not dismayed at all, as Tribolo was, who said: "God help us: these men are here to kill us." Lamentone turned to me and said: "The best thing you can do is to go back to Ferrara, because I see the thing is dangerous. Please, my Benvenuto, let the fury of these mad beasts pass over."

Then I said: "Let us go forward, because God helps the man who is in the right; and you shall see how I shall help myself. Is that boat not hired for us?" "Yes," said Lamentone. "And we shall be in it without them, as far as my own powers can manage."

I urged my horse forward, and when I was within fifty paces I dismounted, and went boldly forward with my javelin. Tribolo had stopped behind and was huddled up on his horse, so that he looked like the cold itself; and Lamentone the courier was puffing and blowing like a wind, for that was his way of doing things — but he did it more then than usual, standing there considering what end that devilry was going to have.

When I got to the boat, the boatman came up to me and said that those several Florentine gentlemen wanted to come into the boat in our company, if I were content with it. To whom I said: "The boat is hired for us and not for anybody else, and it grieves me to my heart not to be able to be with them." At these words a bold young man of the Magalotti said: "Benvenuto, we shall see that you are able." Then I said: "If God and the right I have, together with my own strength, will it or can do it, you will not make me able to do what you say." And with the words together I jumped into the boat. Turning the point of my weapon at them, I said: "With this I shall show you that I am not able."

Wanting to make a little demonstration, having put his hand to his weapon and come forward, that man of the Magalotti — I jumped up onto the edge of the boat and gave him such a great blow that if he had not fallen over backwards on the ground I should have run him through from side to side. The other companions, instead of helping him, pulled back; and, seeing that I could have killed him, instead of striking him I said: "Get up, brother, and take your weapon and go away; you have seen well enough that I cannot do what I do not want to do, and that I have not wanted to do what I could have done."

Then I called Tribolo and the boatman and Lamentone into the boat; and so we went off towards Venice. When we had gone ten miles up the Po, those young men had got into a light boat and caught up with us; and when they came opposite us, that fool Pier Benintendi said to me: "Get along, Benvenuto, for we shall see each other again in Venice." "Get on your way, and I am coming," I said; "and everywhere I let myself be seen again."

So we arrived in Venice. I took advice from a brother of Cardinal Cornaro, asking him to do me the favour of being able to carry a weapon; who told me to carry it freely, since the worst that could happen was to lose the sword.

Chapter 78

So, carrying our weapons, we went to visit Jacopo del Sansovino the sculptor, who had sent for Tribolo; and he made a great fuss of me and wanted to give us dinner, and we stayed with him. Talking with Tribolo, he told him that he did not want to employ him for the present, and that he should come back another time.

At these words I burst out laughing, and said pleasantly to Sansovino: "Your house is much too far from his, for him to have to come back another time." The poor dismayed Tribolo said: "I have here the letter you wrote me to come." At this Sansovino said that men of his sort, decent and able men, could do that and more.

Tribolo shrugged his shoulders and said "Patience" several times. At this, and not looking at the abundant dinner Sansovino had given me, I took my companion Tribolo's part, since he was in the right. And because at that table Sansovino had never stopped chattering about his own great performances, speaking ill of Michelangelo and of everybody else who worked in that art, and only praising himself marvellously, this had become such a nuisance to me that I had not eaten a mouthful I liked, and I only said these two words: "Oh, Messer Jacopo, decent men do the things of decent men; and those able men who do beautiful and good works are much better known when they are praised by others than when they praise themselves so confidently on their own account." At these words both he and we got up from the table grumbling.

That same day, being in Venice near the Rialto, I ran into Piero Benintendi, who was with several men; and, seeing that they were looking to do me some harm, I withdrew into an apothecary's shop until I had let that fury pass by. Afterwards I heard that that young man of the Magalotti, to whom I had shown courtesy, had shouted at them a great deal; and so it passed off.
