Book One, Chapters 79 to 83

Chapter 79

A few days later we came back towards Florence; and being lodged at a certain place which is on this side of Chioggia, on the left hand as you come towards Ferrara, the innkeeper wanted to be paid in his own way before we went to sleep; and when we told him that in other places the custom was to pay in the morning, he said: "I mean to be paid in the evening, and in my own way." I said, at those words, that men who wanted to do things their own way ought to make a world of their own, because that was not the custom here. The innkeeper answered that I should not bother his head, because he meant to do it his way. Tribolo was trembling with fear, and kept nudging me to keep quiet, so that they should not do us worse: so we paid him his way and went off to sleep.

We had the good luck of very beautiful beds, everything new and genuinely clean; for all that, I never slept, thinking all that night how I had to go about revenging myself. At one moment it came into my mind to set fire to his house; at another to cut the throats of four good horses he had in his stable; I saw that all of it was easy for me to do, but I did not see that it would be easy to save myself and my companion. In the end I took as my expedient to put the baggage and my companions in the boat, and so I did; and having hitched the horses to the tow rope which pulled the boat, I said they should not move the boat until I came back, because I had left a pair of my slippers in the place where I had slept.

So, going back into the inn, I asked for the innkeeper; and he answered me that he had nothing to do with us, and that we should go to the brothel. There was a great lout of a stable boy of his there, all half asleep, who said to me: "The innkeeper would not move for the Pope, because he is sleeping with a certain little slut he has wanted for a long time"; and he asked me for a tip; so I gave him some of those small Venetian coins, and told him to hold back the man with the tow rope a little while I looked for my slippers and came back.

Having gone up, I took a little knife that shaved, and the four beds that were there I cut them all to shreds with that knife; so that I knew I had done more than fifty scudi of damage. And coming back to the boat with some scraps of that serge in my pocket, I told the man who was guiding the tow rope in a hurry to get moving quickly.

When we had got a little way from the inn, my gossip Tribolo said that he had left certain straps behind that tied up his little valise, and that he wanted to go back for them at all costs. To which I said that he should not bother about two little straps, because I would make him as many big ones as he could want. He told me I was always joking, but that he wanted to go back for his straps at all costs; and, insisting to the man with the tow rope that he stop, while I said that he should keep going, I told him meanwhile of the great damage I had done to the innkeeper; and having shown him a sample of certain scraps of the serge and so on, such a trembling came over him that he never stopped saying to the man with the rope: "Get on, get on quickly." And he never felt safe from this danger until we had got back to the gates of Florence.

When we got there, Tribolo said: "Let us tie up our swords for the love of God, and do not do this to me any more; because I have felt the whole time as if my guts were in a basin." To which I said: "My gossip Tribolo, you do not need to tie up your sword, because you have never untied it" — and I said this by chance, having never seen him give a sign of being a man on that whole journey. At which, looking at his sword, he said: "By God, you are right, because it is tied in the way I fixed it before I left my house."

My gossip felt that I had kept him bad company, because I had taken offence and defended myself against those who had wanted to do us harm; and I felt that he had kept me much worse company, in not setting himself to help me in such needs. Let a bystander without passion judge it.

Chapter 80

When I had dismounted, I went at once to find Duke Alessandro and thanked him a great deal for the present of the fifty scudi, telling his Excellency that I was fully ready for whatever I was good for in serving his Excellency. He at once ordered me to make the dies for his coins; and the first I made was a coin of forty soldi, with his Excellency's head on one side and on the other a Saint Cosmas and a Saint Damian. These were silver coins, and they pleased so much that the Duke ventured to say that they were the most beautiful coins in Christendom. So said the whole of Florence, and everybody who saw them.

So I asked his Excellency to settle a salary on me, and to have the rooms at the mint made over to me; and he told me to attend to serving him and that he would give me a great deal more than I was asking; and meanwhile he told me he had given the order to the master of the mint, who was a certain Carlo Acciaiuoli, and that I should go to him for all the money I wanted. And so I found it was; but I drew the money so sparingly that I was always left with something owing to me, by my own reckoning.

Then I made the dies for the giulio, on which was a Saint John in profile, seated, with a book in his hand, which seemed to me the most beautiful work I ever made; and on the other side were Duke Alessandro's arms. After this I made the die for the half giulios, on which I made a head facing forward of a young Saint John. This was the first coin with a head facing forward on so thin a silver flan that was ever made; and this difficulty does not show, except to the eyes of those who are excellent in such a profession. After this I made the dies for the gold scudi, on which was a cross on one side with certain little cherubim, and on the other side his Excellency's arms.

When I had made these four sorts of coins, I begged his Excellency to settle my salary and make over to me the rooms mentioned, if my service pleased him. At which words his Excellency told me kindly that he was very content, and that he would give the orders.

While I was speaking to him, his Excellency was in his wardrobe and was looking at a marvellous gun which had been sent him from Germany. Seeing that I was looking at that fine instrument with great attention, he put it into my hands, telling me that he knew perfectly well how much I delighted in such a thing, and that as an earnest of what he had promised me I should take from his wardrobe an arquebus of my own choosing, apart from that one, since he well knew that there were many there as fine and as good. At which words I accepted and thanked him; and, seeing me start looking round with my eyes, he ordered his wardrobe keeper, a certain Pretino of Lucca, to let me take whatever I wanted. And having gone off with the most pleasant words, I stayed behind and chose the most beautiful and the best arquebus I ever saw or ever had, and I took it home.

Two days later I brought him certain small drawings his Excellency had asked me for, to make some works in gold which he wanted to send as a present to his wife, who was still in Naples. Again I asked him about that same business of mine, that he should settle it for me. Then his Excellency told me that first he wanted me to make the dies for a fine portrait of himself, as I had done for Pope Clement. I began that portrait in wax; on account of which his Excellency ordered that at whatever hours I came to take his likeness, I should always be let in.

I, seeing that this business of mine was dragging on, called a certain Pietro Paolo of Monterotondo, of the Roman country, who had been with me from a small boy in Rome; and, finding that he was with a certain wretched Bernardone, a goldsmith who did not treat him very well, on that account I took him away from him and taught him very well to put in those dies for the coins; and meanwhile I took the Duke's likeness. And many times I found him dozing after dinner with that Lorenzino of his who afterwards killed him, and nobody else; and I wondered a great deal that a Duke of that sort should trust himself so.

Chapter 81

It happened that Ottaviano de' Medici, who seemed to govern everything, wanting to favour, against the Duke's wish, the old master of the mint, whose name was Bastiano Cennini, an old-fashioned man of little knowledge, had had those clumsy dies of his mixed in with mine for the dies of the scudi; on which account I complained to the Duke, who, seeing the truth, took it very badly, and said to me: "Go and tell it to Ottaviano de' Medici, and show it to him." So I went at once; and having shown him the injury that had been done to my beautiful coins, he said to me like an ass: "That is how we please to do it." To whom I answered that it was not what was right, and it did not please me. He said: "And if it pleased the Duke?" I answered: "It would not please me; because such a thing is neither just nor reasonable." He said that I should get out of his sight, and that I should swallow it that way if I burst.

Having gone back to the Duke, I told him everything that Ottaviano de' Medici and I had discussed so unpleasantly; so I begged his Excellency not to let a wrong be done to the beautiful coins I had made for him, and to give me leave to go. Then he said: "Ottaviano wants too much of it; and you shall have what you want, because this is an injury done to me."

That same day, which was a Thursday, there came to me from Rome an ample safe conduct from the Pope, telling me to come quickly for the pardon of the Feast of the Assumption in the middle of August, so that I could free myself of that charge for the homicide I had done. Having gone to the Duke, I found him in bed, because they said he had disordered himself; and having finished in a little more than two hours what I needed for his wax medal, I showed it to him finished, and it pleased him a great deal. Then I showed his Excellency the safe conduct I had had by the Pope's order, and how the Pope was asking me to make him certain works; for this reason I should go and win back that beautiful city of Rome, and meanwhile I would serve him with his medal.

At this the Duke said, half in anger: "Benvenuto, do as I say, do not go; because I shall settle your salary, and give you the rooms at the mint, with a great deal more than you would know how to ask me for, because you ask what is just and reasonable: and whom would you have put in my beautiful dies that you have made me?" Then I said: "My lord, everything has been thought of, because I have here a pupil of mine, a young Roman whom I have taught, who will serve your Excellency very well until I come back with your medal finished, to stay with you always afterwards. And because I have my shop open in Rome with workmen and some business, when I have had my pardon I shall leave all my Roman devotions to a man I have brought up who is there, and afterwards, with your Excellency's good favour, I shall come back to you."

Present at this was that Lorenzino de' Medici I have mentioned, and nobody else; the Duke signalled to him several times that he too should encourage me to stay; on account of which Lorenzino never said anything but: "Benvenuto, you would do better to stay." To whom I said that I wanted to win back Rome at all costs. He said nothing else, and kept looking at the Duke with a very evil eye.

I, having finished the medal in my own way and having shut it in its little box, said to the Duke: "My lord, be of good cheer, because I shall make you a far more beautiful medal than I made for Pope Clement; because reason requires that I should do better, that one being the first I ever made; and Messer Lorenzo here will give me some very beautiful reverse, being a learned person and of the greatest wit." At these words Lorenzo at once answered, saying: "I was thinking of nothing else but of giving you a reverse that would be worthy of his Excellency." The Duke smirked, and, looking at Lorenzo, said: "Lorenzo, you shall give him the reverse, and he shall make it here, and shall not go." Lorenzo answered quickly, saying: "I shall do it as soon as I can, and I hope to do something to make the world marvel." The Duke, who took him now for a bit of a madman and now for a lazy fellow, rolled over in bed and laughed at the words he had said to him.

I left without any other ceremony of leave-taking, and left them alone together. The Duke, who did not believe I would go, said nothing more to me. When he heard afterwards that I had gone, he sent a servant after me who caught me up at Siena, and gave me fifty gold ducats from the Duke, telling me that I should enjoy them for love of him and come back as soon as I could. "And from Messer Lorenzo I tell you that he is getting ready a marvellous reverse for that medal you want to make."

I had left all instructions with Pietro Paolo the Roman about how he was to put in the dies; but because it was a very difficult thing, he never put them in very well. I was left a creditor of the mint, for the making of my dies, for more than seventy scudi.

Chapter 82

I went off to Rome, and took with me that most beautiful wheel-lock arquebus the Duke had given me, and with the greatest pleasure I used it many times on the way, doing unreckonable feats with it.

I got to Rome; and because I kept a little house in the Strada Giulia which was not in order, I went to dismount at the house of Messer Giovanni Gaddi, clerk of the Chamber, with whom I had left in trust when I left Rome many fine weapons of mine and many other things I set great store by. So I did not want to dismount at my shop; and I sent for that Felice, my partner, and had that little house of mine put in very good order at once. Then the next day I went to sleep in it, being very well provided with clothes and everything I needed, wanting the following morning to go and visit the Pope to thank him.

I had two boy servants, and under my house there was a laundress who cooked for me very cleanly. Having given supper that evening to several friends of mine, and that supper having passed with the greatest pleasure, I went off to sleep; and hardly had the night passed when in the morning, more than an hour before day, I heard someone knocking with the greatest fury at the door of my house, one blow not waiting for the next.

So I called my elder servant, whose name was Cencio — it was he I had taken into the necromantic circle — and told him to go and see who was the madman who was beating on it so beastly at that hour. While Cencio was going, I lit another lamp, since I always keep one burning at night, and at once put on over my shirt a marvellous shirt of mail, and over it an old coat, anyhow.

Cencio came back and said: "Alas, master, it is the sheriff with the whole guard, and he says that if you do not come quickly he will throw the door down; and they have torches and a thousand things with them." To whom I said: "Tell them I am putting on an old coat, and that I am coming out in my shirt like this."

Imagining that it was a murder, like the one Signor Pier Luigi had already arranged for me, I took in my right hand a marvellous dagger I had, and in my left the safe conduct; then I ran to the back window, which looked out over certain gardens, and there I saw more than thirty constables; from which I knew that I could not escape on that side. Having put the two boys in front of me, I told them to open the door when I told them exactly.

Having got myself ready, the dagger in my right and the safe conduct in my left, in an attitude of real defence, I said to the two boys: "Do not be afraid; open." Vittorio the sheriff jumped inside at once with two others, thinking he could easily lay hands on me; and, seeing me ready in that way, they drew back and said: "This calls for something more than jokes." Then I said, throwing the safe conduct at them: "Read that; and since you cannot take me, still less do I want you to touch me."

The sheriff then told several of them to take me, and that the safe conduct could be looked at afterwards. At this, boldly, I pushed my weapon forward and said: "God be for the right; either I escape alive, or I am taken dead." The room was narrow; they made as if to come at me by force, and I made a great show of defence; on account of which the sheriff knew that he could not have me in any way but the one I had said. Having called the clerk, while he was having the safe conduct read he made as if two or three times to have hands laid on me; at which I never moved from that resolution I had made. Giving up the business, they threw the safe conduct on the ground and went off without me.

Chapter 83

Having gone back to rest, I felt badly upset, and could never take up sleep again. I had made up my mind that as soon as it was day I would have myself bled; so I took advice about it from Messer Giovanni Gaddi, and he from a little apology of a doctor of his, who asked me whether I had been frightened. Now consider what a doctor's judgement that was, having been told so great a case, and asking me such a question! This was a certain young jackanapes who laughed almost continually and at nothing; and, laughing in that way, he told me to take a good glass of Greek wine and to attend to being cheerful and not to be afraid.

Messer Giovanni kept saying: "Master, a man of bronze or of marble would be frightened in such cases; how much more a man." At this the little doctor said: "Monsignor, we are not all made in one way: this is a man neither of bronze nor of marble, but of solid iron"; and, putting his hands on my pulse, with that senseless laughing of his he said to Messer Giovanni: "Now feel here; this is not the pulse of a man, but of a lion or a dragon." At which I, whose pulse was strongly disturbed — perhaps beyond the measure that stupid doctor had learned either from Hippocrates or from Galen — knew my own trouble well enough; but so as not to frighten myself more, or do myself more harm than I had already had, I showed a good spirit.

Meanwhile Messer Giovanni had dinner got ready, and we all ate in company: which was, along with Messer Giovanni, a certain Messer Lodovico da Fano, Messer Antonio Allegretti, Messer Giovanni the Greek, all most learned persons, and Messer Annibal Caro, who was very young. And nothing else was talked of at that dinner but this bold affair. And they had it told over and over again by Cencio, my little servant, who was beyond measure quick-witted, bold and very handsome of body; and every time he told this raging business of mine, doing the attitudes I had done and saying very well the words I had said, something new always came back to me. And they often asked him whether he had been frightened; to which words he answered that they should ask me whether I had been frightened, because he had had exactly what I had had.

This chatter becoming a nuisance to me, and because I felt strongly upset, I got up from the table, saying that I wanted to go and dress myself and him in new clothes of blue cloth and silk; that I wanted to go in the procession in four days' time, when the Feast of the Assumption came, and that I wanted Cencio to carry the lighted white torch for me. So, having gone off, I went to cut out the blue clothes, with a fine little gown of blue watered silk as well and a doublet of the same; and for him I made a doublet and a gown of taffeta, also blue.

When I had cut out these things, I went off to the Pope, who told me to speak to his Messer Ambrogio, since he had given orders that I should make a great work in gold. So I went to find Messer Ambrogio; who was very well informed about the sheriff business, and had been in agreement with my enemies about making me come back, and had shouted at the sheriff for not having taken me; and he excused himself, that against a safe conduct in that form he could not do it. Messer Ambrogio began to talk to me about the business the Pope had ordered; then he told me to make the designs for it and that everything would be provided.

Meanwhile the day of the Assumption came; and because the custom is that those who have such pardons must give themselves up as prisoners, on that account I went back to the Pope and told his Holiness that I did not want to put myself in prison, and that I begged him to do me the favour of not going to prison. The Pope answered me that that was the custom, and so it should be done. At this I knelt down again and thanked him for the safe conduct his Holiness had made me; and said that with it I would go back to serve my Duke of Florence, who was waiting for me with so much eagerness. At these words the Pope turned to a trusted man of his and said: "Let Benvenuto be given the pardon without the prison; and let his grant be drawn up for him so that it is in good form."

The grant having been drawn up, the Pope signed it; it was registered at the Capitol; then, on the appointed day, between two gentlemen, I went most honourably in the procession, and had the full pardon.
