Book One, Chapters 84 to 87

Chapter 84

Four days later a very great fever took me with an unreckonable chill; and, having gone to bed, I judged at once that I was a dead man. I had the first doctors of Rome called, among them a Master Francesco da Norcia, a very old doctor and of the greatest credit in Rome. I told these doctors what I thought had been the cause of my great illness, and that I had wanted to be bled, but that I had been advised against it; and if I was still in time, I begged them to bleed me. Master Francesco answered that bleeding now would not be good, but then it would have been, and I should have had no trouble in the world; now I must be treated another way.

So they set their hands to treating me with all the diligence they could and knew in the world; and every day I got furiously worse, so that at the end of a week the illness grew so much that the doctors, despairing of the business, gave orders that I should be humoured and given everything I asked for. Master Francesco said: "As long as there is breath in him, call me at any hour, because nobody can imagine what nature can do in a young man of this sort; therefore, if he faints, give him these five remedies one after another, and send for me, and I shall come at any hour of the night; because it would please me more to save this man than any cardinal in Rome."

Messer Giovanni Gaddi came to visit me two or three times a day, and every time he took up one of my fine guns and my coats of mail and my swords, and kept saying: "This thing is beautiful, and this other one is more beautiful" — and so with my little models and small things: so that he had become a nuisance to me. And with him came a certain Mattio Franzesi, who seemed to think that a thousand years had gone by before I died as well; not because anything of mine would come to him, but he seemed to want what Messer Giovanni was showing such a great appetite for.

I had that Felice, my partner, who gave me the greatest help that one man in the world can ever give another. My nature was weakened and thoroughly beaten down; I had no strength left, once the breath had gone out, to take it in again; but the soundness of my brain stood firm, just as it did when I had nothing wrong with me. So, being in my right mind like that, a terrible old man came to find me at the bedside and wanted to drag me by force into a great boat of his; on account of which I called that Felice of mine to come near me and drive that scoundrelly old man away. Felice, who was most loving to me, ran up weeping and said: "Get away, you traitor of an old man, who want to rob me of all my good."

Messer Giovanni Gaddi, being there present, said: "The poor fellow is raving, and there are only a few hours left in him." That other man, Mattio Franzesi, said: "He has been reading Dante, and in this great illness that wandering has come over him"; and he said, laughing: "Get away, you old scoundrel, and do not bother our Benvenuto."

Seeing myself mocked, I turned to Messer Giovanni Gaddi and said to him: "My dear master, know that I am not raving, and that it is true about this old man who is giving me this great trouble. But you would do much better to take that wretch Mattio out of my sight, who laughs at my illness; and since your lordship thinks me worthy to see him, you ought to come here with Messer Antonio Allegretti or with Messer Annibal Caro, or with others of your able men, who are persons of another discretion and another wit than this beast."

Then Messer Giovanni said jokingly to Mattio that he should get out of his sight for good; but because Mattio laughed, the joke became earnest, because Messer Giovanni never wanted to see him again, and had Messer Antonio Allegretti called, and Messer Lodovico, and Messer Annibal Caro.

When these decent men had come, I took the greatest comfort from it, and talked with them a good while in my right mind, still urging Felice to drive the old man away. Messer Lodovico kept asking me what it was that I seemed to see, and what he was like. While I was drawing him for them well in words, this old man took me by an arm and pulled me to him by force; on account of which I shouted for them to help me, because he wanted to throw me under the deck in that frightening boat of his. When I had said that last word, a very great faintness came on me, and it seemed to me that he threw me into that boat.

They say that then, in this faint, I threw myself about and said ugly words to Messer Giovanni Gaddi, that he was coming to rob me and not out of any charity; and a great many other very ugly words which made Messer Giovanni ashamed. Then they said that I lay still like a dead man; and having waited more than an hour, and thinking that I was growing cold, they left me for dead. And having gone back to their houses, that Mattio Franzesi heard of it, and wrote to Florence to Messer Benedetto Varchi, a very dear friend of mine, that at such and such an hour of the night they had seen me die. On account of which that great and able man Messer Benedetto, and my great friend, made a marvellous sonnet on my death, which was not real but was well believed, and it will be put in its place.

More than three long hours went by before I came to myself; and, all the remedies of Master Francesco having been given, and seeing that I did not come round, my dearest Felice set off at a run to Master Francesco da Norcia's house, and knocked so hard that he woke him and got him up, and weeping begged him to come to the house, because he thought I was dead. To whom Master Francesco, who was extremely choleric, said: "Son, what do you think I would do by coming? If he is dead, I am sorrier for it than you are; do you think that with my medicine, if I came, I could blow up his backside and give him back to you alive?" Seeing that the poor young man was going off weeping, he called him back and gave him a certain oil to rub on my wrists and my heart, and told them to squeeze the little fingers of my feet and hands very tight; and that if I came round they should send for him at once.

Felice, having gone off, did everything Master Francesco had told him; and, it being nearly broad daylight, and thinking themselves without hope, they gave orders to make the shroud and to wash me. In a moment I came round and called Felice to drive that old man away quickly, quickly, who was bothering me. Felice wanted to send for Master Francesco, and I said he should not send, and that he should come here to me, because the old man went off at once and was afraid of him. Felice having come up to me, I touched him and it seemed to me that the old man went off in a fury; so I begged him always to stay by me.

Master Francesco, having appeared, said that he meant to save me at all costs, and that he had never in his life seen greater strength in a young man than that; and, setting his hand to writing, he ordered me perfumes, washings, ointments, plasters and a great many unreckonable things. Meanwhile I came round with more than twenty leeches on my backside, pricked, bandaged and altogether ground down.

A good many friends of mine having come to see the miracle of the resurrected dead man, men of great importance had come, and plenty of them; in front of whom I said that the little gold and money I had, which might be about eight hundred scudi between gold, silver, jewels and money, I wanted to go to my poor sister who was in Florence, whose name was Monna Liperata; and all the rest of my goods, weapons and everything else, I wanted to go to my dearest Felice, and fifty gold ducats over, so that he could clothe himself. At these words Felice threw himself on my neck, saying that he wanted nothing, only that he wanted me alive. Then I said: "If you want me alive, touch me like that, and shout at that old man, who is afraid of you." At these words there were some who were frightened, knowing that I was not raving but was speaking to the purpose and in my right mind.

So my great illness went on, and I improved little. That most excellent man Master Francesco came four or five times a day; Messer Giovanni Gaddi, who was ashamed, did not come before me any more.

My brother-in-law appeared, my sister's husband: he was coming from Florence for the inheritance; and because he was a very decent man, he was very glad to have found me alive; and it gave me an unreckonable comfort to see him, and he at once made much of me, saying that he had come only to look after me with his own hands; and so he did for several days. Then I sent him away, having an almost certain hope of health. Then he left the sonnet of Messer Benedetto Varchi, which is this:

	On the believed and untrue death
	of Benvenuto Cellini

	Who will console us, Mattio? Who is there
	to stop us dying of our weeping, since
	it is true, alas, that without us
	that clear friendly soul has climbed to Heaven

	so early — the soul in which such worth
	flowered that down to his own time
	the world saw no equal, nor will see one,
	I think, since the best go first?

	Gentle spirit, if outside the mortal veil
	one loves, look down from Heaven on those you loved
	on earth, weeping not for your good but for their own harm.

	You have gone to contemplate up in Heaven
	the high Maker, and now see him living, just as
	with your learned hands you formed him down here.

Chapter 85

The illness had been so beyond all reckoning that it did not seem possible to come to an end of it; and that decent man Master Francesco da Norcia laboured harder over it than ever, and every day brought me new remedies, trying to make the poor disordered instrument firm again; and with all those unreckonable labours it did not seem possible to come to the end of this indignation, so that all the doctors had almost despaired of it and did not know what more to do.

I had an unreckonable thirst, and had been on my guard, as they had ordered me, for many days; and Felice, who felt he had done a fine piece of work in saving me, never left me; and that old man no longer gave me so much trouble, but sometimes visited me in dreams.

One day Felice had gone out, and there had been left to look after me an errand boy of mine and a servant girl called Beatrice. I asked the boy what had become of my lad Cencio, and what it meant that I had never seen him in my need. The boy told me that Cencio had had a far greater illness than I had, and that he was at the point of death. Felice had ordered them not to tell me. When he had told me such a thing I took the greatest sorrow from it.

Then I called that servant Beatrice, who was from Pistoia, and begged her to bring me full of clear cold water a great crystal cooler that was there near by. This woman ran at once and brought it to me full. I told her to hold it to my mouth, and that if she let me drink a draught of it my own way, I would give her a gown. This servant, who had stolen certain little things of some importance from me, and who out of fear that the theft would be found out would have been very glad if I had died, let me drink as much of that water as I could in two goes, so that in fact I drank more than a flask of it; then I covered myself up and began to sweat, and fell asleep.

Felice came back after I must have slept about an hour, and asked the boy what I was doing. The boy said: "I do not know: Beatrice brought him that cooler full of water, and he has drunk nearly all of it; I do not know now whether he is dead or alive." They say that this poor young man nearly fell to the ground for the great sorrow he took; then he took a bad stick and with it beat the servant desperately, saying: "Alas, you traitress, you have killed him for me!"

While Felice was beating her and she was shouting, I was dreaming; and it seemed to me that the old man had cords in his hands, and, wanting to give orders to tie me up, Felice had come on him and was hitting him with an axe, so that this old man ran off, saying: "Let me go, and I shall not come back for a long time."

Meanwhile Beatrice, shouting loudly, had run into my room; on account of which, waking up, I said: "Let her be, because perhaps in wanting to do me harm she has done me so much good that you, with all your labours, never managed to do anything of what she has done entirely: attend to helping me, because I am sweating; and be quick."

Felice took heart again, dried me and comforted me; and I, feeling the greatest improvement, promised myself my health. Master Francesco, appearing, and seeing the great improvement, and the servant weeping, and the errand boy running back and forth, and Felice laughing, this confusion gave the doctor to believe that some strange thing had happened which was the cause of that great improvement of mine.

Meanwhile that other one, Master Bernardino, appeared, who at the beginning had not wanted to bleed me. Master Francesco, a very able man, said: "Oh, the power of nature! She knows her own needs, and the doctors know nothing." That little brain of a Master Bernardino answered at once and said: "If he had drunk another flask he would have been cured at once." Master Francesco da Norcia, an old man and of great authority, said: "It was the bad luck that God send you." And then he turned to me and asked me whether I could have drunk any more; to whom I said no, because I had entirely taken away my thirst. Then he turned to Master Bernardino and said: "Do you see that nature took exactly what she needed, and no more and no less? So she was asking for what she needed when the poor young man asked you to bleed him: if you knew that his health lay in drinking two flasks of water now, why did you not say so before? And you would have had the credit."

At these words the little apology of a doctor went off sulking, and never came there again.

Then Master Francesco said that I should be taken out of that room, and that they should have me carried towards one of the hills of Rome. Cardinal Cornaro, hearing of my improvement, had me carried to a place of his that he had on Monte Cavallo: that same evening I was carried there with great care in a chair, well covered and steady. When I got there I began to vomit; and in that vomiting there came out of my stomach a hairy worm a quarter of an arm long: the hairs were long and the worm was very ugly, spotted with different colours, green, black and red. It was kept for the doctor, who said he had never seen such a thing, and then said to Felice: "Now take care of your Benvenuto, who is cured, and do not let him make any disorder; because although that has saved him, another disorder now would kill him. You see, the illness has been so great that when they brought him the holy oil we were too late; now I know that with a little patience and time he will make other beautiful works."

Then he turned to me and said: "My Benvenuto, be wise and make no disorder at all; and when you are cured I want you to make me a Madonna by your own hand, because I want to adore her always for love of you." Then I promised it him; then I asked him whether it would be a good thing for me to go as far as Florence. Then he told me to make myself a little safer first, and to see what nature did.

Chapter 86

A week having passed, the improvement was so little that I had almost become a nuisance to myself, because I had been more than fifty days in that great trouble; and, having made up my mind, I got ready; and in a pair of panniers my dear Felice and I went off towards Florence.

And because I had written nothing, I arrived in Florence at my sister's house, where I was wept over and laughed over at the same time by my sister. That day a good many friends of mine came to see me; among the others Pier Landi, who was the greatest and dearest I ever had in the world. The next day a certain Niccolò da Monte Aguto came, who was a very great friend of mine; and because he had heard the Duke say, "Benvenuto would have done much better to die, because he has come here to put his head in a halter, and I shall never forgive him" — Niccolò, coming to me, said desperately: "Alas, my dear Benvenuto, what have you come here to do? Did you not know what you have done against the Duke? Because I have heard him swear, saying that you have come to put your head in a halter at all costs."

Then I said: "Niccolò, remind his Excellency that Pope Clement once wanted to do the same to me, and just as wrongly; let him have me looked after and let me get well; because I shall show his Excellency that I have been the most faithful servant he will ever have in his life; and since some enemy of mine will have done me this bad turn out of envy, let him wait for my recovery, and as soon as I can I shall give him such an account of myself that I shall make him wonder."

This bad turn had been done me by Giorgetto Vasari of Arezzo, the painter, perhaps in payment for so many kindnesses done him; for I had kept him in Rome and paid his keep, and he had turned my house upside down for me; because he had a dry sort of leprosy, and had got his hands used to scratching all the time; and, sleeping with a good apprentice I had, called Manno, thinking he was scratching himself he had flayed Manno's leg with those dirty little hands of his, whose nails he never cut. Manno took his leave of me, and wanted to kill him at all costs: I made peace between them; then I got Giorgio a place with the Cardinal de' Medici, and always helped him. This is the reward: that he had told Duke Alessandro that I had spoken ill of his Excellency, and that I had boasted that I would be the first to leap onto the walls of Florence, in agreement with his Excellency's exiled enemies.

These words, according to what I heard afterwards, that fine gentleman Ottaviano de' Medici had made him say, wanting to revenge himself for the anger the Duke had shown him over the coins and over my leaving Florence; but I, being innocent of that falsehood laid on me, had no fear in the world at all. And that able man Master Francesco da Montevarchi treated me with the greatest skill, and my dearest friend Luca Martini had brought him to me, who stayed with me the greater part of the day.

Chapter 87

In the meantime I had sent the most faithful Felice back to Rome to look after my business there. Having lifted my head a little off the pillow, which was at the end of a fortnight, although I could not go on my own feet, I had myself carried into the Medici palace, up to where the little terrace is; and so I had myself set down to sit and wait for the Duke to pass.

And when a good many friends of mine at Court greeted me, they wondered a great deal that I had taken the trouble to have myself carried there in that way, being so badly reduced by the illness; telling me that I ought to have waited to be cured and to visit the Duke afterwards. A good many being gathered together, they all looked at me as a miracle; not so much because they had heard I was dead, but it seemed to them more of a miracle that I looked to them like a dead man.

Then I said, in front of them all, that some wicked scoundrel had told my lord the Duke that I had boasted that I meant to be the first to climb onto his Excellency's walls, and that afterwards I had spoken ill of him; on account of which I had not the nerve either to live or to die until I had first purged myself of this disgrace, and known who the reckless scoundrel was who had made that false report.

At these words a great number of those gentlemen had gathered; and showing the greatest compassion for me, one said one thing and one another; I said that I would never leave that place until I knew who it was who had accused me. At these words there came up, among all those gentlemen, Master Agostino, the Duke's tailor, and said: "If you want to know nothing else but that, you shall know it this very minute." Just then that Giorgio the painter came by: then Master Agostino said: "There is the man who accused you: now you can tell whether it is true or not."

I boldly, unable to move as I was, asked Giorgio whether such a thing were true. Giorgio said no, that it was not true, and that he had never said such a thing. Master Agostino said: "Oh, you gallows-bird, do you not know that I know it for certain?" Giorgio went off at once, and said no, that it had not been him.

Not long afterwards the Duke passed by; at whom I at once had myself held up before his Excellency, and he stopped. Then I said that I had come there in that way only to justify myself. The Duke looked at me and wondered that I was alive; then he told me to attend to being a decent man and getting well.

Having gone back home, Niccolò da Monte Aguto came to find me and told me that I had got through one of the greatest storms in the world, which he had never believed I would; because he had seen my trouble written in an unchangeable ink; and that I should attend to getting well quickly, and then go off with God, because it came from a place and from a man who would have done me harm. And then, having said "Take care", he said to me: "What harm have you done that scoundrel Ottaviano de' Medici?" I told him that I had never done him any harm, but that he had done plenty to me; and, having told him the whole business of the mint, he said: "Go off with God as soon as you can, and be of good cheer, because sooner than you think you will see your revenge."

I attended to getting well; I gave advice to Pietro Paolo about the business of the coin dies; then I went off with God, going back to Rome, without a word to the Duke or anybody else.
