Book One, Chapters 88 to 92

Chapter 88

When I got to Rome, having made much of my friends, I began the Duke's medal; and I had already made in a few days the head in steel, the most beautiful work I ever made in that line; and there came to see me at least once every day a certain great fool called Messer Francesco Soderini. Seeing what I was doing, he said to me several times: "Alas, you cruel man, so you mean to make this raging tyrant immortal for us. And because you never made so beautiful a work, it can be seen by this that you are our sworn enemy and so great a friend of theirs — since the Pope and he both wanted to have you hanged twice, and wrongly: that was the father and the son; now beware of the Holy Ghost." It was certainly held that Duke Alessandro was Pope Clement's son. Messer Francesco also said, and swore it expressly, that if he could he would have stolen those dies of that medal from me. To whom I said that he had done well to tell me, and that I would guard them in such a way that he would never see them again.

I sent word to Florence that they should tell Lorenzino to send me the reverse of the medal. Niccolò da Monte Aguto, to whom I had written it, wrote back to me, telling me that he had asked that mad melancholy philosopher Lorenzino, who had told him that day and night he thought of nothing else, and that he would do it as soon as he could; therefore he told me not to put any hope in his reverse, and to make one myself of my own pure invention; and that when I had finished it I should take it freely to the Duke, and it would be good for me.

Having made a design for a reverse which seemed to me to the purpose, I carried it forward with all the urgency I could; but because I was not yet safe from that measureless illness, I took a good deal of pleasure in going shooting with my gun along with that dear Felice of mine, who knew nothing at all of my art; but because we were continually together, day and night, everybody imagined that he was most excellent in the art. On account of which he, who was the pleasantest of men, and I laughed together a thousand times over this great credit he had won; and because he was called Felice Guadagni — Felix Gains — he said to me jokingly: "I should call myself Felice Gains-little, if you had not made me acquire so great a credit that I can call myself Gains-a-great-deal." And I told him that there are two ways of gaining: the first is what one gains for oneself, the second is what one gains for others; so that I praised in him that second way far more than the first, since he had gained me my life.

We had these conversations again and again; but among the rest, one day at Epiphany, we were together near the Magliana, and the day was already almost done; on which day I had killed a good many ducks and geese with my gun; and having almost made up my mind not to shoot any more that day, we were coming back urgently towards Rome. Calling my dog, whom I called by the name of Barucco, and not seeing him in front of me, I turned and saw that the well-trained dog was watching certain geese that had settled down in a ditch. On account of which I got down at once; and having got my good gun ready, I fired at them from a long way off and got two of them with a single ball; because I never wanted to fire with anything but a single ball, with which I shot two hundred arms' lengths and hit the mark most of the time; which one cannot do those other ways. So, having hit the two geese, one almost dead and the other wounded, which, wounded like that, was flying badly, my dog went after this one and brought it to me; the other, seeing that it was diving down into the ditch, I came up on it. Trusting to my boots, which were quite high, pushing my foot forward, the ground gave way under me: and although I got the goose, I had the boot of my right leg quite full of water. Having lifted my foot in the air I emptied out the water, and, having mounted, we hurried to get back to Rome.

But because it was very cold, I felt my leg freezing in such a way that I said to Felice: "This leg needs help here, because I no longer know any way of being able to bear it." The good Felice, without saying anything else, got down off his horse, and, having taken thistles and small sticks and set about making a fire, meanwhile, while I was waiting, having put my hands into the feathers of the breast of one of those geese, I felt a good deal of warmth; on account of which I did not have the fire made after all, but filled that boot of mine with those goose feathers, and at once I felt so much comfort that it gave me back my life.

Chapter 89

I mounted, and we came on urgently towards Rome. When we had got to a certain little rise, it being already night, looking towards Florence we both together let out a great cry of astonishment, saying: "O God of heaven, what is that great thing to be seen over Florence?" It was like a great beam of fire, which sparkled and gave out a very great brightness. I said to Felice: "Certainly we shall hear tomorrow that some great thing has happened in Florence."

So, having come on to Rome, it was very dark; and when we had got near the Banchi and near our house, I had a little horse under me which went at a very furious amble; so that, a heap of rubble and broken tiles having been made in the middle of the street that day, my horse, not seeing the heap, nor I, went up it at that speed, and then, coming down, stumbled, so as to turn a somersault: it put its head between its legs; whereby, by the express power of God, I did not do myself any harm in the world. Lights having been brought out by the neighbours at that great noise, I, who had jumped to my feet, without mounting again ran home laughing, having escaped a chance of breaking my neck.

When I got home I found there certain friends of mine, to whom, while we were supping together, I told the tight places of the shooting and that devilry of the beam of fire that we had seen; and they said: "What on earth is that going to mean?" I said: "Something new must have happened in Florence." So, having passed our supper pleasantly, the next day late the news came to Rome of Duke Alessandro's death.

On account of which many acquaintances of mine came saying to me: "You said rightly that some great thing had happened over Florence." At this there came trotting up on a certain wretched little mule that Messer Francesco Soderini; laughing wildly and madly along the way, he said: "This is the reverse of the medal of that wicked tyrant, that your Lorenzino de' Medici promised you." And besides he added: "You wanted to make dukes immortal for us: we do not want any more dukes." And there he made fun of me as if I had been a head of one of those factions that make dukes.

At this there came up a certain Baccio Bettini, who had a great head like a basket, and he too made fun of me about these dukes, telling me: "We have un-duked them, and we shall have no more dukes; and you wanted to make them immortal for us" — with a great many of these annoying words. Which becoming too much of a nuisance to me, I said to them: "Oh, you great fools, I am a poor goldsmith who serves whoever pays me, and you make fun of me as if I were a head of a party; but I do not for that want to reproach you with the insatiability, madness and worthlessness of your forefathers. But I do say plainly to all this foolish laughter you are making, that before two or three days at the most have gone by you will have another duke, perhaps much worse than the one who has gone."

The next day that man Bettini came to my shop and said to me: "There would be no need to spend money on couriers, because you know things before they happen: what spirit is it that tells you them?" And he told me that Cosimo de' Medici, son of Signor Giovanni, had been made Duke; but that he had been made so with certain conditions which would hold him in, so that he would not be able to flutter about in his own way. Then it was my turn to laugh at them, and I said: "These men of Florence have put a young man on a marvellous horse, then they have put spurs on him and given him the bridle in his hand at his own liberty, and put him in a most beautiful field, where there are flowers and fruits and a great many delights; and then they have told him not to go beyond certain marked bounds. Now tell me, who is there who can hold him back when he wants to go beyond them? Laws cannot be given to the man who is master of them." So they left me alone and did not bother me.

Chapter 90

Having attended to my shop, I went on with some business of mine, not of much moment, because I was attending to the restoration of my health, and it did not yet seem to me that I was safe from the great illness I had been through.

In the meantime the Emperor was coming back victorious from the Tunis expedition, and the Pope had sent for me and was taking counsel with me about what sort of honourable present I advised him to give the Emperor. To whom I said that what seemed to me most to the purpose was to give his Majesty a gold cross with a Christ, for which I had almost made an ornament, which would be very much to the purpose and would do the greatest honour to his Holiness and to me. I had already made three little gold figures, in the round, about a palm high: these figures were the ones I had begun for Pope Clement's chalice; they were figured for Faith, Hope and Charity. So I added in wax all the rest of the foot of the cross; and having taken it to the Pope with the Christ in wax and with many very beautiful ornaments, it greatly satisfied the Pope; and before I left his Holiness we came to agreement about everything that was to be done, and afterwards we valued the making of the work.

This was one evening at four hours of the night; the Pope had given orders to Messer Latino Juvinale to have money given me the following morning. It seemed good to Messer Latino, who had a great streak of madness in him, to want to give the Pope a new invention which should come from him alone; and he upset everything that had been arranged. And in the morning, when I thought I was going for the money, he said with that beastly presumption of his: "It is for us to be the inventors, and for you to be the workmen. Before I left the Pope in the evening, we thought of something much better." At which first words, not letting him go any further, I said: "Neither you nor the Pope can ever think of anything better than the things where Christ comes in; so now say all the courtiers' rubbish you know." Without saying anything else, he went off from me in a rage, and tried to give the work to another goldsmith; but the Pope would not have it, and sent for me at once and told me that I had spoken well, but that they wanted to use a Book of Our Lady, which was illuminated marvellously, and which had cost Cardinal de' Medici more than two thousand scudi to have illuminated: and this would be to the purpose to make a present to the Empress, and for the Emperor they would afterwards make what I had planned, which was truly a present worthy of him; but this was being done because there was little time, since the Emperor was expected in Rome within a month and a half.

For this book he wanted a cover made of solid gold, richly worked and adorned with many jewels. The jewels were worth about six thousand scudi: so that, having given me the jewels and the gold, I set my hand to the work, and, urging it on, in a few days I made it come out with such beauty that the Pope marvelled and showed me the greatest favours, on condition that that beast Juvinale should not come about me.

Having the work near its end, the Emperor appeared, for whom many marvellous triumphal arches had been made; and having come into Rome with marvellous pomp, which it falls to others to write about, because I want to deal only with what concerns me, on his arrival he at once gave the Pope a diamond which he had bought for twelve thousand scudi. The Pope sent for me about this diamond and gave it me, that I should make him a ring to the measure of his Holiness's finger; but he said he wanted me first to bring the book to the point it had got to.

When I had brought the book to the Pope, it greatly satisfied him; then he took counsel with me about what excuse could be found with the Emperor that would be valid for that work being unfinished. Then I said that the valid excuse was that I should speak of my ill health, which his Majesty would very easily believe, seeing me as thin and dark as I was. At this the Pope said that he liked it very much; but that I should add, on his Holiness's behalf, in making him the present of the book, to make him a present of myself as well; and he told me the whole manner I was to keep to, and the words I was to say, which words I said to the Pope, asking him whether he was pleased that I should say it so. He said to me: "You said it far too well, if you had the nerve to speak in that way to the Emperor as you speak to me."

Then I said that with far greater confidence I had the nerve to speak with the Emperor; seeing that the Emperor went dressed as I went, and it would seem to me that I was speaking to a man who was made as I was; which did not happen to me speaking with his Holiness, in whom I saw a far greater divinity, both because of the ecclesiastical ornaments, which showed me a kind of halo, together with his Holiness's fine old age: all these things made me more afraid than those of the Emperor did. At these words the Pope said: "Go, my Benvenuto, for you are an able man: do us honour, and it will be good for you."

Chapter 91

The Pope ordered two Turkish horses, which had been Pope Clement's, and were the most beautiful that ever came into Christendom. These two horses the Pope ordered Messer Durante his chamberlain to lead down to the corridors of the palace, and there to give them to the Emperor, saying certain words that he laid on him.

We went down together; and when we came before the Emperor, those two horses came in through those rooms with such majesty and such spirit that the Emperor and everybody marvelled. At this Messer Durante came forward in such a graceless way, and with certain words of his in the Brescian manner, his tongue knotting itself in his mouth, that a worse thing was never seen or heard: it moved the Emperor somewhat to laughter.

Meanwhile I had already uncovered my work; and, having noticed that the Emperor had turned his eyes on me in the most gracious way, I came forward at once and said: "Sacred Majesty, our most holy Pope Paul sends this Book of Our Lady as a present to your Majesty, which is written by hand and illuminated by the hand of the greatest man who ever practised that profession; and this rich cover of gold and jewels is unfinished on account of my ill health: for which reason his Holiness, together with the book, presents me as well, that I may come along with your Majesty to finish your book for you; and moreover, whatever you may have a mind to have made, for as long as I live I shall serve you in it."

At this the Emperor said: "The book is welcome to me and so are you; but I want you to finish it for me in Rome; and when it is finished and you are well, bring it to me and come and find me." Then, talking with me, he called me by my name; on account of which I wondered, because no words had passed in which my name could have come up; and he told me he had seen that clasp for Pope Clement's cope, on which I had made so many marvellous figures. So we stretched out our conversation for a whole half hour, talking of a good many different things, all of them skilful and pleasant; and because it seemed to me that I had come out of it with far greater honour than I had promised myself, having made a little cadence in the talk, I made my bow and went off.

The Emperor was heard to say: "Let Benvenuto be given five hundred gold scudi at once" — so that the man who took them up asked which was the Pope's man who had spoken to the Emperor. Messer Durante came forward, and robbed me of my five hundred scudi. I complained of it to the Pope; who said that I should not worry; that he knew everything, how well I had borne myself in speaking to the Emperor, and that of that money I should have my share at all events.

Chapter 92

Having gone back to my shop, I set my hand with great urgency to finishing the diamond ring; about which there were sent to me four of the first jewellers of Rome; because it had been said to the Pope that that diamond was set by the hand of the first jeweller in the world, in Venice, whose name was Master Miliano Targhetta, and, the diamond being somewhat thin, it was too difficult a business to do without great counsel.

I was glad of the four jeweller men, among whom was a Milanese called Gaio. He was the most presumptuous beast in the world, and the one who knew least and thought he knew most; the others were most modest and very able men. This Gaio began to speak before all the rest and said: "Save Miliano's foil, and to that, Benvenuto, you will take off your cap; because just as tinting a diamond is the most beautiful and the most difficult thing in the jeweller's art, Miliano is the greatest jeweller there ever was in the world, and this is the most difficult diamond."

Then I said that so much the greater glory it was to me to fight with so brave a man of such a profession; then I turned to the other jewellers and said: "See, I am saving Miliano's foil; and I shall try whether by making one I can improve on it; and if not, we shall tint it again with that same one." The beastly Gaio said that if I did it that way he would willingly take off his cap to it. To whom I said: "Then if I do it better, it deserves the cap off twice." "Yes," he said; and so I began to make my foils.

Having set about making the foils with the greatest diligence — which I shall teach in its place how they are made — that diamond was certainly the most difficult that ever came before me either before or since, and Miliano's foil was skilfully made; still it did not dismay me. I, having sharpened up the little tools of my wits, managed not only to come up to it but to pass it very well. Then, knowing that I had beaten him, I went looking to beat myself, and with new methods I made a foil that was better than the one I had made, by a long way.

Then I sent to call the jewellers, and, having tinted the diamond with Miliano's foil, then having cleaned it well, I tinted it again with mine. Having shown it to the jewellers, one of the first able men among them, called Raffaello del Moro, took the diamond in his hand and said to Gaio: "Benvenuto has passed Miliano's foil." Gaio, who would not believe it, took the diamond in his hand and said: "Benvenuto, this diamond is two thousand ducats better than with Miliano's foil."

Then I said: "Since I have beaten Miliano, let us see whether I can beat myself"; and having begged them to wait for me a little, I went up to a little upper room of mine, and out of their sight tinted the diamond again, and, having brought it to the jewellers, Gaio said at once: "This is the most marvellous thing I ever saw in my life, because this diamond is worth better than eighteen thousand scudi, where we hardly valued it at twelve." The other jewellers, turning to Gaio, said: "Benvenuto is the glory of our art, and deservedly we ought to take off our caps both to his foils and to him." Gaio then said: "I mean to go and tell the Pope, and I want him to have a thousand gold scudi for the setting of this diamond." And running off to the Pope, he told him everything; on account of which the Pope sent three times that day to see whether the ring was finished.

At twenty-three hours I took the ring up; and because the door was not kept against me, having lifted the curtain discreetly, I saw the Pope together with the Marquis del Vasto, who must have been pressing him about things he did not want to do; and I heard him say to the Marquis: "I tell you no, because it is my part to be neutral and nothing else." Having drawn back quickly, the Pope himself called me; so I went in quickly, and having handed him that beautiful diamond, the Pope drew me aside, so that the Marquis moved away.

The Pope, while he was looking at the diamond, said to me: "Benvenuto, start a conversation with me that looks as if it were important, and do not stop as long as the Marquis is here in this room." And having begun to walk about, the thing he was doing for my sake pleased me, and I began to talk with the Pope about the way I had gone about tinting the diamond. The Marquis stood upright at one side, leaning against a tapestry, and shifted now onto one foot and now onto the other.

The theme of this conversation was of such importance, if one wanted to tell it properly, that one could have talked of it for three whole hours. The Pope took such great pleasure in it that it went beyond the displeasure he had at the Marquis being there. I had mixed into the talk that part of philosophy which belonged to that profession; so that, having talked for close on an hour, the Marquis, becoming bored, went off half in a rage. Then the Pope made me the most familiar caresses anyone in the world can imagine, and said: "Wait, my Benvenuto, and I shall give you another reward for your skills than the thousand scudi that Gaio has told me your labour deserves."

So, when I had gone, the Pope praised me in front of those familiars of his, among whom was that Latino Juvinale I have spoken of. Who, having become my enemy, tried with every study to do me harm; and, seeing that the Pope spoke of me with so much affection and admiration, said: "There is no doubt at all that Benvenuto is a person of marvellous wit; but although every man is naturally bound to love those of his own country more than others, one ought still to consider well in what way one should speak of a Pope. He has had it to say that Pope Clement was the finest prince there ever was, and just as able, but with bad fortune; and he says that your Holiness is quite the opposite, and that the tiara weeps on your head, and that you look like a truss of straw dressed up, and that there is nothing in you but good fortune."

These words had such force, said by a man who knew perfectly well how to say them, that the Pope believed them: I not only had not said them, but such a thing never came into my consideration. If the Pope could have done it with his honour, he would have done me the greatest harm; but, being a person of the greatest wit, he made a show of laughing at it: nevertheless he kept inside himself so great a hatred of me that it was beyond all reckoning. And I began to notice it, because I did not get into his rooms with the same ease as before, but with the greatest difficulty. And because I had been many years practised in those courts, I imagined that somebody had done me a bad turn; and, making neat enquiries about it, I was told the whole thing, but I was not told who it had been; and I could not imagine who had said such a thing, for if I had known it I should have taken revenge for it by the shovelful.
