Book One, Chapters 93 to 97

Chapter 93

I attended to finishing my little book; and when I had finished it I took it to the Pope, who really could not help praising it to me a great deal. To whom I said that he should send me to take it, as he had promised me. The Pope answered that he would do what it suited him to do, and that I had done what belonged to me. So he gave orders that I should be well paid.

Out of those works, in a little more than two months, I made five hundred scudi: the diamond was paid me at the rate of a hundred and fifty scudi and no more; all the rest was given me for the making of that little book, which making deserved more than a thousand, being a work rich in a great many figures and leafwork and enamels and jewels. I took what I could get, and made up my mind to go off with God out of Rome.

At this the Pope sent the little book to the Emperor by a nephew of his called Signor Sforza; who, presenting the book to the Emperor, the Emperor was most grateful for it and at once asked about me. The young Signor Sforza, having been coached, said that I had not come because I was ill. All of it was repeated to me.

Meanwhile I got ready to go off towards France; and I wanted to go quite alone, but I could not, because of a young man who was with me, called Ascanio. This young man was of very tender years and was the most marvellous servant there ever was in the world; and when I took him he had left a master of his called Francesco, who was a Spaniard and a goldsmith. I, who would not have wanted to take this boy so as not to come into a quarrel with the Spaniard, said to Ascanio: "I do not want you, so as not to displease your master." He managed so that his master wrote me a note saying I might freely take him.

So he had been with me many months; and because he had come to me thin and pinched, we called him the Little Old Man; and I thought he was a little old man, both because he served so well, and because he was so knowing, since it did not seem reasonable that at the age of thirteen, which he said he was, there should be so much wit.

Now, to come back: in those few months he filled out, and, having recovered from his hardship, became the handsomest young man in Rome; and both because he was that good servant I have described, and because he learned the art marvellously, I set the greatest love on him as on a son, and I kept him dressed as if he had been my son. Seeing himself restored, the young man felt that he had had a great piece of luck to fall into my hands. He often went to thank his master, who had been the cause of his great good; and because this master of his had a beautiful young wife, she used to say: "Surgetto, what have you done that you have become so handsome?" — for that is what they called him when he was with them. Ascanio answered her: "Madonna Francesca, it has been my master who has made me so handsome and much better besides."

This spiteful little woman took it very badly that Ascanio should say so; and because she had the name of being an unchaste woman, she knew how to make the young man some caresses perhaps beyond the use of decency; on account of which I noticed that this young man went to see his mistress a good deal more often than was usual with him.

It happened that, having one day beaten a shop boy badly, when I came in, coming from outside, the boy complained, weeping, telling me that Ascanio had beaten him for no reason at all. At which words I said to Ascanio: "With reason or without reason, never let me hear that you have struck anybody in my house again, because you will feel how I know how to strike." He answered me back, and I threw myself on him at once and gave him with fists and kicks the roughest beating he ever felt. As soon as he could get out of my hands, without cloak and without cap he ran out; and for two days I never knew where he was, nor did I look for him.

Only at the end of two days there came to speak to me a Spanish gentleman called Don Diego. He was the most generous man I ever knew in the world; I had made him, and was making him, certain works, so that he was very much a friend of mine. He told me that Ascanio had gone back to his old master, and that, if I thought fit, I should give him back his cap and cloak that I had given him. At these words I said that Francesco had behaved badly, and had acted like an ill-bred person; because if he had told me at once when Ascanio went to him, since he was in his house, I would very willingly have given him leave; but for having kept him two days and then not letting me know, I did not want him to stay with him, and let him see to it that I did not see him in his house in any way. Don Diego reported it; on account of which Francesco made a joke of it.

The next morning I saw Ascanio working at some rubbish of wirework beside his master. As I passed, Ascanio made me a bow, and his master almost laughed at me. He sent to tell me, by that gentleman Don Diego, that if I thought fit I should send back to Ascanio the clothes I had given him; and if not, he did not care, and Ascanio would not go short of clothes.

At these words I turned to Don Diego and said: "Signor Don Diego, in all your affairs I never saw a more generous or a more decent man than you; but this Francesco is quite the opposite of what you are, because he is a dishonoured renegade. Tell him this from me: that if before vespers ring he has not himself brought Ascanio back to me here at my shop, I shall kill him at all costs; and tell Ascanio that if he does not get away from there at that hour consecrated to his master, I shall do him little less."

At these words Signor Don Diego answered me nothing, but went and put such terror into Francesco that he did not know what to do. Meanwhile Ascanio had gone to look for his father, who had come to Rome from Tagliacozzo, where he came from; and, hearing of this confusion, he too advised Francesco that he ought to take Ascanio back to me. Francesco said to Ascanio: "Go there yourself, and your father will go with you." Don Diego said: "Francesco, I see some great scandal coming: you know better than I who Benvenuto is; take him back to him safely, and I will come with you."

I, having got myself ready, was walking about the shop waiting for the stroke of vespers, having disposed myself to do one of the most ruinous things I ever did in my life. At this Don Diego appeared, and Francesco and Ascanio, and the father, whom I did not know. Ascanio having come in, I looked at them all with an angry eye, and Francesco, pale of colour, said: "Here is Ascanio brought back to you, whom I kept, not thinking to displease you." Ascanio said reverently: "My master, forgive me; I am here to do everything you order me."

Then I said: "Have you come to finish the time you promised me?" He said yes, and never to leave me again. Then I turned and told that shop boy whom he had beaten to hand me that bundle of clothes; and to him I said: "Here are all the clothes I had given you, and with them take your freedom and go where you like."

Don Diego was left astonished at this, since he had expected anything else. At this, Ascanio together with his father begged me to forgive him and take him back. Having asked who it was who was speaking for him, he told me it was his father; to whom, after many entreaties, I said: "And because you are his father, for love of you I take him back."

Chapter 94

Having made up my mind, as I said a little while ago, to go off towards France — both because I had seen that the Pope did not think of me as he had before, since through evil tongues my long service had been muddied for me, and for fear that those who had the power might do me worse — for that reason I had disposed myself to look for another country, to see whether I could find better fortune; and I would willingly have gone off with God alone.

Having made up my mind one evening to leave in the morning, I told that faithful Felice that he should enjoy all my things until my return; and that if it happened that I did not come back, I wanted everything to be his.

And because I had a Perugian apprentice who had helped me finish those works for the Pope, I gave him his leave, having paid him for his labour. He told me that he begged me to let him come with me, and that he would come at his own expense; that if it happened that I stopped to work with the King of France, it was still better for me to have some of my Italians with me, and above all people whom I knew would know how to help me. He knew how to beg me so well that I was content to take him with me in the way he had said.

Ascanio, being also present at this conversation, said half in tears: "Since you took me back, I said that I meant to stay with you for life, and so I mean to do." I told him that I did not want him on any account. The poor young man began to get ready to come after me on foot. Seeing him take such a resolution, I took a horse for him as well, and having put a little valise of mine on the crupper, I loaded myself with far more baggage than I would have done.

And having left Rome, I came to Florence, and from Florence to Bologna, and from Bologna to Venice, and from Venice I went to Padua; where I was carried off from the inn by that dear friend of mine called Albertaccio del Bene. The next day I went to kiss the hands of Messer Pietro Bembo, who was not yet a cardinal. Messer Pietro made me the most extravagant caresses that can ever be made to any man in the world; then he turned to Albertaccio and said: "I want Benvenuto to stay here with all his people, even if he had a hundred of them; so make up your mind, if you want Benvenuto too, to stay here with me, otherwise I do not mean to give him back to you."

And so I stayed to enjoy myself with this most able lord. He had had a room got ready for me that would have been too honourable for a cardinal, and he insisted always that I should eat beside his lordship. Then he came, with the most modest talk, to show me that he would have liked me to take his portrait; and I, who wanted nothing else in the world, having made myself some very white stucco in a little box, began it; and the first day I worked two hours running, and sketched out that able head with such good grace that his lordship was left astonished; and, being a very great man in his letters and in poetry to a superlative degree, but understanding nothing at all in the world of this profession of mine, the reason is that it seemed to him I had finished it at that time, when I had hardly begun it: so that I could not make him understand that it needed a long time to do well.

At last I made up my mind to do it as well as I knew how, with the time it deserved; and because he wore his beard short, in the Venetian way, it gave me a great deal of trouble to make a head that satisfied me. Still, I finished it, and it seemed to me that I had made the most beautiful work I ever made, as far as my art was concerned. On account of which I saw that he was dismayed, because he thought that, having made it in wax in two hours, I ought to make it in ten in steel. Then, seeing that I had not been able to do it in two hundred hours in wax, and that I was asking leave to go off towards France, he was much put out by it, and asked me at least to make him a reverse for his medal; and this was a Pegasus in the middle of a wreath of myrtle. This I made in about three hours' time, giving it very good grace; and being very well satisfied, he said: "This horse seems to me a ten times greater thing than making a little head, over which you have laboured so long: I cannot grasp this difficulty."

Still he kept telling me and begging me that I ought to do it for him in steel, saying: "Please do it for me, because you will do it very quickly if you want to." I promised him that I did not want to do it there; but that wherever I settled to work I would do it for him without fail.

While we were keeping to this subject, I had gone off to bargain for three horses to go off towards France; and he had me kept an eye on secretly, because he had the greatest authority in Padua; so that when I wanted to pay for the horses, which I had bargained for at fifty ducats, the owner of the horses said to me: "Able man, I make you a present of the three horses." To whom I answered: "It is not you who are giving them me; and from the man who is giving them me I do not want them, because I have not been able to give him anything for my labour." The good man told me that if I did not take those horses I should not get any other horses out of Padua and would have to go on foot. At this I went off to the magnificent Messer Pietro, who made a show of knowing nothing, and still made much of me, telling me to stay on in Padua. I, who wanted nothing of it and was disposed to go at all costs, was forced to accept the three horses; and with them I went off.

Chapter 95

I took my road through the land of the Grisons, because no other road was safe, on account of the wars. We crossed the mountains of the Alba and the Bernina: it was the eighth of May and the snow was very deep. With the greatest danger to our lives we crossed these two mountains. When we had crossed them, we stopped at a place which, if I remember rightly, is called Wallenstadt: there we lodged.

That night a Florentine courier turned up there, who was called Il Busbacca. I had heard this courier spoken of as a man of credit and able in his profession, and I did not know that he had come down in the world through his own knaveries. When he saw me at the inn he called me by name and told me that he was going to Lyons about matters of importance, and that he begged me to lend him money for the journey. At this I said that I had no money to be able to lend him, but that if he wanted to come along with me I would pay his expenses as far as Lyons.

This scoundrel wept and made me fine speeches, telling me how, "over affairs of importance for the nation, a poor courier having run out of money, a man like you is bound to help him"; and besides he told me that he was carrying things of the greatest importance for Messer Filippo Strozzi; and because he had a case for a cup covered in leather, he told me in my ear that in that case was a silver cup, and that in that cup were jewels worth many thousands of ducats, and that there were letters of the greatest importance which Messer Filippo Strozzi was sending.

At this I told him to let me shut up the jewels on his own person, where they would be in less danger than carrying them in that cup; and to leave the cup to me, which might be worth about ten scudi, and I would serve him with twenty-five. At these words the courier said that he would come along with me, since he could do nothing else, because to leave that cup would be no honour to him. So we cut it short.

And in the morning, setting off, we came to a lake which is between Wallenstadt and Wesen; this lake is fifteen miles long, and one comes out at Wesen. Seeing the boats on this lake, I was afraid; because the boats are of fir, not very big and not very thick, and they are not nailed, nor even pitched; and if I had not seen four German gentlemen get into another like it with their horses, I should never have got into this one; on the contrary I would sooner have turned back; but I thought, from the beastly things I saw them do, that those German waters did not drown people as ours in Italy do.

Those two young men of mine kept saying: "Benvenuto, this is a dangerous thing to get into with four horses." To whom I said: "Do you not consider, you cowards, that those four gentlemen have gone in ahead of us, and are going off laughing? If this were wine, as it is water, I should say they were going cheerfully to drown in it; but because it is water, I know very well that they have no more pleasure in drowning in it than we have."

This lake was fifteen miles long and about three wide; on one side was a very high mountain full of caves, on the other it was flat and grassy. When we had gone about four miles in, the lake began to get up a storm, so that those who were rowing asked us for help, that we should help them row; and so we did for a while. I signalled, and said that they should throw us onto that further shore; they said it was not possible, because there is no water there to hold the boat up, and there are certain shallows on which the boat would break up at once and we should all be drowned; and still they urged us to help them. The boatmen were calling to each other, asking for help.

Seeing them dismayed, having a wise horse, I fixed the bridle round his neck and took a part of the halter in my left hand. The horse, who was, as they are, with some intelligence, seemed to have noticed what I meant to do, since, having turned his face towards that fresh grass, I wanted him to drag me with him as he swam.

At this there came so great a wave from that lake that it swamped the boat. Ascanio, shouting: "Mercy, my father, help me!" — meant to throw himself on me; on account of which I put my hand to my little dagger and told them to do what I had taught them, because the horses would save their lives just as I hoped to save mine that way; and that if he threw himself on me again I would kill him. So we went on several miles in this mortal danger.

Chapter 96

When we were halfway across the lake, we found a bit of flat ground where we could rest, and on this flat ground I saw those four German gentlemen had got out. When we wanted to get out, the boatman would not have it at any price. Then I said to my young men: "Now is the time to make some trial of ourselves: so put your hands to your swords, and let us make them put us on land by force." So we did, with great difficulty, because they made the greatest resistance.

Still, when we were put on land, we had to climb two miles up that mountain, which was harder than going up a ladder. I was all armed in mail, with heavy boots and with a gun in my hand, and it was raining as much as God knew how to send. Those devils of German gentlemen, with their little horses led by hand, worked miracles, because our horses were no good for this purpose, and we were bursting with the effort of making them climb that difficult mountain.

When we had got up a good way, Ascanio's horse, which was a most marvellous Hungarian horse, was a little in front of Busbacca the courier, and Ascanio had given him his javelin to help him carry; it happened that at the bad places that horse slipped and went so staggering, not being able to help himself, that he struck on the point of that scoundrel courier's javelin, who had not known how to get it out of the way; and having gone through the horse's throat from side to side — that other apprentice of mine, wanting to help his horse too, which was a black horse, slipped towards the lake and caught hold of a bramble which was very thin. On this horse was a pair of saddlebags, in which was all my money with everything of value that I had. I told the young man to save his own life and let the horse go to the devil: the fall was more than a mile and went sheer down and fell into the lake. Exactly under this place our boatmen had stopped; so that if the horse fell, it would land right on them.

I was ahead of them all, and we stood watching the horse tumbling, which seemed to be going certainly to perdition. At this I said to my young men: "Do not worry about anything, let us save ourselves and thank God for everything; I am only sorry for this poor man Busbacca, who has tied his cup and his jewels, which are worth several thousand ducats, to the saddle bow of that horse, thinking that was safer; and mine are a few hundred scudi, and I am not afraid of anything in the world, as long as I have God's grace."

Busbacca then said: "I am not sorry for mine, but I am very sorry for yours." I said to him: "Why are you sorry for my little, and not sorry for your own great deal?" Busbacca then said: "I shall tell you in God's name: in these cases, and in the pass we are in, one must tell the truth. I know that yours are scudi, and are real; but that cup case of mine, where I said there were so many jewels and so many lies, is quite full of caviar."

Hearing this, I could not help laughing; my young men laughed; he wept.

That horse helped himself, when we had given him up for lost. So, laughing, we took up our strength again and set ourselves to keeping on up the mountain. Those four German gentlemen, who had got to the top of that steep mountain before us, sent us some men who helped us; so that we got to that wildest of lodgings: where, being wet, exhausted and starving, we were most pleasantly received; and there we dried ourselves, rested ourselves, satisfied our hunger, and the wounded horse was treated with certain herbs; and we were shown that sort of herb, which the hedges were full of, and we were told that by keeping the wound continually full of those herbs the horse would not only get well but would serve us as if he had nothing wrong with him at all: and so we did.

Having thanked the gentlemen, and being very well restored, we left there and went on, thanking God for having saved us from that great danger.

Chapter 97

We arrived at a place beyond Wesen: here we rested for the night, where all through the night we heard a watchman singing in a very pleasant way; and because all the houses of that town are of fir wood, the watchman said nothing except that people should look out for fire.

Busbacca, who was terrified by the day, at every hour when the man sang, Busbacca shouted in his sleep, saying: "Alas, God, I am drowning!" — and this was the fright of the day just past; and added to that, he had got drunk that evening, because he wanted to have a drinking match with all the Germans who were there; and sometimes he said, "I am burning," and sometimes, "I am drowning": it seemed to him at times that he was in hell being martyred with that caviar round his neck. This night was so pleasant that all our troubles had been turned into laughter.

Getting up in the morning in very fine weather, we went to dine at a cheerful place called Lachen. There we were treated marvellously; then we took guides, who were going back to a place called Zurich. The guide who was leading went along an embankment of a lake, and there was no other road, and this embankment was itself covered with water, so that the beastly guide slipped, and he and his horse went under the water. I, who was exactly behind the guide, having stopped my horse, stood watching the beast come out of the water; and, as if nothing had happened, he began singing again and signalled to me to go on. I threw myself off to the right hand and broke through some hedges; and so I guided my young men and Busbacca. The guide shouted, telling me in German that if those people saw me they would kill me. We went on and escaped that other fury.

We arrived at Zurich, a marvellous city, as clean as a jewel. There we rested a whole day, and then early one morning we left; we came to another beautiful city called Solothurn: from there we came to Lausanne, from Lausanne to Geneva, from Geneva to Lyons, always singing and laughing.

At Lyons I rested for four days; I was very glad to be with some friends of mine; I was repaid the expense I had been at for Busbacca; then at the end of the four days I took the road towards Paris. This was a pleasant journey, except that when we got to La Palisse a band of adventurers tried to murder us, and it was not without some courage that we saved ourselves. Then we went on as far as Paris without a single trouble in the world: always singing and laughing we arrived safely.
