Book One, Chapters 98 to 103

Chapter 98

After resting a little in Paris, I went to find Rosso the painter, who was in the King's service. This Rosso I believed to be the greatest friend I had in the world, because in Rome I had done him the greatest kindnesses one man can do another; and since these kindnesses can be told in a few words, I do not want to leave off telling them, to show how shameless ingratitude is. Because of his bad tongue, while he was in Rome, he had spoken so much ill of the works of Raphael of Urbino that Raphael's pupils meant to kill him at all costs: I saved him from that, guarding him day and night with enormous trouble. Again, for having spoken ill of Master Antonio da San Gallo, a most excellent architect, Rosso had a commission taken away from him which San Gallo had got him from Messer Agnolo de' Cesi; after that San Gallo began to work against him so hard that he had brought him to the point of starving to death; on account of which I lent him many tens of scudi to live on. And not having had them back yet, knowing that he was in the King's service, I went, as I have said, to visit him: I was not so much thinking that he would give me back my money, but I thought he would give me help and favour to get me into the service of that great King. When the man saw me, he was upset at once and said to me: "Benvenuto, you have come at too great an expense on so long a journey, especially at this time, when the mind is on war and not on trifles like our works." Then I said that I had brought money enough to be able to get back to Rome in the same way as I had come to Paris; and that this was not the return for the trouble I had gone through for him; and that I was beginning to believe what Master Antonio da San Gallo had told me about him. When he tried to turn the thing into a joke, having seen his own wretchedness, I showed him a bill of exchange for five hundred scudi on Ricciardo del Bene. This wretched man was ashamed then, and when he tried to keep me almost by force, I laughed at him and went off along with a painter who was there present. This man was called lo Sguazzella: he too was a Florentine; and I went to lodge in his house with three horses and three servants at so much a week. He treated me very well, and I paid him better. Then I looked for a way to speak to the King, to whom I was introduced by a certain Messer Giuliano Buonaccorsi, his treasurer. Over this I was held up a long while, because I did not know that Rosso was using every diligence to keep me from speaking to the King. Once the said Messer Giuliano had noticed it, he took me straight to Fontainebleau and put me in front of the King, from whom I had a whole hour of most gracious audience. And because the King was making ready to go towards Lyons, he told the said Messer Giuliano to bring me with him, and that on the road they would talk over certain fine works His Majesty had it in mind to have made. So I went along with the train of the Court; and on the way I did a great deal of service to the Cardinal of Ferrara, who did not have his hat yet. And since every evening I had long talks with the said Cardinal, His Lordship said I ought to stay at Lyons at an abbey of his, and there I could enjoy myself until the King came back from the war, since he was going towards Grenoble, and at his abbey in Lyons I should have every comfort. When we reached Lyons I had fallen ill, and that young man of mine Ascanio had caught a quartan fever; so that the French and their Court had become tiresome to me, and it seemed a thousand years until I got back to Rome. When the Cardinal saw me set on going back to Rome, he gave me money enough to make him a basin and a jug of silver in Rome. So we went back towards Rome on very good horses, coming over the mountains of the Simplon; and I had joined company with certain Frenchmen, with whom we travelled a good stretch, Ascanio with his quartan and I with a dull little fever which seemed as if it would never leave me at all; and my stomach had turned against food so much that I do not believe I managed to eat a whole loaf in a week, and I very much wanted to reach Italy, wanting to die in Italy and not in France.

Chapter 99

When we had passed the mountains of the said Simplon, we came on a river near a place called Indevedro. This river was very wide and quite deep, and over it there was a long narrow little bridge with no parapets. It being a morning of very heavy hoarfrost, when I reached the bridge, finding myself ahead of everybody, and seeing it to be very dangerous, I ordered my young men and servants to dismount and lead their horses by the bridle. So I crossed the said bridge very happily, and came along talking with one of those two Frenchmen, who was a gentleman: the other one was a notary, who had stayed a little way behind, and was jeering at that French gentleman and at me for having chosen the discomfort of going on foot out of fear of nothing at all. I turned round to him, seeing him in the middle of the bridge, and begged him to come on gently, because he was in a very dangerous place. This man, who could not fail his French nature, told me in French that I was a man of little spirit, and that there was not a scrap of danger there. While he was saying these words, he chose to prick his horse a little, and at that the horse at once slid off the bridge, and with its legs towards the sky fell beside a very large rock. And because God is often merciful to madmen, this beast together with the other beast, his horse, plunged into a very deep pool, where they both went under, he and the horse. As soon as I saw this, with the greatest speed I set off running, and with great difficulty jumped onto that rock, and hanging over from it I caught hold of a corner of a cloak the man had on him, and by that corner I pulled him up, for he was still under the water; and because he had drunk a great deal of water, and was very near being drowned, when I saw him out of danger I congratulated him on my having saved his life. To which this man answered me in French and said that I had done nothing; that the important thing was his papers, which were worth many tens of scudi: and it seemed as if he said these words to me in a rage, all wet and spluttering. At that, I turned to certain guides we had, and told them to help that beast, and that I would pay them. One of those guides set to helping him with skill and great labour, and fished up his papers for him, so that he lost nothing; the other guide would never take the least trouble to help him. When we had then got to the place mentioned above — we had made up a purse, and it had fallen to me to do the spending — after we had dined I gave several coins out of the company's purse to that guide who had helped to pull the man out of the water; on account of which the man said to me that I would be giving that money out of my own, since he did not mean to give him anything beyond what we had agreed on for doing a guide's office. At that, I said a great many insulting words to him. Then the other guide came at me, the one who had taken no trouble, and wanted me to pay him too; and because I said, "This one deserves a reward as well, for having carried the cross," he answered me that he would soon show me a cross I should weep at. I told him that I would light a candle-end at that cross, by which I hoped it would fall to him to weep first. And because this is a place on the borders between the Venetians and the Germans, the man ran to fetch people, and came back with them, a great boar-spear in front of him. I, who was on my good horse, lowered the cock of my arquebus: turning to my companions, I said, "At the first shot I kill that one; and the rest of you do your duty, because these are highway assassins, and they have taken this small occasion only to murder us." That innkeeper, where we had eaten, called one of those headmen, who was a great old fellow, and begged him to put a stop to so much trouble, saying to him: "This is a very brave young man, and even if you cut him to pieces, he will kill so many of you, and after doing the harm he means to do he might well slip out of your hands." The thing quieted down, and that old chief of theirs said to me: "Go in peace, for you would not make a salad of it, if you had a hundred men with you." I, who knew he was telling the truth, and had already made up my mind and counted myself a dead man, hearing no further insulting words said to me, shook my head and said: "I should have done all I could, to show I was a live animal and a man." And taking the road, that evening at the first lodging we made up the account of the purse, and I parted from that brutish Frenchman, remaining great friends with the other one who was a gentleman; and with my three horses, alone, we came to Ferrara. When I had dismounted, I went to the Duke's Court to pay my respects to His Excellency, so as to be able to leave in the morning towards Santa Maria of Loreto. I had waited until two hours into the night, and then the Duke appeared: I kissed his hands; he made me a great welcome, and gave orders that water should be brought for my hands. At which I said pleasantly: "Most excellent lord, it is more than four months since I have eaten enough to make anybody believe a man could live on so little; so, knowing that I should not be able to enjoy the royal dishes of your table, I will stay here talking with you while Your Excellency has supper, and both you and I at one and the same time will have more pleasure than if I supped with you." So we struck up conversation, and went on until five hours into the night. At five hours I took my leave, and going off to my inn I found a marvellous meal laid out, because the Duke had sent me the choice pieces off his own dish with very good wine; and having been kept in that way more than two hours past my hour for eating, I ate with the greatest appetite, which was the first time in four months that I had been able to eat.

Chapter 100

Leaving in the morning, I went to Santa Maria of Loreto, and from there, having said my prayers, I went on to Rome; where I found my most faithful Felice, to whom I left the shop with all its furnishings and fittings, and I opened another one next to Sugherello the perfumer, much bigger and roomier; and I thought to myself that great King Francis would not be remembering me. On account of which I took on a great many works from various lords, and meanwhile I was working on that jug and basin I had undertaken to make for the Cardinal of Ferrara. I had a great many workmen and a great deal of big business in gold and silver. I had made an agreement with that Perugian workman of mine, who had written down for himself all the money that had been spent on his account, which money had been spent on his clothing and on many other things; with the expenses of the journey it came to about seventy scudi: of which we had agreed that he should work off three scudi a month; for I was making him earn more than eight scudi. At the end of two months this rascal went off out of my shop with a God-be-with-you, and left me embarrassed by a great deal of business, and said he did not mean to give me anything more. For this reason I was advised to help myself by way of justice, because I had made up my mind to cut off one of his arms; and I would certainly have done it, but my friends told me it was not right for me to do such a thing, seeing that I would lose my money and perhaps Rome another time, because blows are not struck on terms; and that with that paper I had in his own hand I could have him arrested at once. I took the advice, but I chose to go about the thing more openly. I brought the suit before the auditor of the Chamber properly, and won it; and by virtue of it, which took several months, I afterwards had him put in prison. I found my shop loaded with very large commissions, and among the rest all the gold ornaments and jewels of the wife of Signor Gerolimo Orsino, father of Signor Paolo, today son-in-law of our Duke Cosimo. These works were very near finishing, and all the while more of the most important kind kept coming in. I had eight workmen, and along with them, for honour and for profit, I worked day and night.

Chapter 101

While I was pushing on my undertakings so vigorously, there came to me a letter sent with all speed by the Cardinal of Ferrara, which ran to this effect: "Benvenuto, our dear friend. In these last days this great Most Christian King remembered you, saying that he wished to have you in his service. To which I answered that you had promised me that whenever I sent for you on His Majesty's service you would come at once. To these words His Majesty said: 'I want the means of coming to be sent to him, as a man of his rank deserves,' and at once ordered his Admiral to have a thousand gold scudi paid me by the treasurer of savings. Present at this conversation was Cardinal de' Gaddi, who at once came forward and told His Majesty that there was no need for His Majesty to give that order, because he said he had already sent you money enough, and that you were on the road. Now if by chance the contrary is the case, as I believe, when you have had this letter of mine, answer at once, because I will pick up the thread again and get you the promised money from this magnanimous King."

Now let the world and those who live in it take notice of how much the malignant stars with adverse fortune can do in us human beings! I had not spoken twice in my life to that silly little creature of a small cardinal, Gaddi; and he did not do this piece of officiousness to do me any harm in the world, but did it only out of scattiness and worthlessness of his own, making a show of taking care himself of the affairs of the talented men the King wanted, as the Cardinal of Ferrara did. But he was such a fool afterwards that he sent me no word of it; for certainly, rather than shame a silly puppet, for love of my country, I would have found some excuse to patch up that foolish officiousness of his. As soon as I had the most reverend Cardinal of Ferrara's letter, I answered that of Cardinal de' Gaddi I knew nothing in the world, and that even if he had made me some such offer, I would not have moved out of Italy without His most reverend Lordship's knowing it; and all the more so since I had in Rome a greater quantity of business than I had ever had before; but that at a single word from His Most Christian Majesty, told me by so great a lord as His most reverend Lordship, I would set off at once, throwing everything else aside.

When I had sent my letters off, that traitor of a Perugian workman of mine thought up a piece of malice, which succeeded for him at once, given the avarice of Pope Paul of the Farnese family, and still more that of his bastard son, then called Duke of Castro. This workman I speak of let one of the secretaries of the said Signor Pier Luigi understand that, having been with me as a workman several years, he knew all my affairs; on the strength of which he gave the said Signor Pier Luigi his word that I was a man worth more than eighty thousand ducats, and that most of this money I had in jewels; and that the jewels belonged to the Church, and that I had stolen them at the time of the sack of Rome in the Castel Sant'Angelo, and that they should see to having me arrested at once and secretly.

One morning among others, I had worked more than three hours before daybreak on the works for the bride I spoke of above, and while my shop was being opened and swept out I had put my cloak on to take a little turn; and taking my way along the Strada Giulia, I came out at the corner of the Chiavica; where Crespino the constable with his whole troop of catchpoles came up against me, and said to me: "You are the Pope's prisoner." To whom I said: "Crespino, you have taken me for somebody else." "No," said Crespino, "you are the talented Benvenuto, and I know you very well, and I have to take you to the Castel Sant'Angelo, where lords and men of talent like you go." And because four of his corporals threw themselves on me and tried by force to take from me a dagger I had at my side and certain rings I had on my finger, the said Crespino said to them: "Let none of you touch him: it is quite enough that you do your office, and see that he does not escape me." Then, coming up to me, he asked me for my weapons with courteous words. While I was giving him my weapons, it struck me that in that very place I had killed Pompeo. From there they took me into the Castle, and shut me up as a prisoner in a room high up, in the keep. This was the first time I ever tasted prison, up to that age of mine of thirty-seven years.

Chapter 102

When Signor Pier Luigi, the Pope's son, had considered the great quantity of money I was accused of, he at once asked as a favour of that father of his the Pope that he should make him a gift of this sum of money. Which the Pope willingly granted him, and moreover told him that he would also help him to recover it: so that, having kept me prisoner eight whole days, at the end of the eight days, to bring the matter to some conclusion, they sent to examine me. So I was called into one of those halls which are in the Castle, the Pope's own, a very honourable place; and the examiners were the Governor of Rome, who was called Messer Benedetto Conversini of Pistoia, who was afterwards Bishop of Iesi; the second was the Procurator Fiscal, whose name I do not remember; the third was the judge of criminal cases, who was called Messer Benedetto da Cagli. These three men began to examine me, first with kindly words, then with the harshest and most frightening words, brought on because I said to them: "My lords, it is more than half an hour that you have not stopped asking me about fables and about matters of which it can truly be said that you are chattering, or that you are gossiping. A way of speaking, chattering, that has no tone to it, or gossiping, that means nothing; so I beg you to tell me what you want from me, and to let me hear reasoning come out of your mouths, and not fables and chatter." At these words of mine the Governor, who was from Pistoia, no longer able to cover up his hot-tempered nature, said to me: "You speak very confidently, indeed too haughtily; so that I will make this haughtiness of yours humbler than a puppy's at the reasoning you will hear me tell you; which will be neither chatter nor fables, as you say, but will be a setting out of arguments, to which you will certainly need to do your best to give us an answer." And so he began: "We know for a certainty that you were in Rome at the time of the Sack that was made in this unhappy city of Rome; and at that time you were in this Castel Sant'Angelo, and were employed here as a gunner; and because your trade is that of goldsmith and jeweller, Pope Clement, having known you before, and there being nobody else here of that profession, called you into his privacy and had you take out all the jewels of his tiaras and mitres and rings; and then, trusting you, he wanted you to sew them onto him: on account of which you kept back for yourself, hidden from His Holiness, the value of eighty thousand scudi. This has been told us by a workman of yours, in whom you confided and to whom you boasted of it. Now we tell you plainly to find the jewels, or the value of those jewels: and then we will let you go free."

Chapter 103

When I heard these words I could not keep myself from bursting into enormous laughter; then, having laughed a while, I said: "I thank God greatly that for this first time it has pleased His Majesty that I should be imprisoned, and that I am at least happy not to be imprisoned for some feeble thing, as most often seems to happen to young men. If what you say were true, there is no danger here of my having to be punished with a bodily penalty, since the laws at that time had lost all their authority; so that I could excuse myself by saying that as an officer I had kept that treasure for the sacred and holy Apostolic Church, waiting to hand it over to a good Pope, or truly to whoever should ask me for it, which now would be you, if it were so." At these words that furious Governor of Pistoia did not let me finish saying my reasons, but said in a rage: "Arrange it as you please, Benvenuto, since it is enough for us to have found our own again; and be quick about it, if you do not want us to do more than talk." And as they were about to get up and go away, I said to them: "My lords, I have not finished being examined, so finish examining me, and then go where you please." They sat down again at once, in a fine rage, almost showing that they did not want to hear another word I might say then, and half risen, thinking they had found out all they wanted to know. On account of which I began in this fashion: "Know, my lords, that it is about twenty years that I have lived in Rome, and never here nor anywhere else was I imprisoned." At these words that ruffian of a Governor said: "But you have killed men." Then I said: "You say it, and not I; but if a man came to kill you, priest as you are, you would defend yourself, and in killing him the holy laws allow it: so let me say my reasons, since you will want to be able to report to the Pope and to be able to judge me justly. I tell you again that it is close on twenty years that I have lived in this marvellous Rome, and in it I have done very great business in my profession: and because I know that this is the seat of Christ, I would certainly have promised myself that if a temporal prince had wanted to do me some violence, I should have had recourse to this holy Chair and to this Vicar of Christ, that he might defend my rights. Alas! where am I to go then? and to what prince, to defend me from so wicked an assault? Ought you not, before you took me, to have found out where I was turning over these eighty thousand ducats? And ought you not to have looked at the list of the jewels which this Apostolic Chamber has had written down carefully these five hundred years? Then, if you had found anything missing, that was the moment to seize all my books, along with me. I tell you that the books in which all the jewels of the Pope and of the tiaras are written down are all in existence, and you will not find anything missing of what Pope Clement had that is not carefully written down. The only thing there might be is that, when that poor man Pope Clement wanted to come to terms with those thieves of Imperials, who had robbed Rome and shamed the Church, there came to negotiate this agreement a man called Cesare Iscatinaro, if I remember rightly; who, having as good as concluded the agreement with that plundered Pope, in order to make a little show of affection to him let fall from his finger a diamond worth about four thousand scudi: and because the said Iscatinaro bent down to pick it up, the Pope told him to keep it for love of him. I was actually present at these doings: and if the said diamond is missing, I can tell you where it has gone; but I am quite certain that you will find this one written down too. After that you may be ashamed at your leisure of having assaulted a man like me, who has done so many honourable services for this Apostolic See. Know that if I had not been what I was, the morning the Imperials came into the Borgo they would have got into the Castle without any hindrance at all; and I, without being rewarded on that account, threw myself vigorously on the artillery, which the gunners and the soldiers of the garrison had abandoned, and put heart into a poor little companion of mine called Raffaello da Montelupo, a sculptor, who had abandoned it too and had got himself into a corner all terrified, doing nothing: I roused him up; and he and I alone killed so many of the enemy that the soldiers took another way. I was the one who fired an arquebus shot at Scatinaro, for seeing him talk with Pope Clement without a bow, but with the ugliest mockery, Lutheran and impious as he was. Pope Clement over this had a search made in the Castle for whoever had done it, to hang him. I was the one who wounded the Prince of Orange in the head with an arquebus shot, down here under the trenches of the Castle. Besides that, I have made for the holy Church so many ornaments of silver, of gold and of jewels, so many medals and coins so fine and so honourable. Is this then the rash priestly reward that is used towards a man who has served and loved you with such faith and such skill? Oh, go and tell the Pope again everything I have told you, telling him that he has all his jewels, and that I never had anything else from the Church except certain wounds and stonings in that time of the Sack; and that I counted on nothing except a little reward from Pope Paul, which he had promised me. Now I am clear about His Holiness and about you, his officers." While I was saying these words they stood astonished to hear me; and looking each other in the face, with a gesture of amazement they went away from me. All three went in agreement to report to the Pope everything I had said. The Pope, ashamed, gave orders with the greatest diligence that all the accounts of the jewels should be gone over again. Then, when they had seen that nothing was missing, they left me in the Castle without saying anything more: Signor Pier Luigi, thinking himself too that he had done badly, they set about diligently trying to make me die.
