Book One, Chapters 104 to 108

Chapter 104

During this little stir of the time, King Francis had already learned in detail how the Pope was holding me prisoner, and so very wrongfully: having sent to the Pope as ambassador a certain gentleman of his who was called Monsignor de Morluc, he wrote to him to ask me of the Pope, as a man of His Majesty's. The Pope, who was a very able and marvellous man, but in this affair of mine behaved like a mean and foolish one, answered the King's said envoy that His Majesty should not concern himself about me, because I was a man very troublesome with weapons, and for this reason he warned His Majesty to let me alone, because he was holding me prisoner for homicides and other devilries of mine of that kind. The King answered again that in his kingdom very good justice was kept; and that just as His Majesty rewarded and favoured men of talent marvellously, so on the other hand he punished troublesome ones; and that since His Holiness had let me go, not caring for the service of the said Benvenuto, and had seen him gladly in his kingdom, he had taken him into his own service; and asked for him as his own man. These things were the greatest annoyance and harm to me, although they were the most honourable favours a man of my sort could wish for. The Pope had fallen into such a fury out of his fear that I might go and tell of that wicked piece of villainy used towards me, that he was thinking of every way he could, with his honour, to have me put to death. The Castellan of the Castel Sant'Angelo was a Florentine of ours, who was called Messer Giorgio the knight, of the Ugolini. This honest man used towards me the greatest courtesies that can be used in the world, letting me go free about the Castle on my word alone; and because he understood the great wrong that had been done me, when I wanted to give him security for going about the Castle at my ease, he told me that he could not take it, seeing that the Pope set too much store by this affair of mine; but that he would freely trust my word, because he heard from everybody what an honest man I was: and I gave him my word, and so he gave me the chance of doing a little work on something. At this, thinking that this indignation of the Pope's would come to an end, both because of my innocence and because of the King's favours, and still keeping my shop open, Ascanio my apprentice came to me in the Castle, and brought me some things to work on. Though I could work little, seeing myself imprisoned in that way and so wrongfully; still I made a virtue of necessity: cheerfully, as best I could, I put up with this perverse fortune of mine. I had made the greatest friends of all those guards and of many soldiers of the Castle. And because the Pope came sometimes to supper in the Castle, and during the time the Pope was there the Castle kept no guards, but stayed freely open like an ordinary palace; and because during the time the Pope was there in that way all the prisoners were usually shut up with greater diligence; yet none of these things was done to me, but freely at all these times I went about the Castle; and several times some of those soldiers advised me that I ought to run away, and that they would back me up, knowing the great wrong that had been done me: to whom I answered that I had given my word to the Castellan, who was such an honest man, and who had done me such great kindnesses. There was a soldier there, very brave and very clever; he said to me: "My Benvenuto, know that a man who is a prisoner is not bound, and cannot bind himself, to keep faith, any more than to anything else; do what I tell you; run away from this rascal of a Pope and from this bastard son of his, who will take your life from you in any case." I, who had made up my mind rather to lose my life than to fail of my promised word to that honest man the Castellan, put up with this inestimable unpleasantness, along with a friar of the Pallavicini house, a very great preacher.

Chapter 105

This one had been arrested as a Lutheran: he was a very good companion to live with, but as a friar he was the greatest rascal in the world, and lent himself to every sort of vice. His fine qualities I admired, his ugly vices I greatly abhorred, and I reproved him for them freely. This friar never did anything but remind me that I was not bound to keep faith with the Castellan, since I was in prison. To which I answered that as a friar he was quite right, but as a man he was not right, because a man who was a man and not a friar had to keep his word in every sort of accident he might find himself in: therefore I, who was a man and not a friar, was never going to fail of that plain and honest word of mine. When the said friar saw that he could not manage to corrupt me by way of his most subtle and virtuous reasonings, so marvellously put by him, he thought of trying me another way; and letting a good many days pass like that, while he was reading me the sermons of Fra Girolamo Savonarola, he gave them a commentary so admirable that it was finer than the sermons themselves; by which I was left enchanted, and there was nothing in the world I would not have done for him, apart from failing of my word, as I have said. When the friar saw me astonished at his talents, he thought of another way; for he began, in a pretty fashion, to ask me what course I would take if the wish came on me, once they had shut me up, to open those prison doors and escape. I too, wanting to show some subtlety of my wit to this talented friar, told him that I would certainly open any lock, however difficult, and all the more those of these prisons, which would be like eating a little fresh cheese to me. The said friar, to make me tell my secret, belittled me, saying that there are a great many things said by men who have got some credit for being ingenious; that if they then had to put in practice the things they boasted of, they would lose so much credit that it would go hard with them: and that he was hearing me say things so far from the truth that if I were ever put to it, he thought I would come out of it with little honour. At this, feeling myself pricked by this devil of a friar, I told him that I always undertook far less in words about myself than I knew how to do, and that this thing I had promised about the keys was the feeblest of them; and that in a few words I would make him quite sure it was as I said; and inconsiderately, as I have said, I showed him easily everything I had spoken of. The friar, making a show of not caring about it, took the whole thing in at once, most cleverly and thoroughly.

And as I have said above, that honest man the Castellan let me go freely all about the Castle; and he did not even lock me up at night, as he did all the others; he also let me work at whatever I wanted, in gold and silver and wax; and although I had worked several weeks on a certain basin I was making for the Cardinal of Ferrara, finding myself sick of the prison, working at that sort of thing had become tiresome to me; and I worked only, for less unhappiness, at some little figures of mine in wax: of which wax the said friar got hold of a piece from me, and with the said piece he put into practice that way with the keys which I had inconsiderately taught him. He had taken as companion and helper a chancellor who was with the said Castellan. This chancellor was called Luigi, and was a Paduan. When they wanted to have the said keys made, the locksmith gave them away; and because the Castellan came sometimes to see me in my room, and having seen me working with that wax, he recognized the said wax at once and said: "Even if this poor man Benvenuto has had one of the greatest wrongs done him that was ever done, he ought not to have carried on this kind of business with me, who was doing him the one kindness I could do him. Now I shall keep him shut up very close and never do him another kindness in the world." So he had me shut up again with some unpleasantness, especially of words said to me by certain devoted servants of his, who wished me exceedingly well, and every hour told me all the good offices this lord Castellan had done for me; so that over this incident they called me an ungrateful man, empty and without faith. And because one of those servants said these insults to me more boldly than became him, I, feeling myself innocent, answered boldly, saying that I had never failed of my word, and that I would maintain such words at the risk of my life, and that if he or anybody else said such unjust words to me again, I would say that whoever said such a thing lied in his throat. Unable to bear the insult, he ran to the Castellan's room and brought me back the wax with that model made of the key. As soon as I saw the wax, I told him that he and I were both in the right; but that he should let me speak to the lord Castellan, because I would tell him frankly how the case stood, which was of far more importance than they thought. At once the Castellan had me called, and I told him the whole business; on account of which he took the friar in hand, and the friar gave away that chancellor, who was within an inch of being hanged. The said Castellan quieted the matter, which had already come to the Pope's ears; he saved his chancellor from the gallows, and gave me the same freedom I had before.

Chapter 106

When I saw this affair go forward with so much severity, I began to think about my own case, saying: "If another one of these furies came on, and this man did not trust me, I should no longer be under any obligation to him, and I should want to use my wits a little, which I am sure would come out for me differently from that wretched friar's." And I began to have new thick sheets brought to me, and I did not send the dirty ones back. When my servants asked me for them, I told them to keep quiet, because I had given them away to certain poor soldiers; and that if such a thing got known, those poor fellows would be in danger of the galleys: so that my young men and servants, most faithfully, and Felice above all, kept the matter of the said sheets very well hidden for me. I set about emptying a straw mattress, and burnt the straw, because in my prison there was a fireplace where a fire could be made. I began to make out of these sheets strips a third of a braccio wide: when I had made as much as seemed to me enough to get down from that great height of the keep of the Castel Sant'Angelo, I told my servants that I had given away as many as I wanted, and that they should see to bringing me the thin ones, and that I would always give them back the dirty ones. The matter was forgotten.

As for those workmen and servants of mine, Cardinal Santiquattro and Cardinal Cornaro had my shop shut up, telling me plainly that the Pope would not hear a word of letting me go, and that those great favours of the King's had done me far more harm than good; because the last words Monsignor de Morluc had said on the King's behalf had been that Monsignor de Morluc told the Pope he ought to hand me over to the ordinary judges of the court; and that, if I had done wrong, he could punish me, but if I had not done wrong, reason required that he should let me go. These words had annoyed the Pope so much that he had a mind never to let me go again. This Castellan most certainly helped me as much as he could.

At this time, when those enemies of mine saw that my shop had been shut, they said in mockery some insulting word every day to those servants and friends of mine who came to visit me in prison. It happened one day among others that Ascanio, who came to me twice every day, asked me to make him a certain little coat for himself out of a blue satin gown of mine, which I never wore: it had served me only that once, when I went in procession in it: so I told him that these were not the times, nor was I in a place, for wearing clothes of that sort. The young man took it so badly that I did not give him this wretched gown, that he told me he wanted to go off to Tagliacozzo to his home. All worked up, I told him that he would be doing me a kindness by getting out of my sight; and he swore in a great passion never to come in front of me again. While we were saying this, we were walking round the keep of the Castle. It happened that the Castellan was walking too: meeting His Lordship at exactly that point, Ascanio said: "I am going, and goodbye for ever." At this I said: "And for ever I want it to be, and so let it truly be: I will order the guards never to let you pass again," and turning to the Castellan, with all my heart I begged him to order the guards never to let Ascanio pass again, saying to His Lordship: "This little peasant comes to add to my great trouble; so I beg you, my lord, never to let him in again." The Castellan was very sorry about it, because he knew him for a young man of marvellous talent: besides which he was of such a fine shape of body that it seemed as if everybody who saw him even once was particularly fond of him. The said young man went off in tears, and carried with him a little curved sword of his, which he sometimes carried secretly under his clothes. Going out of the Castle, with his face all in tears, he met two of my greatest enemies, one of whom was that Girolamo of Perugia I spoke of, and the other a certain Michele, both of them goldsmiths. This Michele, being a friend of that rascal the Perugian and an enemy of Ascanio's, said: "What does it mean that Ascanio is crying? Perhaps his father is dead? I mean that father of his in the Castle." Ascanio said to this: "He is alive, but you will be dead in a moment;" and raising his hand, with that curved sword of his he dealt him two blows, both of them on the head, so that with the first he laid him on the ground, and with the second he then cut off three fingers of his right hand, while still striking at his head. He was left there as if dead. It was reported to the Pope at once; and the Pope in great anger said these words: "Since the King wants him to be tried, go and give him three days to defend his case." At once they came, and did the said office the Pope had charged them with. That honest man the Castellan went straight to the Pope, and made it clear to him that I had known nothing of the matter, and that I had driven him away. He defended me so admirably that he saved my life from that great fury. Ascanio fled to Tagliacozzo to his home, and from there he wrote to me asking my pardon a thousand times, saying that he knew he had been wrong to add unpleasantness to my great troubles; but that if God gave me the grace to get out of that prison, he would never leave me again. I let him know that he should attend to learning his trade, and that if God gave me liberty, I would call him back in any case.

Chapter 107

This Castellan had every year certain illnesses which took his wits away altogether; and when this thing began to come on him, he talked a great deal: a way of chattering; and these humours of his were different every year, because one time it seemed to him that he was an oil jar; another time it seemed to him that he was a frog, and he hopped like a frog; another time it seemed to him that he was dead, and he had to be buried: so every year he came into one or another of these different humours. This time he began to imagine that he was a bat, and while he went about at his ease he sometimes squeaked as dully as bats do; he also made a little play with his hands and his body, as if he had meant to fly. His doctors, who had seen how it was, and so had his old servants, gave him every pleasure they could imagine: and because it seemed to them that he took great pleasure in hearing me talk, every little while they came for me and brought me to him. On account of which this poor man sometimes kept me four and five whole hours, in which I had never left off talking with him. He kept me at his table to eat opposite him, and never left off talking or making me talk; but in all that talking I ate very well all the same. He, poor man, neither ate nor slept, so that he had worn me out and I could bear no more; and looking him in the face sometimes, I saw that the pupils of his eyes were frightening, because one looked one way and the other another.

He began to ask me if I had ever had a fancy for flying: to whom I said that all those things which had been most difficult for men, I had most gladly tried to do and had done; and this business of flying, since the God of nature had presented me with a body very fit and disposed for running and jumping far more than the ordinary, and then with that little wit of mine which I would apply with my hands, I had the heart to fly for certain. This man began to ask me what methods I would use: to whom I said that, considering the animals that fly, and wanting to imitate by art what they had from nature, there was none that could be imitated except the bat. As soon as this poor man heard that name of bat, which was the humour he was suffering from that year, he let out an enormous cry, saying: "He speaks the truth, he speaks the truth; this is it, this is it;" and then he turned to me and said to me: "Benvenuto, if somebody gave you the means, would you have the heart to fly?" To whom I said that if he would afterwards give me my liberty, it would be enough for me to have the appearance of flying as far as the Prati, if he would make me a pair of wings of waxed Rheims linen. Then he said: "And the appearance would be enough for me too; but because the Pope has ordered me to take care of you as of his own eyes, I know that you are an ingenious devil who would run away; so I mean to have you shut up with a hundred keys, so that you shall not escape me." I set about begging him, reminding him that I could have escaped and, for love of the word I had given him, would never have failed him; so I begged him for the love of God, and for so many kindnesses as he had done me, that he would not choose to add a greater trouble to the great trouble I already had. While I was saying these words to him, he was giving express orders that they should bind me and take me to prison and shut me in well. When I saw that there was no other remedy, I said to him in front of all his people: "Shut me up well and guard me well, because I shall run away in any case." So they took me off, and shut me up with marvellous diligence.

Chapter 108

Then I began to think of the way I should take to escape. As soon as I saw myself shut in, I went examining how the prison stood in which I was locked; and when it seemed to me that I had certainly found the way to get out of it, I began to think in what way I should get down from that great height of the keep, for so that high tower was called: and taking those new sheets of mine, which I have already said I had made into strips and sewn together very well, I went examining how much bulk of them would be enough for me to be able to get down. Having judged what would serve me, and having put everything in order, I found a pair of pincers which I had taken from a Savoyard who was one of the Castle guards. This man had charge of the barrels and the cisterns; he also took pleasure in working with wood; and because he had several pairs of pincers, among them there was one pair very thick and large: thinking they were the thing for me, I took them from him and hid them inside that straw mattress. When the time came that I wanted to use them, I began with them to try at those nails which held the hinges; and because the door was double, the clinching of the said nails could not be seen; so that when I tried to draw one out, I went through the greatest labour; still, in the end I managed it. When I had drawn out this first nail, I went thinking what way I should take so that they should not notice it. At once I fixed up, with a little scraping of rusty iron, a little wax, which was exactly the same colour as those nail heads I had drawn out; and with that wax I began carefully to counterfeit those nail heads on their hinges: and one after another, as many as I drew out, so many I counterfeited in wax. I left the hinges fastened, each of them at top and bottom, with certain of the same nails I had drawn out, and then put back; but they were cut, then put back lightly, just enough to hold the hinges for me. I did this thing with the greatest difficulty, because the Castellan dreamed every night that I had escaped, and so he sent to look at the prison from hour to hour; and the man who came to look at it had the name and the ways of a catchpole. This one was called il Bozza, and he always brought another with him, who was called Giovanni, nicknamed Pedignone; this one was a soldier, and Bozza was a servant. This Giovanni never came a single time to that prison of mine without saying some insult to me. He was from the district of Prato and had been in Prato at the apothecary's: he looked carefully every evening at those hinges and at the whole prison, and I said to him: "Guard me well, because I mean to escape in any case." These words bred the greatest enmity between him and me; so that with the greatest diligence I put away carefully in my straw mattress all those bits of iron of mine, such as the pincers, and a dagger quite a big one and other things belonging to the business; and so those strips I had made, these too I kept in this straw mattress; and as soon as it was day, I swept out my room myself: and although by nature I take pleasure in cleanliness, at that time I was cleanliness itself. When I had swept out, I made my bed so daintily, and with some flowers, which almost every morning I had brought me by a certain Savoyard. This Savoyard had charge of the cistern and of the barrels; and he too took pleasure in working with wood; and it was from him that I stole the pincers with which I unfastened the nails of those hinges.
