Book One, Chapters 109 to 113

Chapter 109

To come back to my bed: when Bozza and Pedignone came, I never said anything else to them except that they should keep away from my bed, so that they should not dirty it for me or spoil it; telling them, on some occasion when out of mockery they touched my bed a little, ever so lightly: "Ah, you filthy loafers! I will lay my hand on one of those swords of yours, and do you such a mischief that I will make you wonder. Do you think you are fit to touch the bed of a man like me? Over this I will have no regard for my own life, because I am certain I shall take yours; so leave me alone with my troubles and my tribulations, and do not give me any more grief than I have already; if not, I will let you see what a desperate man can do." These words they repeated to the Castellan, who expressly ordered them never to come near that bed of mine, and that when they came to me they should come without swords, and take very good care of me in everything else. Having made my bed safe, I felt I had done everything: because in that lay the whole importance of my business.

One holiday evening among others, the Castellan feeling himself very badly disposed and those humours of his grown stronger, never said anything except that he was a bat, and that if they heard that Benvenuto had flown away, they should let him go, for he would catch me up, since he too would certainly fly by night, and stronger than I, saying: "Benvenuto is a counterfeit bat, and I am a real bat; and since he has been given into my keeping, just leave it to me, and I shall certainly catch him." Having been several nights in this humour, he had worn out all his servants; and I by various ways heard everything, above all from that Savoyard who was fond of me.

Having made up my mind that holiday evening to escape in any case, first of all I said my prayers to God most devoutly, begging His divine Majesty to defend and help me in so dangerous an undertaking; then I set my hand to all the things I meant to use, and worked all that night. When it was two hours before daybreak, I got those hinges out with the greatest labour, because the wooden jamb of the door, and the bolt as well, made an obstruction, and so I could not open it: I had to hack away the wood; still, in the end I opened it, and putting on me those strips, which I had wound like skeins of yarn on two little sticks, I got out and went to the privies of the keep; and having uncovered two roof tiles from the inside, I easily jumped up onto the roof at once. I was in a white doublet and a pair of white hose and likewise a pair of half boots, in which I had put that little dagger of mine already mentioned. Then I took one end of those strips of mine and made it fast to a piece of old tile which was built into the said keep: by chance this stuck out barely four fingers. The strip was arranged like a stirrup. When I had hooked it to that piece of tile, turning to God I said: "Lord God, help my right, because I have right on my side, as You know, and because I am helping myself." Letting myself go very gently, holding myself up by the strength of my arms, I got right down to the ground. There was no moonlight, but it was a fine clear night. When I was on the ground, I looked at the great height I had come down so boldly, and went off happy, thinking I was free. It turned out not to be so, because on that side the Castellan had had two walls built, quite high, and used the place as a stable and a hen house: this place was closed with heavy bolts on the outside. When I saw that I could not get out of there, it gave me the greatest unhappiness.

While I was walking up and down thinking about my situation, my feet struck against a great pole which was covered by the straw. This with great difficulty I set upright against that wall; then by the strength of my arms I climbed it right to the top of the wall. And because that wall came to a sharp edge, I had no strength to pull the said pole up; so I made up my mind to fasten on a piece of those strips, which was the second skein, because one of the two skeins I had left attached to the keep of the Castle: so I took a piece of this other strip, as I have said, and having tied it to that beam, I got down this wall, which gave me the greatest labour and had tired me very much, and besides that I had flayed the insides of my hands, which were bleeding; on account of which I had settled down to rest, and had bathed my hands with my own urine. When it seemed to me that my strength had come back, I climbed to the last circuit of the walls, which looks towards the Prati; and having laid down that skein of strips of mine, with which I meant to take a turn round a battlement, and to do at this lesser height what I had done at the greater; having, as I say, laid down my strip, one of those sentries who were on guard came upon me. Seeing my design blocked, and seeing myself in danger of my life, I resolved to face that guard; who, seeing my determined spirit and that I was coming towards him with a weapon in my hand, quickened his pace, making as though to get out of my way. Having got a little distance from my strips, very quickly I turned back; and although I saw another guard, that time he chose not to see me. When I got to my strips, having tied them to the battlement, I let myself go; on account of which, whether it was that it seemed to me I was near the ground and I opened my hands to jump, or whether my hands were simply tired and could not stand up to that labour, I fell, and in this fall of mine I struck my head and lay senseless more than an hour and a half, as far as I can judge. Then, as the day was beginning to break, that little coolness that comes an hour before the sun brought me back to myself; but I was still out of my wits, because it seemed to me that my head had been cut off, and it seemed to me that I was in purgatory. Lying like that, little by little my faculties came back to their proper state, and I realized that I was outside the Castle, and at once I remembered everything I had done. And because I felt the blow on my head before I noticed that my leg was broken, putting my hands to my head I brought them away all bloody: then, having felt myself over well, I knew and judged that I had no injury of any importance; but when I tried to get up from the ground, I found my right leg broken three fingers above the heel. Not even this dismayed me: I drew out my little dagger together with its sheath; for this having a metal tip with quite a big ball at the end of the tip, that was the cause of my having broken my leg; because the bone coming up against that thickness of that ball, and the bone not being able to bend, made it break in that place: so that I threw away the dagger's sheath, and with the dagger I cut a piece of that strip which I had left over, and as best I could I put the leg together again, and then on all fours, with the said dagger in my hand, I went off towards the gate. When I got to the gate, I found it shut; and seeing a certain stone right under the gate, which, judging that it was not very firmly set, I tried to loosen; then I put my hands to it, and feeling it shift, it obeyed me easily, and I drew it out; and by that way I got in.

Chapter 110

It had been more than five hundred paces walking from the place where I fell to the gate where I got in. When I had got inside Rome, certain mastiff dogs threw themselves on me and bit me badly; and when they came at me several times to worry me, I struck at them with that dagger of mine and pricked one of them so soundly that it yelped loudly, so that the other dogs, as their nature is, ran to that dog: and I made haste, going off towards the church of the Traspontina still on all fours. When I had reached the mouth of the street that turns towards Sant'Angelo, from there I took the way to go towards St. Peter's, so that as broad day came on me, I considered that I was in danger; and meeting a water carrier who had loaded his donkey and filled his jars with water, I called him to me and begged him to lift me up bodily and carry me onto the level at the top of the steps of St. Peter's, saying to him: "I am a poor young man who, over a love affair, tried to get down from a window; and so I fell, and broke my leg. And because the place I came out of is of great importance, and I should be in danger of being cut to pieces, I beg you to take me quickly, and I will give you a gold scudo," and I put my hand to my purse, where I had a good quantity of them. At once the man took hold of me, and willingly got me on his back, and carried me onto the said level at the top of the steps of St. Peter's; and there I made him set me down, and told him to run back to his donkey.

At once I took my way, still on all fours, and was going to the house of the Duchess, wife of Duke Ottavio and daughter of the Emperor, natural, not legitimate, who had been the wife of Duke Alessandro, Duke of Florence; and because I knew for certain that about this great princess there were many friends of mine, who had come from Florence with her; and also because she had done me a favour by means of the Castellan; who, wanting to help me, had told the Pope, when the Duchess made her entry into Rome, that I had been the cause of saving more than a thousand scudi of damage which a heavy rain was doing them: on account of which he said that he was in despair, and that I put heart into him, and told how I had trained several heavy pieces of artillery towards that quarter where the clouds were thickest, and where a very heavy rain had already begun; on account of which, when these pieces of artillery began to be fired, the rain stopped, and at the fourth round the sun came out; and that I had been the entire cause of that festival passing off very well; on account of which, when the Duchess heard it, she had said: "That Benvenuto is one of those men of talent who were with the blessed memory of Duke Alessandro my husband, and I shall always take account of such men, when the occasion comes of doing them a kindness;" and she had also spoken about me to Duke Ottavio her husband. For these reasons I was going straight to the house of Her Excellency, who was living in the Borgo Vecchio in a very fine palace that is there; and there I should have been quite safe from the Pope's touching me; but because what I had done up to that point had been too marvellous for a human body, and God not wanting me to fall into so much vainglory, for my own good chose to give me yet a greater discipline than the one before; and the cause was this, that while I was going on all fours like that up those steps, a servant who was with Cardinal Cornaro recognized me at once; which cardinal was lodged in the Palace. This servant ran to the Cardinal's room, and having woken him, said: "Most reverend Monsignor, your Benvenuto is down there, having escaped from the Castle, and he is going along on all fours all covered in blood: by the look of him he has broken a leg, and we do not know where he is going." The Cardinal said at once: "Run, and carry him bodily up here to my room." When I came to him, he told me not to be afraid of anything; and at once he sent for the first doctors of Rome; and by them I was treated: and this was a Master Iacomo of Perugia, a most excellent surgeon. He set the bone for me admirably, then bandaged me, and with his own hand let my blood; for my veins being swollen far beyond the ordinary, and also because he chose to make the opening somewhat wide, the rush of blood came out so great that it caught him in the face, and covered him in such abundance that he could not get on with treating me: and having taken this for a very bad omen, he treated me with great difficulty; and several times he wanted to leave me, remembering that he too was risking no small penalty for having treated me, or even for having finished treating me. The Cardinal had me put in a private room, and went off at once to the Palace with the intention of asking the Pope for me.

Chapter 111

Meanwhile a very great noise had gone up in Rome: for the strips had already been seen hanging from the great tower of the keep of the Castle, and all Rome was running to see this astonishing thing. Meanwhile the Castellan had come into the highest of his humours of madness, and wanted, in spite of all his servants, to fly from that keep himself, saying that nobody could recapture me but he, by flying after me. At this Messer Roberto Pucci, father of Messer Pandolfo, having heard of this great affair, went in person to see it; then he came on to the Palace, where he met Cardinal Cornaro, who told him the whole business, and how I was in one of his rooms and already treated. These two honest men went in agreement to kneel down before the Pope, who, before he let them say anything, said: "I know everything you want from me." Messer Roberto Pucci said: "Most blessed Father, we ask you as a favour for that poor man, who for his talents deserves to have some consideration shown him, and besides those, has shown such bravery together with such ingenuity that it has not seemed a human thing. We do not know for what sins Your Holiness has kept him so long in prison; so, if those sins were too outrageous, Your Holiness is holy and wise, and may do your will in the matter, high and low; but if they are things that can be forgiven, we beg you to grant them to us as a favour." The Pope at this, ashamed, said that he had kept me in prison at the request of certain of his people, "he being a little too bold; but knowing his talents and wanting to keep him here beside us, we had arranged to give him so much good that he should have had no cause to go back to France. I am very sorry for his great injury; tell him to attend to getting well; and when he is well, we will make him amends for his troubles." These two great men came and gave me this good news on the Pope's behalf.

Meanwhile the nobility of Rome came to visit me, young and old and of every sort. The Castellan, being out of his mind as he was, had himself carried to the Pope; and when he was before His Holiness he began to shout, saying that if the Pope did not give me back to him in prison he was doing him a great wrong, saying: "He escaped from me under the word he had given me; alas, he has flown away from me, and he promised me not to fly away!" The Pope, laughing, said: "Go, go, for I will give him back to you in any case." The Castellan added, saying to the Pope: "Send the Governor to him, to find out who helped him escape, because if it is one of my men, I want to hang him by the throat from that battlement Benvenuto escaped by." When the Castellan had gone, the Pope called the Governor, smiling, and said: "This is a brave man, and this is a marvellous thing; for all that, when I was young, I too came down from that very place." Here the Pope was telling the truth, because he had been a prisoner in the Castle for having forged a brief, when he was an abbreviator of the Parco Maggiore: Pope Alexander had kept him prisoner a long time; then, the thing being too ugly, he had made up his mind to cut off his head; but wanting to let the feast of Corpus Domini go by, Farnese, knowing all about it, had Pietro Chiavelluzzi come with several horses, and in the Castle bribed certain of those guards with money; so that on the day of Corpus Domini, while the Pope was in procession, Farnese was put in a basket and lowered by a rope right down to the ground. The circuit of walls at the Castle was not made yet, but only the tower, so that he did not have the great difficulties in escaping that I had: besides, he had been imprisoned justly and I unjustly. Enough that he chose to boast to the Governor of having been spirited and brave himself in his youth, and did not notice that he was disclosing his own great villainies. He said: "Go and tell him he may freely say who helped him: so, let it have been whoever it likes, it is enough that he is pardoned, and promise him that freely yourself."

Chapter 112

This Governor came to me, who had been made Bishop of Iesi two days before: when he reached me, he said: "My Benvenuto, although my office is one that frightens men, I come to you to reassure you; and I have authority to promise you so by the express commission of His Holiness, who has told me that he escaped too, but that he had a great deal of help and a great deal of company, for otherwise he could not have done it. I swear to you by the Sacraments I bear — for I have been made a Bishop these two days — that the Pope has set you free and pardoned you, and is very sorry for your great injury; but attend to getting well, and take everything for the best, for this imprisonment, which you have certainly suffered as an entirely innocent man, will have been the making of you for ever, because you will tread poverty underfoot, and you will not need to go back to France, wearing out your life travelling here and there. So tell me freely how the case went, and who gave you help; then take comfort and rest and get well." I went back to the beginning and told him the whole thing exactly as it had happened, and I gave him the fullest details, down to the water carrier who had carried me on his back. When the Governor had heard the whole of it, he said: "Truly these are too great things for one man alone: they are not worthy of any man but you." So, having had my hand brought out, he said: "Be of good cheer and take comfort, for by this hand that I touch you are free and, if you live, will be happy."

Having left me, since he had kept waiting a crowd of great gentlemen and lords who were coming to visit me, saying among themselves, "Let us go and see the man who works miracles," these stayed with me; and some of them made me offers and some brought me presents. Meanwhile the Governor, having got to the Pope, began to tell over the thing I had told him; and it just happened that Signor Pier Luigi his son was present; and they all wondered greatly. The Pope said: "Certainly this is too great a thing." Signor Pier Luigi then added, saying: "Most blessed Father, if you set him free, he will do you greater ones, because this is far too bold a spirit of a man. I want to tell you another one, which you do not know. This Benvenuto of yours, before he was a prisoner, had words with a gentleman of Cardinal Santa Fiore's; which words came out of a small thing this gentleman had said to Benvenuto, so that he answered most insolently and with such daring that he even made as if to pick a quarrel; the said gentleman reported it to Cardinal Santa Fiore, who said that if he laid hands on him he would knock the madness out of his head; Benvenuto, hearing this, kept a fowling piece of his in readiness, with which he hits a farthing every time: and one day, when the Cardinal came to the window, the said Benvenuto's shop being under the Cardinal's palace, he took his fowling piece and got himself ready to fire at the Cardinal. And because the Cardinal was warned of it, he moved away at once. Benvenuto, so that the thing should not be noticed, fired at a house pigeon that was brooding in a hole high up on the palace, and hit the said pigeon in the head: a thing impossible to believe. Now let Your Holiness do with him whatever you please; I did not want to fail to have told you of it. It might also come into his head, thinking he has been in prison wrongfully, to take a shot one day at Your Holiness. This is far too fierce and too confident a spirit. When he killed Pompeo, he gave him two dagger thrusts in the throat in the middle of ten men who were guarding him, and then got away, to no small discredit of those men, who were honest men of standing."

Chapter 113

Present at these words was that gentleman of Santa Fiore's with whom I had had words, and he confirmed to the Pope everything his son had said. The Pope sat swollen up and said nothing. I will not fail to state my case justly and honestly. This gentleman of Santa Fiore's came to me one day and handed me a little gold ring, which was all smeared with quicksilver, saying: "Get the quicksilver off this little ring for me, and be quick." I, who had before me many works in gold with jewels of the greatest importance, and also feeling myself ordered about so confidently by a man to whom I had never spoken and whom I had never seen, told him that I had no tool for the job just then, and that he should go to somebody else. The man, with no cause in the world, told me that I was an ass. To which words I answered that he was not telling the truth, and that I was in every respect a better man than he; but that if he provoked me, I would kick him harder than an ass would. The man reported it to the Cardinal and painted him a picture of hell.

Two days later I fired, behind the palace into a very high hole, at a wild pigeon that was brooding in that hole; and at that same pigeon I had seen a goldsmith called Giovan Francesco della Tacca, a Milanese, fire several times, and he had never hit it. This day when I fired, the pigeon was showing just its head, being suspicious because of the other times it had been fired at; and because this Giovan Francesco and I were rivals at shooting, some gentlemen and friends of mine being in my shop, they pointed it out to me, saying: "There up above is Giovan Francesco della Tacca's pigeon, that he has fired at so many times: now look, the poor creature is suspicious; it hardly shows its head." Raising my eyes, I said: "That little bit of head alone would be enough for me to kill it, if it would only wait until I got my gun up to my face." Those gentlemen said that the inventor of the gun himself would not hit it. To which I said: "Let there be a jug of Greek wine on it, of that good wine of Palombo the innkeeper, and if it waits until I get my marvellous Broccardo to my face" — for so I called my gun — "I will plant a shot in that little bit of head it is showing me." At once getting it up to my face, at arm's length, without a rest or anything else, I did what I had promised, thinking neither of the Cardinal nor of anybody else; on the contrary, I held the Cardinal to be very much my patron. So let the world see, when fortune wants to set about assassinating a man, how many different ways she takes. The Pope, swollen up and sulking, sat considering what his son had told him.
