Book One, Chapters 114 to 119

Chapter 114

Two days later Cardinal Cornaro went to ask the Pope for a bishopric for a gentleman of his, who was called Messer Andrea Centano. It is true that the Pope had promised him a bishopric: one having fallen vacant in this way, when the Cardinal reminded the Pope how he had promised him the thing, the Pope agreed that it was true and that he meant to give it him; but that he wanted a favour from His most reverend Lordship, and this was that he wanted him to put Benvenuto back into his hands. Then the Cardinal said: "Oh, if Your Holiness has pardoned him and given him to me free, what will the world say both of Your Holiness and of me?" The Pope replied: "I want Benvenuto, and let everybody say what they like, if you want the bishopric." The good Cardinal said that His Holiness should give him the bishopric, and that for the rest he should consider it himself and afterwards do everything His Holiness both wanted and could do. The Pope said, still somewhat ashamed of the wicked word he had already given: "I will send for Benvenuto, and for a little satisfaction of my own I will put him down in those rooms in the private garden, where he will be able to attend to getting well, and none of his friends will be forbidden to go and see him, and I will also have his expenses paid, until this little fancy of ours passes off."

The Cardinal went home and sent word to me at once, by the man who was waiting for the bishopric, that the Pope wanted me back in his hands; but that he would keep me in a ground-floor room in the private garden; where I should be visited by everybody just as I was in his house. Then I begged this Messer Andrea to be so good as to tell the Cardinal not to give me to the Pope and to leave it to me; because I would have myself wrapped up in a mattress and have myself carried out of Rome to a safe place; because if he gave me to the Pope, most certainly he was giving me to death. The Cardinal, when he heard it, I believe would have been willing to do it, but that Messer Andrea, who was to have the bishopric, disclosed the matter. Meanwhile the Pope sent for me at once and had me put, as he had said, in a ground-floor room in his private garden. The Cardinal sent to tell me that I should eat nothing of those dishes the Pope sent me, and that he would send me food; and that what he had done he could not do otherwise, and that I should be of good cheer, for he would help me so much that I should be free.

Being in that position, I was visited every day, and many great things were offered me by many great gentlemen. From the Pope came the food, which I did not touch; instead I ate what came from Cardinal Cornaro, and so I lived. Among my other friends I had a young Greek of twenty-five years of age: this man was exceedingly strong and played at the sword better than any other man in Rome: he was faint-hearted, but he was a most faithful honest man and very ready to believe. He had heard it said that the Pope had said he wanted to make up to me for my troubles. This was true, that the Pope had said such things at the beginning, but at the end afterwards he was saying something else. On account of which I confided in this young Greek and said to him: "Dearest brother, these men mean to assassinate me, so now is the time to help me: for they think I do not see it, doing me these extraordinary favours, which are all done to betray me." This honest young man said: "My Benvenuto, it is said all over Rome that the Pope has given you an office worth five hundred scudi of income; so I beg you as a favour not to let this suspicion of yours rob you of so great a good." And still I begged him, with my arms crossed on my breast, to take me away from there, because I well knew that a Pope like that could do me a great deal of good, but that I knew for certain that he was studying to do me, secretly, for his honour's sake, a great deal of harm; so let him be quick and try to save my life from this man: for if he got me out of there in the way I would tell him, I should always owe my life to him; and if the need came, I would spend it for him. This poor young man said to me, weeping: "Oh my dear brother, you insist on ruining yourself, and I cannot fail you in what you order me; so tell me the way and I will do everything you say, even if it is against my will." So we had made up our minds and I had given him the whole plan, which was working out very easily for us. When I thought he was coming to put in practice what I had arranged with him, he came to tell me that for my own good he meant to disobey me, and that he well knew what he had heard from men who were about the Pope and who knew the whole truth of my case. I, who could not help myself in any other way, was left discontented and in despair. This was the day of Corpus Domini in 1539.

Chapter 115

After this argument, time went by all that day until night, and from the Pope's kitchen came a plentiful meal: from Cardinal Cornaro's kitchen too came a very good supply: several friends of mine happening to be there, I made them stay to supper with me; and so, keeping my leg in splints in the bed, I made merry with them; and they stayed on with me. When an hour of the night had passed they went away; and two servants of mine settled me down to sleep, and then went into the outer room. I had a dog as black as a mulberry, one of the shaggy sort, and he served me marvellously at shooting, and never stayed a step away from me. In the night, being under my bed, three good times I called my servant to take him out from under the bed, because he was howling frighteningly. When the servants came, this dog threw himself on them to bite them. They were terrified and were afraid the dog had gone mad, because he howled continually. So we went on until four hours into the night.

At the stroke of four hours of the night the constable came into my room with a large troop: then the dog came out and threw himself on them with such fury, tearing their cloaks and their hose, and had put them into such fear that they thought he was mad. On account of which the constable, as an experienced person, said: "The nature of good dogs is this, that they always guess and foretell the harm that is coming to their masters: take a couple of sticks and defend yourselves from the dog, and let the others tie Benvenuto onto this chair, and carry him where you know." As I have said, the day of Corpus Domini had just passed, and it was about four hours of the night. They carried me gagged and covered up, and four of them went ahead, making the few men who were still to be found in the street get out of the way. So they carried me to the Torre di Nona, as the place is called, and put me in the condemned cell, laid me down on a bit of a mattress and gave me one of those guards, who all night lamented my bad fortune, saying to me: "Alas! poor Benvenuto, what have you done to these people?" So I saw very well what was going to happen to me, both because the place was what it was and also because that man had let me know it. I spent a part of that night tormenting myself with wondering what could be the reason it pleased God to give me such a penance; and because I could not find it, I struggled hard. That guard had then set about comforting me as best he knew how; on account of which I entreated him for the love of God not to say anything to me and not to speak to me, seeing that by myself I should come to such a resolution sooner and better. So he promised me.

Then I turned my whole heart to God; and I prayed Him most devoutly that it might please Him to receive me into His kingdom; and that although I had complained, this departure in this way seeming to me a very innocent one, so far as the ordinances of the laws promised; and although I had committed homicides, that Vicar of His had called me from my own country and pardoned me by the authority of the laws and of his own; and what I had done had all been done in defence of this body which His Majesty had lent me: so that I did not see, according to the ordinances by which men live in the world, that I deserved that death; but that it seemed to me there was happening to me what happens to certain unfortunate people who, going along the street, have a stone fall on their head from some great height and are killed by it: which is plainly seen to be the power of the stars: not that they are conspiring against us to do us good or harm, but it comes about in their conjunctions, to which we are subject; though I know that I have free will: and if my faith had been exercised in a holy way, I am quite certain that the angels of Heaven would carry me out of that prison and would save me surely from all my trouble; but because it does not seem to me that I have been made worthy by God of such a thing, therefore these heavenly influences must needs work out their malignity upon me. And having struggled a while with this, afterwards I made up my mind, and fell asleep at once.

Chapter 116

When dawn came, the guard woke me and said: "Oh unlucky honest man, now it is no longer time for sleeping, because the man has come who has to give you bad news." Then I said: "The sooner I get out of this worldly prison, the more welcome it will be to me, all the more since I am sure my soul is saved, and that I am dying wrongfully. The glorious and divine Christ makes me the companion of His disciples and friends, who, both He and they, were put to death wrongfully: so wrongfully am I being put to death, and I thank God for it in all holiness. Why does the man not come forward who has to pass sentence on me?" Then the guard said: "He is too sorry for you and is weeping." Then I called him by name, whose name was Messer Benedetto da Cagli. I said: "Come forward, my Messer Benedetto, now that I am very well disposed and resolved; it is much more to my glory that I should die wrongfully than if I died justly: come forward, I beg you, and give me a priest, so that I may say four words to him; although there is no need, because I have made my holy confession to my Lord God; but only to observe what holy mother Church has ordained for us; for although she is doing me this wicked wrong, I freely forgive her. So come, my Messer Benedetto, and dispatch me before my senses begin to trouble me." When I had said these words, this honest man told the guard to shut the door, because without him the office could not be performed.

He went off to the house of the wife of Signor Pier Luigi, who was together with the Duchess I spoke of above; and coming before them, this man said: "My most illustrious patroness, be pleased, I beg you for the love of God, to send word to the Pope to send somebody else to pass that sentence on Benvenuto and do this office of mine, because I resign it and never want to do it again;" and sighing with the greatest grief he went away. The Duchess, who was there present, twisting her face aside, said: "This is the fine justice that is kept in Rome by the Vicar of God! The Duke who was my husband was very fond of this man for his goodness and for his talents, and did not want him to go back to Rome, holding him very dear about his own person;" and she went off, muttering a great many angry words. The wife of Signor Pier Luigi, who was called Signora Girolama, went off to the Pope, and throwing herself on her knees — several Cardinals were present — this woman said so many great things that she made the Pope blush, and he said: "For love of you we will let him be, though we never had any bad intention towards him." These words the Pope said because those Cardinals were present, who had heard the words that marvellous and daring woman had said.

I stayed on in the greatest discomfort, my heart beating continually. And all those men who were appointed to that ugly office stayed in discomfort too, until it was late at the hour for dinner; at which hour every man went off to his other business, so that dinner was brought to me: whereat, wondering, I said: "Here truth has been able to do more than the malignity of the heavenly influences; so I pray God, if it be His pleasure, to save me from this fury." I began to eat, and just as before I had made up my mind to my great harm, so now I made it up to the hope of my great good. I dined with a good appetite. So I stayed without seeing or hearing anybody until an hour of the night. At that hour the constable came with a good part of his troop, and put me back on that chair on which the evening before he had carried me to that place, and from there, with many kind words to me not to be afraid, he ordered his catchpoles to take care not to knock that leg of mine that I had broken, as they valued their eyes. So they did, and carried me to the Castle, from which I had escaped; and when we were up at the top of the keep, where there is a little courtyard, they stopped me there for a while.

Chapter 117

Meanwhile the Castellan spoken of above had himself carried to the place where I was, and ill and afflicted as he was he said: "See, I have taken you again?" "Yes," I said, "but see, I escaped, as I told you I would? And if I had not been sold, under the papal word, for a bishopric by a Venetian cardinal and a Roman one by Farnese, both of whom have clawed the face of the sacred holy laws, you would never have taken me again. But since they have now set up this bad custom, do you too the worst you can, for I care about nothing in the world." This poor man began to cry out very loudly, saying: "Alas! alas! this man cares neither about living nor about dying, and he is bolder than when he was well: put him down there under the garden, and never speak to me about him again, for he is the cause of my death."

I was carried down under a garden into a very dark room, where there was a great deal of water, full of tarantulas and many venomous worms. A wretched little mattress of tow was thrown down on the ground for me, and that evening I was given no supper, and I was shut in behind four doors: so I stayed until nineteen hours the next day. Then food was brought to me: and I asked them to give me some of those books of mine to read. Not one of these men spoke to me, but they reported it to that poor man the Castellan, who had asked what I was saying. The next morning then a book of mine was brought me, a Bible in Italian, and a certain other book in which were the Chronicles of Giovanni Villani. When I asked for certain other books of mine, I was told that I should have nothing else and that I already had too many of those.

So I lived on wretchedly on that mattress, which was all rotten, for in three days everything was water; so that I was continually unable to move, because I had my leg broken; and when I had to get out of the bed for the necessity of relieving myself, I went on all fours with the greatest distress, so as not to make filth in the place where I slept. I had an hour and a half of the day of a little reflected light which came into that unhappy cave through a very small hole; and only in that little space of time did I read, and the rest of the day and the night I was always in the dark, patiently, never out of thoughts of God and of this human frailty of ours; and it seemed to me certain that within a few days I should end my unlucky life there and in that way. Still, as best I could I comforted myself, considering how much greater a suffering it would have been for me, in passing out of my life, to feel that inestimable agony of the knife, whereas being in that state I was passing out of it with a sleeping draught, which had become much pleasanter to me than the first one had been: and little by little I felt myself going out, until my good constitution had accommodated itself to that purgatory. Then, when I felt that it had accommodated and accustomed itself, I took heart to bear that inestimable suffering as long as my constitution itself bore it for me.

Chapter 118

I began at the beginning of the Bible, and read it devoutly and thought it over, and I was so enchanted with it that if I had been able I would never have done anything but read: but as soon as the light failed me, all my miseries jumped on me at once and gave me such torment that several times I had made up my mind to put an end to myself somehow; but because they did not let me have a knife, I had little means of doing such a thing. Still, once among other times I had arranged a thick beam that was there, propped up like a trap; and I meant to make it come down on my head; which would have crushed it at the first blow: so that, when I had got this whole engine ready, and moved resolutely to set it off, when I tried to strike it with my hand, I was caught hold of by something invisible and thrown four braccia away from that place, and so terrified that I was left in a swoon: and so I lay from the dawn of day until nineteen hours, when they brought me my dinner. They must have come several times without my hearing them; because when I did hear them, Captain Sandrino Monaldi came in, and I heard him say: "Oh! unhappy man, see what an end so rare a talent has come to!" Hearing these words I opened my eyes: and so I saw priests with their gowns on, who said: "Oh, you said he was dead!" Bozza said: "I found him dead, and so I said so." At once they lifted me out of the place where I was, and lifting the mattress, which had become all rotten like macaroni, they threw it out of that room: and when these things had been repeated to the Castellan, he had another mattress given me. And so, remembering what that thing could have been which had held me back from that undertaking, I thought it must have been something divine and my defender.

Chapter 119

Afterwards there appeared to me in a dream by night a marvellous creature in the form of a most beautiful young man, and as though scolding me he said: "Do you know who it was that lent you that body, which you meant to spoil before its time?" It seemed to me that I answered him that I acknowledged the whole of it from the God of nature. "Then," he said to me, "you despise His works, wanting to spoil them? Let yourself be guided by Him and do not lose hope in His power," with many other words so admirable that I do not remember the thousandth part of them.

I began to consider that this figure of an angel had told me the truth; and casting my eyes about the prison, I saw a bit of rotten brick; so I rubbed one piece against another and made a sort of little paste of it: then on all fours I went up to a corner of that prison door and with my teeth I worked away until I got off a little splinter; and when I had done this, I waited for that hour of light which came into my prison, which was from twenty and a half hours until twenty-one and a half. Then I began to write as best I could on certain leaves that were left over in the book of the Bible; and I reproved the spirits of my intellect, angry at their not wanting to stay alive any longer; and they answered my body, excusing themselves for their misfortune: and my body gave them hope of good: so I wrote it in dialogue:

	"Afflicted spirits of mine,
	alas, how cruel, that life should weary you!"
	"If you are set against Heaven,
	who will be for us? who will bring us any help?
	Let us go, let us go to a better life."
	"Ah, do not go yet,
	for Heaven promises you more happiness and joy
	than you have ever known."
	"We will stay some little while,
	provided that great God grants you
	the grace that we come to no worse trouble."

Having taken my vigour back again, after I had comforted myself by my own means, going on with reading my Bible, my eyes had grown so used to that darkness that where before I used to read an hour and a half, I now read three whole hours. And I considered with such wonder the force of the power of God in those very simple men, who believed with such fervour that God granted them everything they imagined: promising myself too the help of God, both for His divinity and mercy and also for my innocence; and continually, now with prayer and now with reasonings turned to God, I was always in these high thoughts about God; so that there began to come to me such a great delight in these thoughts about God that I no longer remembered any unhappiness I had ever had before; on the contrary, I sang psalms all day and many other compositions of my own, all directed to God.

The only thing that gave me great distress was my nails, which kept growing; because I could not touch myself without wounding myself with them: I could not dress myself, because they turned back either inwards or outwards, giving me a great deal of pain. My teeth were dying in my mouth as well; and I knew this, because the dead teeth being pushed by the living ones, little by little they perforated the gums, and the points of the roots came through the bottom of their sockets. When I noticed it I pulled them out, like drawing them out of a sheath, without any pain or blood: so I had lost a good many of them. Still, having come to terms with these new distresses too, I spent the time now singing, now praying, and now writing with that pounded brick I have spoken of; and I began a poem in praise of the prison, and in it I told all those things that had happened to me there; which poem shall be written out later in its own place.
