Book One, Chapters 120 to 125

Chapter 120

The good Castellan often sent secretly to find out what I was doing: and because on the last day of July I made great rejoicing by myself, remembering the great festival they hold in Rome on that first day of August, I said to myself: "All these past years I have kept this pleasant festival with the frailties of the world; this year I shall keep it from now on with the divinity of God;" and I said to myself: "Oh, how much happier I am with this one than with those!" Those who heard me say these words reported the whole of it to the Castellan; who with wonderful annoyance said: "Oh God! that man triumphs and lives in so much misery; and I suffer in so many comforts, and am dying solely because of him! Go quickly and put him in that deepest underground cave, where the preacher Foiano was starved to death: perhaps seeing himself in such wretchedness the maggot might get out of his head."

At once Captain Sandrino Monaldi came to my prison with about twenty of those servants of the Castellan; and they found me on my knees, and I did not turn towards them, but went on worshipping a God the Father adorned with Angels and a Christ rising victorious, which I had drawn for myself on the wall with a bit of charcoal I had found covered by the earth, after four months of my having lain on my back in bed with my leg broken; and so many times I dreamed that the Angels came to treat it for me, that after four months I had become as strong as if it had never been broken. Still, they came at me so heavily armed, almost as if they were afraid I was a venomous dragon. The said captain said: "You surely hear that there are a good many of us, and that we come to you with a great noise; and you do not turn towards us." At these words, imagining very well the worst that could happen to me, and having made myself practised and steady under trouble, I said to them: "To this God who carries me to the God of the heavens I have turned my soul and my contemplations and all my vital spirits; and to you I have turned exactly what belongs to you, because what is good in me you are not worthy to look at, nor can you touch it: so do to what is yours everything you can." This hard captain, in fear, not knowing what I meant to do, said to four of the strongest of them: "Take off all your weapons from your sides." When they had taken them off, he said: "Quick, quick, jump on him and take him. Is this man the devil, that so many of us should be afraid of him? Hold him tight now so that he does not get away from you."

I, forced and roughly handled by them, imagining much worse than what afterwards happened to me, raising my eyes to Christ said: "O just God, You surely paid all our debts on that high wood: why then must my innocence pay the debts of men I do not know? Oh, still let Your will be done." Meanwhile they were carrying me away with a great flaring torch alight; I thought they meant to throw me into the oubliette of Sammalò, as they call a fearful place which has swallowed a good many men alive, because they come down into the foundations of the Castle into a well. This did not happen to me: on account of which it seemed to me I had made a very good bargain; because they put me in that filthiest cave I spoke of, where Foiano died of hunger, and left me there, doing me no other harm. When they had left me, I began to sing a De profundis clamavi, a Miserere, and In te Domine speravi. All that first day of August I kept festival with God, and my heart was always jubilant with hope and faith.

The second day they drew me out of that hole and carried me back to where those first drawings of mine of those images of God were. And when I got there, in front of them I wept a great deal out of sweetness and gladness. After that the Castellan wanted to know every day what I was doing and what I was saying. The Pope, who had heard the whole business, and the doctors having already given the said Castellan up for dead, said: "Before my Castellan dies, I want him to put that Benvenuto to death in his own way, since he is the cause of his death, so that he shall not die unavenged." When the Castellan heard these words from the mouth of Duke Pier Luigi, he said to him: "Then the Pope makes me a present of Benvenuto, and wants me to take my revenge? Let him think no more about it and leave it to me." Just as the Pope's heart was bad towards me, at first sight the Castellan's was the worst and most grievous; and at that point that Invisible One, who had turned me aside from wanting to kill myself, came to me, invisibly again but with a clear voice; and shook me and lifted me from where I lay and said: "Alas! my Benvenuto, quickly, quickly turn to God with your usual prayers, and cry out loudly, loudly." At once, terrified, I got on my knees, and said many prayers of mine aloud: then all of them, and a Qui habitat in adiutorium; then after this I talked with God a while: and in an instant that same voice, open and clear, said to me: "Go and rest, and be afraid no more." And this was because the Castellan, having given the foulest order for my death, had at once taken it back and said: "Is not this Benvenuto the man I have defended so much, and the man I know for certain is innocent, and that all this harm has been done him wrongfully? Oh, how shall God ever have mercy on me and on my sins, if I do not forgive those who have done me the greatest offences? Oh, why must I offend an honest man, an innocent one, who has done me service and honour? Let him go; and instead of putting him to death, I give him life and liberty; and I leave it in my will that nobody shall ask him anything for the debt of the heavy expense he would have to pay here." The Pope heard this and took it very badly.

Chapter 121

Meanwhile I went on with my usual prayers and wrote my poem, and I began to have every night the happiest and pleasantest dreams that can ever be imagined; and it always seemed to me that I was visibly together with the One I had heard invisibly, and heard very often, of whom I asked no other favour except that I begged Him, and pressingly, to take me where I could see the sun, telling Him that this was the whole of my desire; and that if I could see it just once, I would die content afterwards. Of all the things I had in this prison that were disagreeable, all of them had become my friends and companions, and nothing disturbed me. Although those devoted servants of the Castellan, who were expecting the Castellan to hang me from that battlement I had come down by, as he had said, seeing afterwards that the said Castellan had come to another resolution altogether contrary to that one; these men, who could not bear it, were always giving me some different fright, meant to make me take alarm for the loss of my life. As I say, I had grown so used to all these things that I was no longer afraid of anything and nothing moved me any more; only this desire, this dreaming of seeing the disc of the sun. So that, going on with my long prayers, always with my heart turned to Christ, always saying: "O true Son of God, I beg You by Your birth, by Your death on the cross and by Your glorious resurrection, to make me worthy to see the sun, if not otherwise, at least in a dream; but if You made me worthy to see it with these mortal eyes of mine, I promise to come and visit You at Your holy Sepulchre." This resolution and these greatest prayers of mine to God I made on the second day of October in 1539.

The next morning came, which was the third day of the said October, and I had woken at the point of day, almost an hour before sunrise; and getting up from that unhappy den of mine, I put on a bit of a wretched gown I had, because it had begun to turn cold: and standing up like that, I made prayers more devout than any I had ever made in the past; for in the said prayers I said with great entreaty to Christ that He would grant me at least so much grace that I might know by divine inspiration for what sin of mine I was doing so great a penance; and since His divine Majesty had not chosen to make me worthy of the sight of the sun even in a dream, I begged Him by all His power and might to make me worthy to know what was the cause of that penance.

Chapter 122

When I had said these words, by that Invisible One I was caught up as by a wind and carried away, and I was taken into a room where that Invisible One of mine then showed himself to me visibly in human form, like a young man with his first beard; with a most marvellous face, beautiful but stern, not wanton; and he showed me things in the said room, saying to me: "All those many men you see are all those who up to now have been born and then have died." So I asked him for what reason he was taking me there: and he said to me: "Come forward with me and you will soon see." I found I had a little dagger in my hand and a coat of mail on my body; and so he led me through that great room, showing me those who in infinite thousands were walking now one way, now another. Having led me forward, he went out ahead of me by a little door into a place like a narrow street; and when he drew me after him into the said street, on coming out of that room I found myself unarmed, and I was in a white shirt with nothing on my head, and I was on the right hand of my said companion. Seeing myself like that, I wondered, because I did not recognize that street; and raising my eyes, I saw that the brightness of the sun was striking on a face of wall, like the front of a house, above my head. Then I said: "Oh my friend, how must I manage so as to raise myself high enough to see the very disc of the sun?" He showed me several steps that were there on my right hand, and said to me: "Go there by yourself."

Getting a little apart from him, I climbed those several steps backwards on my heels, and began little by little to make out the neighbourhood of the sun. I hurried to climb; and I went so far up in that way that I made out the whole disc of the sun. And because the force of its rays, as they usually do, made me shut my eyes, realizing my mistake, I opened my eyes and looking fixedly at the sun, I said: "O sun of mine, that I have wanted so much, I want never to look at anything else again, even if your rays blind me." So I stayed with my eyes fixed on it; and having been a little while like that, I saw in a moment all that force of those great rays throw itself over onto the left side of the said sun; and the sun being left clear, without its rays, with the greatest pleasure I looked at it; and it seemed to me a marvellous thing that those rays should have taken themselves off in that way. I stayed considering what a divine grace this was that I had that morning from God, and I said aloud: "Oh, how wonderful is Your power! oh, how glorious Your might! How much greater a grace You do me than I looked for!" This sun without its rays seemed to me neither more nor less than a bath of purest molten gold.

While I was considering this great thing, I saw that in the middle of the said sun there began to be a swelling; and this shape of this swelling grew, and in a moment there was made a Christ on the cross of the same substance as the sun; and He was of such beautiful grace and of so kindly an aspect that human wit could not imagine the thousandth part of it; and while I was considering the thing, I said aloud: "Miracles, miracles! O God, O Your mercy, O Your infinite power, of what things You make me worthy this morning!" And while I was considering and saying these words, this Christ moved towards that quarter where His rays had gone, and in the middle of the sun there swelled up again as it had done before; and when the swelling had grown, at once it was turned into the form of a most beautiful Madonna, who seemed to be seated very high up with the said Son in her arms in a most pleasing attitude, almost laughing; on this side and on that she had in the middle of two Angels so beautiful that the imagination does not reach them. I also saw in that same sun, on the right hand, a figure dressed like a priest: this one had his back to me and kept his face turned towards that Madonna and that Christ. All these things I saw truly, clearly and living, and continually I thanked the glory of God in the loudest voice.

When this marvellous thing had been before my eyes a little more than an eighth of an hour, it went away from me, and I was carried back to that den of mine. At once I began to shout out loud, in a loud voice saying: "The power of God has made me worthy to be shown all His glory, which perhaps no other mortal eye has ever seen: so by this I know myself to be free and happy and in the grace of God; and you rascals will remain rascals, unhappy and in the disgrace of God. Know that I am quite certain that on All Saints' day, which was the day I came into the world, in exactly 1500, the first day of November, on the night following, at four hours, that day when it comes you will be forced to take me out of this dark prison; and you will not be able to do otherwise, because I have seen it with my own eyes and in that throne of God. That priest, who was turned towards God and who showed his back to me, was Saint Peter, who was pleading for me, ashamed that in his house such foul wrongs should be done to Christians. So tell it to whom you like, that nobody has the power to do me any more harm; and tell that lord who keeps me here that if he gives me either wax or paper, and the means of my expressing to him this glory of God which has been shown me, most certainly I shall make him clear about what he is perhaps in doubt of."

Chapter 123

The Castellan, although the doctors had no hope at all of his recovery, still had a firm spirit left in him, and those humours of madness which used to trouble him every year had gone off: and having given himself altogether and entirely to his soul, his conscience gnawed at him, and it certainly seemed to him that I had received and was receiving a very great wrong; and when he let the Pope know those great things I was saying, the Pope sent word back to him, like a man who believed in nothing, neither in God nor in anybody else, saying that I had gone mad, and that he should attend as much as he could to his own health. When the Castellan heard these answers, he sent to comfort me and sent me writing materials and some wax and certain little sticks made for working in wax, with many courteous words, which were said to me by a certain one of his servants who was fond of me. This man was quite the opposite of that faction of those other rascals, who would have liked to see me dead. I took those papers and that wax, and began to work: and while I worked I wrote this sonnet addressed to the Castellan:

	If I could show you, my lord, the truth
	of the eternal light, here in this low life,
	which I have from God, then my faith in your eyes
	would be worth far more than any high empire.

	Ah, if the great Shepherd of the fold believed
	that God has shown Himself in His infinite glory,
	as no soul ever saw Him before it left
	this low kingdom, harsh and unsparing;

	then you would see the sacred and holy gates
	of Justice thrown open, and wicked fury
	fall bound, and send its cries up to heaven.

	If I had light — alas — at least I might carve
	the footprints of Heaven's great worth!
	My great trouble would not be so heavy a cross.

Chapter 124

When the next day that servant of the Castellan came to bring me my food, the one who was fond of me, I gave him this sonnet written out; which, secretly from those other malicious servants who wished me ill, he gave to the Castellan: who would gladly have let me go, because it seemed to him that the wrong which had been done me was a great cause of his death. He took the sonnet, and having read it more than once, said: "These are neither the words nor the ideas of a madman; but rather of a good and honest man;" and at once he ordered a secretary of his to carry it to the Pope, and to give it into his own hand, begging him to let me go. While the said secretary carried the sonnet to the Pope, the Castellan sent me light for the day and for the night, with all the comforts that could be wished for in that place; on account of which I began to improve from the disorder of my health, which had become very great. The Pope read the sonnet several times; then he sent word to the Castellan that he would very soon do something that would please him. And certainly the Pope would afterwards have let me go willingly; but the said Signor Pier Luigi, his son, almost against the Pope's will, kept me there by force.

The Castellan's death drawing near, while I had drawn and modelled that marvellous miracle, on the morning of All Saints' he sent Piero Ugolini, his nephew, to me to show me certain jewels; which, when I saw them, I said at once: "This is the sign of my deliverance." Then this young man, who was a person of very little sense, said: "Never think of that, Benvenuto." Then I said: "Take your jewels away, because I am brought to such a state that I see no light except in this dark cave, in which the quality of jewels cannot be made out; but as for getting out of this prison, this whole day will not end before you come to fetch me out: and it must needs be so, and you cannot do otherwise." The man went away and had me shut up again; and having gone, he stayed away more than two hours by the clock; then he came for me without armed men, with two boys to help hold me up, and so took me into those large rooms I had had before (this was in 1538), giving me all the comforts I asked for.

Chapter 125

A few days later the Castellan, who thought I was outside and free, hard pressed by his great illness passed out of this present life, and in his place there remained Messer Antonio Ugolini his brother, who had given the late Castellan, his brother, to understand that he had let me go. This Messer Antonio, as far as I heard, had orders from the Pope to leave me in that roomy prison until such time as he should tell him what was to be done with me.

That Messer Durante of Brescia already spoken of came to an agreement with that soldier, the apothecary of Prato, to give me among my food some liquor to eat that should be deadly, but not at once; it should take effect within four or five months. They took to thinking of putting powdered diamond among the food; which has no poison in it of any kind, but by reason of its inestimable hardness it keeps the sharpest edges, and does not behave as other stones do; for that very fine sharpness in all stones does not survive their being pounded, but they are left as it were rounded; and the diamond alone keeps that sharpness; so that getting into the stomach along with the other food, in that turning about which the food does to make digestion, this diamond catches on the cartilages of the stomach and of the bowels, and as the new food comes pushing it always forward, that diamond caught on them in no long space of time pierces them; and for that reason a man dies; whereas every other sort of stone or glass mixed with food has not the power of catching on, and so goes off with the food. So this Messer Durante mentioned above gave a diamond of some little value to one of these guards. It was said that a certain Lione of Arezzo, a goldsmith, a great enemy of mine, had the handling of it. This Lione got the diamond to pound it; and because Lione was very poor and the diamond might be worth several tens of scudi, the man gave that guard to understand that the powder he gave him was that pounded diamond which had been ordered to be given me; and that morning when I had it, they put it in all my dishes; which was a Friday: I had it in salad and in sauces and in soup.

I set to eating with a good appetite, because in the evening I had fasted. This day was a holiday. It is quite true that I felt the food crunch under my teeth, but I never thought of such villainy. When I had finished dining, a little salad being left in the dish, my eyes fell straight on certain very fine splinters which were left over. At once I took them, and going up to the light of the window, which was very bright, while I was looking at them I was reminded of that crunching the food had made for me that morning more than usual: and having considered them well, as far as my eyes could judge, I firmly believed that this was pounded diamond. At once I gave myself up for dead, absolutely; and so, full of grief, I ran devoutly to holy prayers; and having made up my mind, it seemed to me certain that I was finished and dead: and for a whole hour I made great prayers to God, thanking Him for so pleasant a death. Since my stars had so destined me, it seemed to me I had had a good bargain in getting out of it by that easy road; and I was content, and had blessed the world and the time I had spent in it. Now I was going back to a better kingdom with the grace of God, which it seemed to me I had most surely gained: and while I was in these thoughts, I held in my hand certain very fine little grains of that supposed diamond, which I judged for a certainty to be such.

Now, because hope never dies, it seemed to me that I was prompted by a little vain hope; which was the cause of my taking a little knife, and taking some of the said little grains, and putting them on an iron bar of the prison; then setting the point of the knife on them flatwise, pressing hard, I felt the said stone break up; and looking well with my eyes, I saw that this was really so. At once I clothed myself in new hope and said: "This is not my enemy Messer Durante, but a soft bit of stone which cannot do me any harm in the world." And whereas I had made up my mind to keep quiet and to die in peace in that way, I made a new resolution, but first thanking God and blessing poverty, which just as it is often the cause of men's death, that time had itself been the cause of my life; because that Messer Durante my enemy, or whoever it was, having given a diamond worth more than a hundred scudi to Lione, to pound it for me, the man out of poverty kept it for himself, and pounded for me a yellow beryl worth two carlins, thinking perhaps that, being a stone too, it would have the same effect as the diamond.
