Book One, Chapters 126 to 128

Chapter 126

At this time the Bishop of Pavia, brother of the Count of San Secondo, called Monsignor de' Rossi of Parma, this bishop was a prisoner in the Castle over certain troubles he had had at Pavia; and because he was a great friend of mine, I put myself out at the hole of my prison and called to him in a loud voice, telling him that to kill me those thieves had given me pounded diamond: and I had some of those little powders that were left me shown him by a servant of his; but I did not tell him that I had found out that it was not diamond; instead I told him that most certainly they had poisoned me after the death of that honest man the Castellan; and for the little while I might live, I begged him to give me one of his loaves a day, because I never wanted to eat anything again that came from them. So he promised to send me some of his own food. That Messer Antonio, who certainly knew nothing of the business, made a very great noise about it and insisted on seeing that pounded stone, thinking too that it was diamond; and supposing that such an enterprise came from the Pope, he passed it over lightly, once he had considered the case.

I set myself to eating the food the Bishop sent me, and went on continually writing that poem of mine about the prison, putting into it day by day all those things that newly happened to me, point by point. The said Messer Antonio also sent me my food by a certain Giovanni mentioned above, the apothecary from the district of Prato, and a soldier there. This man, who was my greatest enemy and who had been the one who brought me that pounded diamond, I told that I would eat nothing of what he brought me unless he first tasted it before me: on account of which he told me that tasters are provided for Popes. To whom I answered that just as gentlemen are bound to taste for the Pope, so he, a soldier, an apothecary, a peasant from Prato, was bound to taste for a Florentine like me. He said some big words, and I said some to him. That Messer Antonio, being somewhat ashamed, and also planning to make me pay those expenses which the poor dead Castellan had made me a present of, found another of those servants of his who was a friend of mine; and he sent me my food, which the man just mentioned pleasantly tasted for me with no further argument. This servant told me how the Pope was pestered every day by that Monsignor de Morluc, who on the King's behalf was continually asking for me; and that the Pope had little mind to give me up; and that Cardinal Farnese, once so much my patron and friend, had said that I should not plan on getting out of that prison for a good while: to whom I said that I would get out of it in spite of them all. This decent young man begged me to keep quiet, and not to be heard saying such a thing, because it would do me a great deal of harm; and that with that trust I had in God I ought to wait for His grace, keeping quiet. I told him that the powers of God have no need to be afraid of the malignity of injustice.

Chapter 127

So a few days went by, and the Cardinal of Ferrara arrived in Rome; who, going to pay his respects to the Pope, was kept by the Pope so long that the supper hour came. And because the Pope was a very able man, he wanted plenty of leisure to talk with the Cardinal about French affairs. And because at table things get said which outside such an occasion would sometimes not be said; so that, that great King Francis being most generous in everything of his, and the Cardinal, who well knew the King's taste, on his side satisfied the Pope far more fully than the Pope had imagined; so that the Pope had come into such gaiety, both from this and because he was in the habit once a week of making a really heavy debauch, since afterwards he vomited it up. When the Cardinal saw the Pope's disposition, fit for granting favours, he asked for me on the King's behalf with great insistence, showing that the King had a great desire for the thing. Then the Pope, feeling the hour of his vomit coming on, and the too great abundance of wine also doing its office, said to the Cardinal with a great laugh: "This minute, this minute I want you to take him home with you;" and having given the express orders, he got up from the table; and the Cardinal sent for me at once, before Signor Pier Luigi should know of it, because he would never have let me out of prison on any account. The Pope's messenger came together with two great gentlemen of the said Cardinal of Ferrara, and at four hours past nightfall they took me out of the said prison and led me before the Cardinal; who gave me an inestimable welcome; and there, well lodged, I stayed to enjoy myself.

Messer Antonio, the Castellan's brother and in his place, insisted that I should pay him all the expenses, with all those extras that constables and people of that kind are in the habit of wanting, and would not observe anything of what the late Castellan had left instructions should be done for me. This thing cost me many tens of scudi, and afterwards the Cardinal told me that I should be well on my guard if I valued my life, and that if he had not got me out of that prison that evening, I should never have got out at all; for he had already heard it said that the Pope was very sorry to have let me go.

Chapter 128

I must go back a step, because in my poem all these things I am telling come in. When I stayed those several days in the Cardinal's room and afterwards in the Pope's private garden, among my other dear friends there came to find me a cashier of Messer Bindo Altoviti, who by name was called Bernardo Galluzzi; to whom I had entrusted the value of several hundreds of scudi; and this young man came to find me in the Pope's private garden and wanted to give me back everything; and I told him that I did not know how to give my property either to a dearer friend or into a place where I could have thought it safer; and this friend of mine seemed to twist about at not wanting it, and I almost by force made him keep it. When I had come out of the Castle for the last time, I found that that poor young man Bernardo Galluzzi had been ruined; on account of which I lost my property.

Again: at the time I was in prison, a terrible dream came to me, in which as it were with a reed pen there were written on my forehead words of the greatest importance; and the one who wrote them repeated to me three good times that I should keep silent and not report them to anybody. When I woke up, I felt my forehead defiled. So in my poem about the prison a great many things of this kind come in.

Again: it came to me to say, without knowing what I was saying, everything that afterwards happened to Signor Pier Luigi, so clearly and so exactly that I have considered by myself that an Angel of Heaven must have dictated them to me.

Again: I do not want to leave out one thing, the greatest that ever happened to any other man; which is in justification of the divinity of God and of His secrets, of which He deigned to make me worthy: that from then on, since I saw that thing, there has remained a splendour — a marvellous thing! — above my head; which is plain to every sort of man to whom I have wanted to show it, and those have been very few. This can be seen above my shadow in the morning at sunrise until two hours of sun, and it is seen much better when the grass has that soft dew on it; it can also be seen in the evening at sunset. I noticed it in France, in Paris, because the air in that part of the world is so much clearer of mists that there it was seen far more distinctly than in Italy, where the mists are much more frequent; but that does not mean that I do not see it in any case; and I can show it to others, but not so well as in that part I have spoken of.

I want to write out my poem made in prison and in praise of the said prison; then I shall go on with the good and the bad things that happened to me from time to time, and those too that shall happen to me in my life.
