The Capitolo

I write this poem to Luca Martini, calling on him in it as you will hear.

	Anyone who wants to know how great God's power is,
	and how far a man resembles that Good,
	had better spend time in prison, to my mind;

	let him be loaded with worries and a household,
	and some pain in his own body,
	and have come a thousand miles from home.

	Now if you want to be able to do something good,
	be arrested wrongfully, and then stay there a long while,
	and get help from nobody;

	let them rob you as well of the little you have:
	danger of your life; be roughly handled,
	with never a hope of rescue.

	And let them drive you into desperation,
	to break the prison, to jump the Castle:
	then be put back in a worse place still.

	Listen, Luca, now the fine part is coming:
	to have broken a leg, to have been tricked,
	the prison soaking, and no cloak to your back.

	And let nobody ever speak to you,
	and let your food be brought, with bad news,
	by a soldier, apothecary, peasant from Prato.

	Now hear where the glory really shows:
	nowhere to sit but on the privy;
	and still always awake to make something new.

	Express orders given to the servant
	not to hear you speak, nor give you anything;
	and to open the door the tiniest crack.

	Now this is where a fine brain amuses itself:
	no paper, pen, ink, iron or fire,
	and full of fine thoughts since the cradle.

	The great pity of it — little has been told of it,
	but for every one of them imagine a hundred,
	for I have kept a share and a place for them all.

	Now, to come back to what we first meant,
	and speak the praise the prison deserves:
	everyone in Heaven would not be enough for it.

	Good people are never put in here
	except by officials, or by bad government,
	envy, spite, or over some quarrel.

	To tell the truth of what I make out about it,
	here a man knows God and calls on Him always,
	feeling all the while the pains of Hell.

	Let a man be as bad in repute as the world allows,
	and let him stay in prison a couple of wretched years:
	he comes out holy and wise, and everybody loves him.

	Here the soul is refined, and the body, and the clothes;
	and every coarse lump of a man is made fine,
	and Heaven is seen right up to its benches.

	I want to tell you a great marvel:
	the fancy taking me to write a caprice,
	what things a man lays hold of at a pinch.

	I go about the room, knitting my brows and my head,
	then I make for an edge of the door,
	and with my teeth I get off a splinter of wood;

	and I took a piece of brick as it came,
	and broke a little of it down into powder;
	then I made a paste of it with stagnant water.

	Just then the fire of poetry
	came into my body, and I think by the road
	the bread goes out by; for there was no other way in.

	To come back to my first notion:
	whoever wants to know what good is
	must first know the evil God sends him.

	The prison knows and keeps every trade:
	if it were the apothecary's you wanted,
	it makes you sweat the blood out of your veins.

	Then it has a certain natural power in it:
	it makes you eloquent, spirited and bold,
	loaded with fine thoughts for good and for ill.

	It is good for the man who lies a long time
	in a dark prison, and then at last gets out:
	he can talk about war, truce and peace.

	Everything is bound to come out right for him;
	for the place fills a man so full of skill
	that his brain does not go dancing afterwards.

	You might say to me: "You are those years the poorer."
	It is not true, for it teaches you a way
	of filling your breast and your bosom with them later.

	As for me, so far as I know, I praise it;
	but I would like to see a law in use:
	that whoever deserves it most should not get off.

	Every man who is given charge of the poor flock
	ought to take his doctorate in the prison,
	because then he would know how governing is done.

	He would do things as people should,
	and would never stray out of the sown field,
	nor would such great confusion be seen.

	In this time that I have been here
	I have seen friars, priests and other people,
	and those who deserved it most stay the least.

	If you knew the great grief a man feels
	when one of them walks out ahead of you!
	He almost repents of having been born.

	I will say no more: I have turned into gold,
	which is not spent so easily,
	nor would very good work be made of it.

	Another thing has come into my mind
	which I have not told you, Luca: where I wrote it
	was in a book belonging to a relative of ours,

	for I set down along the length of the margins
	this great grief that has twisted my limbs,
	and the paste would not run, as I told you;

	so that to make one O I had to dip
	the stick three times; and I do not think there is grief
	like it in Hell among the souls wrapped up there.

	Now since I am not the first here to be wronged,
	I say nothing of it; and come back to the prison,
	where I file my brain and my heart away with grief.

	I praise it more than other people do;
	and if you want to make a learned man of one who knows nothing,
	without it no good work can be done.

	Oh, if only there were, as I read a while ago,
	somebody to say as at the Pool:
	"Take up your clothes, Benvenuto, and go!"

	I would sing the Creed and the Salve Regina
	and the Our Father, and then hand out alms
	to the blind, the poor and the lame every morning.

	Oh, how many times these lilies have made my cheek
	pale and bloodless, so much so
	that I want neither Florence nor France any more!

	And if I happen to go to the hospital
	and the Annunciation is painted there,
	I shall run away and look like an animal.

	I do not say this against Her, worthy and consecrated,
	nor against her glorious and holy lilies,
	which have lit up heaven and earth;

	but because at every hour I see, up on the street corners,
	some of those that have their petals hooked,
	I shall be afraid they belong to that great crowd.

	Oh, how many go wretched as I do,
	some born to it, some brought to this business,
	spirits clear, graceful, high and divine!

	I saw the deadly emblem fall
	swiftly from the sky among the empty people,
	then a new lamp lit in the stone;

	I saw the Castle bell break
	before I got out of it; and He had told me so,
	He who lays the truth flat in Heaven and on earth;

	after this, a bier draped in mourning
	and decked with broken lilies; weeping and a cross,
	and many laid in bed afflicted with grief.

	I saw her who torments and burns souls,
	frightening now this man, now that; then she said:
	"I mean to carry in my breast whoever harms you."

	Then that Worthy One wrote on my forehead
	words to me with Peter's reed pen,
	and three good times told me to keep silent.

	I saw Him who drives and reins in the sun,
	clothed in it in the midst of His Court,
	as no mortal eye is ever used to seeing.

	A solitary sparrow was singing loudly
	above the fortress; so that I said: "Certainly
	that bird foretells life for me, and death for you."

	And I sang and wrote out my great case,
	asking of God only pardon and help,
	for I felt my eyes going out, fixed in death.

	There never was wolf, lion, tiger or bear
	more bristling than that man for human blood,
	nor viper with a more venomous bite;

	this was a cruel thieving captain,
	the greatest rascal, with certain other bad men;
	but so that not everyone shall know it, I will say it low.

	If you have ever seen starving catchpoles
	going in to distrain on some poor wretch,
	throwing Our Ladies and Christs on the ground —

	on the August day they came out of spite
	to move me into a more wretched tomb:
	"November: every one of them scattered and cursed."

	I had at my ears such a truthful trumpet
	that it told me everything, and I told them,
	without thinking, because grief empties a man out.

	And when they were left without hope,
	they gave me, to kill me, a diamond
	pounded up to eat, and not set in gold.

	I asked that peasant rogue to taste it,
	the one who brought my food; and I said to myself:
	"That was not my enduring enemy after all."

	But first I gave my thoughts up to God,
	begging Him to forgive my sin;
	and weeping I said a Miserere.

	Somewhat quieted from the great grief,
	giving up this soul to God willingly,
	content to go to a better kingdom and another state,

	I saw an Angel come down from Heaven
	with a glorious palm; and then with a glad face
	he promised my life a longer span,

	saying to me: "By God, first every enemy of yours
	shall be taken away in bitter war,
	and you shall be left fortunate, happy and free,

	in the grace of Him who is Father in heaven and on earth."
