Book Two, Chapters 1 to 6

Chapter 1

Staying in the palace of the Cardinal of Ferrara mentioned above, very well thought of by everybody in general, and visited much more than I used to be, every man wondering all the more at my having come out and stayed alive among such immeasurable troubles; while I was getting my breath back and trying to remember my trade, I took the greatest pleasure in writing out this poem given above. Then, the better to get my strength back, I decided to go out for some days into the open air, with leave and with horses from my good Cardinal, together with two young Romans, one of whom was a workman of my trade; the other, his companion, was not of the trade, but came to keep me company. Leaving Rome, I went off towards Tagliacozzo, thinking to find there Ascanio, my apprentice spoken of above; and when I got to Tagliacozzo, I found the said Ascanio together with his father and brothers and sisters and stepmother. By them for two days I was made so much of that it would be impossible to tell it: I left for Rome, and took Ascanio with me. On the road we began to talk about the trade, so that I was burning to get back to Rome to begin my works again.

When we had got to Rome, I at once set myself up to work; and I found again a silver basin which I had begun for the Cardinal before I was imprisoned: along with the said basin a very beautiful little jug had been begun: this had been stolen from me along with a great quantity of other things of much value. On the said basin I set Pagolo, mentioned above, to work. I also began the jug again, which was composed of little figures in the round and in low relief; and likewise the said basin was composed of figures in the round and fishes in low relief, so rich and so well arranged that everybody who saw it was left wondering, both for the strength of the design and for the invention and for the neatness those young men used on the said works. The Cardinal came at least twice a day to stay with me, together with Messer Luigi Alamanni and with Messer Gabriello Cesano, and there we passed some hours cheerfully. Although I had plenty to do, still new works came in on me in abundance; and he gave me to make his pontifical seal, which was the size of the hand of a boy of twelve; and on the said seal I carved two little scenes in intaglio; one of which was Saint John preaching in the desert, the other Saint Ambrose driving out those Arians, shown on horseback with a whip in his hand, with such daring and such good design, and so neatly worked, that everybody said I had surpassed that great Lautizio who did nothing but this branch of the trade; and the Cardinal, out of his own pride, compared it with the other seals of the cardinals of Rome, which were almost all from the hand of the said Lautizio.

Chapter 2

The Cardinal further charged me, together with those two men mentioned above, to make him a model for a saltcellar; but he would have liked to get outside the usual run of those who had made saltcellars. Messer Luigi, on this subject of the salt, said many admirable things; Messer Gabriello Cesano too said very fine things to the same purpose. The Cardinal, a most kindly listener and satisfied beyond measure with the designs these two great talents had made in words, turned to me and said: "My Benvenuto, Messer Luigi's design and Messer Gabriello's please me so much that I should not know which of the two to take; so I leave it to you, who have to put it into execution." Then I said: "See, gentlemen, how important the sons of kings and emperors are, and that marvellous splendour and divinity which appears in them. Nevertheless, if you ask a poor humble shepherd which he has more love and affection for, those sons or his own, for certain he will say he has more love for his own sons. So I too have great love for my sons, whom I bring to birth in this profession of mine: so the first thing I shall show you, my most reverend Monsignor and patron, will be my own work and my own invention; because many things are fine to describe which, when you come to make them, do not go well together as a work." And turning to those two great talents, I said: "You have spoken and I shall do."

Messer Luigi Alamanni then, laughing, with the greatest pleasantness added many gracious words in my favour: and they suited him, because he was handsome in his face and in the proportion of his body, and had a gentle voice. Messer Gabriello Cesano was quite the reverse, so ugly and so disagreeable; and so he spoke according to his shape. Messer Luigi had designed in words that I should make a Venus with a Cupid, together with many pretty conceits, all to the purpose; Messer Gabriello had designed that I should make an Amphitrite, Neptune's wife, together with some of Neptune's Tritons and a great many other things very fine to describe, but not to make.

I made an oval form of a size well over half a braccio, almost two thirds, and on the said form, as the Sea shows itself embracing the Land, I made two figures well over a palm high, which sat with their legs entwined in each other, as one sees certain long arms of the sea that run into the land; and in the hand of the male Sea I put a most richly worked ship: in this ship a great deal of salt sat conveniently and well; underneath him I had arranged those four sea horses: in the right hand of the said Sea I had put his trident. The Land I had made a woman of as beautiful a form as I could and knew how, beautiful and full of grace; and in the hand of the said figure I had put a rich and adorned temple, resting on the ground; and she leaned on it with the said hand; this I had made to hold the pepper. In her other hand I had put a horn of plenty, adorned with all the beauties I knew in the world. Under this Goddess, and in that part which showed itself to be land, I had arranged all those most beautiful animals the earth produces. Under the part of the Sea I had figured all the fine sorts of fishes and little snails that the small space would allow: for the rest of the oval, in its thickness, I made many very rich ornaments.

Then, having waited for the Cardinal, who came with those two talented men, I brought out this work of mine in wax: at which the first with a great noise was Messer Gabriello Cesano, and he said: "This is a work not to be finished in the lifetime of ten men; and you, most reverend Monsignor, who would like it, will never have it in your lifetime; so Benvenuto has chosen to show you his sons, but not to give them, as we were doing, who spoke of things that could be made; and he has shown you things that cannot be made." At this, Messer Luigi Alamanni took my side. The Cardinal said that he did not want to go into so great an undertaking. Then I turned to them and said: "Most reverend Monsignor, and to you gentlemen full of talent, I say that I hope to make this work for whoever is to have it, and each of you will see it finished a hundred times richer than the model; and I hope there will still be plenty of time left us to make things much greater than this." The Cardinal said in annoyance: "If you do not make it for the King, where I am taking you, I do not think you can make it for anybody else;" and having shown me the letters in which the King wrote in one paragraph that he should soon come back, bringing Benvenuto with him, I raised my hands to heaven, saying: "Oh, when will this soon come?" The Cardinal said that I should give my orders and wind up the business I had in Rome, within ten days.

Chapter 3

When the time of departure came, he gave me a fine good horse; and it was called Tornon, because Cardinal Tournon had given it to him. Pagolo and Ascanio too, my apprentices, were provided with mounts. The Cardinal divided his Court, which was a very large one: the nobler part he took with him: with it he took the road through the Romagna, to go and visit Our Lady of Loreto, and from there on to Ferrara, his home; the other part he directed towards Florence. This was the larger part; and it was a great number, with all the beauty of his horsemen. To me he said that if I wanted to go safely, I should go with him: if not, I was in danger of my life. I gave His most reverend Lordship to understand that I would go with him; and as what is ordained by the Heavens must needs be, it pleased God to bring back into my memory my poor sister of my own blood, who had had such great unhappiness over my great troubles. There also came back into my memory my cousins, who were nuns at Viterbo, one an abbess and the other the treasurer, so that they were the governesses of that rich convent; and they had had such heavy trouble on my account and had said so many prayers for me, that I held it for certain that it was through the prayers of those poor virgins that I had obtained from God the grace of my deliverance. So, all these things coming into my memory, I turned towards Florence; and where I should have gone free of expense either with the Cardinal or with the other part of his train, I chose to go by myself; and I joined company with a most excellent master of clocks, who was called Master Cherubino, a great friend of mine. Meeting by chance, we made that journey very pleasantly together.

Having left Rome on Holy Monday, we came along just the three of us, and at Monterosi I found the said company; and because I had given people to understand that I was going off with the Cardinal, I did not think that any of those enemies of mine would have been keeping watch on me otherwise. Certainly I came off badly at Monterosi, because ahead of us a troop of well-armed men had been sent, to do me a mischief; and God willed it that while we were dining, they, having had word that I was coming without the Cardinal's train, had got themselves in order to do me harm. At just this point the said train of the Cardinal came up, and with it I went on happily and safe as far as Viterbo; for from there onwards I saw no more danger, and all the more since I always went several miles ahead; and those better men who were in that train took a great deal of account of me. I arrived, God be thanked, safe and sound at Viterbo, and there I was made a great deal of by those sisters of mine and by the whole convent.

Chapter 4

Having left Viterbo with the men spoken of, we came on riding, now ahead and now behind the said train of the Cardinal, so that on Holy Thursday at twenty-two hours we found ourselves near Siena at a post house; and seeing that there were some mares there to go back, and that the post men were waiting to give them to some traveller, for some small profit, so that he should take them back to the post at Siena; seeing this, I dismounted from my horse Tornon, and put my cushion and my stirrups on that mare, and gave a giulio to one of those post boys. Leaving my horse to my young men to bring on for me, I went ahead at once so as to get to Siena half an hour earlier, both to visit a friend of mine and to do some other business of my own: so, although I came on quickly, I did not race the said mare. When I got to Siena I took rooms at the inn, good ones such as we needed for five people, and by the innkeeper's boy I sent the said mare back to the post, which was outside the Camollia gate; and on the said mare I had forgotten my stirrups and my cushion.

We passed the evening of Holy Thursday very cheerfully: then in the morning, which was Good Friday, I remembered my stirrups and my cushion. When I sent for them, that postmaster said he would not give them back to me, because I had raced his mare. Several times word was sent back and forth and the man always said he would not give them back to me, with many insulting and unbearable words; and the innkeeper where I was lodged said to me: "You get off well if he does nothing worse to you than not give you back your cushion and stirrups;" and he added: "Know that he is the most brutish man this city ever had; and he has two grown sons there, very fierce soldiers, more brutish than he is; so buy again what you need and go on your way without saying anything to him." I bought a pair of stirrups again, still thinking to get my good cushion back with friendly words: and because I was very well mounted, and well armed with a coat of mail and sleeves, and with a wonderful arquebus at my saddlebow, those great brutalities the man said that mad brute had in him did not frighten me. I had also accustomed those young men of mine to wearing mail and sleeves, and I trusted very much in that young Roman, whom I thought never took his off while we were in Rome. Ascanio too, although he was still a boy, wore his as well: and because it was Good Friday, I thought the madness of madmen ought at least to keep a little holiday.

We came to the said Camollia gate; and there I saw and knew, by the marks that had been given me, being blind in the left eye, this postmaster. Coming up to him, and leaving my young men and my companions to one side, I said pleasantly: "Postmaster, if I assure you that I did not race your mare, why will you not be content to give me back my cushion and my stirrups?" To this he answered exactly in that mad, brutish way I had been told of. On account of which I said to him: "How is this? are you not a Christian? Do you want to scandalize both yourself and me on a Good Friday?" He said that neither Good Friday nor Devil's Friday was any trouble to him, and that if I did not get out of his sight, with a boar spear he had taken up he would tumble me on the ground together with that arquebus I had in my hand.

At these fierce words there came up an old gentleman of Siena, dressed in a citizen's clothes, who was coming back from performing those devotions that are usual on such a day; and having heard from a distance the whole of my case very well, he boldly came up to reprove the said postmaster, taking my side, and scolded his two sons for not doing what was right by the strangers who passed, and that in that way they were acting against God and bringing shame on the city of Siena. Those two young sons of his, shaking their heads without saying anything, went off inside their house. The furious father, envenomed by the words of that honourable gentleman, at once with abusive blasphemies lowered his boar spear, swearing that with it he meant to kill me in any case. Seeing this brutish resolution, to keep him back a little, I made as if to show him the mouth of my arquebus. The man, more furious, threw himself on me, and the arquebus which I had in my hand, although it was ready for my defence, I had not yet lowered enough for it to be pointed at him, but its mouth was still high; and it went off of itself. The ball struck the arch of the gate, and being beaten back, caught him in the windpipe, and he fell dead to the ground.

His two sons ran up quickly, and one of them took a weapon from a rack, the other took his father's boar spear; and throwing themselves on those young men of mine, that son who had the boar spear ran the first of them, Pagolo the Roman, through above the left breast; the other ran at a Milanese who was in our company, who had the face of a madman: and it did him no good to plead that he had nothing to do with me, and to defend himself from the point of a partisan with a little stick he had in his hand: with which he could not fence well enough to avoid being caught a little in the mouth. That Messer Cherubino was dressed as a priest, and although he was a most excellent master of clocks, as I have said, he had had benefices from the Pope with good incomes. Ascanio, although he was very well armed, made no sign of running away, as that Milanese had done; so that these two were not touched.

I had set spurs to my horse, and while he galloped had quickly put my arquebus in order again and loaded it, and was coming back in a rage, feeling I had been playing at it and now meaning to be in earnest; and I thought those young men of mine had been killed, and I was going, resolved, to die there too. The horse had not run many paces back before I met them coming towards me, and I asked them if they were hurt. Ascanio answered that Pagolo was wounded to death with a boar spear. Then I said: "Oh Pagolo my son! Then the spear went through your coat of mail?" "No," he said, "for I put my coat of mail in the saddlebag this morning." "So coats of mail are worn about Rome to look fine to the ladies? and in dangerous places, where there is need to have them, they are kept in the saddlebag? All the harm you have suits you very well, and you are the reason I mean to go and get killed there myself this minute;" and while I was saying these words, I kept going stoutly back. Ascanio and he begged me to be content, for the love of God, to save myself and to save them, because we were surely going to our deaths.

At this I met that Messer Cherubino, together with that wounded Milanese: at once he shouted at me, saying that nobody was hurt, and that Pagolo's blow had gone so straight along that it had not gone through; and that that old postmaster had been left dead on the ground, and that the sons, with a good many other people, had got themselves ready, and would certainly have cut us all to pieces: "So, Benvenuto, since fortune has saved us from that first fury, do not tempt her any more, for she would not save us again." Then I said: "Since you are content with it that way, I am content too;" and turning to Pagolo and Ascanio, I said to them: "Set spurs to your horses, and let us gallop as far as Staggia without ever stopping, and there we shall be safe." That wounded Milanese said: "A plague on sins! for this hurt I have came only from the sin of a little meat soup I ate yesterday, having nothing else for dinner." With all these great tribulations we were in, we were forced to make some show of laughing at that beast and at those foolish words he had said. We set spurs to our horses, and left Messer Cherubino and the Milanese to come on at their leisure.

Chapter 5

Meanwhile the dead man's sons ran to the Duke of Melfi, to have him give them several light horsemen to overtake us and take us. The said Duke, learning that we were men of the Cardinal of Ferrara's, would give them neither horses nor leave. Meanwhile we got to Staggia, where we were safe. When we got to Staggia, we looked for a doctor, the best that could be had in that place: and when the said Pagolo had been looked at, the wound ran between skin and skin, and I saw that he would come to no harm. We had dinner got ready.

Meanwhile there appeared Messer Cherubino and that madman of a Milanese, who never left off sending a plague on quarrels, and said he was excommunicated, because on that holy morning he had not been able to say a single Our Father. Being ugly in the face, and his mouth by nature large; and then, from the wound he had got in it, his mouth had grown more than three fingers larger; and with that yowling Milanese speech of his, and with that silly tongue, the words he said gave us so much occasion to laugh that instead of grieving over our fortune, we could not help laughing at every word the man said. When the doctor wanted to sew up that wound in his mouth, having already put in three stitches, he told the doctor to hold off a bit, because he would not have liked him out of some enmity to sew the whole of it up: and he laid hold of a spoon, and said he wanted him to leave it so much open that the spoon would go in, so that he might get back alive to his own people. These words the man said, with certain shakings of the head, gave such great occasion for laughing that instead of grieving over our bad fortune, we never left off laughing; and so, laughing all the way, we got ourselves to Florence.

We went to dismount at the house of my poor sister, where we were made marvellously much of by my brother-in-law and by her. That Messer Cherubino and the Milanese went off about their business. We stayed in Florence four days, during which Pagolo got well; but it was a strange thing, that every time we spoke of that beast of a Milanese it moved us to as much laughter as the other misfortunes that had happened moved us to tears; so that continually, at one and the same time, we laughed and wept. Pagolo got well easily: then we went off towards Ferrara, and we found that our Cardinal had not yet arrived at Ferrara, and had heard all about our adventures; and grieving over them he said: "I pray God to give me grace enough to bring you alive to that King I have promised you to."

The said Cardinal made over to me in Ferrara a palace of his, a very beautiful place, called Belfiore: it borders on the walls of the city: there he had me fitted up to work. Then he gave orders to leave for France without me; and seeing that I was left very discontented, he said to me: "Benvenuto, all that I do is for your safety; because before I take you out of Italy, I want you to know very well first what you are coming to do in France: meanwhile press on as fast as you can with this basin and little jug of mine; and everything you need, I will leave orders with a steward of mine to give you." And when he had gone, I was left very discontented, and several times I had a mind to go off with God: but the only thing that held me was his having got me free from Pope Paul, because for the rest I was discontented and much out of pocket. Still, clothing myself in the gratitude the benefit received deserved, I made up my mind to have patience and to see what end this business was to have; and setting to work with those two young men of mine, I carried that jug and that basin marvellously far forward.

Where we were lodged the air was bad, and as the summer came on, we all fell a little ill. In these indispositions of ours we went looking about the place where we were, which was very large, and had almost a mile of open ground left wild, in which there were so many of our native peacocks that they brooded there like wild birds. Noticing this, I fitted up my fowling piece with a certain powder that made no noise; then I lay in wait for some of those young peacocks, and every two days I killed one, which fed us very amply, and with such virtue in it that all our illnesses left us: and for those several months we attended most cheerfully to our work, and carried forward that jug and that basin, which was a work that took a very long time.

Chapter 6

At this time the Duke of Ferrara came to terms with Pope Paul of Rome over certain old differences of theirs, which they had about Modena and certain other cities; over which, the Church having a right in them, the Duke made this peace with the said Pope by force of money: and the amount was a great one: I believe it came to more than three hundred thousand ducats of the Chamber. The Duke at this time had an old treasurer of his, a man brought up by Duke Alfonso his father, who was called Messer Girolamo Giliolo. This old man could not bear this outrage of so much money going to the Pope, and went shouting about the streets, saying: "Duke Alfonso his father, with this money, would sooner have taken Rome with it than shown it to him;" and there was no way of making him pay it. In the end, when the Duke forced him to have it paid, this old man got such a great flux of the body that it brought him close to death.

While he was ill, the said Duke called me and wanted me to make his portrait, which I did on a round of black stone, as large as a small serving trencher. The Duke liked these labours of mine together with a great deal of pleasant conversation; which two things often caused him to stay four and five hours at the least, attentive to being portrayed, and sometimes he made me sup at his table. In the space of eight days I finished this portrait of his head for him: then he ordered me to make the reverse; which was figured as Peace, a woman with a little torch in her hand, burning a trophy of arms: which I made, this said woman, in a joyful posture, with the finest of draperies, of most beautiful grace; and under her feet I figured, afflicted and downcast, and bound with many chains, despairing Fury. This work I made with much study, and it did me the greatest honour. The Duke could not have enough of calling himself satisfied, and gave me the mottoes for the head of His Excellency and for the reverse. The one on the reverse said "Pretiosa in conspectu Domini". It meant that that peace had been sold for a price in money.
