Book Two, Chapters 7 to 12

Chapter 7

At this time, when I set about making the said reverse, the Cardinal had written to me telling me to get myself ready, because the King had asked for me: and that with his first letters there would come the order for everything he had promised me. I had my basin and my jug well packed in a case; and I had already shown them to the Duke. The Cardinal's business was managed by a gentleman of Ferrara, who was called by name Messer Alberto Bendedio. This man had been in the house twelve years without ever going out of it, because of an infirmity of his. One day with the greatest haste he sent for me, telling me that I ought to get into the post saddle at once to go and find the King, who with great insistence had asked for me, thinking I was in France. The Cardinal, as an excuse for himself, had said that I had stayed at an abbey of his in Lyons, a little ill, but that he would see to it that I should soon be with His Majesty; so he was making all this haste for me to ride post.

This Messer Alberto was a very honest man, but he was proud, and because of his illness insufferably proud; and as I say, he told me to get ready quickly, to ride post. To whom I said that my art was not carried on in the post saddle, and that if I had to go there, I wanted to go by easy stages and to take with me Ascanio and Pagolo, my workmen, whom I had brought from Rome; and besides that I wanted a servant with us on horseback, for my service, and money enough to get me there. This sick old man answered me with the most arrogant words, that in the way I described, and no otherwise, the Duke's sons travelled. To him I answered at once that the sons of my art travelled in the way I had said; and never having been the son of a duke, I did not know how they travelled; and that if he used those outlandish words to my ears, I would not go there at all, both because the Cardinal had failed of his word to me and because, with these boorish words added, I should certainly make up my mind not to want anything to do with men of Ferrara; and turning my back on him, I muttering and he blustering, I went off.

I went to find the said Duke with his medal finished; who made me the most honourable welcome ever made to a man in the world: and he had ordered that Messer Girolamo Giliolo of his to find, for these labours of mine, a ring with a diamond worth two hundred scudi, and to give it to Fiaschino his chamberlain, who should give it to me. So it was done. The said Fiaschino, on the evening of the day when I had given him the medal, at one hour of the night handed me a ring with a diamond in it, which made a great show; and he said these words on his Duke's behalf: that that matchless skilled hand, which had worked so well, should adorn itself with that diamond in memory of His Excellency. When day came, I looked at the said ring, which was a thin wretched diamond, worth about ten scudi. And because of those marvellous words that Duke had had used to me, I, not wanting them to be dressed in so poor a reward, the Duke thinking he had satisfied me well; and I, imagining that it came from that rascally treasurer of his, gave the ring to a friend of mine to give back to the chamberlain Fiaschino in whatever way he could. This was Bernardo Saliti, who did this office admirably.

The said Fiaschino came at once to find me with the greatest outcry, telling me that if the Duke knew that I was sending him back a present in that way, which he had so kindly given me, he would take it very badly, and perhaps I might repent of it. To him I answered that the ring His Excellency had given me was worth about ten scudi, and that the work I had done for His Excellency was worth more than two hundred; but that to show His Excellency that I valued the act of his courtesy, let him send me only a crab ring, of those that come from England which are worth about a carlin; I would keep that in memory of His Excellency as long as I lived, together with those honourable words His Excellency had had conveyed to me; because I reckoned that His Excellency's splendour had amply paid for my labours, whereas that low-priced jewel disgraced them. These words were such an annoyance to the Duke that he called that said treasurer of his, and abused him worse than he had ever abused him in the past; and he had orders given me, under pain of his displeasure, that I was not to leave Ferrara unless he let me know; and to his treasurer he gave orders to give me a diamond that came to three hundred scudi. The miserly treasurer found one worth a little over sixty scudi, and gave it out that the said diamond was worth far more than two hundred.

Chapter 8

Meanwhile the said Messer Alberto had come round to the right course, and had provided me with everything I had asked for. I had made up my mind that day to leave Ferrara in any case; but that diligent chamberlain of the Duke's had arranged with the said Messer Alberto that for that day I should have no horses. I had loaded a mule with a good deal of my baggage, and with it I had packed in a case that basin and that jug I had made for the Cardinal. At this point there came up a gentleman of Ferrara, who was called by name Messer Alfonso de' Trotti. This gentleman was very old and was a most affected person, and took the greatest pleasure in works of art; but he was one of those people who are extremely hard to please; and if by chance they ever happen to see something that pleases them, they paint it so excellent in their brains that they never think to see anything else that pleases them again.

This Messer Alfonso arrived; on account of which Messer Alberto said to him: "I am sorry you have come late: because that jug and that basin we are sending to the Cardinal in France are already packed and shut up." This Messer Alfonso said that he did not care; and beckoning to a servant of his, he sent him to his house: who brought a jug of white clay, of those clays of Faenza, very delicately worked. While the servant went and came back, this Messer Alfonso said to the said Messer Alberto: "I want to tell you why I do not care to see any more vases: it is that once I saw one in silver, an antique, so beautiful and so marvellous that the human imagination would not reach to conceiving such excellence; and so I do not care to see anything else of the kind, for fear it should spoil that marvellous image of it for me. This was a great gentleman of taste, who went to Rome on some business of his own and was secretly shown this antique vase; which by force of a great quantity of scudi he got out of the man who had it, corrupting him, and brought it with him to these parts of ours; but he keeps it very secret, so that the Duke shall not know of it; because he would be afraid of losing it in any case."

This Messer Alfonso, while he was telling these long tales of his, was not on his guard against me, who was present, because he did not know me. Meanwhile, this blessed clay model appeared, uncovered with such pomposity, patter and self-importance that when I had seen it, turning to Messer Alberto, I said: "Well, I am lucky to have seen it!" Messer Alfonso, in anger, said with some insulting word: "And who are you, who do not know what you are saying?" To this I said: "Now listen to me, and then you will see which of us knows better what he is saying." Turning to Messer Alberto, a very serious and intelligent person, I said: "This is a little silver jug of such and such a weight, which I made at such and such a time for that quack Master Iacopo the surgeon of Carpi, who came to Rome and stayed there six months; and with an ointment of his he besmeared many tens of lords and poor gentlemen, from whom he drew many thousands of ducats. At that time I made him this vase and another different from this; and he paid me for both of them very badly, and now all those unlucky men he greased are in Rome, crippled and in a bad way. It is the greatest glory to me that my works should be so famous with you rich gentlemen; but I tell you plainly that in all these years since, I have attended as far as I could to learning; so that I think the vase I am taking to France is worthy of the Cardinal and of the King in a way that that little doctor of yours was not."

When I had said these words of mine, that Messer Alfonso seemed literally to be consumed with desire to see that basin and jug, which I continually refused him. When we had been at this a while, he said that he would go to the Duke and by means of His Excellency he would see it. Then Messer Alberto Bendedio, who was, as I have said, exceedingly proud, said: "Before you leave here, Messer Alfonso, you shall see it, without using the Duke's favours." At these words I went off and left Ascanio and Pagolo to show it to them; who said afterwards that they had said the greatest things in my praise. After that Messer Alfonso wanted me to be on familiar terms with him, and it seemed a thousand years to me until I could get out of Ferrara and away from them all. What I had had of good there had been the company of Cardinal Salviati and that of the Cardinal of Ravenna, and of one or two of those talented musicians, and of nobody else; because the Ferrarese are a most avaricious people and love other men's property in every way they can get it; they are all like that.

At twenty-two hours the said Fiaschino appeared, and handed me the said diamond worth about sixty scudi; telling me with a gloomy face and in few words that I should wear it for love of His Excellency. To whom I answered: "And so I will." Putting my foot in the stirrup in his presence, I took the road to go off with God. He noted the act and the words; and having reported them to the Duke, in his anger the Duke had the greatest wish to make me come back.

Chapter 9

That evening I went on more than ten miles, trotting all the way; and when the next day I was out of the Ferrarese territory, I had the greatest pleasure in it, because apart from those young peacocks I ate there, which were the cause of my health, I found nothing else good in it. We made the journey by way of Mont Cenis, not touching the city of Milan on account of the suspicion mentioned above; so that safe and sound we arrived at Lyons. Together with Pagolo and Ascanio and a servant, we were four with four quite good mounts. Having got to Lyons, we stopped several days to wait for the muleteer, who had that basin and silver jug together with the rest of our baggage: we were lodged in an abbey belonging to the Cardinal. When the muleteer had arrived, we put all our things in a cart and started it off towards Paris: and so we went on towards Paris, and had some troubles on the road, but not very notable ones.

We found the King's court at Fontainebleau: we showed ourselves to the Cardinal, who at once had lodgings assigned us, and that evening we did well. The next day the cart appeared; and when we had taken our things, the Cardinal, having heard of it, told the King, who at once wanted to see me. I went to His Majesty with the said basin and jug, and having come into his presence, I kissed his knee and he received me most graciously. While I was thanking His Majesty for having set me free from prison, saying that he was under an obligation, every good and matchless prince in the world, as His Majesty was, to free good men who are fit for something, and all the more innocent ones as I was; and that those benefits are written down in the books of God before any other that can be done in the world; this good King listened to me until I had done, with much gratitude and with certain words worthy only of himself. When I had finished, he took the vase and the basin, and then said: "Truly I do not believe such a fine style of work was ever seen even among the ancients: for I well remember having seen all the best works, and made by the best masters, of the whole of Italy; but I never saw anything that moved me more greatly than this." These words the said King spoke in French to the Cardinal of Ferrara, with many others greater than these. Then turning to me he spoke to me in Italian, and said: "Benvenuto, pass your time cheerfully for a few days, and comfort your heart and attend to living well; and meanwhile we will think of giving you good conveniences for making some fine work for us."

Chapter 10

The Cardinal of Ferrara mentioned above, seeing that the King had taken the greatest pleasure in my arrival; and seeing too that with those few works the King had promised himself he could satisfy his wish to make certain very great works which he had in mind; so at this time, while we were following the Court, it may be said in torment (the reason being that the King's train drags continually behind it twelve thousand horse; and that is the least of it: because when the Court in times of peace is complete, they are eighteen thousand, so that they always come to be more than twelve thousand; on account of which we went on following the said Court sometimes into places where there were barely two houses; and as the gypsies do, we made ourselves tents of canvas, and many times we suffered a great deal): I still pressed the Cardinal to urge the King to set me to work; the Cardinal told me that the best thing in this case was to wait for the King to remember it of his own accord; and that I should let myself be seen by His Majesty now and then, while he was eating.

Doing so, one morning at his dinner the King called me: he began to speak to me in Italian, and said that he had it in mind to make many great works, and that he would soon give me orders where I was to work, providing me with everything I needed; with much other pleasant talk about various things. The Cardinal of Ferrara was present, because almost continually he ate in the morning at the King's small table; and having heard all this talk, when the King had got up from the table the Cardinal of Ferrara said in my favour, as far as was reported to me: "Sacred Majesty, this Benvenuto has a very great wish to work; one might almost say it is a sin to make such a talent lose time." The King added that he had said well, and that he should settle with me everything I wanted for my salary. The said Cardinal, on the evening of the day whose morning had brought him the commission, after supper, having sent for me, told me on His Majesty's behalf that His Majesty had made up his mind that I should set my hand to work; but that first he wanted me to know what my salary was to be. On this the Cardinal said: "It seems to me that if His Majesty gives you a salary of three hundred scudi a year, you can very well keep yourself; besides, I tell you to leave the care of it to me, because every day occasion comes of being able to do well in this great kingdom, and I will always help you marvellously."

Then I said: "Without my asking Your most reverend Lordship, when you left me in Ferrara you promised me never to take me out of Italy unless I first knew all the terms on which I was to be with His Majesty; Your most reverend Lordship, instead of sending word to me of the terms I was to be on, sent express orders that I should come post, as if such an art were carried on in the post saddle: for if you had sent to tell me three hundred scudi, as you tell me now, I would not have stirred for six hundred. But for all of it I thank God and Your most reverend Lordship as well, because God has used you as an instrument for so great a good as my deliverance from prison. So I say to Your Lordship that all the great harm I might have from you now cannot come to the thousandth part of the great good I have received from you, and I thank you for it with all my heart, and take a good leave of you, and wherever I am, as long as I live, I shall pray God for you." The Cardinal, angry, said in his rage: "Go where you like, because you cannot do a man good by force." Certain of those loaf-eating courtiers of his said: "This fellow thinks himself something great, because he refuses three hundred ducats of income." Others, of those men of talent, said: "The King will never find another like him; and this Cardinal of ours wants to bargain for him as if he were a load of firewood." This was Messer Luigi Alamanni, who I was told said this. This was in the Dauphiné, at a castle whose name I do not remember: and it was the last day of October.

Chapter 11

Having left the Cardinal, I went off to my lodging three miles away from there, together with a secretary of the Cardinal's who was coming to the same lodging. All that journey that secretary never left off asking me what I meant to do with myself, and what my fancy would have been about the salary I wanted. I never answered him a single word, except to say: "I knew the whole of it already." Then, having got to the lodging, I found Pagolo and Ascanio who were staying there; and seeing me thoroughly upset, they forced me to tell them what I had; and seeing the poor young men dismayed, I said to them: "Tomorrow morning I will give you money enough for you to be able to get back to your homes comfortably; and I shall go about a most important business of my own, without you; which I have had it in mind to do for a long time." Our room was wall to wall with that of the said secretary, and it is possible that he wrote to the Cardinal everything I had it in mind to do; although I never knew anything about it.

The night passed without my sleeping at all: it seemed a thousand years to me until day came, so that I could follow out the resolution I had made about myself. When the dawn of day came, having given orders for the horses and got myself quickly ready, I gave those two young men everything I had brought with me, and fifty gold ducats besides: and I kept as much again for myself, and besides that the diamond the Duke had given me; I took only two shirts and certain not too good riding clothes, which I had on my back. I could not get away from the two young men, who wanted to come with me in any case; on account of which I greatly belittled them, saying to them: "One of you has his first beard and the other is beginning to get his little by little, and you have learned from me so much of this poor skill that I have been able to teach you that you are today the first young men in Italy; and are you not ashamed that you have not the heart to get out of your daddy's go-cart, which has always carried you? This is surely a mean thing! And if I let you go without money, what would you say? Now get out of my sight, and God bless you a thousand times: goodbye." I turned my horse and left them weeping.

I took a very fine road through a wood, so as to get forty miles away at the least that day, to the most unknown place I could think of. And I had already got about two miles off; and in that little journey I had made up my mind never again to practise in any place where I was known, nor ever to make any other work than a Christ three braccia high, coming as near as I could to that infinite beauty which had been shown me by Himself. Having quite made up my mind, I was going off towards the Sepulchre. Thinking I had got so far off that nobody could find me any more, at this point I heard horses running behind me; and they made me somewhat suspicious, because in those parts there is a certain breed of company, who are called adventurers, who gladly rob people on the road; and although every day a good many of them are hanged, they hardly seem to care about it. When these men had come nearer me, I saw that they were a messenger of the King's, together with that young man of mine Ascanio; and coming up to me he said: "On the King's behalf I tell you to come to him at once." To which man I said: "You come on the Cardinal's behalf; and for that reason I do not want to come." The man said that since I would not come willingly, he had authority to command the country people, who would bring me bound like a prisoner. Ascanio too, as much as he could, begged me, reminding me that when the King put a man in prison, he took five years at the least afterwards to make up his mind to get him out. This word "prison", reminding me of the one in Rome, gave me such a fright that I quickly turned my horse where the King's messenger told me. He, always muttering in French, never left off all that journey until he had brought me to the Court: now he blustered at me, now he said one thing, now another, enough to make me renounce the world.

Chapter 12

When we had got to the King's lodgings, we passed in front of those of the Cardinal of Ferrara. The Cardinal being at the door, he called me to him and said: "Our Most Christian King of his own accord has settled on you the same salary that His Majesty used to give Leonardo da Vinci the painter: which is seven hundred scudi a year; and besides that he pays you for all the works you make for him; and moreover for your coming he gives you five hundred gold scudi, which he wants paid you before you leave here." When the Cardinal had finished speaking, I answered that these were offers worthy of the King he was. That messenger of the King's, not knowing who I was, seeing such great offers made me on the King's behalf, asked my pardon many times. Pagolo and Ascanio said: "God has helped us back into so honourable a go-cart."

Then the next day I went to thank the King, who charged me to make him the models of twelve silver statues, which he wanted to serve as twelve candlesticks round his table: and he wanted six gods and six goddesses figured, of exactly the size of His Majesty, who was very little short of four braccia tall. When he had given me this commission, he turned to the treasurer of savings and asked him whether he had paid me the five hundred scudi. He said that nothing had been said to him about it. The King took it very badly, for he had ordered the Cardinal to tell him. He also told me to go to Paris, and to look for a workshop that would suit for making such works, because he would have it given to me.

I took the five hundred gold scudi and went off to Paris to a lodging of the Cardinal of Ferrara's; and there I began, in the name of God, to work, and made four small models, of two thirds of a braccio each, in wax: Jupiter, Juno, Apollo, Vulcan. Meanwhile the King came to Paris; on account of which I went at once to find him, and took the said models with me, together with those two young men of mine, that is Ascanio and Pagolo. When I saw that the King was satisfied with the said models, he charged me first of all to make him the Jupiter in silver of the said height. I explained to His Majesty that I had brought those two young men from Italy for His Majesty's service; and because I had brought them up myself, I should for these beginnings get much better help from them than from the men of the city of Paris. At this the King said that I should settle for the said two young men whatever salary seemed right to me, which should be enough for them to keep themselves. I said that a hundred gold scudi each would do well, and that I would certainly make them earn such a salary. So we agreed.

I also said that I had found a place which seemed to me very suitable for making such works in; the said place belonged to His Majesty in particular, called the Petit Nesle, and at that time it was held by the provost of Paris, to whom His Majesty had given it; but because this provost did not use it, His Majesty could give it to me, who would use it for his service. The King said at once: "That place is my house; and I know very well that the man I gave it to does not live in it, and does not use it; so you shall use it for our business;" and at once he ordered his lieutenant to put me into the said Nesle. The lieutenant made some resistance, telling the King that he could not do it. To this the King answered in anger that he meant to give his own things to whom he pleased and to a man who served him, because this other man was of no use to him at all: so he should say no more to him about the matter. The lieutenant added further that it would be necessary to use a little force. To whom the King said: "Go now, and if a little force is not enough, put in a great deal of it."

He took me at once to the place and did have to use force to put me in possession: then he told me to take very good care not to get killed there. I went in, and at once took on servants, and bought several great weapons on poles, and for several days I lived in the greatest unpleasantness; because this was a great gentleman of Paris, and the other gentlemen were all my enemies, so that they did me so many insults that I could not stand up to it. I do not want to leave out that at this time when I entered His Majesty's service the year was exactly 1540, which was exactly my fortieth year.
