Book Two, Chapters 13 to 18

Chapter 13

Because of these great insults I went back to the King, begging His Majesty to settle me somewhere else: at which words the King said to me: "Who are you, and what is your name?" I was left quite bewildered and did not know what the King meant; and as I stayed quiet like that, the King repeated the same words a second time, almost angrily. Then I answered that my name was Benvenuto. The King said: "Then if you are that Benvenuto I have heard of, act after your own custom, for I give you full leave to do it." I told His Majesty that all I needed was to keep myself in his favour; for the rest I saw nothing that could hurt me. The King, laughing a little, said: "Go then, and my favour shall never fail you."

At once he gave orders to one of his chief secretaries, who was called Monsignor de Villeroy, to give orders for me to be provided for and fitted out with all I needed. This Villeroy was a very great friend of that gentleman called the provost, whose the said place of Nesle was. This place was in the shape of a triangle, and was attached to the city walls, and was an old castle, but no guard was kept in it: it was of a good size. This Monsignor de Villeroy advised me to look for something else, and to give it up in any case; because the man whose it was, was a man of the greatest power, and he would most certainly have me killed. To whom I answered that I had come from Italy to France only to serve that marvellous King, and as for dying, I knew for certain that I had to die; and a little sooner or a little later did not trouble me in the world.

This Villeroy was a man of the greatest spirit, and admirable in everything he did, and enormously rich: there is nothing in the world he would not have done to do me a mischief, but he showed nothing of it; he was a serious person, of handsome appearance, and spoke slowly. He gave charge of the matter to another gentleman, who was called Monsignor de Marmagne, who was treasurer of Languedoc. The first thing this man did was to look out the best rooms of that place and have them fitted up for himself: to whom I said that the King had given me that place so that I might serve him, and that I did not want anybody living there except me and my servants. This man was proud, bold and spirited; and he told me that he meant to do whatever he pleased, and that I was banging my head against a wall in wanting to stand up against him; and that everything he was doing, he had orders from Villeroy that he might do it. Then I said that I had orders from the King, and that neither he nor Villeroy could do such a thing. When I said this, this proud man said to me in his French tongue many foul words, to which I answered in my own tongue that he lied. Moved by anger, he made as if to lay his hand on a little dagger of his; on account of which I laid my hand on a great dagger of mine, which I always carried at my side for my defence, and said to him: "If you are bold enough to draw that weapon, I will kill you on the spot." He had two servants with him, and I had my two young men: and while the said Marmagne stood there uncertain, not knowing what to do, but rather inclined to mischief, he said, muttering: "I will never put up with such a thing." I saw the business going the bad way; at once I made up my mind and said to Pagolo and Ascanio: "As soon as you see me draw my dagger, throw yourselves on the two servants and kill them if you can: because I shall kill this man at the first blow; then we will go off with God together at once." When Marmagne heard this resolution, he thought he had done well enough to get out of that place alive. All these things, somewhat more modestly put, I wrote to the Cardinal of Ferrara, who at once told them to the King. The King in vexation gave me into the charge of another of those men of his, who was called Monsignor the Viscount of Orbec. This man, with as much pleasantness as can be imagined, provided me with everything I needed.

Chapter 14

When I had made all the fittings of the house and of the workshop, most conveniently arranged for serving me, and most honourably, for the services of the house, I at once set my hand to making three models, of exactly the size they were to be in silver: these were Jupiter and Vulcan and Mars. I made them of clay, very well armed with iron, and then I went to the King, who had given me, if I remember rightly, three hundred pounds of silver, so that I might begin work. While I was giving orders for these things, the little vase and the oval basin were being finished, which took several months. When I had finished them, I had them very well gilded. This seemed the most beautiful work that had ever been seen in France. I took it at once to the Cardinal of Ferrara, who thanked me a great deal; then without me he took it to the King and made him a present of it. The King held it very dear, and praised me more beyond measure than a man of my sort was ever praised; and for this present he gave the Cardinal of Ferrara an abbey of seven thousand scudi of income; and he meant to make me a present too. On account of which the Cardinal hindered it, telling His Majesty that he was doing it too soon, since I had not yet given him any work. And the King, who was most generous, said: "That is just why I want to give him courage, so that he can give me some." The Cardinal, ashamed at this, said: "Sire, I beg you to leave it to me; because I will make him a pension of three hundred scudi at the least, as soon as I have taken possession of the abbey." I never had them, and it would be far too long to tell all the devilries of this Cardinal; but I want to keep myself for things of greater importance.

Chapter 15

I went back to Paris. With so much favour done me by the King I was admired by everybody. I got the silver, and began the said statue of Jupiter. I took on many workmen, and with the greatest diligence day and night I never left off working; so that, having finished Jupiter, Vulcan and Mars in clay, and having already begun to carry the Jupiter in silver a good way forward, the workshop showed itself already very rich.

At this the King appeared in Paris: I went to visit him; and as soon as His Majesty saw me, he called me cheerfully and asked me whether there was anything fine at my house to show him, because he would come as far as there. To whom I recounted all I had done. At once the greatest wish came on him to come; and after his dinner he made arrangements with Madame d'Étampes, with the Cardinal of Lorraine, and certain others of those lords, such as the King of Navarre, brother-in-law of King Francis, and the Queen, sister of the said King Francis; the Dauphin came and the Dauphine; the fact is that on that day all the nobility of the Court came. I had gone off home, and had set myself to work. When the King appeared at the gate of my castle, hearing the beating of several hammers, he ordered everybody to be silent: in my house everybody was at work; so that I was taken by surprise by the King, whom I was not expecting. He came into my hall: and the first thing he saw, he saw me with a great plate of silver in my hand, which was to serve for the body of the Jupiter: another was making the head, another the legs, so that the noise was very great. While I was working, having a little French boy of mine about me, who had done me some little annoyance or other, on account of which I had given him a kick, and by my good luck, having caught him with my foot in the fork of his legs, I had driven him forward more than four braccia, so that at the King's entrance this boy fetched up against the King: at which the King laughed a great deal, and I was left much abashed. The King began to ask me what I was doing, and wanted me to work; then he told me that he would be much better pleased if I never tired myself, but rather took on as many men as I liked, and made them work: because he wanted me to keep myself healthy so as to be able to serve him longer. I answered His Majesty that I should fall ill at once if I did not work, nor would the works be of the kind "I wish to make for His Majesty". The King, thinking that what I said was said out of boasting, and not because it was the truth, made me say it over again to the Cardinal of Lorraine, to whom I set out my reasons so fully and so clearly that he was quite convinced by them: so he urged the King to let me work little or much, according to my own will.

Chapter 16

The King, left satisfied with my works, went back to his palace, and left me full of so many favours that it would take long to tell them. The next day, at his dinner, he sent to call me. The Cardinal of Ferrara was present, dining with him. When I got there, the King was still at the second course: coming up to His Majesty, he at once began to talk with me, saying that since he had so fine a basin and so fine a jug from my hand, he wanted a fine saltcellar to keep them company, and that he wanted me to make him a design for it; but he would like to see it soon. Then I added: "Your Majesty shall see such a design much sooner than you ask of me; because while I was making the basin I thought that a saltcellar ought to be made to keep it company," and that such a thing was already made; and that if he liked, I would show it to him at once. The King started up with great eagerness, and turning to those lords, who were the King of Navarre, the Cardinal of Lorraine and the Cardinal of Ferrara, he said: "This is truly a man to be loved and desired by every man who does not know him;" then he said to me that he would gladly see that design I had made on such a subject.

I set off, and quickly went and came back, because I only had to cross the river, that is the Seine: I brought with me a wax model, which I had already made at the request of the Cardinal of Ferrara in Rome. When I got to the King and had uncovered the model to him, the King, wondering, said: "This is a hundred times more divine a thing than I should ever have thought. This man is a great matter! He ought never to rest." Then he turned to me with a very happy face, and told me that it was a work which pleased him greatly, and that he wanted me to make it for him in gold. The Cardinal of Ferrara, who was present, looked me in the face and made me a sign, as one who recognized that this was the model I had made for him in Rome. At this I said that I had already said I would make that work for whoever was to have it. The Cardinal, remembering those same words, almost in indignation, thinking I had wanted to take my revenge, said to the King: "Sire, this is a very great work, and so I should suspect nothing except that I should never believe I should see it finished; because these able men, who have those great conceits of this art, gladly make a beginning of them, without considering well when they are to have an end. So, if I were having works of this kind made, I should want to know when I was to have them." To this the King answered, saying that whoever looked so narrowly for the end of works would never begin any of them; and he said it in a certain way, showing that works of that kind were not matter for men of little spirit. Then I said: "All princes who give their servants courage, in the way His Majesty does and says, make every great undertaking easy; and since God has given me such a marvellous master, I hope to give him a great many great and marvellous works finished." "And I believe it," said the King; and he got up from the table.

He called me into his room and asked me how much gold was needed for that saltcellar: "A thousand scudi," I said. At once the King called a treasurer of his, who was called Monsignor the Viscount of Orbec, and told him to provide me that very moment with a thousand old scudi of good weight, in gold. When we had left His Majesty, I sent to call those two clerks who had had the silver given me for the Jupiter and many other things, and having crossed the Seine, I took a very small basket which a cousin of mine, a nun, had given me on my way through Florence, and for my good luck I took that basket and not a bag: and thinking to get the business done by daylight, because it was still a good hour, and not wanting to draw off the workmen; and neither did I care to take a servant with me.

I got to the treasurer's house, and he already had the money before him, and was picking it out as the King had told him. As far as I could see, that thieving treasurer artfully delayed until three hours into the night in counting me out the said money. I, who was not lacking in caution, sent to call several of those workmen of mine to come and keep me company, because it was a matter of great importance. Seeing that they did not come, I asked the messenger whether he had done my errand. A certain thievish little servant said he had done it, and that they had said they could not come; but that he would willingly carry that money for me: to whom I said that I meant to carry the money myself. Meanwhile the receipt was made out, the money counted and everything done. Having put it in the said little basket, I then put my arm through the two handles; and because it went in with great difficulty, they were well closed, and I carried it more conveniently than if it had been a bag. I was well armed with mail and sleeves, and with my little sword and dagger at my side I quickly put the road between my legs.

Chapter 17

At that moment I saw certain servants who, whispering, quickly left the house too, making as if to go by another way than the one I was going by. I, walking briskly, having passed the Pont au Change, was coming along a little wall by the river, which brought me home to Nesle. When I was exactly at the Augustinians', a most dangerous place, although only five hundred paces from my house; the dwelling part of the castle being about as far again inside, my voice would not have been heard if I had set about calling out, but making up my mind in a moment when I saw four men with four swords out upon me, I quickly covered that little basket with my cloak, and laying my hand on my sword, seeing that they were closing on me briskly, I said: "From soldiers there is nothing to be got but a cloak and a sword; and this one, before I give it to you, I hope you will have it with little profit to yourselves." And fighting against them spiritedly, several times I opened my cloak, so that, if they were of those put up to it by those servants who had seen me take the money, they might have some reason to judge that I had no such sum of money on me. The fight lasted a short time, because little by little they drew back; and they said among themselves in their own tongue: "This is a brave Italian, and certainly he is not the man we were looking for; or truly, if it is he, he has nothing on him." I was speaking Italian, and I kept driving at them with thrusts and downward strokes, sometimes very close to their bodies; and because I have handled weapons very well, they judged rather that I was a soldier than anything else; and closing up together, little by little they drew away from me, always muttering under their breath in their own tongue; and I too kept saying, modestly enough, that whoever wanted my weapons and my cloak would not have them without trouble.

I began to hurry my pace, and they always came after me at a slow pace; on account of which my fear grew, thinking I might fall into some ambush of several others of the same kind, who would have put me in the middle; so that when I was within a hundred paces, I set off at a full run and shouted at the top of my voice: "To arms, to arms, out, out, for I am being murdered." At once four young men ran up with four weapons on poles: and when they wanted to follow those men, whom they could still see, I stopped them, saying, still loudly: "Those four cowards have not known how, against one man alone, to make a booty of a thousand gold scudi in gold, which have broken my arm with the weight of them; so let us first go and put them away, and then I will keep you company with my two-handed sword wherever you like."

We went to put the money away; and those young men of mine, grieving greatly over the great danger I had run, as though scolding me, said: "You trust too much in yourself, and one day you will make us all weep." I said a good many things; and they answered me back too; my adversaries had run off; and we all, merry and cheerful, had supper, laughing at those great squeezes fortune gives, as much in good as in bad; and when she misses, it is as if nothing had happened at all. It is quite true that people say: "You will learn for another time." That is worth nothing, because she always comes with different ways and never with ones you have imagined.

Chapter 18

The next morning I at once made a beginning on the great saltcellar, and with diligence had it and the other works carried forward. By now I had taken on a great many workmen, both for the art of sculpture and for that of goldsmith's work. These workmen were Italians, French and Germans, and sometimes I had a good number of them, according as I found good ones; because from day to day I changed them, taking those who knew most, and I urged them on so that, from the continual toil (seeing what I did, whose constitution served me a little better than theirs, and being unable to stand up to the great labours, thinking to refresh themselves with plenty of drinking and eating), some of those Germans, who knew better than the others, in wanting to keep up with me, found that their nature would not bear such abuse, and it killed them.

While I was carrying the Jupiter in silver forward, seeing that I had a good deal of silver over, I set my hand, without the King's knowing, to making a large vase with two handles, of about a braccio and a half in height. I also had a wish to cast in bronze that great model I had made for the silver Jupiter; and setting my hand to this new undertaking, which I had never done before, and having talked it over with certain of those old master men of Paris, I told them all the ways we in Italy were used to carry out such an undertaking. These men told me that they had never gone by that road, but that if I let them do it in their own ways, they would give it me cast as clean and as fine as the clay one was. I chose to make a bargain, giving this work over to them: and on top of the price they had asked me, I promised them several scudi more. They set their hands to the undertaking; and seeing that they were not taking the right road, I quickly began a head of Julius Caesar, with his breast, armed, much larger than life, which I copied from a small model I had brought from Rome, taken from a most marvellous antique head. I also set my hand to another head of the same size, which I copied from a very beautiful girl whom I kept about me for my carnal pleasure. To this one I gave the name Fontainebleau, which was the place the King had chosen for his own particular delight.

Having made a very fine little furnace for melting the bronze, and got ready and baked our moulds, they the Jupiter and I my two heads, I said to them: "I do not believe your Jupiter will come out, because you have not given it enough vents underneath for the air to circulate; so you are wasting your time." These men told me that if their work did not come out, they would give me back all the money I had given them on account, and would make good the whole of the lost expense; but that I should look out well, for those fine heads of mine, which I meant to cast in my Italian way, would never come out for me. Present at this argument were those treasurers and other gentlemen, who came to see me by the King's orders; and everything that was said and done, they reported it all to the King.

These two old fellows, who wanted to cast the Jupiter, held back a while from giving the order for the pouring; because they said they would have liked to fix those two moulds of my heads; because that way I was doing it, it was not possible they should come out, and it was a great pity to lose such fine works. When this was made known to the King, His Majesty answered that they should attend to learning and not try to teach the master. These men with great laughter put their work in the pit; and I, steady, without any show either of laughter or of anger — which I had — put my two moulds in the middle of the Jupiter: and when our metal was very well melted, with the greatest pleasure we gave the said metal its way, and the mould of the Jupiter filled very well; at the same time the mould of my two heads filled: so that they were glad and I was content; because I was very pleased to have told lies about their work, and they showed themselves very pleased to have told lies about mine. They asked, in the French way, with great cheerfulness for a drink: I very willingly had a rich collation made them. Then they asked me for the money they were to have, and those extra ones I had promised them. At this I said: "You have been laughing over something which I am much afraid you may have to weep over; because I have considered that into that mould of yours far more metal has gone than it ought; so I do not want to give you any more money than what you have had, until tomorrow morning."

These poor men began to consider what I had said to them, and without saying anything they went off home. When morning came, very quietly they began to dig out of the pit; and because they could not uncover their great mould without first getting out those two heads of mine, they got them out and they were very good, and they had set them up on end, so that they could be well seen. Then, when they began to uncover the Jupiter, they had not gone two braccia down when they and four of their workmen set up such a great shout that I heard it. Thinking it was a shout of gladness, I set off running, for I was in my room more than five hundred paces away. I got to them and found them in the attitude given to those who watched the sepulchre of Christ, afflicted and terrified. I cast my eyes on my two heads, and seeing that they were good, I balanced my pleasure against my displeasure: and they excused themselves, saying: "Our bad fortune!" At which words I said: "Your fortune has been very good, but what has certainly been bad is your want of knowledge. If I had seen you put the core into the mould, with a single word I would have taught you so that the figure would have come out very well; on account of which the greatest honour would have come to me and much profit to you: but I shall be excused about my honour, whereas you have no escape either as to honour or as to profit: so another time learn to work and do not learn to make fools of people."

Still they commended themselves to me, telling me that I was right, and that if I did not help them, having to pay that heavy expense and that loss, they would go begging together with their families. At this I said that if the King's treasurers wanted to make them pay what they had bound themselves to, I promised them to pay it out of my own pocket, because I had truly seen that they had done with a good heart everything they knew. These things gained me so much goodwill with those treasurers and with those officers of the King that it was beyond reckoning. The whole of it was written to the King, who, matchless and most generous, ordered that everything I said should be done.
