Book Two, Chapters 19 to 26

Chapter 19

At this point the most marvellous and brave Piero Strozzi had arrived; and having reminded the King about his letters of naturalization, the King at once ordered that they should be made out. "And together with them," he said, "make out those for Benvenuto, mon ami, and take them at once on my behalf to his house, and give them to him without any expense." Those of the great Piero Strozzi cost him many hundreds of ducats; mine were brought me by one of his chief secretaries, who was called Messer Antonio Le Maçon. This gentleman handed me the letters with a marvellous show of ceremony on His Majesty's behalf, saying: "The King makes you a present of these, so that you may serve him with the greater courage. These are letters of naturalization;" and he told me how, after a long time and with many favours, he had given them to Piero Strozzi at his own request, and that these he was sending to present to me of his own accord: that such a favour had never been done before in that kingdom. At these words I thanked the King with great demonstrations; then I begged the said secretary to be so good as to tell me what those "letters of naturalization" meant. This secretary was very cultivated and courteous, and spoke Italian very well: first breaking into great laughter, then recovering his gravity, he told me in my own tongue, that is in Italian, what "letters of naturalization" meant, which was one of the greatest dignities given to a foreigner; and he said: "This is a greater thing than being made a Venetian gentleman." Having left me, when he got back to the King, he reported the whole of it to His Majesty, who laughed a while, then said: "Now I want him to know why I have sent him letters of naturalization. Go, and make him lord of the castle of the Petit Nesle which he lives in, which is mine by inheritance. He will find out what this is much more easily than he found out what letters of naturalization were." A messenger came to me with the said present, on account of which I wanted to show him a courtesy: he would not accept anything, saying that such were His Majesty's orders. The said letters of naturalization, together with those for the gift of the castle, when I came to Italy I brought with me; and wherever I go, and wherever I end my life, there I shall take care to have them.

Chapter 20

Now I go on with the account of my life that I had begun. Having in hand the works spoken of above, that is the silver Jupiter, already begun, the said gold saltcellar, the great silver vase spoken of, the two bronze heads, we worked on these works diligently. I also gave orders for the casting of the base of the said Jupiter, which I made of bronze most richly, full of ornaments, among which ornaments I carved in low relief the rape of Ganymede; and on the other side Leda and the swan: this I cast in bronze, and it came out very well. I also made another like it to put the statue of Juno on, waiting to begin this one too, if the King gave me the silver to be able to make such a thing.

Working diligently, I had already put the silver Jupiter together; I had also put the gold saltcellar together; the vase was far advanced; the two bronze heads were already finished. I had also made several small works for the Cardinal of Ferrara; besides that I had made a little silver vase, richly worked, to give as a present to Madame d'Étampes; for many Italian lords, that is Signor Piero Strozzi, the Count of Anguillara, the Count of Pitigliano, the Count of Mirandola and many others, I had made a great many works.

To come back to my great King, as I have said, having carried these works of his very well forward, at this time he came back to Paris, and on the third day he came to my house with a great number of the greatest nobility of his Court, and he wondered greatly at the many works I had in hand and had brought to so good a point; and because his Madame d'Étampes was with him, they began to talk about Fontainebleau. Madame d'Étampes said to His Majesty that he ought to have me make something beautiful for the ornament of his Fontainebleau. At once the King said: "What you say is well said, and this very minute I mean to make up my mind that something beautiful shall be made there;" and turning to me, he began to ask me what seemed to me the thing to make for that beautiful fountain. At this I put forward some fancies of my own: His Majesty too said what he thought; then he told me that he wanted to go for a change of air for fifteen or twenty days to Saint-Germain-en-Laye, which was twelve leagues from Paris; and that in that time I should make a model for this beautiful fountain of his with the richest inventions I knew, because that place was the greatest recreation he had in his kingdom; so he ordered and begged me to do my best to make something beautiful: and I promised him as much.

The King, seeing so many works in hand, said to Madame d'Étampes: "I have never had a man of this profession who pleased me more, nor who deserved more to be rewarded than this one; so we must think of fixing him here. Because he spends a great deal, and is a good companion and works a great deal, we must of ourselves remember him: for consider, Madame, how many times he has come to me, and how often I have come here, and he has never asked for anything: his heart is plainly wholly intent on his works; and we must do him some good soon, so that we do not lose him." Madame d'Étampes said: "I will remind you of it." They went off: I set myself with great diligence to the works I had begun, and moreover set my hand to the model of the fountain and carried it forward diligently.

Chapter 21

Within a month and a half the King came back to Paris; and I, who had been working day and night, went to find him, and took my model with me, so beautifully sketched out that it was plainly understood. The devilries of the war between the Emperor and himself had already begun again, so that I found him much distracted; still I spoke with the Cardinal of Ferrara, telling him that I had with me certain models which His Majesty had ordered me to make: so I begged him, if he saw a time to put in a word so that these models might be shown, "I believe the King would take great pleasure in them." The Cardinal did so much; he put the said models before the King; at once the King came to where I had the models.

First of all I had made the door of the palace of Fontainebleau: so as to alter as little as I could the order of the door that was already made at the said palace, which was large and squat, in that bad French manner of theirs, in which the opening was little more than a square, and above that square a flattened half circle in the fashion of a basket handle: in this half circle the King wanted to have a figure which should represent Fontainebleau. I gave the said opening very beautiful proportions; then I put over the said opening a true half circle; and at the sides I made certain pleasing projections, under which in the lower part, which came to correspond to the one above, I put a plinth; and as much above; and instead of two columns, which the mouldings made below and above showed to be required, I had made a satyr in each of the places of the columns. This was more than half relief, and with one of his arms he seemed to hold up that part which belongs to the columns: in the other arm he had a heavy club, with his head bold and fierce, which showed terror to those who looked at it. The other figure was like it in posture, but was different and various in the head and in certain other such things: it had in its hand a scourge with three balls fixed to it by certain chains. Although I say satyrs, these had nothing of the satyr except certain little horns and the goatish head; all the rest was human form. In the half circle I had made a woman lying in a beautiful attitude: she held her left arm over the neck of a stag, which was one of the King's devices: on one side I had made in half relief little roe deer, and certain wild boars and other game in lower relief; on the other side hounds and greyhounds of several sorts, because that is what that most beautiful wood produces, where the fountain rises. I had then enclosed the whole of this work in an oblong square, and in the upper corners of the square, in each of them, I had made a Victory in low relief, with those little torches in their hands, as the ancients used. Above the said square I had made the salamander, the King's own device, with many other most pleasing ornaments suited to the said work, which showed itself to be of the Ionic order.

Chapter 22

When the King saw this model, it at once cheered him up, and turned him aside from those tiresome discussions he had been in for more than two hours. Seeing him cheerful as I wanted, I uncovered the other model to him, which he was not expecting at all, thinking he had seen work enough in the first. This model was more than two braccia large, in which I had made a fountain in the form of a perfect square, with very beautiful stairways round it, which crossed one into the other: a thing which had never been seen in those parts, and is very rare in these. In the middle of the said fountain I had made a solid block, which stood a little higher than the said basin of the fountain: on this block I had made, to correspond with it, a naked figure of very beautiful grace. This one held a broken lance in his right hand raised on high, and his left hand he held on the hilt of a curved sword of his of a very beautiful form: he rested on his left foot and held the right on a helmet as richly worked as can be imagined; and on the four corners of the fountain I had made, on each one, a seated figure raised up, with many charming devices for each of them.

The King began to ask me to tell him what fine fancy this was that I had made, telling me that everything I had done at the door he had understood without asking me anything, but that this of the fountain, although it seemed to him most beautiful, he understood nothing of; and he well knew that I had not done as the other fools do, who, even when they make things with some little grace, make them without any meaning at all. At this I set myself in order; for having pleased him with my doing, I very much wanted my speaking to please him as much. "Know, sacred Majesty, that this whole small work is very exactly measured in small feet, so that when it is afterwards carried out, it will come out with this same grace you see. That figure in the middle is fifty-four feet" (at this word the King made a great show of wonder); "besides, it is made to figure the god Mars. These other four figures are made for the Virtues in which Your Majesty takes such delight and which you so favour: this one on the right hand is figured for the knowledge of all Letters: you see that she has her tokens, which show Philosophy with all her companion virtues. This other shows herself to be the whole Art of design, that is Sculpture, Painting and Architecture. This other is figured for Music, which is a fit companion for all these sciences. This other, who shows herself so gracious and kindly, is figured for Liberality; for without her none of these admirable Virtues that God shows us can be displayed. This great statue in the middle is figured for Your Majesty yourself, who are a god Mars, for you alone are brave in the world; and this bravery you use justly and holily in defence of your glory."

He hardly had patience enough to let me finish speaking before, raising his voice loudly, he said: "Truly I have found a man after my own heart;" and he called the treasurers appointed to me, and told them to provide me with everything I needed, and let it be as great an expense as it liked: then he clapped me on the shoulder with his hand, saying to me: "Mon ami" (which means "my friend"), "I do not know which is the greater pleasure, that of a prince who has found a man after his own heart, or that of the man of talent who has found a prince who gives him such conveniences that he can express his great and skilful conceptions." I answered that if I was the man His Majesty said, my luck had been much the greater. He answered, laughing: "Let us say it is equal." I went off in great joy, and went back to my works.

Chapter 23

My bad fortune willed that I was not warned to make as much of a play to Madame d'Étampes, who, having heard in the evening all these things that had happened from the King's own mouth, it bred such venomous rage in her breast that in scorn she said: "If Benvenuto had shown me his fine works, he would have given me cause to remember him at the right time." The King tried to excuse me, and nothing took hold. When I heard of this, a fortnight later — for having gone round through Normandy to Rouen and to Dieppe, they had then come back to Saint-Germain-en-Laye mentioned above — I took that fine little vase which I had made at the request of the said Madame d'Étampes, thinking that by giving it to her I ought to win back her favour. So I took it with me; and having let her know by a nurse of hers, and having shown the said nurse the fine vase I had made for her Lady, and how I wanted to give it to her, the said nurse made an immense fuss of me, and told me that she would say a word to Madame, who was not yet dressed, and that as soon as she had told her, she would put me in. The nurse told the whole of it to Madame, who answered scornfully: "Tell him to wait."

Hearing this, I clothed myself in patience, which is the hardest thing in the world for me; still I had patience until after her dinner: and then, seeing the hour late, hunger caused me such anger that, not being able to hold out any longer, and having devoutly wished a plague on her heart, I left the place and went off to find the Cardinal of Lorraine, and made him a present of the said vase, only commending myself to him that he should keep me in the King's good graces. He said there was no need, and that when there was need, he would gladly do it: then, calling a treasurer of his, he spoke to him in his ear. The said treasurer waited until I had left the Cardinal's presence; then he said to me: "Benvenuto, come with me, and I will give you a glass of good wine to drink." To whom I said, not knowing what he meant: "For pity's sake, Monsignor Treasurer, have a single glass of wine and a mouthful of bread given me, because truly I am fainting away, for I have been from early this morning until this hour you see, fasting, at the door of Madame d'Étampes, to give her that fine little vase of gilt silver, and I let her know all about it, and she, always to torment me, sent to tell me to wait. Now hunger has come on me, and I felt myself failing; and, as God has willed it, I have given my goods and my labours to somebody who deserved them much better, and I ask you for nothing but a little to drink; for being somewhat too choleric, fasting affects me in such a way that it would make me fall to the ground in a faint."

In the time it took me to say these words, there had appeared marvellous wine and other pleasant things for a collation, so that I refreshed myself very well: and having got my vital spirits back, my temper had left me. The good treasurer handed me a hundred gold scudi; which I resisted, not wanting them on any account. He went and reported it to the Cardinal; who, after abusing him roundly, ordered him to make me take them by force, and not to come before him again otherwise. The treasurer came to me in vexation, saying that he had never been shouted at by the Cardinal before; and wanting to give them to me, when I made a little resistance, he told me very crossly that he would have them taken by force. I took the money. When I wanted to go and thank the Cardinal, he let me know by a secretary of his that whenever he could do me a kindness, he would do it with a good heart: I went back to Paris that same evening.

The King heard the whole of it. They made a joke of Madame d'Étampes, which was the cause of her becoming still more envenomed against me, on account of which I was in great danger of my life, as shall be told in its place.

Chapter 24

I ought to have remembered much sooner the friendship I had gained of the most talented, the most affectionate and the most companionable honest man I ever knew in the world: this was Messer Guido Guidi, an excellent physician and doctor and a noble citizen of Florence; because of the infinite troubles put before me by perverse fortune, I had rather left him a little behind. Although this does not matter much, I thought that having him continually in my heart was enough; but seeing afterwards that my Life does not go well without him, I have brought him in among these greatest troubles of mine, so that just as he was a comfort and a help to me then, here he may put me in mind of that good.

The said Messer Guido came to Paris; and having begun to know him, I took him to my castle, and there gave him a set of rooms free to himself; and so we enjoyed ourselves together several years. There also came the Bishop of Pavia, that is Monsignor de' Rossi, brother of the Count of San Secondo. This lord I took out of the inn and put into my castle, giving him too a free set of rooms, where he was very well accommodated with his servants and horses for a great many months. At another time too I put up Messer Luigi Alamanni with his sons for some months; so God gave me the grace to be able, even I, to do some kindness to men both great and gifted. With the said Messer Guido we enjoyed our friendship for as many years as I stayed there, often glorying together that we were learning something of our arts at the expense of that so great and marvellous prince, each of us in his own profession. I can truly say that whatever I am, and whatever good and beautiful things I have made, all of it has been by reason of that marvellous King: so I pick up the thread to talk about him and the great works I made for him.

Chapter 25

I had in this castle of mine a tennis court to play at with the cord, from which I got a good deal of profit while I had it kept up. There were in the said place some small rooms where various sorts of men lived, among whom was a very able printer of books: this man kept almost his whole shop inside my castle, and it was he who printed that first fine book of medicine for Messer Guido. Wanting to make use of those rooms, I sent him away, though with no small difficulty.

There was also a maker of saltpetre living there; and because I wanted to use these small rooms for certain good German workmen of mine, this said maker of saltpetre would not move out; and I had told him pleasantly several times that he should give me up my rooms, because I wanted to use them as lodgings for my workmen for the King's service. The more humbly I spoke, the more proudly this beast answered me: in the end I gave him three days as a term. He laughed at it, and told me that at the end of three years he would begin to think about it. I did not know that this man was a household servant of Madame d'Étampes: and if it had not been that this matter of Madame d'Étampes made me think a little more about things than I used to do, I would have sent him away at once; but I chose to have patience for those three days; and when they had passed, without saying anything more, I took Germans, Italians and Frenchmen with weapons in their hands, and many labourers I had; and in a short time I dismantled the whole house, and threw his goods out of my castle. And I did this somewhat harsh act because he had told me that he knew of no Italian's power bold enough to have shifted a link of his out of its place. So, after the deed, this man arrived; to whom I said: "I am the least of the Italians of Italy, and I have done nothing to you compared with what I should have the heart to do to you, and what I will do to you, if you say a single word;" with other insulting words I said to him.

This man, astonished and terrified, put his goods in order as best he could; then he ran to Madame d'Étampes and painted her a picture of hell; and that great enemy of mine, so much the greater as she was more eloquent and far more able, painted it to the King; who twice, I was told, meant to be angry with me and to give harsh orders against me; but because Henry the Dauphin his son, today King of France, had received some unpleasantness from that too bold woman, together with the Queen of Navarre, sister of King Francis, they favoured me with such spirit that the King turned the whole thing into a laugh: on account of which, with the true help of God, I got through a great storm.

Chapter 26

I had to do the same again with another man like this one, but I did not pull the house down; I did throw all his goods outside. On account of which Madame d'Étampes was bold enough to say to the King: "I believe this devil will sack Paris for you one day." At these words the King, angry, answered Madame d'Étampes, telling her that I did very well to defend myself from that rabble, who wanted to hinder me in his service.

The rage of this cruel woman grew greater every hour: she called to her a painter, who lodged at Fontainebleau, where the King stayed almost continually. This painter was an Italian and a Bolognese, and was known as Il Bologna: by his own name he was called Francesco Primaticcio. Madame d'Étampes told him that he ought to ask the King for that work of the Fountain, which His Majesty had decided on for me, and that she with all her power would help him in it: so they came to an agreement. This Bologna had the greatest joy he had ever had, and promised himself the thing for certain, although it was not his profession; but because he had quite a good hand at design, and was set up with certain workmen who had been formed under the discipline of Rosso, our Florentine painter, truly a most marvellously able man: and whatever this man did that was good, he had taken it from the admirable manner of the said Rosso, who was already dead.

Those cunning arguments could do so much, with the great help of Madame d'Étampes and with the continual hammering day and night, now Madame, now Bologna, at the ears of that great King. And what was the powerful cause of making him give way, was that she and Bologna in agreement said: "How is it possible, sacred Majesty, that when you want Benvenuto to make you twelve statues in silver, he has not yet finished one of them? And if you employ him on so great an undertaking, you must certainly deprive yourself of these others which you so much desire; because a hundred most able men could not finish so many great works as this able man has laid out. It is plain to see that he has a great will to do them; which will be the cause of Your Majesty losing at one stroke both him and the works." These with many other like words, finding the King in a mood for it, obtained everything they had asked him: and as yet neither designs nor models of anything had been shown from the hand of the said Bologna.
