Book Two, Chapters 27 to 32

Chapter 27

At this same time there had been stirred up against me in Paris that second tenant whom I had driven out of my castle, and he had brought a lawsuit against me, saying that I had stolen a great quantity of his goods when I turned him out of the house. This lawsuit gave me the greatest trouble and took up so much of my time that several times I was ready to give up in despair and go off with God.

They have a custom in France of making a great capital out of a lawsuit which they bring against a foreigner or against any other person whom they see to be somewhat careless about litigating; and as soon as they begin to see some advantage in the said suit, they find people to sell it to; and some have given a suit as a dowry to certain men who follow this trade entirely, of buying lawsuits. They have another ugly thing, that the men of Normandy, almost the greater part of them, make a trade of giving false witness; so that these men who buy the suit at once instruct four of these witnesses or six, according to need, and by way of these, a man who is not warned to produce as many on the other side, one who does not know the custom, at once has sentence given against him.

And these same things happened to me: and it seeming to me a very dishonest business, I appeared in the great hall of Paris to defend my rights; where I saw a judge, the King's lieutenant for civil cases, raised up on a great tribunal. This man was tall, big and fat, and of the sternest aspect: he had round him on one side and the other many attorneys and advocates, all set in order on the right and on the left: others came, one at a time, and put a case before the said judge. Those advocates who were at the side, I saw them at times all speaking at once; whereat I was left wondering that this admirable man, a true likeness of Pluto, with a manner plain to see gave his ear now to this one and now to that, and answered them all skilfully. And because it has always delighted me to see and taste every sort of skill, this seemed to me so admirable that I would not for a great deal have missed seeing it.

It happened that, this hall being very large and full of a great quantity of people, they also took care that nobody should come in who had no business there, and they kept the door shut and a guard at the said door; which guard sometimes, in resisting somebody he did not want to let in, hindered with that great noise that marvellous judge, who in anger abused the said guard. And I several times happened on it, and considered the accident; and the very words I heard were these, which the judge himself said, catching sight of two gentlemen who were coming to look on; and this doorkeeper making the greatest resistance, the said judge said, shouting at the top of his voice: "Be quiet, be quiet, Satan, get away from there, and be quiet." These words in the French tongue sound like this: "Phe phe Satan phe phe Satan alè phe." I, who had learned the French tongue very well, hearing this phrase, remembered what Dante Alighieri meant when he entered with Publius Virgilius Maro his master inside the gates of Hell. For Dante in the time of Giotto the painter were together in France and above all in Paris, where for the said reasons the place where lawsuits are pleaded may be called a Hell: so Dante too, understanding the French tongue well, made use of that phrase; and it has seemed to me a great matter that it has never been understood as such; so that I say, and believe, that these commentators make him say things he never thought of.

Chapter 28

To come back to my own affairs, when I saw certain sentences being given against me by the hands of these advocates, and saw no way of being able to help myself, I turned for my help to a great dagger I had, because I have always taken pleasure in keeping fine weapons; and the first man I began to notch was that principal one who had brought the unjust suit against me; and one evening I gave him so many blows, taking care all the same not to kill him, in the legs and in the arms, that I deprived him of the use of both his legs. Then I found that other man who had bought the suit, and I touched him up in such a way too that the suit came to a stop.

Thanking God for this and for everything else always, and thinking that for the moment I should be a while without being molested, I told the young men of my household, especially the Italians, that for the love of God each of them should attend to his own business and help me for some time, so that I could finish the works I had begun, because I would soon finish them; and after that I meant to go back to Italy, not being able to put up with the villainies of those Frenchmen; and that if that good King ever grew angry with me, he would have me come to a bad end, since I had done so many things of that sort in my own defence.

These Italians were: the first and the dearest, Ascanio, from the kingdom of Naples, from a place called Tagliacozzo; the next was Pagolo, a Roman, a person born very humbly and whose father was not known: these two were the ones I had brought from Rome, who in the said Rome had lived with me. Another Roman, who had also come from Rome on purpose to find me, this one too was called by name Pagolo and was the son of a poor Roman gentleman of the family of the Macaroni: this young man did not know much about the art, but he was very brave with weapons. I had another, who was of Ferrara, and by name Bartolomeo Chioccia. I had yet another: this one was a Florentine and his name was Pagolo Miccieri. And because his brother, who was called by nickname Il Gatta, was able at accounts, but had spent too much in handling the property of Tommaso Guadagni, a very rich merchant, this Gatta set in order for me certain books in which I kept the accounts of the great Most Christian King and of others; this Pagolo Miccieri, having learned from his brother the way of these books of mine, kept them up for me, and I gave him a very good salary.

And because he seemed to me a very good young man, since I saw him devout, hearing him continually now muttering psalms, now with the rosary in his hand, I promised myself a great deal from his pretended goodness. Calling him aside alone, I said to him: "Pagolo, dearest brother; you see how well off you are with me, and you know that you had no start in life, and moreover you are a Florentine; on account of which I trust you more, seeing you so devout in the acts of religion, which is a thing that pleases me greatly. I beg you to help me, because I do not trust any of these others so much: so I beg you to take care of these two things above all for me, which would give me a great deal of trouble: the one is that you keep very good watch over my property, so that it is not taken from me, and so that you do not touch it yourself; and then, you see that poor girl Caterina, whom I keep chiefly for the service of my art, since without her I could not manage: besides, because I am a man, I have made use of her for my carnal pleasures, and it might be that she would give me a child; and because I do not want to bear the expense of other men's children, nor would I put up with such an injury being done me. If anybody in this house were bold enough to do such a thing, and I found it out, for certain I believe I would kill both her and him. So I beg you, dear brother, to help me; and if you see anything, tell me at once, because I will send her and her mother and whoever went after such a thing to the gallows: so be the first to keep yourself from it."

This rascal crossed himself with a sign that went from his head to his feet, and said: "Oh blessed Jesus! God keep me from ever thinking of such a thing! first, because I am not given to those filthy doings; and then, do you not think I know the great good I have from you?" At these words, seeing them said to me in a simple and affectionate way, I believed that things stood exactly as he said.

Chapter 29

Then two days later, a holiday coming, Messer Mattia del Nazaro, also an Italian and a servant of the King's, a most able man in the same profession, had invited me with those young men of mine to enjoy ourselves in a garden. On account of which I got ready, and told Pagolo too that he ought to come out for a change and enjoy himself, since it seemed to me that I had somewhat quieted down that tiresome lawsuit. This young man answered me, saying: "Truly it would be a great mistake to leave the house so empty: see how much gold, silver and jewels you have here. Being in a city of thieves as we are, we must be on guard by day as by night: I will attend to saying certain prayers of mine, while I keep watch on the house; go with an easy mind to enjoy yourself and have a good time: another time somebody else will do this office."

Thinking I was going with an easy mind, together with Pagolo, Ascanio and Chioccia we went off to the said garden to enjoy ourselves, and passed a good part of that day cheerfully. When it began to draw on towards evening, past midday the humour took me, and I began to think about those words that wretch had said to me with pretended simplicity; I got on my horse and with two servants of mine went back to my castle; where I found Pagolo and that wretched Caterina all but in the act; because as soon as I arrived, the French bawd of a mother said in a loud voice: "Pagolo, Caterina, the master is here." Seeing the two of them come, terrified and caught out, all in confusion in front of me, not knowing what they were saying, and, like stupefied creatures, where they were going, their committed sin was plainly to be seen. On account of which, reason being overcome by anger, I laid my hand on my sword, resolved to kill them both. The one ran off, the other threw herself on the ground on her knees, and cried out for all the mercies of heaven.

I, who would rather have struck the man first, not being able to reach him at the first blow, when afterwards I had caught up with him had by then taken counsel with myself: the best thing for me was to drive them both away; because with so many other things that had happened close to this one, I should have had difficulty in saving my life. So I said to Pagolo: "If my eyes had seen what you, you rascal, make me believe, I would run this sword through your guts ten times over: now get out of my sight, and if you ever said the Our Father, know that this is Saint Julian's day for you." Then I drove the mother and the daughter out with shoves, kicks and blows of my fists.

They thought of avenging themselves for this injury, and having talked it over with a Norman advocate, he taught them that she should say that I had used her in the Italian fashion; which fashion was understood to be against nature, that is in sodomy; saying: "At the very least, as soon as this Italian hears of such a thing, and knows how great a danger it is for him, he will at once give you several hundred ducats, so that you shall not speak of it, considering the heavy punishment that is inflicted in France for that sin." So they came to an agreement: they laid the charge against me, and I was summoned.

Chapter 30

The more I looked for rest, the more tribulations showed themselves to me. Injured by fortune every day in different ways, I began to think which of the two things I ought to do: either go off with God and leave France in its own bad hour; or truly fight this battle too and see for what end God had created me. I had tormented myself a great while over this thing; in the end I took the resolution to go off with God, so as not to tempt my perverse fortune so far that she should make me break my neck. When I was disposed to it altogether and entirely, and had made a move to find a quick place for those goods I could not take with me, and to fit the more portable ones as best I could on my own back and my servants', still it was with very heavy unhappiness that I was making such a departure.

I had stayed alone in a little study of mine; because to those young men of mine, who had urged me that I ought to go off with God, I said that it was well that I should take counsel a little by myself; although I well knew that they were largely telling the truth; because once I was out of prison and had given a little room to this fury, I could much better excuse myself to the King, telling him in letters of this attempt to murder my name, made on me only out of envy. And as I have said, I had made up my mind to do so; and having made a move, I was taken by one shoulder and turned round, and a voice said spiritedly: "Benvenuto, do as you are used to do, and have no fear."

At once taking the opposite counsel to what I had settled, I said to those Italian young men of mine: "Take good weapons and come with me, and obey what I tell you, and think of nothing else, because I mean to appear. If I went away, the next day you would all go up in smoke; so obey and come with me." All those young men said in agreement: "Since we are here and live on his bread, we must go with him and help him as long as there is life in us in whatever he proposes; because he has spoken more truly than we thought. As soon as he was out of this place, his enemies would have us all sent away. Let us consider well the great works that are begun here, and how great is their importance: we should not have the heart to finish them without him, and his enemies would say that he had gone off because he had not the heart to finish undertakings of that kind." They said a great many words besides these, of importance. That young Roman of the Macaroni was the first to put heart into the others: he also called several of those Germans and Frenchmen who wished me well. We were ten in all: I took the road, resolved and disposed not to let myself be imprisoned alive.

When I came before the criminal judges, I found the said Caterina and her mother. I came upon them while they were laughing with an advocate of theirs: I went in and boldly asked for the judge, who, swollen up, big and fat, sat raised above the others on a tribunal. When this man saw me, threatening me with his head, he said in a low voice: "Although your name is Benvenuto — Welcome — this time you will be the ill-come." I understood, and answered once more, saying: "Dispatch me quickly: tell me what I have come here to do." Then the said judge turned to Caterina and said to her: "Caterina, say everything that you have had to do with Benvenuto." Caterina said that I had used her in the Italian fashion. The judge turned to me and said: "You hear what Caterina says, Benvenuto." Then I said: "If I had used her in the Italian fashion, I should have done it only from the wish to have a son, as you people do." Then the judge replied, saying: "She means that you have used her outside the vessel where children are made." At this I said that that was not the Italian fashion; on the contrary it must be the French fashion, since she knew of it and I did not; and that I wanted her to say exactly in what fashion I had had to do with her. This wretched whore wickedly said, openly and clearly, the foul fashion she meant. I made her repeat it three times over one after another; and when she had said it, I said in a loud voice: "My lord judge, lieutenant of the Most Christian King, I ask you for justice; because I know that the laws of the Most Christian King promise the fire for such a sin, to the doer and to the sufferer alike; so this woman confesses the sin: I have no acquaintance with it in any way: the bawd of a mother is here, who for the one offence and the other deserves the fire; I ask you for justice."

And these words I repeated so often and in so loud a voice, always demanding the fire for her and for her mother: telling the judge that if he did not put her in prison in my presence, I would run to the King, and would tell him of the injustice a criminal lieutenant of his was doing me. At this great noise of mine they began to lower their voices; then I raised mine higher: the little whore fell to weeping together with her mother, and I shouted at the judge: "Fire, fire." That great coward, seeing that the thing had not gone the way he had planned, began with gentler words to excuse the weak feminine sex. At this, I considered that it seemed to me I had won a great battle, and muttering and threatening, I went off with God gladly; for certainly I would have paid five hundred scudi never to have appeared there. Out of that deep water, I thanked God with all my heart, and went back happily with my young men to my castle.

Chapter 31

When perverse fortune, or if we would rather say that contrary star of ours, takes to persecuting a man, she never lacks new ways of bringing something into the field against him. Thinking I had come out of a deep water beyond reckoning, thinking too that for some little time this perverse star of mine ought to leave me alone, I had not yet got my breath back from that danger beyond reckoning before she gave me two more at once. Within three days two cases happened to me; in each of the two my life was in the balance.

This was that, as I was going to Fontainebleau to talk with the King, who had written me a letter by which he wanted me to make the dies for the coinage of his whole kingdom, and with that letter had sent me some little sketches to show me part of his wish; but he certainly gave me leave to do everything I pleased: I had made new designs, according to my own judgment and according to the beauty of the art. So when I got to Fontainebleau, one of those treasurers who had orders from the King to provide for me — this one was called Monsignor de la Fa — at once said to me: "Benvenuto, Bologna the painter has had orders from the King to make your great colossus, and all the commissions our King had given us for you, he has taken them all away from us and given them to him. We have been extremely sorry about it, and it has seemed to us that this Italian of yours has behaved very rashly towards you; because you had already got the work by virtue of your models and your labours; this man takes it from you only through the favour of Madame d'Étampes: and it is many months now since he had that commission, and it has not yet been seen that he gives orders about anything."

I, wondering, said: "How is it possible that I have never known anything of this?" Then he told me that the man had kept it most secret, and that he had got it with the greatest difficulty, because the King would not give it to him; but that only the pressing of Madame d'Étampes had got it for him. Feeling myself injured in this way and so wrongfully, and seeing a work taken away from me which I had won with my great labours, and disposing myself to do some great thing of consequence with weapons, I went straight off to find Bologna. I found him in his room and in his study: he had me called inside, and with certain Lombard greetings of his asked me what good business had brought me there. Then I said: "A very good and great business." This man ordered his servants to bring drink, and said: "Before we talk about anything, I want us to drink together; for that is the custom of France." Then I said: "Messer Francesco, know that the talk we have to have together does not call for drinking first: perhaps afterwards we may drink."

I began to talk with him, saying: "All men who make profession of being honest men do their works in such a way that by them they are known to be honest men; and doing the contrary, they no longer have the name of honest men. I know that you knew the King had given me that great colossus to make, which had been talked about for eighteen months, and neither you nor anybody else had ever come forward to say anything about it; on account of which with my great labours I had shown myself to the great King, who, being pleased with my models, had given me this great work to make; and it is so many months that I have heard nothing else: only this morning I have heard that you have got it and have taken it from me; which work I won for myself by my marvellous doings, and you take it from me only with your empty words."

Chapter 32

To this Bologna answered and said: "Oh Benvenuto, everybody tries to do his own business in every way he can: if the King wants it so, what have you to say against it? for you would be throwing away your time, because I have had it made out, and it is mine. Now say whatever you like, and I will listen to you." I said this: "Know, Messer Francesco, that I should have many words to say to you, by which with admirable and true reasoning I should make you confess that such ways as these you have used and spoken are not used among rational animals; but I will come in a few words quickly to the point of my conclusion; only open your ears and understand me well, because it matters."

The man tried to get up from his seat, because he saw me dark in the face and greatly changed: I said that it was not yet time to get up: that he should stay seated and listen to me. Then I began, saying this: "Messer Francesco, you know that the work was mine first, and that, by the reason of the world, the time had gone by when anybody could speak of it any more: now I tell you that I am content that you should make a model, and I, besides the one I have made, will make another; then quietly we will take them to our great King; and whoever wins by that road the credit of having worked the better, he will deservedly be worthy of the colossus; and if it falls to you to make it, I will lay aside all this great injury you have done me, and will bless your hands as worthier than mine of so great a glory. So let us leave it at that, and we shall be friends; otherwise we shall be enemies; and God, who always helps the right, and I, who make the way for it, would show you into what great error you had fallen."

Messer Francesco said: "The work is mine, and since it has been given me, I do not want to put what is mine in question." To this I answer: "Messer Francesco, since you will not take the good course, which is just and reasonable, I will show you this other one, which will be like yours, ugly and disagreeable. I tell you this, that if I ever hear in any way that you speak of this work of mine again, I will kill you on the spot like a dog: and because we are neither in Rome, nor in Bologna, nor in Florence — here men live in another fashion — if I ever know that you speak of it to the King or to anybody else, I will kill you in any case. Think which road you want to take: either that first good one, which I spoke of, or this last bad one, which I speak of now."

This man did not know either what to say or what to do, and I was ready to carry that out then and there rather than let any more time come between. The said Bologna said no other words than these: "When I do the things an honest man ought to do, I shall have no fear in the world." At this I said: "You have spoken well; but if you do the contrary, be afraid, because it matters to you;" and at once I left him, and went off to the King, and with His Majesty I argued the matter of the coinage a great while; over which we were not much in agreement; because his Council being there, they persuaded him that the coins ought to be made in that French manner in which they had been made up to that time. To whom I answered that His Majesty had made me come from Italy so that I might make him works that should be good; and if His Majesty ordered me to the contrary, my spirit would never bear my making them. On this a time was fixed to talk about it another time: I went straight back to Paris.
