Book Two, Chapters 33 to 40

Chapter 33

I had hardly dismounted when a good person, one of those who take pleasure in seeing mischief, came to tell me that Pagolo Miccieri had taken a house for that little whore Caterina and for her mother, and that he was continually going back there, and that when he spoke of me he always said in mockery: "Benvenuto set the geese to guard the lettuce, and thought I would not eat it; it is enough that now he goes about blustering and believes I am afraid of him: I have put on this sword and this dagger at my side to let him see that my sword cuts too, and that I am a Florentine as he is, of the Miccieri, a much better family than his Cellini are." This rascal, who brought me this message, said it to me with such effect that I at once felt the fever leap on me — I mean the fever, without saying it by way of comparison. And because perhaps of such a brutish passion I should have died, I took as a remedy the giving of that outlet which the occasion had given me, according to what I felt in myself.

I told that workman of mine from Ferrara, who was called Chioccia, to come with me, and I had my horse led behind me by my servant; and when I got to the house where this wretch was, finding the door ajar, I went in: I saw him with his sword and dagger at his side, and he was sitting on a chest, and had his arm round Caterina's neck: just as I arrived, I heard him joking with her mother about my affairs. Pushing the door open and at the same moment laying my hand on my sword, I put the point of it to his throat, not having given him time to think that he too had a sword, and said all at once: "Vile coward, commend yourself to God, for you are a dead man." He, quite still, said three times: "Oh mother of mine, help me." I, who had a mind to kill him in any case, when I heard those words, so foolish, half my anger went off me. Meanwhile I had told that workman of mine Chioccia not to let either her or the mother go out, because if I struck him, I meant to do the same harm to those two whores.

Keeping the point of my sword continually at his throat, and pricking him a little now and then, always with terrifying words; then seeing that he made no defence in the world, and I not knowing what more to do, and it seeming to me that this piece of blustering had no end to it at all, it came into my head, as the least evil, to make him marry her, meaning to take my revenge afterwards. So having made up my mind, I said: "Take that ring off your finger, coward, and marry her, so that afterwards I can take the revenge you deserve." The man said at once: "Only do not kill me, and I will do everything." "Then," said I, "put the ring on her finger." Having taken the sword a little away from his throat, the man put the ring on her. Then I said: "This is not enough, because I want two notaries to be sent for, so that the thing may go through by contract." Having told Chioccia to go for the notaries, I turned at once to her and to her mother. Speaking in French I said: "The notaries and other witnesses will come here: the first of you I hear say anything about this business, I will kill her on the spot, and I will kill all three of you; so keep your wits about you." To him I said in Italian: "If you say a word against anything I put forward, at the least word you say I will give you so many dagger thrusts that I will make you empty out everything you have in your bowels." To this he answered: "It is enough for me that you do not kill me; and I will do whatever you want." The notaries and the witnesses came, the contract was made in due form and — marvellous! — my anger and my fever went off me. I paid the notaries, and went away.

The next day Bologna came to Paris on purpose, and had me called by Mattio del Nazaro: I went and found the said Bologna, who came to meet me with a cheerful face, begging me to take him for a good brother, and saying that he would never speak of that work again, because he knew very well that I was in the right.

Chapter 34

If in some of these things that happened to me I did not admit that I had done wrong, those others where I know I did right would not pass for true; so I acknowledge that I did wrong in wanting to revenge myself so strangely on Pagolo Miccieri. Although, if I had thought he was a man of so much weakness, such a shameful revenge as I took would never have come into my mind; for it was not enough for me to have made him take so wicked a little whore for his wife; but afterwards, wanting to finish the rest of my revenge, I used to send for her and draw her: every day I gave her thirty soldi; and making her stand naked, first she wanted me to give her her money beforehand; second she wanted a very good breakfast; third I, for revenge, had my will of her, reproaching her and her husband with the various horns I was giving him; fourth I made her stay in great discomfort for hours and hours. And staying in this discomfort was a great weariness to her, as much as it delighted me, because she was of a very beautiful form and did me the greatest credit.

And because it did not seem to her that I had that consideration for her which I used to have before she was married, and it becoming very wearisome to her, she began to grumble; and in that French way of hers she blustered in words, bringing in her husband, who had gone to stay with the Prior of Capua, brother of Piero Strozzi. And as I have said, she brought in this husband of hers; and as soon as I heard him spoken of, an unspeakable rage came over me; still I put up with it, most unwillingly, as best I could, considering that for my art I could not find anything more to my purpose than she was; and I said to myself: "I am taking two different revenges here: one because she is a wife: these are not empty horns, as his were when she was a whore of mine; so if I take this revenge so complete against him and against her too such strangeness, making her stay here in such discomfort, which, besides the pleasure of it, brings me so much honour and so much profit, what more can I want?"

While I was making this reckoning of mine, this wretch multiplied those insulting words, always speaking of her husband; and she did and said so much that she drove me out of the bounds of reason; and giving myself up a prey to anger, I took her by the hair and dragged her about the room, giving her so many kicks and so many blows of my fists until I was tired. And nobody could come in there to her help. Having beaten her very thoroughly, she swore never to come back to me again; on account of which for the first time it seemed to me that I had done very wrong, because it seemed to me I was losing a marvellous opportunity of doing myself credit. Besides, I saw her all torn, livid and swollen, thinking that even if she did come back, it would be necessary to have her treated for a fortnight before I could use her.

Chapter 35

To come back to her: I used to send a maidservant of mine to help her dress, which maidservant was an old woman called Ruberta, a most kindly one; and when she got to this wretched girl, she took her fresh food and drink; then she anointed those bad bruises I had given her with a little fat of roast bacon, and the rest of the fat that was left over they ate between them. Then when she was dressed, she went off swearing and cursing all the Italians and the King who kept them there: and so she went home weeping and muttering. Certainly this first time it seemed to me that I had done very wrong; and my Ruberta reproved me, and kept saying to me: "You are very cruel to strike so harshly at such a beautiful young girl." When I tried to excuse myself to this Ruberta of mine, telling her the villainies she and her mother had done while she was with me, at this Ruberta scolded me, saying that that was nothing, because it was the custom of France, and that she knew for certain that in France there was no husband who had not his little pair of horns. At these words I was moved to laughter, and then I told Ruberta to go and see how Caterina was, because I should have been glad to be able to finish that work of mine, making use of her.

My Ruberta reproved me, telling me that I did not know how to live; because "hardly will it be day before she will come here of her own accord, whereas, if you send to ask for her or to visit her, she will play the great lady and will not want to come." The next day came, and this said Caterina came to my door, and with great fury banged at the said door, so that, being downstairs, I ran to see whether this was a madman or somebody of the house. Opening the door, this beast, laughing, threw herself on my neck, embraced me and kissed me, and asked me whether I was still angry with her. I said no. She said: "Give me a good breakfast, then." I gave her a good breakfast, and ate with her as a sign of peace. Then I set to drawing her, and in the meantime the pleasures of the flesh came in, and then at that same hour as on the past day, she provoked me so much that I had to give her the same beating; and so we went on for several days, doing every day all these same things, as if from a stamp: it varied little more or less.

Meanwhile I, who had won myself the greatest credit and finished my figure, gave orders to cast it in bronze; in which I had some difficulty, which it would be a very fine thing to tell for the accidents of the art; but because I should go on too long, I shall pass it over. It is enough that my figure came out very well, and it was as fine a cast as was ever made.

Chapter 36

While this work was being carried forward, I divided off certain hours of the day and worked on the saltcellar, and sometimes on the Jupiter. Because the saltcellar was worked on by many more people than I had the convenience to have working on the Jupiter, by this time I had finished it completely. The King had come back to Paris, and I went to find him, taking him the said saltcellar finished; which, as I have said above, was oval in form and was about two thirds of a braccio in size, all of gold, worked by the strength of the chisel. And as I said when I spoke of the model, I had figured the Sea and the Land seated the one and the other, and they entwined their legs, as certain arms of the sea run into the land, and the land into the said sea: I had given them that grace exactly.

Into the hand of the Sea I had put a trident in his right; and in his left I had put a boat finely worked, in which the salt was put. Under the said figure were his four sea horses, which as far as the breast and the forelegs were horse; all the part from the middle backwards was fish: these fishes' tails were twined together in a pleasing way; on which knot the said Sea sat in a most fierce attitude: he had round him many sorts of fishes and other sea creatures. The water was figured with its waves; then it was very well enamelled in its own colour.

For the Land I had figured a most beautiful woman, with the horn of her plenty in her hand, entirely naked just as the male was; in her other, left hand I had made a little temple of the Ionic order, most finely worked; and in this I had arranged the pepper. Under this woman I had made the most beautiful animals that the earth produces; and her earthy rocks I had partly enamelled and partly left in gold. I had then set this said work and fixed it in a base of black ebony: it was of a certain suitable thickness, and had a little hollow moulding, in which I had distributed four gold figures, made in more than half relief: these were figured as Night, Day, Twilight and Dawn. There were also four other figures of the same size, made for the four chief winds, worked and partly enamelled with as much neatness as can be imagined.

When I set this work before the King's eyes, he let out a cry of astonishment, and could not have enough of looking at it: then he told me to take it back home, and that he would tell me in time what I was to do with it. I took it home, and at once invited several dear friends of mine, and with them I dined in the greatest cheerfulness, putting the saltcellar in the middle of the table; and we were the first to use it. Then I went on to finish the silver Jupiter, and a great vase already spoken of, worked all over with many most pleasing ornaments and with plenty of figures.

Chapter 37

At this time Bologna the painter mentioned above gave the King to understand that it would be well for His Majesty to let him go as far as Rome, and to give him letters of recommendation, by which he might mould those first fine antiques, that is the Laocoön, the Cleopatra, the Venus, the Commodus, the Gypsy and the Apollo. These are truly the most beautiful things there are in Rome. And he told the King that when His Majesty had afterwards seen those marvellous works, then he would know how to talk about the art of design; because everything he had seen of us moderns was very far from the good work of those ancients. The King was content, and did him all the favours he asked. So this beast went off to his own ruin. Not having had the heart to compete with me with his own hands, he took that other Lombard expedient, trying to belittle my works by making himself a moulder of antiques. And although he had them moulded very well, the effect for him came out quite contrary to what he had imagined; which shall be told later in its place.

Having driven that wretched Caterina right away, and that poor unlucky young man her husband having gone off with God out of Paris, wanting to finish cleaning up my Fontainebleau, which was already made in bronze, and also to do those two Victories well, which went in the corners at the sides of the half circle of the door, I took a poor young girl of about fifteen. She was very beautiful in the form of her body and was somewhat dark; and because she was rather wild and of very few words, quick in her going about, and with frowning eyes, these things caused me to give her the name Scorzone: her own name was Gianna. With this said girl I finished in bronze very well the said Fontainebleau, and those two Victories for the said door. This young girl was pure and a virgin, and I got her with child; she bore me a daughter on the seventh day of June, at thirteen hours of the day, 1544, which was exactly the course of my age of 44 years. To the said daughter I gave the name Costanza; and she was baptized for me by Messer Guido Guidi, the King's physician, my great friend, as I have written above. He alone was godfather, because in France it is the custom to have one godfather and two godmothers, of whom one was Signora Maddalena, wife of Messer Luigi Alamanni, a Florentine gentleman and a marvellous poet; the other godmother was the wife of Messer Ricciardo del Bene, our Florentine citizen and a great merchant there; she a great French lady. This was the first child I ever had, as far as I remember. I made over to the said girl as much money for a dowry as an aunt of hers was satisfied with, to whom I gave her back; and I never had anything to do with her again.

Chapter 38

I pressed on with my works, and had carried them a long way forward: the Jupiter was almost at its end, the vase likewise; the door was beginning to show its beauties. At this time the King came to Paris; and although I have said 1544 for the birth of my daughter, we had not yet passed 1543; but because it has come in for me to speak of this daughter of mine now, so as not to have to interrupt myself in these other things of more importance, I shall say no more of it until its own place.

The King came to Paris, as I have said, and at once came to my house, and found those many works so far forward that his eyes could very well be satisfied; as those of that marvellous King were, whom the said works satisfied as much as anybody who takes such pains as I had done could wish; at once of his own accord he remembered that the said Cardinal of Ferrara had given me nothing, neither pension nor anything else of what he had promised me; and muttering with his Admiral, he said that the Cardinal of Ferrara had behaved very badly in not giving me anything; but that he meant to put this thing right, because he saw that I was a man to make few words about it; and, between seeing and not seeing, one day I should have gone off with God without saying anything more to him.

Having gone home, after His Majesty's dinner, he told the Cardinal to tell the treasurer of savings in his own words to pay me as soon as he could seven thousand gold scudi, in three or four payments, according to what suited him, so long as he did not fail in this; and moreover he repeated to him, saying: "I gave you Benvenuto in charge, and you have forgotten him." The Cardinal said that he would willingly do everything His Majesty said. The said Cardinal, out of his bad nature, let this wish of the King's pass off.

Meanwhile the wars were growing; and it was at the time when the Emperor with his very great army was coming towards Paris. The Cardinal, seeing that France was in great want of money, having come one day to speak about me, said: "Sacred Majesty, for the best I have not had money given to Benvenuto; the one reason is that there is too much need of it now; the other reason is that so heavy a sum of money would sooner have made you lose Benvenuto; because, thinking himself rich, he would have bought himself property in Italy, and once the whim took him, he would the more readily have left you; so I have considered that the best thing is for Your Majesty to give him something in your kingdom, if you wish him to stay a longer time in your service." The King thought these reasons good, being in want of money; nevertheless, as a most noble spirit, truly worthy of the King he was, he considered that the said Cardinal had done this thing rather to make himself agreeable than out of any necessity, or that he could have foreseen so far in advance the necessities of so great a kingdom.

Chapter 39

And although, as I have said, the King showed that he had thought these reasons good, in his own secret mind he did not take it so; because, as I have said above, he came back to Paris, and the next day, without my going to urge him, of his own accord he came to my house: where, going to meet him, I led him through various rooms, where there were various sorts of works, and beginning with the lowest things, I showed him a great quantity of works in bronze, of which he had not seen anything like so many. Then I took him to see the silver Jupiter, and showed it to him as finished, with all its most beautiful ornaments: which seemed to him a much more admirable thing than it would have seemed to any other man, on account of a certain terrible occasion which had befallen him a few years before: that when, after the taking of Tunis, the Emperor passed through Paris on good terms with his brother-in-law King Francis, the said King, wanting to make a present worthy of so great an Emperor, had a Hercules made for him in silver, of exactly the size that I had made the Jupiter; which Hercules the King admitted was the ugliest work he had ever seen; and having said so plainly to those able men of Paris, who claimed to be the ablest men in the world in that profession, they having given the King to understand that this was all that could be done in silver, and for all that they wanted two thousand ducats for that swinish work of theirs; for this reason, having seen that work of mine, the King saw in it such neatness as he would never have believed. So he made a good judgment, and wanted my work of the Jupiter to be valued at two thousand ducats too, saying: "To those men I gave no salary at all: to this man, to whom I give about a thousand scudi of salary, he can certainly make it for me for the price of two thousand gold scudi, having the said advantage of his salary."

Next I took him to see other works of silver and gold, and many other models for inventing new works. Then, at the last of his going, in my meadow at the castle I uncovered that great giant, at which the King made a greater show of wonder than he had ever made at anything else; and turning to the Admiral, who was called Monsignor Annibale, he said: "Since this man has been provided with nothing by the Cardinal, since he is himself slow at asking, without saying anything more I want him to be provided for: for these men, who are not used to asking for anything, think it right that their labours should ask a great deal: so provide him with the first abbey that falls vacant, one worth up to two thousand scudi of income; and if it does not come in one piece, see that it is in two or three pieces, because it will be the same to him." I, being present, heard everything and thanked him at once, as if I had already had it, telling His Majesty that when this thing came, I would work for His Majesty without any other reward, neither of salary nor of any other value for my works, until such time as, forced by old age and being no longer able to work, I might rest my tired life in peace, living honourably on that income, remembering that I had served so great a King as His Majesty was. At these words of mine the King, most cheerful towards me and with great heartiness, said: "And so let it be done;" and His Majesty went away content, and I stayed behind.

Chapter 40

Madame d'Étampes, hearing of these affairs of mine, grew still more envenomed against me, saying to herself: "I govern the world today, and a little man like this makes nothing of me!" She set up shop altogether and entirely to work against me. And a certain man coming into her hands, who was a great distiller — this man gave her certain sweet-smelling and marvellous waters, which tightened her skin, a thing never used before in France — she brought him before the King: which man set forth some of these distillations, which greatly delighted the King; and in these pleasures she brought it about that he asked His Majesty for a tennis court that I had in my castle, with certain small rooms, which he said I did not use.

That good King, who knew where the thing came from, gave no answer at all. Madame d'Étampes set about pressing it by those ways in which women can work on men, so much that this design of hers easily succeeded, since, finding the King in an amorous mood, to which he was very subject, she got as much as she wanted from him. This said man came together with the treasurer Grolier, a very great gentleman of France; and because this treasurer spoke Italian very well, he came to my castle, and went into it in my presence, speaking to me in Italian, in a joking way. When he saw his moment, he said: "I put this man here in possession, on the King's behalf, of that tennis court together with those little houses which belong to the said court." At this I said: "Everything belongs to the sacred King; so you could have come in here more freely; because in this way, done through notaries and through the court, it looks more like a way of trickery than a straightforward commission from so great a King; and I declare to you that before I go to complain to the King, I will defend myself in the way His Majesty ordered me to do the other day; and I will pitch this man, whom you have put in here, out of the windows, unless I see some other express commission in the King's own hand."

At these words of mine the said treasurer went off threatening and muttering, and I, doing the same, stayed where I was, and would not for the time make any other demonstration: then I went off to find those notaries who had put the man in possession. These were well known to me, and they told me that this was a ceremony properly done with the King's commission, but that it did not matter much; and that if I had made a little resistance, he would not have taken possession, as he did; and that these were acts and customs of the court, which touched the King's authority not at all; so that if it suited me to put him out of possession in the same way as he had come into it, it would be well done, and there would be nothing more in it.

It was enough for me to have the hint given, and the next day I began to lay my hand on my weapons; and although I had some difficulty, I had taken it on for my pleasure. Every day I made one assault, with stones, with pikes, with arquebuses, though firing without ball; but I put them into such fright that nobody wanted to come and help him any more. On account of which, finding his battle weak one day, I went into the house by force and drove him out of it, throwing outside every single thing he had brought there. Then I went to the King and told him that I had done every single thing His Majesty had ordered me, defending myself from all those who wanted to hinder me in His Majesty's service. At this the King laughed, and made me out new letters, by which I should no longer be molested.
