Book Two, Chapters 41 to 48

Chapter 41

Meanwhile with great diligence I finished the beautiful silver Jupiter, together with its gilded base, which I had set on a block of wood that showed very little; and in the said block of wood I had fitted four little balls of hard wood, which were more than half hidden in their sockets, in the fashion of the nut of a crossbow. These things were so nicely arranged that a small child could easily, in every direction and without any effort in the world, send the said statue of Jupiter backwards and forwards and turn it about. Having arranged it to my own liking, I went off with it to Fontainebleau, where the King was.

At this time the said Bologna had brought the said statues from Rome, and had with great diligence had them cast in bronze. I knew nothing of this, both because he had done this business of his very secretly, and because Fontainebleau is more than forty miles from Paris; so I could not have known anything. When I let the King know where I wanted the Jupiter put, Madame d'Étampes being present, she told the King that there was no more suitable place to put it than in his beautiful gallery. This was, as we should say in Tuscany, a loggia, or truly a hall: a hall it might better be called, because we call a loggia those rooms that are open on one side. This room was more than a hundred paces long, and was adorned and very rich with paintings from the hand of that admirable Rosso, our Florentine; and among the paintings a great many pieces of sculpture were set, some in the round, others in low relief: it was about twelve paces wide. The said Bologna had brought into this said gallery all the said antique works, made in bronze and very well brought to finish, and had set them in beautiful order, raised on their bases; and as I have said above, these were the most beautiful things taken from those antiques of Rome.

Into this said room I brought my Jupiter; and when I saw that great array, all done by design, I said to myself: "This is like running the gauntlet of the pikes. Now God help me." Having put it in its place and arranged it as well as I could, I waited for that great King to come. The said Jupiter had in his right hand his thunderbolt arranged in the attitude of about to hurl it, and in his left I had arranged the World. Among the flames I had very skilfully set a piece of a white torch. And because Madame d'Étampes had kept the King back until night, so as to bring about one of two mischiefs, either that he should not come, or truly that my work, because of the night, should show itself less beautiful; and as God promises to those creatures who have faith in Him, quite the contrary came about; because seeing that night had fallen, I lit the said torch which was in Jupiter's hand; and being somewhat raised above the head of the said Jupiter, the lights fell from above and made it a much finer sight than they would have made by day.

The said King appeared together with his Madame d'Étampes, with the Dauphin his son and with the Dauphine, today King, with the King of Navarre his brother-in-law, with Madame Marguerite his daughter, and several other great lords, who had been instructed on purpose by Madame d'Étampes to speak against me. Seeing the King come in, I had that boy of mine already spoken of, Ascanio, push it forward, so that he gently moved the fine Jupiter towards the King: and because I had made it too with a little art, that little movement given to the said figure, it being very well made, made it seem alive; and having left the said antique figures somewhat behind, I first gave great pleasure to their eyes with my work.

At once the King said: "This is a much more beautiful thing than any man ever saw, and I, who take pleasure in these things and understand them, would not have imagined the hundredth part of it." Those lords, who were to speak against me, seemed unable to have enough of praising the said work. Madame d'Étampes boldly said: "It certainly seems that you have no eyes. Do you not see how many beautiful antique figures in bronze are set further along, in which the true excellence of this art consists, and not in these modern trifles?" Then the King moved on, and the others with him; and having given a glance at the said figures, and those, because the lights were brought to them from below, not showing themselves at all well; at this the King said: "Whoever wanted to do this man a disservice has done him a great service; because by means of these admirable figures one sees and knows that this one of his is by far more beautiful and more marvellous than they are. So Benvenuto is to be greatly esteemed, since his works not only stand comparison with the antiques, but even surpass them."

At this Madame d'Étampes said that seeing such a work by day, it would not seem a thousandth part as beautiful as it seems by night; besides, it was to be considered that I had put a veil on the said figure, to cover the faults. This was a very fine veil which I had put with fine grace on the said Jupiter, so that it should increase his majesty: which at those words I took hold of, lifting it from below, uncovering those fine genital members, and with a little show of anger I tore the whole of it off. She thought I had uncovered that part in mockery of her. The King, noticing her anger and that I was overcome with passion, when I tried to begin to speak, at once the wise King said these very words in his own tongue: "Benvenuto, I cut off your speech; so be quiet, and you shall have a thousand times more treasure than you desire." Not being able to speak, I twisted about in great passion: which caused her to mutter still more scornfully; and the King, much sooner than he would have done, went away, saying loudly, to give me courage, that he had brought out of Italy the greatest man ever born, full of so many professions.

Chapter 42

Leaving the Jupiter there, and wanting to go away in the morning, he had a thousand gold scudi given me: part were of my salary, and part on accounts which I showed I had spent of my own. Having taken the money, happy and content I went back to Paris; and as soon as I arrived, having made merry in the house, after dinner I had all my clothes brought out, which were a great quantity of silk, of the finest furs and likewise of the finest cloth. These I made a present of to all those workmen of mine, giving to each according to the merits of those servants, down to the maids and the stable boys, giving them all courage to help me with a good heart.

Having taken up my vigour again, with the greatest study and diligence I set myself to finishing that great statue of Mars, which I had made of very well joined wood for an armature; and over that, its flesh was a crust an eighth of a braccio thick, made of plaster and carefully worked; then I had arranged to mould the said figure in many pieces, and afterwards to join them dovetailed, as the art requires; which I managed very easily.

I do not want to leave out giving one token of this great work, a thing truly worth a laugh: because I had commanded all those whose expenses I paid that they should not bring prostitutes into my house or into my castle; and about this I was very careful that such a thing should not happen. That young man of mine Ascanio was in love with a very beautiful girl, and she with him: on account of which this said girl having run away from her mother, and having come one night to find Ascanio, and then not wanting to go away, and he not knowing where to hide her, as a last remedy, being an ingenious person, he put her inside the figure of the said Mars, and arranged her a place to sleep in the very head; and there she stayed a good while, and at night he sometimes quietly got her out.

Having left that head very near its finish, and out of a little vanity of mine, I left the said head uncovered, so that it could be seen from most of the city of Paris: those who lived nearest had begun to climb up on the roofs, and a great many people went on purpose to see it. And because there was a report about Paris that in that castle of mine a spirit had lived from of old, of which thing I saw one or two tokens that made me believe it was so — the said spirit was universally called by the common people of Paris by the name of Lemmonio Boreo — and because this girl, who lived in the said head, could sometimes not help a certain little movement being seen through the eyes; whereat some of those foolish people said that the said spirit had entered into the body of that great figure, and that it made the eyes of that head move, and the mouth, as if it wanted to speak; and many went away terrified, and some cunning ones, having come to see and not being able to persuade themselves out of that flickering of the eyes which the said figure made, they too maintained that there was a spirit in there, not knowing that there was a spirit and good flesh besides.

Chapter 43

In the meantime I was attending to putting together my beautiful door, with all the things described. And because I do not want to trouble to write in this Life of mine things which belong to those who write chronicles, I have left out the coming of the Emperor with his great army, and the King with all his armed force. And at these times he asked my advice about fortifying Paris quickly: he came to my house on purpose for me, and took me round the whole city of Paris; and having heard with what good reason I would quickly fortify Paris for him, he gave me express orders to do at once everything I had said; and he ordered his Admiral to command those people to obey me, on pain of his displeasure.

The Admiral, who had been made such by the favour of Madame d'Étampes and not by his own good works, being a man of little wit, and his name being Monsignor d'Annebault, although in our tongue it means Monsignor Annibale, in that tongue of theirs it sounds in such a way that most of the people called him Monsignor Ass-and-Ox; this beast, having reported the whole thing to Madame d'Étampes, she ordered him quickly to send for Girolamo Bellarmati. This was a Sienese engineer and was at Dieppe, little more than a day's journey from Paris. He came at once, and having set to work on the longest way of fortifying, I withdrew from the undertaking; and if the Emperor had pushed forward, Paris could very easily have been taken. It was indeed said that in that agreement made afterwards, Madame d'Étampes, who more than anybody else had put herself in the middle of it, had betrayed the King. I have nothing else to say about this, because it is not to my purpose.

I set myself with great diligence to putting together my bronze door, and to finishing that great vase, and two other middling ones made of my own silver. After these tribulations the good King came to rest a while in Paris. This cursed woman having been born almost for the ruin of the world, it seems to me that I must be something after all, since she took me for her mortal enemy. Having fallen to talking about my affairs with that good King, she said so much ill of me that this good man, to please her, set about swearing that he would never again take any account of me in the world, as if he had never known me. These words were told me at once by a page of the Cardinal of Ferrara's, who was called Il Villa, and he told me that he himself had heard them from the King's mouth.

This thing put me into such anger that, throwing all my tools aside, and all my works too, I got ready to go off with God, and went at once to find the King. After his dinner, I went into a room where His Majesty was with very few people; and when he saw me come in, and I had made him that due reverence that belongs to a King, at once with a cheerful face he bowed his head to me. On account of which I took hope, and little by little came near His Majesty, because certain things of my profession were being shown; and when we had talked a little while over the said things, His Majesty asked me whether I had anything fine to show him at my house, then he said when did I want him to come and see them. Then I said that I was in a position to show him something, if he had a mind for it, at that very moment. At once he said that I should set off home, and that he wanted to come then.

Chapter 44

I set off, waiting for this good King, who had gone to take leave of Madame d'Étampes. She wanting to know where he was going, since she said she would keep him company, when the King had told her where he was going, she told His Majesty that she did not want to go with him, and that she begged him to do her so much favour as not to go himself either that day. She had to come back to it more than twice, wanting to turn the King away from that undertaking: for that day he did not come to my house.

The next day I went back to the King at that same hour: as soon as he saw me, he swore he would come to my house at once. Having gone as usual to take leave of his Madame d'Étampes, and she seeing that with all her power she had not been able to turn the King aside, she set about with her biting tongue saying as much ill of me as can be said of a man who was a mortal enemy of that worthy Crown. At this that good King said that he wanted to come to my house only to scold me in such a way as would have terrified me; and so he gave his word to Madame d'Étampes to do.

And at once he came to the house, where I led him into certain great ground-floor rooms, in which I had put together all that great door of mine; and when he got to it the King was left so astonished that he could not find the way to say to me that great abuse he had promised Madame d'Étampes. Nor even so would he give up finding the occasion to say to me that promised abuse, and he began by saying: "It is a very great matter, Benvenuto, that you men, although you are talented, ought to know that you cannot show those talents by yourselves; and you only show yourselves great by means of the opportunities you receive from us. Now you ought to be a little more obedient, and not so proud and self-willed. I remember expressly ordering you to make me twelve statues in silver; and that was my whole desire. You have wanted to make me a saltcellar, and vases and heads and doors, and so many other things, that I am much bewildered, seeing all the desires of my wishes left behind, and you attending to satisfying all your own wishes: so if you think of going on in this fashion, I shall let you see how I am used to act when I want a thing done in my way. Therefore I tell you: attend to obeying what you are told, because if you stay obstinate in these fancies of yours, you will bang your head against a wall." And while he was saying these words, all those lords stood attentive, seeing that he shook his head, knitted his brows, and made gestures now with one hand and now with the other; so that all those men who were there present trembled with fear for me, because I had made up my mind not to have any fear in the world.

Chapter 45

And as soon as he had finished giving me that scolding which he had promised his Madame d'Étampes, I put one knee on the ground, and having kissed his robe on his knee, I said: "Sacred Majesty, I acknowledge everything you say to be true; only I say to you that my heart has been continually day and night with all my vital spirits intent only on obeying you and on serving you; and everything which to Your Majesty may seem contrary to what I say, let Your Majesty know that this has not been Benvenuto, but may have been some bad fate of mine or evil fortune, which has wanted to make me unworthy of serving the most marvellous prince the earth ever had: so I beg you to forgive me.

"It only seemed to me that Your Majesty gave me silver for a single statue: and having none of my own, I could not make more than that one; and out of that little silver which was left me over from the said figure, I made that vase, to show Your Majesty that beautiful manner of the ancients; which perhaps you had not seen of that kind before. As to the saltcellar, it seemed to me, if I remember rightly, that Your Majesty of your own accord asked me for one one day, having fallen to talking of one that was brought before you; on account of which, when I had shown you a model, which I had already made in Italy, only at your request you had a thousand gold ducats given me at once, so that I should make it, saying that you were much obliged to me for such a thing: and still more it seemed to me that you thanked me greatly when I gave it to you finished. As to the door, it seemed to me that, talking of it by chance, Your Majesty gave the orders to Monsignor de Villeroy your chief secretary, who ordered Monsignor de Marmagne and Monsignor de la Fa to press on this work with me, and to provide for me; and without these orders, by myself I could never have carried forward such great undertakings.

"As to the bronze heads and the base of the Jupiter and the rest, the heads I truly made of my own accord, to make trial of these clays of France, which I, as a foreigner, did not know at all; and without making trial of the said clays I would not have set about casting these great works. As to the bases, I made them because it seemed to me that such a thing was very fitting to keep those figures company; so everything I have done, I have thought to do for the best, and never to depart from Your Majesty's will. It is quite true that that great colossus I have made entirely, up to the point it has got to, at the expense of my own purse; only it seemed to me that you, so great a King, and I, the poor artist that I am, ought to make for your glory and mine a statue such as the ancients never had. Now, knowing that it has not pleased God to make me worthy of so honourable a service, I beg you that, instead of that honourable reward which Your Majesty had destined for my works, you would only give me a little of your good grace and with it your good leave to go; because at this moment, if you make me worthy of such things, I shall go, returning to Italy, always thanking God and Your Majesty for those happy hours I have been in your service."

Chapter 46

He took me with his hands, and raised me with great gentleness from my knees; then he told me that I should be content to serve him, and that everything I had done was good, and was most acceptable to him. And turning to those lords he said these very words: "I certainly believe that if Paradise were to have doors, it would never have a more beautiful one than this." When I saw the heartiness of those words a little settled, all of which were in my favour, again with the greatest reverence I thanked him, still repeating that I wanted my leave; because my anger had not yet gone off me. When that great King saw that I had not made the account those unusual and great caresses of his deserved, he ordered me with a great and terrible voice not to say another word, for it would go ill with me; and then he added that he would drown me in gold, and that he gave me leave, so that, after the works ordered by His Majesty, he was quite content with everything I did in between of my own accord, and that I should never have any difference with him again, because he had come to know me; and that I too should try to know His Majesty, as was only right. I said that I thanked God and His Majesty for everything, then I begged him to come and see the great figure, and how far I had carried it forward: so he came after me. I had it uncovered: which gave him such wonder as could never be imagined; and he at once ordered a secretary of his that he should immediately repay me all the money I had spent of my own, and let it be whatever sum I liked, so long as I gave it in writing in my own hand. Then he went away, and said to me: "Adieu, mon ami": which great word is not usual for a king.

Chapter 47

Having got back to his palace, he came to repeat those great words, so marvellously humble and so loftily proud, which I had used with His Majesty, which words had made him very angry; and he told some of the particulars of such words in the presence of Madame d'Étampes, where there was Monsignor de Saint-Pol, a great baron of France. This man had in the past made a great profession of being a friend of mine; and certainly this time he showed it very finely, in the French manner. For, after much talking, the King complained of the Cardinal of Ferrara, that having given me into his charge, he had never thought about my affairs again, and that it had not been his fault that I had not gone off with God out of his kingdom, and that he would truly think of giving me into the charge of somebody who knew me better than the Cardinal of Ferrara had done, because he did not want to give me any more occasion to be lost to him.

At these words Monsignor de Saint-Pol at once offered himself, telling the King to give me into his keeping, and that he would certainly do something that would give me no more cause to leave his kingdom. At this the King said that he was very content, if Saint-Pol would tell him the way he meant to take so that I should not leave. Madame, who was present, was very much put out, and Saint-Pol stood on his dignity, not wanting to tell the King the way he meant to take. The King asking him again, and he, to please Madame d'Étampes, said: "I would hang him by the throat, this Benvenuto of yours; and in that way you would not lose him out of your kingdom." At once Madame d'Étampes broke into a great laugh, saying that I well deserved it. At this the King for company set to laughing, and said that he was very content that Saint-Pol should hang me, if he first found another man like me; for although I had never deserved it, he gave him full leave. In the way described this day was ended, and I was left safe and sound; for which God be praised and thanked.

Chapter 48

At this time the King had quieted the war with the Emperor, but not with the English, so that these devils kept us in great tribulation. The King having his head on other things than pleasures, had ordered Piero Strozzi to take certain galleys into those seas of England; which was a very great and difficult thing to take them there, even for that admirable soldier, matchless in his time in such a profession, and as matchless in his ill luck.

Several months had gone by in which I had had neither money nor any orders to work; so that I had sent away all my workmen, except those two Italians, whom I set to make two little vases out of my own silver, because they did not know how to work in bronze. When they had finished the two vases, I went off with them to a city which belonged to the Queen of Navarre: this is called Argentan, and is many days' journey from Paris. I got to the said place and found that the King was unwell; the Cardinal of Ferrara told His Majesty that I had arrived in that place. At this the King answered nothing at all, which was the cause of my having to stay many days in discomfort. And truly I never had greater unhappiness: still at the end of several days I came before him one evening, and set those two fine vases before his eyes: which pleased him beyond measure.

When I saw the King very well disposed, I begged His Majesty to be content to do me so much favour as to let me go for a change as far as Italy, and that I would leave the seven months' salary I was owed, which money His Majesty would deign to have paid me afterwards, if I should need it for my return. I begged His Majesty to grant me such a favour, seeing that it was truly a time for making war, and not yet for making statues, and since His Majesty had granted such a thing to his Bologna the painter, so I most devoutly begged him to be content to make me worthy of it too.

The King, while I was saying these words to him, was looking with the greatest attention at those two vases, and now and then he wounded me with a terrible look of his; still I, as best I could and knew how, begged him to grant me this favour. All at once I saw him angry, and he got up from his seat and said to me in Italian: "Benvenuto, you are a great fool; take these vases off to Paris, because I want them gilded;" and giving me no other answer, he went away.

I went up to the Cardinal of Ferrara, who was present, and begged him that, since he had done me so much good in getting me out of prison in Rome, together with so many other benefits, he would grant me this too, that I might go as far as Italy. The said Cardinal told me that he would most willingly do everything he could to do me that kindness, and that I should freely leave the care of it to him; and also that, if I wished, I could freely go, because he would settle it very well with the King. I said to the said Cardinal that I knew His Majesty had given me into the charge of His most reverend Lordship, and that if he gave me leave, I would gladly go, to come back at a single least sign from His most reverend Lordship. Then the Cardinal told me that I should go off to Paris, and stay there a week, and in that time he would get leave from the King for me to go: and in case the King was not content that I should leave, he would without fail send me word; on account of which, if he wrote me nothing else, it would be a sign that I might freely go.
