Book Two, Chapters 49 to 54

Chapter 49

Having gone off to Paris, as the Cardinal had told me, I made marvellous cases for those three silver vases. When twenty days had passed, I got myself ready, and put the three vases on a mule's pack, which had been lent me as far as Lyons by the Bishop of Pavia, whom I had lodged once more in my castle. I set off in my ill hour, together with Signor Ippolito Gonzaga, which lord was in the King's pay and maintained by Count Galeotto della Mirandola, and with certain other gentlemen of the said count. Leonardo Tedaldi, our Florentine, also joined company with us.

I left Ascanio and Pagolo in charge of my castle and of all my property, among which were certain little vases that had been begun, which I left so that those two young men should not be idle. There was also a great deal of household furniture of great value, because I lived very honourably: the value of these said goods of mine was more than fifteen hundred scudi. I told Ascanio to remember how many great benefits he had had from me, and that up to then he had been a boy of little sense: that it was time now to have a man's sense; so I meant to leave in his keeping all my property, together with all my honour; and that if he heard so much as one thing or another from those beasts of Frenchmen, he should let me know at once, because I would get into the post saddle and fly from wherever I was, both for the great obligation I had to that good King and for my own honour. The said Ascanio with pretended and thievish tears said to me: "I never knew a better father than you, and everything a good son ought to do towards his good father, I will always do towards you." So in agreement I set off with a servant and with a small French boy.

When midday had gone by, there came to my castle certain of those treasurers, who were not friends of mine at all. This rascally rabble said at once that I had gone off with the King's silver, and told Messer Guido and the Bishop of Pavia to send quickly for the King's vases; if not, they would send after me for them, to my very great unpleasantness. The Bishop and Messer Guido were much more frightened than there was any need for, and quickly sent that traitor Ascanio after me by post, who appeared about midnight. And I, who was not sleeping, was grieving to myself, saying: "To whom am I leaving my property, my castle? Oh what a destiny of mine this is, which forces me to make this journey? If only the Cardinal is not in agreement with Madame d'Étampes, who desires nothing else in the world except that I should lose that good King's favour!"

Chapter 50

While I was having this dispute with myself, I heard Ascanio call me; and at the first sound I got up out of bed and asked him whether he brought me good news or bad. The thief said: "I bring good news; but you only need to send back the three vases, because those rascals of treasurers are raising a hue and cry, so that the Bishop and Messer Guido say that you should send them back in any case: and for the rest let nothing trouble you, and go and enjoy this journey happily." I gave him back the vases at once, two of which were my own, with the silver and everything.

I was taking them to the Cardinal of Ferrara's abbey in Lyons; because although they gave out that I meant to take them off to Italy, everybody knows well that neither money, nor gold, nor silver can be taken out without great leave. Now it is well worth considering whether I could have taken out those three great vases, which with their cases took up a whole mule. It is quite true that, they being a very beautiful thing and of great value, I feared for the King's death, because certainly I had left him very unwell; and I said to myself: "If such a thing happened, having them in the Cardinal's hands, I cannot lose them."

Now, in conclusion, I sent back the said mule with the vases and other things of importance; and with the said company the next morning I attended to going on my way, nor could I ever, in all the journey, keep myself from sighing and weeping. Still, sometimes I comforted myself with God, saying: "Lord God, You who know the truth, know that this going of mine is only to carry alms to six poor wretched virgins and to their mother, my sister of my own blood; that although they have their father, he is so old and his trade earns nothing; and they might easily go the bad way; whereas by doing this pious work, I hope for help and counsel from Your Majesty." This was all the recreation I took as I went on.

Finding ourselves one day within a day's journey of Lyons, near twenty-two hours the sky began to make certain dry claps of thunder, and the air was very white: I was a crossbow shot ahead of my companions; after the thunder the sky made so great and so fearful a noise that I judged to myself that it was the day of Judgment; and having stopped a little, there began to fall a hail without a drop of water. This was larger than pellets from a blowpipe, and, striking on me, it hurt me a great deal: little by little this began to grow larger so that it was like crossbow bolts. Seeing that my horse was greatly frightened, I turned him back with the greatest fury at a gallop, until I found my companions, who from the same fear had stopped inside a pine wood. The hail grew as large as big lemons: I sang a Miserere; and while I was saying this devoutly to God, there came one of those stones so large that it broke off a very thick branch of that pine where I thought I was safe. Another of those stones struck the head of my horse, which made as if to fall to the ground; one caught me, but not full on, because it would have killed me. Likewise one caught that poor old Leonardo Tedaldi, in such a way that he, who was on his knees like me, was made to put his hands on the ground. Then I quickly, seeing that that great branch could no longer defend me and that with the Miserere it was necessary to do something as well, began to double my clothes over my head: and so I said to Leonardo, who was crying out for help, "Jesus, Jesus," that Jesus would help him if he helped himself. I had greater trouble in saving him than in saving myself.

This thing lasted a good while, but then it stopped, and we, who were all battered, got back on our horses as best we could; and while we were going on towards our lodging, showing each other our scratches and our bruises, a mile further on we found so much greater ruin than our own that it seems impossible to tell it. All the trees were stripped and broken, with as many beasts dead as it had found there; and many shepherds dead too: we saw a great quantity of those hailstones which two hands could not have gone round. So it seemed to us that we had made a good bargain, and we knew then that calling on God and those Misereres of ours had served us better than we could have done by ourselves. So thanking God, we went on to Lyons the next day, and there we rested for a week. When the week had passed, having refreshed ourselves very well, we took up the journey again, and very happily crossed the mountains. There I bought a small horse, because some little baggage had rather tired out my horses.

Chapter 51

When we had been a day in Italy, Count Galeotto della Mirandola came up with us, who was travelling post, and having stopped with us, he told me that I had made a mistake in leaving, and that I ought not to go any further, because my affairs, if I went straight back, would go better than ever; but if I went on, I was giving my enemies room and the chance of doing me harm; whereas, if I went straight back, I would have blocked their way to what they had planned against me; and those men in whom I had most faith were the ones who were deceiving me. He would not tell me any more, though he knew it very well: and the Cardinal of Ferrara had come to an agreement with those two rascals of mine whom I had left in charge of everything of mine. The said young count repeated to me several times that I ought to go back in any case. Having got into the post saddle he went on ahead, and I, because of the company I was in, made up my mind to go on too.

I had a torment in my heart, now to get to Florence very quickly, and now to go back to France. I was in such passion, undecided in that way, that in the end I made up my mind to take post so as to get quickly to Florence. I could not come to terms at the first post house; and so I settled my purpose absolutely to come and be tormented in Florence. Having left the company of Signor Ippolito Gonzaga, who had taken the road to go to Mirandola, and I that of Parma and Piacenza, when I got to Piacenza I met in a street Duke Pier Luigi, who looked me over and knew me. And I, who knew that all the harm I had had in the Castel Sant'Angelo in Rome, he had been the entire cause of it, felt great passion at seeing him; and knowing no remedy for getting out of his hands, I made up my mind to go and visit him; and I arrived just as the meat had been taken away, and with him were those men of the Landi family, who were afterwards the ones who killed him.

When I came to His Excellency, this man made the most immoderate fuss of me that can ever be imagined: and among these caresses he fell of himself into the subject, telling those who were present that I was the first man in the world of my profession and that I had been a long time in prison in Rome. And turning to me he said: "My Benvenuto, what happened to you grieved me a great deal; and I knew that you were innocent, and I could not help you otherwise, because my father, to satisfy certain enemies of yours, who had also given him to understand that you had spoken ill of him: which thing I know for a certainty was never true; and I was very sorry about your case;" and with these words he multiplied so many others like them that it seemed almost as if he were asking my pardon. Next he asked me about all the works I had made for the Most Christian King; and while I told him of them, he stayed attentive, giving me the most gracious audience possible in the world. Then he asked me whether I would serve him: to this I answered that with my honour I could not do it; that if I had left finished those many great works I had begun for that great King, I would leave any great lord, only to serve His Excellency.

Now here it is seen how the great power of God never leaves unpunished any sort of men who do wrongs and injustices to the innocent. This man asked my pardon, as it were, in the presence of those who a little afterwards took my revenge, together with that of many others who had been murdered by him; so let no lord, however great he may be, make a mockery of the justice of God, as certain of those men do whom I know, who have so foully murdered my name, of which I shall speak in its place. And these things of mine I do not write out of worldly boasting, but only to thank God, who has saved me from so many great troubles. And of those too who present themselves before me day by day, I complain of all of them to Him, and call on Him as my own defender and commend myself to Him. And always, besides helping myself as much as I can, when afterwards I am brought low where my weak forces do not reach, at once that great courage of God shows itself to me, which comes unlooked for upon those who wrongfully injure others, and upon those who take little care of the great and honourable charge which God has given them.

Chapter 52

I went back to the inn and found that the said Duke had sent me most abundant presents of food and drink, most honourable ones: I took my meal with a good appetite; then, having got on horseback, I came on towards Florence; where when I arrived, I found my sister of my own blood with six little daughters, one of whom was of an age to marry and one still at nurse: I found her husband, who because of various accidents in the city no longer worked at his trade. I had sent more than a year before jewels and French gilt work worth more than two thousand ducats, and with me I had brought about a thousand scudi' worth. I found that, although I gave them four gold scudi a month continually, they were also continually taking a good deal of money from those gilt works of mine which they sold from day to day. That brother-in-law of mine was such an honest man that, for fear I might grow angry with him, the money I sent him for his keep not being enough, and giving it him as alms, he had pawned almost everything he had in the world, letting the interest eat him up, only so as not to touch that money which was not meant for him. By this I knew that he was a very honest man and my wish grew to give him more alms: and before I left Florence I meant to make arrangements for all his little daughters.

Chapter 53

Our Duke of Florence at this time, which was the month of August in 1545, being at Poggio a Caiano, a place ten miles from Florence, I went to find him, only to do my duty, since I too was a Florentine citizen and because my forefathers had been great friends of the house of Medici, and I more than any of them loved this Duke Cosimo. As I say, I went to the said Poggio only to pay him my respects and never with any intention of settling with him, though as God, who does everything well, was pleased that it should be: for when the said Duke saw me, after making infinite fuss of me, he and the Duchess asked me about the works I had made for the King; on which I willingly, and all in order, told them.

When he had heard me, he said that he had already heard as much and that it was true; and then he added in an attitude of compassion, and said: "Oh, small reward for so many fine and great labours! My Benvenuto, if you would make something for me, I would pay you very differently from what that King of yours has done, whom out of your good nature you praise so much." To these words I added the great obligations I had to His Majesty, who had taken me out of so unjust a prison, and then had given me the chance of making the most marvellous works that any craftsman of my sort ever born had made. While I was speaking so, my Duke twisted about and seemed as if he could not bear to hear me. Then when I had finished, he said to me: "If you will make something for me, I will make so much of you that perhaps you will be left wondering, provided that your works please me; of which I have no doubt at all."

I, poor unlucky man, wishing to show in this marvellous School that since I had been away from it I had laboured in a profession other than that which the said school reckoned with, answered my Duke that I would willingly, either in marble or in bronze, make him a great statue for that fine square of his. To this he answered that he would have liked from me, as a first work, only a Perseus. This was what he had already wanted for a good while; and he begged me to make him a little model of it. I willingly set to making the said model, and in a few weeks I had finished it, about a braccio high: this was of yellow wax, quite well finished: it was certainly made with the greatest study and art.

The Duke came to Florence and before I could show him this said model, several days went by; so that it really seemed as if he had never seen or known me, so that I made a bad judgment of my affairs with His Excellency. Still afterwards, one day after dinner, having taken it into his wardrobe, he came to see it together with the Duchess and with a few other lords. As soon as he saw it he liked it and praised it beyond measure: on account of which he gave me a little hope that he understood something about it. After he had considered it a good while, his pleasure in it growing greatly, he said these words: "If you carried out this little model on a great scale, my Benvenuto, this would be the finest work in the square." Then I said: "My most excellent lord, in the square are the works of the great Donatello and of the marvellous Michelangelo, who have been the two greatest men since the ancients. So Your most illustrious Excellency gives great courage to my model, because I am confident I can make the work better than the model, more than three times over."

At this there was no small dispute, because the Duke kept saying that he understood these things very well and that he knew exactly what could be done. At this I told him that my works would decide that question and that doubt of his, and that most certainly I would perform for His Excellency far more than I promised him, and that he should only give me the conveniences for being able to do such a thing, because without those conveniences I could not perform for him the great thing I promised. At this His Excellency told me to make a petition of what I asked of him, and to put in it all my needs, for he would give the fullest orders about it.

Certainly if I had been shrewd enough to bind by contract everything I needed for these works of mine, I should not have had the great troubles which have come on me through my own fault: because his will was plainly very great both in wanting works made and in giving good orders about them. But not knowing that this lord had more of the ways of a merchant than of a duke, I proceeded most freely with His Excellency as with a duke and not as with a merchant. I made him the petitions, to which His Excellency answered most freely. At this I said: "My most singular patron, the true petitions and the true agreements between us do not consist in these words nor in these writings, but the whole of it consists in my succeeding with my works in what I have promised you; and if I succeed, then I promise myself that Your most illustrious Excellency will remember very well what you promise me." At these words His Excellency, taken with both my doing and my saying, he and the Duchess showed me the most immoderate favours that can be imagined in the world.

Chapter 54

Having the greatest desire to begin work, I told His Excellency that I needed a house, of such a kind that I could set myself up in it with my little furnaces, and work in it in clay and bronze, and then, separately, in gold and silver; because I knew that he knew how well fitted I was to serve him in these professions; and I needed convenient rooms to be able to do such a thing. And so that His Excellency should see how much I wanted to serve him, I had already found the house which suited my purpose, and it was in a place which pleased me greatly. And because I did not want to touch His Excellency for money or anything else before he had seen my works, I had brought two jewels from France, with which I begged His Excellency to buy me the said house, and to keep them until with my works and my labours I had earned it. The said jewels were very well worked by the hands of my workmen, under my designs.

When he had looked at them a good while, he said these spirited words, which clothed me in false hope: "Take back your jewels, Benvenuto, because I want you and not them; and you shall have your house free." Next he made me a rescript on a petition of mine, which I have always kept. The said rescript ran thus: "Let the said house be seen, and who has it to sell, and the price asked for it; because we wish to oblige Benvenuto in this." It seemed to me from this rescript that I was sure of the house; because I confidently promised myself that my works would please much more than I had promised.

Next to this, His Excellency had given express orders to a certain majordomo of his who was called Ser Pier Francesco Riccio. He was from Prato, and had been the said Duke's little schoolmaster. I spoke to this beast, and told him everything I needed, because where there was a garden in the said house I meant to make a workshop. At once this man gave the orders to a certain dry, thin paymaster, who was called Lattanzio Gorini. This little manikin, with certain little spidery hands of his and with a little gnat's voice, as quick as a little snail, in an unlucky hour had brought to the house stones, sand and lime enough as would have served, and grudgingly, to build a pigeon hole. Seeing things go so miserably cold, I began to be dismayed; but still I said to myself: "Small beginnings sometimes have great ends;" and I also took a little hope from seeing how many thousands of ducats the Duke had thrown away on certain ugly wretched sculptures, made by the hand of that beast Baccio Bandinello.

Having put heart into myself, I blew up the backside of that Lattanzio Gorini to make him move; I shouted at certain lame asses and at a little blind man who drove them; and with these difficulties, and then with my own money, I had marked out the site of the workshop, and had grubbed up trees and vines: still, as I usually do, boldly, and with a little fury, I went on getting things done.

On the other hand, I was in the hands of Tasso the carpenter, a great friend of mine, and I was having him make certain wooden armatures for beginning the great Perseus. This Tasso was a most excellent able man, I believe the greatest there ever was of his profession: on the other side he was pleasant and cheerful, and every time I went to him, he came to meet me laughing, with a little song in falsetto. And I, who was already more than half in despair, both because I was beginning to hear that things in France were going badly, and because I promised myself little of these things here for their coldness, forced myself always to listen to at least half of that little song of his: still in the end I cheered up somewhat with him, forcing myself to lose as much as I could of four of those desperate thoughts of mine.
