Book Two, Chapters 55 to 61

Chapter 55

Having given orders for all the things spoken of above, and beginning to push on so as to get myself ready the sooner for this said undertaking — part of the lime was already slaked — all at once I was sent for by the said majordomo; and going to him, I found him after His Excellency's dinner in the hall called the Clock Hall; and when I came before him, I with the greatest reverence to him, and he with the greatest stiffness to me, he asked me who it was that had put me in that house, and by what authority I had begun building inside it; and that he wondered greatly at me, that I should be so bold and presumptuous. To this I answered that it was His Excellency who had put me in the house, and in the name of His Excellency his own Lordship, who had given the orders to Lattanzio Gorini; and the said Lattanzio had brought stone, sand and lime, and had given the orders for the things I had asked for — "and he said he had orders to that effect from Your Lordship."

When I had said these words, that said beast turned on me with greater sourness than before, and told me that neither I nor any of those I had cited were telling the truth. Then I took offence and said to him: "Majordomo, so long as Your Lordship speaks according to that most noble rank in which you are wrapped, I shall revere you and speak to you with that submission I use to the Duke; but if you do otherwise, I shall speak to you as to a Ser Pier Francesco Riccio." This man fell into such anger that I thought he would go mad on the spot, and gain time on what the heavens had determined for him; and he told me, along with some insulting words, that he wondered greatly at having made me worthy to speak to a man of his sort. At these words I was moved and said: "Now listen to me, Ser Pier Francesco Riccio, and I will tell you who are men of my sort, and who are men of your sort, masters at teaching children to read."

When I had said these words, this man with a hooked-up face raised his voice, repeating those same words more rashly. To which I too, setting my face in fighting order, clothed myself on his account with a little presumption, and said that men of my sort were worthy to speak to popes and to emperors and to great kings; and that of men of my sort perhaps one went about the world, but of men of his sort ten went to a doorway. When he heard these words, he got up on a window ledge that is in that hall; then he told me to repeat once more the words I had said to him; which I repeated more boldly than I had done before, and moreover I said that I no longer cared to serve the Duke, and that I would go back to France, where I could freely return. This beast was left stupefied and the colour of earth, and I in a rage went off with the intention of going off with God; would to God that I had carried it out.

His Excellency the Duke cannot have known at once about this devilment that had happened, because I stayed some few days having laid aside all thought of Florence, except those of my sister and of my little nieces, whom I was setting in order; for with the little I had brought I wanted to leave them settled as best I could, and as soon as possible afterwards I meant to go back to France, and never care to see Italy again. Having made up my mind to get myself away as quickly as I could, and to go without leave of the Duke or of anybody else, one morning the said majordomo of his own accord very humbly sent for me, and set his hand to a certain schoolmasterly oration of his, in which I never heard either method or grace, or skill, or beginning, or end: I only gathered that he said he made profession of being a good Christian, and that he did not want to bear hatred against anybody, and he asked me on the Duke's behalf what salary I wanted for my keep. At this I stayed a little within myself and did not answer, with the plain intention of not wanting to stay. Seeing me hold back without an answer, he still had enough sense to say: "Oh Benvenuto, one answers dukes; and what I say to you I say on His Excellency's behalf." Then I said that since he was saying it on His Excellency's behalf, I would very willingly answer; and I told him to tell His Excellency that I did not want to be made second to any of those men he kept of my profession. The majordomo said: "Bandinello is given two hundred scudi for his keep, so if you are content with that, your salary is settled." I answered that I was content, and that what I deserved beyond it should be given me after my works had been seen, and left the whole of it to the good judgment of His most illustrious Excellency: so against my will I picked up the thread and set myself to work, the Duke continually doing me the most immoderate favours that can be imagined in the world.

Chapter 56

I had had letters very often from France from that most faithful friend of mine Messer Guido Guidi: these letters as yet told me nothing but good; that Ascanio of mine also sent me word telling me to attend to giving myself a good time, and that if anything happened, he would let me know. It was reported to the King that I had set myself to work for the Duke of Florence; and because this man was the best in the world, he said several times: "Why does Benvenuto not come back?" And when those young men of mine were asked about it in particular, both of them told him that I wrote to them that I was so well off, and that they thought I no longer had any wish to come back and serve His Majesty. Finding the King in anger, and hearing these rash words, which never came from me, he said: "Since he has left us with no cause at all, I shall never ask for him again; so let him stay where he is." These thieving murderers, having brought the thing to the point they wanted, because every time I came back to France they went back to being workmen under me as they had been before, whereas, if I did not come back, they were left free and in my place, for this they made every effort so that I should not come back.

Chapter 57

While I was having the workshop built, so as to begin the Perseus in it, I worked in a ground-floor room, in which I made the Perseus in plaster, of the size it was to be, with the idea of moulding it from that plaster one. When I saw that doing it this way was taking me rather a long time, I took another expedient, because by now a bit of a wretched little workshop had been set up, brick upon brick, made with such meanness that it offends me too much to remember it. I began the figure of the Medusa, and made a skeleton of iron; then I began to make it in clay, and when I had made it in clay, I baked it. I was alone with a few little assistants, among whom there was one very beautiful: this was the son of a prostitute, called La Gambetta. I made use of this boy to draw from, because we have no other books that teach us the art except the natural model. I tried to get workmen so as to get this work of mine done quickly, and I could not find any, and by myself alone I could not do everything. There were a few in Florence who would gladly have come, but Bandinello at once prevented their coming; and after making me struggle like this a good while, he told the Duke that I was going about looking for his workmen, because by myself it was never possible that I should know how to put together a large figure. I complained to the Duke of the great annoyance this beast was giving me, and begged him to get me some of those workmen of the Cathedral Works. These words of mine were the cause of making the Duke believe what Bandinello was telling him. Realizing this, I disposed myself to do by myself as much as I could.

And having set myself down to the most extreme labours that can be imagined, while I was toiling day and night at this, my sister's husband fell ill, and in a few days he died. He left me my sister, a young woman, with six daughters small and grown: this was the first great trouble I had in Florence: to be left the father and guide of such a wreck.

Chapter 58

Wanting nothing to go wrong, my garden being loaded with a great deal of rubbish, I called two labourers, who were brought me from the Ponte Vecchio: of these one was an old man of sixty, the other a young man of eighteen. Having kept them about three days, that young man told me that the old man did not want to work and that I would do better to send him away, because not only did he not want to work, he prevented the young man from working: and he told me that the little there was to do, he could do it himself, without throwing money away on other people: this one was called Bernardino Mannellini of the Mugello. Seeing him work so willingly, I asked him whether he would take service with me: at the first word we agreed. This young man looked after a horse for me, worked in the garden, and then set himself to help me in the workshop, so that little by little he began to learn the art with such fineness that I never had a better helper than he.

And making up my mind to do everything with this man, I began to show the Duke that Bandinello was telling lies, and that I would do very well without Bandinello's workmen. At this time I got a little trouble in my kidneys; and because I could not work, I was glad to stay in the Duke's wardrobe with certain young goldsmiths, who were called Gianpagolo and Domenico Poggini, whom I set to making a little gold vase, worked all over in low relief, with figures and other fine ornaments: this was for the Duchess, and Her Excellency had it made to drink water from. She also asked me to make her a gold girdle; and this work too most richly, with jewels and with many pleasing inventions of little masks and other things: this was made for her.

The Duke came into this wardrobe every little while, and took the greatest pleasure in seeing the work go on, and in talking with me. Beginning to get a little better of my kidneys, I had some clay brought to me, and while the Duke was staying there passing the time, I made his portrait, making a head a good deal bigger than life. His Excellency took the greatest pleasure in this work and conceived such affection for me that he told me it would be the greatest pleasure to him if I would settle down to work in the Palace, looking for rooms in the said palace large enough, which I should have fitted up with the furnaces and with everything I needed; because he took the greatest pleasure in such things. To this I told His Excellency that it was not possible, because I should not have finished my works in a hundred years.

Chapter 59

The Duchess did me favours beyond reckoning, and would have liked me to attend to working for her, and not to care either about the Perseus or about anything else. I, who saw myself in these empty favours, knew for certain that my perverse and biting fortune could not hold off from doing me some new murder; because at every hour there came before me the great harm I had done in trying to do so great a good: I mean as to my affairs in France. The King could not swallow that great unhappiness he had at my leaving, and would indeed have liked me to come back, but with his own honour expressly saved: it seemed to me I had many great rights on my side, and I would not humble myself; because I thought that if I had humbled myself to write submissively, those men in the French way would have said that I had been a sinner and that certain foul charges, which had been wrongly laid on me, were true. For this I stood on my dignity, and, as a man who is in the right, wrote stiffly, which was the greatest pleasure those two traitors I had brought up could have: because in writing to them I boasted of the great caresses which had been made me in my own country by a Lord and a Lady, absolute masters of the city of Florence, my own country. As soon as they had one of these letters, they went to the King and pressed His Majesty to give them my castle, in the same way as he had given it to me.

The King, who was a good and admirable person, would never consent to the rash demands of these great little thieves, because he had begun to see what they were maliciously aiming at: and to give them a little hope and to give me occasion to come back at once, he had me written to somewhat angrily by a treasurer of his, who was called Messer Giuliano Buonaccorsi, a Florentine citizen. The letter contained this: that if I wanted to keep up that name of an honest man which I had carried there, since I had gone away with no cause at all, I was truly bound to render an account of everything I had handled and done for His Majesty.

When I had this letter, it gave me such pleasure that if I could have asked with my tongue, I would not have asked either more or less. Setting myself to write, I filled nine sheets of ordinary paper; and in them I narrated in detail all the works I had made and all the accidents I had had over them, and the whole quantity of money that had been spent on the said works, all of which had been paid out by the hands of two notaries and of a treasurer of his, and signed by all those very men who had had it, some of whom had given their goods and the others their labours; and that of this money I had not put a single farthing in my purse, and that for my finished works I had had nothing in the world; only I had brought with me to Italy certain favours and most royal promises, truly worthy of His Majesty. And although I could not boast of having got anything else out of my works except certain salaries appointed me by His Majesty for my keep, and of those too I was still owed more than seven hundred gold scudi, which I left there on purpose, so that they might be sent me for my good return; "so, knowing that certain malicious people out of their own envy have done me some ill service, the truth must always be uppermost: I glory in His Most Christian Majesty, and greed does not move me. Although I know that I have performed for His Majesty much more than I offered to do: and although the promised recompense has not come to me, I care for nothing else in the world, except to remain, in His Majesty's opinion, an honest and clean man, such as I always was. And if any doubt of this were in Your Majesty, at the least sign I will come flying to give account of myself, with my own life: but seeing so little account made of me, I have not wanted to come back and offer myself, knowing that I shall always have bread to spare wherever I go: and when I am called, I shall always answer." There were in the said letter many other particulars worthy of that marvellous King and of the saving of my honour. This letter, before I sent it, I took to my Duke, who was very pleased to see it; then I sent it at once to France, directed to the Cardinal of Ferrara.

Chapter 60

At this time Bernardone Baldini, His Excellency's broker in jewels, had brought from Venice a great diamond, of more than thirty-five carats in weight: Antonio di Vittorio Landi too had an interest in getting the Duke to buy it. This diamond had once been a point stone, but because it did not come out with that shining clearness which is to be desired in such a jewel, the owners of the said diamond had had this said point sliced off, which truly made it good neither for a table stone nor for a point stone. Our Duke, who took great pleasure in jewels, but did not understand them, gave this great rascal Bernardaccio sure hopes of wanting to buy this said diamond. And because this Bernardo was trying to have the honour of it to himself alone, of this cheat he meant to work on the Duke of Florence, he never told anything to his partner, the said Antonio Landi.

This said Antonio had been a great friend of mine ever since boyhood, and because he saw that I was so familiar with my Duke, one day among others he called me aside — it was near midday, and it was at the corner of the Mercato Nuovo — and said this to me: "Benvenuto, I am certain that the Duke will show you a diamond which he shows a wish to buy: you will see a great diamond. Help the sale on; and I tell you that I can let it go for seventeen thousand scudi: I am certain the Duke will want your advice; if you see him well inclined to wanting it, something will be done to enable him to take it." This Antonio showed that he had great confidence in being able to make a bargain of this jewel. I promised him that, if it were shown me and my opinion then asked, I would say everything I understood, without damaging the jewel.

As I have said above, the Duke came every day into that goldsmith's room for several hours; and more than a week after the day Antonio Landi had spoken to me, the Duke one day after dinner showed me this said diamond, which I recognized by the tokens Antonio Landi had told me of, both of the form and of the weight. And because this said diamond was of a water, as I said above, rather cloudy, and for that reason they had had that point sliced off, when I saw it to be of that kind I would certainly have advised against making such an outlay; so, when he showed it me, I asked His Excellency what he wanted me to say, because it was one thing for jewellers to price a jewel after a lord had bought it, and another to put a price on it so that he might buy it. Then His Excellency told me that he had bought it and that I should only say what I thought.

I did not want to fail to point out to him modestly the little I understood of that jewel. He told me to consider the beauty of those great facets it had. Then I said that this was not that great beauty His Excellency imagined and that it was a point stone with its point sliced off. At these words my lord, who saw that I was telling the truth, made a bad grimace and told me to attend to valuing the jewel and to judge what I thought it was worth. I, thinking that, Antonio Landi having offered it me for seventeen thousand scudi, I believed the Duke had had it for fifteen thousand at most, and because of this I, seeing that he took it badly that I told him the truth, thought to keep him in his false opinion, and handing him the diamond, I said: "Eighteen thousand scudi you have spent." At these words the Duke made an outcry, making an O bigger than the mouth of a well, and said: "Now I believe you know nothing about it." I said to him: "Certainly, my lord, you believe wrong: attend to keeping your jewel in credit and I will attend to understanding these things. Tell me at least what you have spent on it, so that I may learn to understand them according to the ways of Your Excellency." The Duke got up with a slightly scornful sneer, and said: "Twenty-five thousand scudi and more, Benvenuto, it costs me;" and went away.

At these words there were present Gianpagolo and Domenico Poggini, goldsmiths; and Bachiacca the embroiderer, who worked in a room next to ours, ran up too at that noise; where I said: "I would never have advised him to buy it; but if he had a mind for it all the same, Antonio Landi eight days ago offered it me for seventeen thousand scudi; I believe I could have got it for fifteen or less. But the Duke wants to keep his jewel in credit; for since Antonio Landi offered it to me for such a price, the devil that Bernardone should have played the Duke so shameful a trick!" And never believing that such a thing was true, as it was, we passed off that simplicity of the Duke's with a laugh.

Chapter 61

Having by now brought the figure of the great Medusa to that point, as I said, I had made its skeleton of iron: then having made it in clay, like an anatomy, and lean by half a finger, I baked it very well; then I put the wax over it and finished it in the way I wanted it to be. The Duke, who had come to see it several times, was so anxious lest it should not come out in bronze for me, that he would have liked me to call in some master to cast it for me. And because His Excellency spoke continually and with the greatest favour of my clever talk, his majordomo, who was continually looking for some snare to make me break my neck, and because he had the authority to command the constables and all the offices of the poor unlucky city of Florence — that a man of Prato, an enemy of ours, the son of a cooper, most ignorant, for having been a rotten schoolmaster to Cosimo de' Medici before he was duke, should have come into such great authority, as I have said — being as watchful as he could to do me harm, and seeing that in no way could he get a hook into me, he thought of a way of doing something.

And going to find the mother of that little assistant of mine, whose name was Cencio, and hers La Gambetta, they arranged, that rascally schoolmaster and that rogue of a whore, to give me a fright, so that by it I should have gone off with God. La Gambetta, following her own trade, came out on the orders of that mad rascal of a schoolmaster majordomo: and because they had also put up the constable, who was a certain Bolognese, whom the Duke afterwards drove out for doing things of this kind; on a Saturday evening, at three hours of the night, the said Gambetta came to find me with her son, and told me that she had kept him shut up several days for my safety. To whom I answered that on my account she should not keep him shut up: and laughing at her whorish trade, I turned to the son in her presence and said to him: "You know, Cencio, whether I have sinned with you;" and he, weeping, said no. Then the mother, shaking her head, said to her son: "Ah, you little rascal, do you think I do not know how it is done?" Then she turned to me, telling me to keep him hidden in the house, because the constable was looking for him, and would take him in any case outside my house; but that in my house they would not touch him. To this I told her that in my house I had my widowed sister with six holy little daughters, and that I did not want anybody in my house. Then she said that the majordomo had given the orders to the constable and that I would be arrested in any case; but since I would not take her son into the house, if I gave her a hundred scudi I need have no further fear of anything, because the majordomo being such a very great friend of hers, I might be sure that she would have him do everything she pleased, provided I gave her the hundred scudi.

I had come into such a fury that I said to her: "Get out of my sight, you shameful whore, for if it were not for the honour of the world and for the innocence of that unhappy son you have there, I would already have cut your throat with this little dagger, which I have laid my hand on two or three times." And with these words, with many rough shoves, I pushed her and her son out of the house.
