Book Two, Chapters 62 to 68

Chapter 62

Then, having considered the villainy and the power of that bad schoolmaster, I judged that my best course was to give a little room to that devilment, and early in the morning, having made over to my sister jewels and things worth close on two thousand scudi, I got on horseback and went off towards Venice, and took with me that Bernardino of the Mugello. And when I got to Ferrara, I wrote to His Excellency the Duke that although I had gone without being sent, I would come back without being called.

Then, having got to Venice, considering in how many different ways my cruel fortune tormented me, nevertheless finding myself sound and strong, I made up my mind to skirmish with her as I usually do. And while I was going about thinking over my affairs like this, passing my time in that beautiful and very rich city, having paid my respects to that marvellous painter Titian and to Jacopo Sansovino, an able sculptor and architect of ours from Florence, very well kept by the Signory of Venice, and because we had known each other in our youth in Rome and in Florence as a Florentine of ours, these two men of talent made a great deal of me. The next day I met Messer Lorenzo de' Medici, who at once took me by the hand with the greatest welcome that can be seen in the world, because we had known each other in Florence when I was making the coins for Duke Alessandro, and afterwards in Paris, when I was in the King's service. He was staying in the house of Messer Giuliano Buonaccorsi, and having nowhere else to go and pass the time without the greatest danger to himself, he stayed most of the time in my house, watching me work at those great works.

And as I say, because of this old acquaintance, he took me by the hand and led me to his house, where there was the Prior of the Strozzi, brother of Signor Piero, and rejoicing, they asked me how long I meant to stay in Venice, believing that I meant to go back to France. To which lords I said that I had left Florence for such an occasion as I have described above, and that within two or three days I meant to go back to Florence to serve my great Duke. When I said these words, the Prior and Messer Lorenzo turned on me with such sternness that I was greatly afraid, and they said to me: "You would do better to go back to France, where you are rich and known; for if you go back to Florence, you will lose everything you had gained in France, and out of Florence you will get nothing but unhappiness." I did not answer their words, and having left the next day as secretly as I could, I went back towards Florence.

Meanwhile the devilments had ripened, because I had written to my great Duke all about the occasion which had carried me off to Venice. And with his usual prudence and severity, I visited him without any ceremony; having stayed a while with the said severity, he then turned to me pleasantly and asked me where I had been. To whom I answered that my heart had never moved a finger's breadth away from His most illustrious Excellency, though for certain just occasions it had been necessary for me to take my body a little way off wandering. Then, becoming more pleasant, he began to ask me about Venice and so we talked a while; then at last he told me to attend to working and to finish his Perseus for him. So I went home cheerful and happy, and cheered my family, that is my sister with her six daughters, and having taken up my works again, I carried them forward with as much diligence as I could.

Chapter 63

And the first work I cast in bronze was that great head, the portrait of His Excellency, which I had made in clay in the goldsmith's room while I had trouble in my back. This was a work that pleased, and I made it for no other reason than to make trial of the clays for casting bronze. And although I saw that that admirable Donatello had made his works in bronze, which he had cast with the clay of Florence, it seemed to me that he had brought them off with the greatest difficulty; and thinking that this came from a defect in the clay, before I set about casting my Perseus, I chose to take these first pains; by which I found that the clay was good, although it had not been well understood by that admirable Donatello, because I saw his works brought off with the greatest difficulty. So, as I say above, by the strength of art I compounded the clay, which served me very well; and, as I say, with it I cast the said head; but because I had not yet made the furnace, I made use of the furnace of Master Zanobi di Pagno the bellfounder.

And seeing that the head had come out clean, I at once set about making a little furnace in the workshop the Duke had made me, by my own order and design, in the very house he had given me; and having made the furnace at once, with all the diligence I could, I got ready to cast the statue of the Medusa, which is that twisted woman who is under the feet of the Perseus. And this cast being a most difficult thing, I did not want to fail in all those cares I had learned, so that no error should be made; and so the first cast I made in that little furnace of mine came out well in the highest degree, and it was so clean that it did not seem right to my friends that I should have to clean it up at all; a thing which certain Germans and Frenchmen have found, who talk and boast of very fine secrets for casting bronzes without cleaning up; a thing truly for madmen; because bronze, after it is cast, has to be closed up with hammers and with chisels, as the most marvellous ancients did, and as the moderns have done too, I mean those moderns who have known how to work in bronze.

This cast pleased His most illustrious Excellency greatly, and he came several times as far as my house to see it, giving me great courage to do well. But that raging envy of Bandinello's was able to do so much, with so much pressing at the ears of His most illustrious Excellency, that he made him think that even if I cast some of these statues, I should never put them together, because it was a new art with me; and that His Excellency ought to look out well not to throw away his money. These words were able to do so much in those glorious ears that some of my expenses for workmen were cut down; on account of which I was forced to complain boldly to His Excellency: and one morning, waiting for him in the Via de' Servi, I said to him: "My lord, I am not helped in my needs, so that I suspect Your Excellency has no confidence in me; therefore I tell you again that I am confident I can bring off this work three times better than the model was, just as I promised you."

Chapter 64

Having said these words to His Excellency, and seeing that they bore no fruit at all, because I got no answer out of them, at once my anger grew, together with an unbearable passion, and I began to speak to the Duke again and said to him: "My lord, this city has truly always been the school of the greatest talents; but once a man is known, having learned something, if he wishes to increase the glory of his city and of his glorious Prince, it is well for him to go and work elsewhere. And that this is true, my lord, I know that Your Excellency has known who Donatello was, and who the great Leonardo da Vinci was, and who the admirable Michelangelo Buonarroti is now. These men increase the glory of Your Excellency by their talents; on account of which I too hope to do my part; so, my lord, let me go. But let Your Excellency take good care not to let Bandinello go, rather give him always more than he asks you for; because if he goes abroad, his ignorance is so presumptuous that he is fit to bring disgrace on this most noble School. Now give me leave, my lord, and I ask nothing else for my labours up to now than the favour of Your most illustrious Excellency."

Seeing me so resolute, His Excellency turned to me with a little scorn, saying: "Benvenuto, if you have a mind to finish the work, nothing shall be wanting." Then I thanked him, and said that my only desire was to show those envious men that I was confident I could carry out the work I had promised. So having got away from His Excellency, I was given a little help; on account of which I was forced to put my hand in my own purse, wanting my work to go a little more than at a walk.

And because in the evening I always went to sit up in His Excellency's wardrobe, where there were Domenico and Gianpagolo Poggini, his brother, who were working on a gold vase, which has been spoken of before, for the Duchess, and a gold girdle; His Excellency had also had me make a little model of a pendant, in which that great diamond was to be set which Bernardone and Antonio Landi had made him buy. And although I dodged wanting to do such a thing, the Duke with so many fine pleasantries made me work on it every evening until four hours of the night. He also pressed me in the most pleasant ways to work on it by day as well; to which I would never consent; and for this I believed for certain that His Excellency was angry with me. And one evening among others, having arrived somewhat later than usual, the Duke said to me: "You are the ill-come." At which words I said: "My lord, that is not my name, because my name is Benvenuto, the welcome; and because I think Your Excellency is joking with me, I will go no further into it." At this the Duke said that he spoke in cursed earnest and was not joking, and that I should take good care what I was doing, because it had come to his ears that, taking advantage of his favour, I was having now this and now that got for me.

At these words I begged His most illustrious Excellency to be so good as to name me one single man from whom I had ever got anything in the world. At once he turned on me in anger and said: "Go and give back what you have of Bernardone's: there is one for you." At this I said: "My lord, I thank you, and I beg you to be so good as to hear me for four words: it is true that he lent me a pair of old scales and two anvils and three little hammers, which pieces of gear it is fifteen days ago today that I told his Giorgio of Cortona to send for them; on which the said Giorgio came for them himself; and if Your most illustrious Excellency ever finds that, from the day I was born until now, I have ever had anything of anybody's in that fashion, whether in Rome or in France, let those who have reported those things to you, or others, be asked; and if you find it true, punish me by the measure of the coals."

Seeing me in the greatest passion, the Duke, as a most discerning and affectionate Lord, turned to me and said: "It is not said to those who do not commit the faults; so, if it is as you say, I shall always be glad to see you, as I have been in the past." At this I said: "Let Your Excellency know that Bernardone's villainies force me to ask you and to beg you to tell me what you spent on the great diamond, the point stone with its point sliced off: because I hope to show you why this bad wretch of a man is trying to put me in your disgrace." Then His Excellency said to me: "The diamond cost me 25 thousand ducats: why do you ask me?" "Because, my lord, on such a day, at such an hour, at the corner of the Mercato Nuovo, Antonio di Vittorio Landi told me to try to make a bargain with Your most illustrious Excellency, and at the first asking he asked sixteen thousand ducats for it: now Your Excellency knows what you bought it for. And that this is true, ask Ser Domenico Poggini and Gianpagolo his brother, who are here; for I told them at once, and afterwards I never spoke of it again, because Your Excellency said that I knew nothing about it; and I thought you wanted to keep it in credit. Know, my lord, that I do understand these things; and as to the other matter, I make profession of being as honest a man as any born into the world, be he who he may. I shall not try to rob you of eight or ten thousand ducats at a time; rather I shall try to earn them by my labours: and I settled to serve Your Excellency as sculptor, goldsmith and master of the mint; and as for reporting other men's affairs to you, never. And what I am telling you now, I tell you in my own defence, and I do not want a quarter of it: and I tell you of it in the presence of so many honest men who are here, so that Your most illustrious Excellency may not believe everything Bernardone says."

At once the Duke rose in anger and sent for Bernardone, who was forced to run as far as Venice, he and Antonio Landi; which Antonio told me that he had not meant to speak of that diamond. They went and came back from Venice, and I found the Duke, and said: "My lord, what I told you is true, and what Bernardone told you about the gear was not true; and you would do well to make trial of it, and I will set off for the constable's." At these words the Duke turned to me, saying: "Benvenuto, attend to being an honest man, as you have done in the past, and never fear anything." The thing went off in smoke and I never heard it spoken of again.

I attended to finishing his jewel; and having taken it finished to the Duchess one day, she herself told me that she valued my workmanship as much as the diamond, which that wretch Bernardone had made her buy, and she wanted me to fasten it on her breast with my own hand, and she gave me a thickish pin into my hand, and with that I fastened it on her, and I went away with much good favour from her. Afterwards I heard that they had had it reset by a German or some other foreigner, if the truth be told, because the said Bernardone said that the said diamond would show better set with less work about it.

Chapter 65

Domenico and Gianpagolo Poggini, goldsmiths and brothers, were working, as I think I have said, in the wardrobe of His most illustrious Excellency, from my designs, on certain little gold vases chased with scenes of little figures in low relief and other things of much importance. And because I said several times to the Duke: "My lord, if Your most illustrious Excellency would pay me several workmen, I would make you the coins for your mint and the medals with the head of Your most illustrious Excellency, which I would make in competition with the ancients and would hope to surpass them: because since the time I made the medals of Pope Clement I have learned so much that I would do much better than those: and so I would do better than the coins I made for Duke Alessandro, which are still held to be beautiful; and so I would make you great vases of gold and silver, as I made so many for that admirable King Francis of France, only because of the great conveniences he gave me, and no time was ever lost over the great colossi or over the other statues." To these words of mine the Duke said: "Do it, and I shall see;" and he never gave me either conveniences or any help.

One day His most illustrious Excellency had several pounds of silver given me and said: "This is silver from my mines, make me a fine vase." And because I did not want to leave my Perseus behind and yet had a great wish to serve him, I gave it to be made, with my designs and little wax models, to a certain rascal called Piero di Martino, a goldsmith: who began it badly and moreover did not work at it, so that I lost more time over it than if I had made the whole of it with my own hand. So having tormented me for several months, and seeing that the said Piero was not working at it, nor having it worked at either, I had it given back to me, and I had great difficulty in getting back, along with the body of the vase badly begun, as I said, the rest of the silver I had given him. The Duke, who heard something of these disputes, sent for the vase and for the models and never told me either why or how; it is enough that with certain designs of mine he had them made by various people both in Venice and elsewhere, and he was very badly served.

The Duchess often told me to work for her at goldsmith's work: to whom I said several times that the world knew very well, and all Italy, that I was a good goldsmith; but that Italy had never seen works of sculpture from my hand: "and in the profession certain raging sculptors, laughing at me, call me the new sculptor; to whom I hope to show that I am an old sculptor, if God will give me so much grace that I may show my Perseus finished in that honoured square of His most illustrious Excellency."

And having withdrawn home, I attended to working day and night, and did not let myself be seen at the Palace. And thinking still to keep myself in the good graces of the Duchess, I had made for her certain little vases, as big as a two-farthing pot, in silver, with fine little masks in a very rare fashion, in the antique style; and having taken her the said little vases, she gave me the most gracious welcome that can be imagined in the world and paid me for my silver and gold that I had put into them. And I still commended myself to Her most illustrious Excellency, begging her to tell the Duke that I had little help for so great a work, and that Her most illustrious Excellency ought to tell the Duke not to give so much credit to that evil tongue of Bandinello's, with which he hindered me from finishing my Perseus. At these tearful words of mine the Duchess shrugged her shoulders and still said to me: "Certainly the Duke ought surely to know that this Bandinello of his is worth nothing."

Chapter 66

I stayed at home, and rarely presented myself at the Palace, and worked with great diligence to finish my work; and I had to pay the workmen out of my own pocket; because, the Duke having had certain workmen paid me by Lattanzio Gorini for about eighteen months, and having grown tired of it, he had the orders taken away from me, on account of which I asked the said Lattanzio why he did not pay me. He answered me, waving certain little spidery hands of his, with a little gnat's voice: "Why do you not finish this work of yours? People believe you will never finish it." I answered him at once in anger and said: "May a plague come on you and on all those who do not believe that I shall finish it."

And so in despair I went back home to my ill-fortuned Perseus, and not without tears, because there came back into my memory the fine state I had left in Paris in the service of that marvellous King Francis, with whom I had everything to spare, and here everything was wanting to me. And several times I was ready to throw myself into despair: and once among others I got on a good little horse of mine, and put a hundred scudi at my side, and went off to Fiesole to see a natural son of mine, whom I kept at nurse with a woman who was godmother to him, the wife of a workman of mine. And when I got to my little son I found him in good health, and I, so discontented, kissed him; and when I wanted to leave, he would not let me, because he held me tight with his little hands and with a fury of weeping and screaming, which at that age of about two years was a more than marvellous thing.

And because I had made up my mind that, if I found Bandinello, who used to go every evening to that farm of his above San Domenico, in my desperation I meant to throw him to the ground, so I tore myself away from my baby, leaving him with that broken weeping. And coming on towards Florence, when I got to the square of San Domenico, just then Bandinello was coming into the square from the other side. Having at once made up my mind to do that bloody work, I came up to him, and raising my eyes I saw him without weapons, on a wretched mule like an ass, and he had with him a little boy of about ten; and as soon as he saw me, he turned the colour of death, and trembled from his head to his feet. I, seeing how base the work would be, said: "Have no fear, vile coward, for I do not want to make you worthy of my blows." He looked at me submissively and said nothing. Then I took my courage back, and thanked God, who by His true power had not chosen that I should commit such a disorder.

So, freed from that devilish fury, my spirit rose and I said to myself: "If God gives me the grace to finish my work, I hope with it to kill all my rascally enemies; whereby I shall take a much greater and more glorious revenge than if I had vented myself on one alone;" and with this good resolution I went back home.

At the end of three days I heard that that woman, my child's godmother, had smothered my only little son; which gave me such grief as I never felt greater. Yet I knelt on the ground, and not without tears, as I usually do, thanked my God, saying: "My Lord, You gave him to me, and now You have taken him from me, and for all of it I thank You with all my heart." And although the great grief had all but bewildered me, still, as I usually do, making a virtue of necessity, I went about settling myself as best I could.

Chapter 67

At this time a young man had left Bandinello, whose name was Francesco, son of Matteo the smith. This said young man had me asked whether I would give him work; and I was content, and set him to cleaning up the figure of the Medusa, which was already cast. This young man, a fortnight later, told me that he had spoken with his master, that is Bandinello, and that he said to me on his behalf that, if I wanted to make a figure in marble, he sent to offer me the present of a fine piece of marble. At once I said: "Tell him that I accept it; and the marble might turn out ill for him, because he goes on provoking me, and does not remember the great danger he was in with me in the square of San Domenico: now tell him that I want it in any case. I never speak of him and this beast is always troubling me: and I believe that you have come to work with me sent by him, only to spy on my affairs. Oh go, and tell him that I shall want the marble in spite of him; and go back to him."

Chapter 68

Having gone many days without letting myself be seen at the Palace, I went there one morning, when that whim took me, and the Duke had almost finished dining, and, from what I heard, His Excellency had that morning been talking and speaking very well of me, and among other things he had praised me greatly for setting jewels; and because of this, as soon as the Duchess saw me, she had me called by Messer Sforza; and when I came near Her most illustrious Excellency, she begged me to set a little point diamond in a ring for her, and told me that she meant to wear it always on her finger; and she gave me the measure and the diamond, which was worth about a hundred scudi, and begged me to do it quickly.

At once the Duke began to talk with the Duchess and said to her: "Certainly Benvenuto was without an equal in that art; but now that he has left it off, I believe that making a little ring as you would want it would be too great a labour for him: so I beg you not to tire him with this small thing, which for him would be a great one, since he is out of practice." At these words I thanked the Duke, and then begged him to let me do this little service for the lady Duchess: and having set my hands to it at once, in a few days I had it finished. The ring was for the little finger of the hand: so I made four round boys with four little masks, which things made up the said little ring: and I also fitted in some enamelled fruits and little bindings; so that the jewel and the ring showed themselves very well together. And I took it at once to the Duchess: who with kindly words told me that I had made her a very beautiful piece of work, and that she would remember me. The said little ring she sent as a present to King Philip, and afterwards she was always ordering something from me, but so affectionately that I always did my best to serve her, although I saw little money; and God knows whether I had great need of it, because I wanted to finish my Perseus, and I had found certain young men who helped me, whom I paid out of my own pocket; and I began again to let myself be seen more often than I had done in the past.
