Book Two, Chapters 69 to 75

Chapter 69

One holiday among others I went to the Palace after dinner, and having got to the Clock Hall, I saw the door of the wardrobe open, and having come a little nearer, the Duke called me, and with a pleasant welcome said to me: "You are welcome: look at that case, which Signor Stefano da Palestrina has sent me as a present; open it and let us see what it is." Opening it at once, I said to the Duke: "My lord, this is a figure of Greek marble and it is a marvellous thing: I say that for a boy figure I do not remember ever having seen among the antiques so beautiful a work, nor of so beautiful a manner; so that I offer Your most illustrious Excellency to restore it for you, both the head and the arms and the feet. And I will make it an eagle, so that it may be christened for a Ganymede. And although it is not fitting for me to patch up statues, because it is an art for certain cobblers, who do it very badly; still the excellence of this great master calls me to serve him." It pleased the Duke greatly that the statue should be so beautiful, and he asked me about a great many things, saying to me: "Tell me, my Benvenuto, exactly in what such great excellence of this master consists, which gives you such wonder." Then I showed His most illustrious Excellency in the best way I knew, so as to make him understand such beauty and such excellence of intelligence, and such a rare manner; on which things I had discoursed a great deal, and I did it all the more willingly, knowing that His Excellency took the greatest pleasure in it.

Chapter 70

While I was so pleasantly entertaining the Duke, it happened that a page came out of the wardrobe and that, as the said page came out, Bandinello came in. When the Duke saw him, he was half put out, and with a stern face said to him: "What are you doing?" The said Bandinello, without answering anything, at once cast his eyes on that case where the said statue was uncovered, and with an ugly sneer of his, shaking his head, he said, turning towards the Duke: "My lord, these are some of those things I have so often spoken of to Your most illustrious Excellency. Know that these ancients understood nothing about anatomy, and for this reason their works are all full of errors." I stayed quiet and paid no attention to anything he said, but rather turned my back on him. As soon as this beast had finished his disagreeable chatter, the Duke said: "Oh Benvenuto, this is quite the contrary of what with so many fine reasons you have just now shown me so well: so defend it a little."

At these ducal words, put to me with so much pleasantness, I answered at once and said: "My lord, Your most illustrious Excellency must know that Baccio Bandinelli is composed entirely of ill, and so he has always been; so that whatever he looks at, at once to his disagreeable eyes, although things are in the highest degree wholly good, at once they turn into the worst of ill. But I, who am drawn only to the good, see the truth more piously; so that what I have said of this most beautiful statue to Your most illustrious Excellency is all of it the pure truth, and what Bandinello has said of it is all of it that ill alone, of which he is composed." The Duke stood listening to me with much pleasure, and while I was saying these things, Bandinello twisted about and made the ugliest faces with his face, which was very ugly, that can be imagined in the world.

All at once the Duke moved off, setting out through certain ground-floor rooms, and the said Bandinello followed him. The chamberlains took me by the cloak and started me off after them and so we followed the Duke, until His most illustrious Excellency, having reached a room, sat down, and Bandinello and I stood one on the right and one on the left of His most illustrious Excellency. I stayed quiet, and those who were around, several servants of His Excellency, all stared at Bandinello, sneering a little at each other over those words I had said to him in that room upstairs.

So the said Bandinello began to speak and said: "My lord, when I uncovered my Hercules and Cacus, certainly I believe that more than a hundred wretched sonnets were made about me, which said the worst that can be imagined in the world by that vile mob." Then I answered and said: "My lord, when our Michelangelo Buonarroti uncovered his Sacristy, where so many beautiful figures were seen, this admirable and skilled School, the friend of truth and of good, made more than a hundred sonnets about it, each vying with the other to see who could say best of it: and just as Bandinello's work deserved all the ill he says was said of it, so Buonarroti's deserved all the good that was said of it."

At these words of mine Bandinello came into such a rage that he burst, and turned on me and said: "And what fault would you know how to find with it?" "I will tell you if you have patience enough to be able to listen to me." He said: "Now say on." The Duke and the others who were there all stood attentive. I began and first said: "Know that it grieves me to have to tell you the faults of that work of yours, but it is not I who will tell you such things, rather I will tell you everything that this most skilled School says." And because this wretched man now said something disagreeable and now made gestures with his hands and with his feet, he made me come into such anger that I began in a far more disagreeable fashion than, if he had behaved otherwise, I would have done:

"This skilled School says that if Hercules' hair were shorn off, there would not be skull enough left to hold his brains in; and that as for that face of his, it cannot be told whether it is a man's or a lion-ox's; and that it is not attending to what it is doing, and that it is badly stuck on the neck, with so little art and with so little grace that worse was never seen; and that those wretched shoulders of his are like the two saddlebows of an ass's packsaddle; and that his breasts and the rest of those muscles are not taken from a man, but are taken from a great sack full of melons, set upright and propped against a wall. So the back seems taken from a sack full of long gourds; the two legs, and it cannot be told in what way they are stuck onto that ugly trunk; because it cannot be told on which leg he is resting or on which he is making some show of strength; nor is it seen either that he rests on both, as those masters who know something have sometimes been used to do; it is plainly seen that it falls forward more than a third of a braccio: which alone is the greatest and the most unbearable error made by those wretched twopenny masters of the common sort. Of the arms they say that they are both of them stretched down without any grace, nor is any art seen in them, as if you had never seen living naked bodies, and that Hercules' right leg and Cacus's share the calves of their legs between them; so that if one of the two were to move away from the other, not only one of them, but both of them would be left without calves on the side where they touch; and they say that one of Hercules' feet is buried, and that the other seems to have a fire under it."

Chapter 71

This man could not stand still enough to have patience for me to tell the great faults of the Cacus as well; one reason being that I was telling the truth, the other that I was making it plainly known to the Duke and to the others who were present with us, who made the greatest signs and gestures of wonder and of knowing then that I was telling the very truth. All at once this wretched man said: "Ah, wicked tongue, and where do you leave my draughtsmanship?" I said that whoever drew well could never work badly — "so I shall believe that your draughtsmanship is like your works." Now, seeing those ducal faces and the others, who were tearing him to pieces with their looks and with their gestures, he let himself be too much overcome by his insolence, and turning on me with that most ugly face of his, all at once he said to me: "Oh, hold your tongue, you filthy sodomite."

The Duke at that word knitted his brows sharply at him, and the others closed their mouths and frowned at him. I, who felt myself so wickedly insulted, driven by fury, and all at once, ran for a remedy and said: "You madman, you go outside all bounds: but would to God that I knew how to practise so noble an art, because we read that Jove practised it with Ganymede in paradise, and here on earth the greatest emperors and the greatest kings of the world practise it. I am a low and humble little man, who neither could nor would know how to meddle with so marvellous a thing." At this nobody could contain himself, and the Duke and the others raised the greatest roar of laughter that can be imagined in the world.

And although I showed myself so pleasant, know, kind readers, that inside my heart was bursting, considering that a man, the filthiest villain that was ever born into the world, should be so bold, in the presence of so great a prince, as to say to me so great and so gross an insult; but know that he insulted the Duke and not me; because, if I had been out of so great a presence, I would have struck him down dead.

Seeing, this filthy clumsy rascal, that the laughter of those lords did not stop, he began, to turn them aside from so much mockery of him, to start on a new subject, saying: "This Benvenuto goes about boasting that I have promised him a marble." At these words I said at once: "What! did you not send to tell me by Francesco di Matteo the smith, your workman, that if I wanted to work in marble, you wanted to give me a marble? And I have accepted it, and I want it." Then he said: "Oh, reckon that you will never have it." At once I, who was full of rage over the unjust insults said to me before, having lost my reason and being blinded by the presence of the Duke, said in great fury: "I tell you expressly that if you do not send me the marble as far as my house, look for another world, because in this one I will let the wind out of you in any case." At once, realizing that I was in the presence of so great a Duke, I turned humbly to His Excellency and said: "My lord, one madman makes a hundred; the madnesses of this man had made me lose sight of the glory of Your most illustrious Excellency and of myself; so forgive me."

Then the Duke said to Bandinello: "Is it true that you promised him the marble?" The said Bandinello said that it was true. The Duke said to me: "Go to the Cathedral Works, and take one to your liking." I said that he had promised to send it to me at my house. The words were terrible; and I would not have it in any other way. The next morning a marble was brought me at home; and I asked who was sending it me: and they said that Bandinello was sending it me, and that this was the marble he had promised me.

Chapter 72

At once I had it carried into the workshop and began to chisel it; and while I worked, I was making the model: and so great was the wish I had to work in marble that I could not wait to settle on making a model with that judgment such an art requires. And because I heard it all creaking, I repented several times of ever having begun to work at it: still I got out of it what I could, which is the Apollo and Hyacinth, which can still be seen unfinished in my workshop. And while I was working at it, the Duke came to my house, and often said to me: "Leave the bronze alone a little and work a little in marble, so that I may see you." At once I took up the marble tools, and worked away with confidence. The Duke asked me about the model I had made for the said marble; to whom I said: "My lord, this marble is all cracked, but in spite of it I shall get something out of it; so I could not settle on a model, but I shall go on doing the best I can."

With great speed the Duke had a piece of Greek marble brought me from Rome, so that I might restore his antique Ganymede, which was the cause of the said quarrel with Bandinello. When the Greek marble came, I considered that it was a pity to make pieces of it to make the head and the arms and the other things for the Ganymede; and I provided myself with other marble, and for that piece of Greek marble I made a little model in wax, to which I gave the name Narcissus. And because this marble had two holes which went in more than a quarter of a braccio deep and were two good fingers wide, for this reason I made the attitude that is seen, to defend myself from those holes, so that I had got them out of my figure. But those many tens of years in which the rain had fallen on it, because those holes were always left full of water, the water had penetrated so far that the said marble was weakened; and as it were rotten in that part of the upper hole; and it showed itself afterwards, when there came that great flood of the Arno, which rose in my workshop more than a braccio and a half. And because the said Narcissus was set on a square of wood, the said water made it turn over, on account of which it broke across the breast, and I fastened it together again; and so that that crack of the joining should not be seen, I made it that garland of flowers which is seen that it has on its breast; and I went on finishing it at certain hours before daybreak, or truly on holidays, only so as not to lose time from my work of the Perseus.

And because one morning among others I was fitting up certain little chisels of mine to work at it, a very fine splinter of steel shot into my right eye; and it had gone so far inside the pupil that in no way could it be got out. I thought for certain that I should lose the sight of that eye. At the end of several days I called Master Raffaello de' Pilli, a surgeon, who took two live pigeons, and making me lie on my back on a table, he took the said pigeons and with a little knife pierced a small vein they have in their wings, so that the blood ran down into my eye; by which blood I at once felt myself relieved and in the space of two days the splinter of steel came out and I was left free and improved in my sight. And when the feast of Saint Lucy came, which we were within three days of, I made an eye of gold out of a French scudo, and had it presented to her by one of my six nieces, daughters of Liperata my sister, who was about ten years old, and with it I thanked God and Saint Lucy; and for a while I would not work on the said Narcissus, but carried the Perseus forward with the difficulties spoken of above, and I had made up my mind to finish it and go off with God.

Chapter 73

Having cast the Medusa, and it having come out well, with great hope I brought my Perseus, which I had in wax, to its finish, and I promised myself that it would come out for me as well in bronze as the said Medusa had done. And because, seeing it well finished in wax, it showed itself so beautiful that (the Duke seeing it in that state and it seeming beautiful to him; whether it was that somebody had given the Duke to believe that it could not come out so in bronze, or that the Duke imagined it of himself; and coming to the house more often than he used to) once among other times he said to me: "Benvenuto, this figure cannot come out for you in bronze, because the art does not promise you so much."

At these words of His Excellency I was greatly offended, saying: "My lord, I see that Your most illustrious Excellency has this very little faith in me: and this I believe comes because Your most illustrious Excellency believes too much those who say so much ill of me, or truly you do not understand these things." He hardly let me finish my words before he said: "I make profession of understanding them, and I understand them very well." I answered at once and said: "Yes, like a Lord, and not like an artist; because if Your most illustrious Excellency understood them in the way you believe you understand them, you would believe me by means of the fine bronze head I made you, so large, the portrait of Your most illustrious Excellency, which has been sent to Elba, and by means of my having restored for you the fine marble Ganymede with such extreme difficulty, in which I have endured much greater labour than if I had made the whole of it new; and again by my having cast the Medusa, which is to be seen here in Your Excellency's presence: a cast so difficult that in it I have done what no other man ever did before me, in this devilish art.

"See, my lord: I have made the furnace new, in a way different from other men's; because I, besides many other differences and skilful contrivances that are seen in it, have made two outlets in it for the bronze, because this difficult and twisted figure could not in any other way possibly have come out; and only by these understandings of mine has it come out so well, which thing none of these practised men of this art ever believed. And know, my lord, for a certainty, that all the great and most difficult works I made in France under that most marvellous King Francis, all of them came out for me very well, only because of the great courage that good King always gave me with those great allowances, and in satisfying me with as many workmen as I asked for; there were times when I made use of more than forty workmen, all of my own choosing; and for these reasons I made you such a quantity of works in so short a time. Now, my lord, believe me and help me with the help I need, because I hope to bring to an end a work that will please you; whereas, if Your most illustrious Excellency casts down my spirit and does not give me the help I need, it is impossible that either I or any man in the world should ever make anything that would be good."

Chapter 74

With great difficulty the Duke stood listening to these arguments of mine, for he kept turning now one way and now another; and I in despair, poor wretch, having remembered the fine state I had in France, was afflicting myself so. All at once the Duke said: "Now tell me, Benvenuto, how is it possible that that fine head of the Medusa, which is up there on high in the hand of the Perseus, can ever come out?" At once I said: "Now see, my lord, that if Your most illustrious Excellency had that knowledge of the art which you say you have, you would not be afraid for that fine head you speak of, that it should not come out; but you would rightly have to be afraid for this right foot, which is down here so far off."

At these words of mine the Duke, half angry, at once turned to certain lords who were with His most illustrious Excellency and said: "I believe this Benvenuto does it out of a know-all habit of contradicting everything;" and at once turning to me half in mockery, at which all those who were present did the same, he began to say: "I will have patience enough with you to listen to what reason you will be able to think up to give me, so that I may believe it." Then I said: "I will give you a reason so true that Your Excellency will be quite convinced by it;" and I began: "Know, my lord, that the nature of fire is to go upwards, and for this I promise you that that head of the Medusa will come out very well; but because the nature of fire is not to go downwards, and one has to force it down six braccia by strength of art, for this living reason I tell Your most illustrious Excellency that it is impossible that that foot should come out; but it will be easy for me to make it again."

The Duke said: "Oh why did you not think that that foot should come out in the way you say the head will come out?" I said: "It would have been necessary to make the furnace much larger, where I could have made a branch for the pouring, as thick as my leg, and with that weight of hot metal I would have forced it to go there, whereas my branch, which goes as far as the feet those six braccia I speak of, is not thicker than two fingers. Still, it was not worth the price; for it will easily be put right. But when my mould is more than half full, as I hope, from that middle upwards, the fire rising according to its nature, this head of the Perseus and that of the Medusa will come out very well: so be quite certain of it."

When I had said him these fine reasons of mine, with many other endless ones which, so as not to be too long, I do not write down, the Duke, shaking his head, went off with God.

Chapter 75

Having given myself confidence out of my own good spirit, and having driven away all those thoughts which presented themselves before me from hour to hour (which often made me weep bitterly and repent of my leaving France, for having come to Florence, my sweet native place, only to give alms to my said six nieces, and for such a good deed I saw myself shown the beginning of so much evil), for all this I certainly promised myself that, on finishing my begun work of the Perseus, all my troubles ought to be turned into the highest pleasure and glorious good.

And so, having got my vigour back, with all my strength, both of my body and of my purse, although little money was left me, I began to procure for myself several stacks of pine wood, which I got from the pine wood of the Seristori, near Montelupo; and while I was waiting for it, I clothed my Perseus with those clays which I had prepared several months before, so that they should have their proper seasoning. And when I had made its coat of clay, which is called a coat in the art, and had very well armed it and girded it about with irons with great diligence, I began with a slow fire to draw out the wax, which came out through many vents I had made, since the more of them one makes, the better the moulds fill.

And when I had finished getting the wax out, I made a sleeve round my Perseus, that is round the said mould, of bricks, weaving one over the other, and I left a great many spaces, where the fire could better exhale: then I began to put wood in it, quite gently, and I kept fire on it two days and two nights continually; so that, all the wax having been got out of it, and the said mould having afterwards been very well baked, I at once began to empty out the pit to bury my mould in, with all those fine methods that the fine art commands us. When I had finished emptying out the said pit, then I took my mould, and by strength of windlasses and of good ropes I carefully set it upright; and having hung it a braccio above the level of my furnace, having got it very well upright so that it hung exactly in the middle of its pit, very gently I let it come down right to the bottom of the furnace, and it settled with all the care that can be imagined in the world.

And when I had done this fine labour, I began to pack it round with the same earth I had taken out of it; and as I raised the earth, I put in its vents, which were little pipes of baked clay that are used for sinks and other like things. As soon as I saw that I had it very well firm, and that that way of packing it with putting those pipes properly in their places, and that those workmen of mine had well understood my method, which was very different from that of all the other masters of such a profession; being sure that I could trust them, I turned to my furnace, which I had had filled with many pigs of copper and other pieces of bronze; and having arranged them one over another in the way the art shows us, that is raised up, making a way for the flames of the fire, so that the said metal takes its heat sooner and with it melts and reduces itself to a bath, so with good spirit I said that they should set fire to the said furnace.

And putting in that pine wood, which by reason of that unctuousness of the resin the pine makes, and because my little furnace was so well made, it worked so well that I was forced to run now to one side and now to another with such labour that it was unbearable for me; and still I forced myself on. And in addition it came upon me that fire caught in the workshop, and we were afraid that the roof would fall on us; on the other side, towards the garden, the sky drove so much water and wind at me that it was cooling my furnace.

So, fighting with these perverse accidents several hours, the labour forced me so much more than my strong constitution could stand up to, so that an intermittent fever leapt on me, the greatest that can be imagined in the world, on account of which I was forced to go and throw myself into bed. And so, very discontented, being forced to go, I turned to all those who were helping me, who were about ten or more, among masters of bronze casting and labourers and countrymen and my own particular workmen of the shop; among whom was one Bernardino Mannellini of the Mugello, whom I had brought up several years; and to him I said, after commending myself to them all: "See, my dear Bernardino, observe the order I have shown you, and be as quick as you can, because the metal will soon be ready: you cannot go wrong, and these other honest men will quickly make the channels, and you can confidently with these two iron rods strike into the two plugs, and I am certain that my mould will fill very well. I feel the greatest illness that I ever felt since I came into the world, and I certainly believe that in a few hours this great illness will have killed me." So, very discontented, I left them, and went off to bed.
