Book Two, Chapters 76 to 82

Chapter 76

When I had got into bed, I ordered my maidservants to carry food and drink into the workshop for everybody; and I said to them: "I shall never be alive tomorrow morning." They still gave me courage, telling me that my great illness would pass off, and that it had come on me from too much labour. So I stayed two hours in this great struggle with the fever; and continually I felt it growing, and I kept saying: "I feel myself dying." My maidservant, who managed the whole house, whose name was Monna Fiore of Castel del Rio: this woman was the ablest that was ever born and as much the kindest, and continually she scolded me for having lost heart, and on the other hand she showed me the greatest kindnesses of service that can ever be done in the world. Still, seeing me with such an immeasurable illness and so dismayed, for all her brave heart she could not keep some quantity of tears from falling from her eyes; and yet she took care as much as she could that I should not see them.

Being in these immeasurable tribulations, I see coming into my room a certain man, who in his person showed himself twisted like a capital S; and he began to say with a certain sound of voice, mournful, afflicted, like those who give the commendation of the soul to men who are going to execution, and he said: "Oh Benvenuto! your work is spoiled, and there is no remedy for it in the world." As soon as I heard the words of that wretch, I let out a cry so immeasurable that it would have been heard from the heaven of fire; and getting out of bed I took my clothes and began to dress; and to the maidservants and my boy and everybody who came near me to help me, I gave either kicks or blows, and I lamented, saying: "Ah, traitors, envious men! This is a treachery done by design; but I swear by God that I shall find it out very well, and before I die I will leave such a proof of myself in the world that more than one man will be left wondering."

When I had finished dressing, I set off in a bad state of mind towards the workshop, where I saw all those people, whom I had left with so much confidence, all standing astonished and dismayed. I began, and said: "Now then, listen to me, and since you have either not known how or not chosen to obey me in the way I taught you, obey me now that I am with you in the presence of my work; and let nobody set himself against me, because cases of this kind need help and not advice." At these words of mine a certain Master Alessandro Lastricati answered me and said: "See, Benvenuto, you want to set about an undertaking which the art never promises, nor can it be done in any way." At these words I turned with such fury and so bent on mischief that he and all the others, all with one voice said: "Come, give your orders, for we will all help you as much as you can order us, as long as we can hold out with our lives." And these affectionate words I think they said thinking that I should soon fall down dead.

At once I went to look at the furnace, and saw the metal all curdled, which thing is called having made a cake. I told two labourers to go across the way, to the house of Il Capretta the butcher, for a stack of wood of young oaks, which had been dry more than a year, which wood Madonna Ginevra, the said Capretta's wife, had offered me; and when the first armfuls came, I began to fill the ash pit. And because oak of that kind makes the most vigorous fire of all the other kinds of wood, whereas alder or pine wood is used for melting for artillery, because it is a mild fire; oh, when that cake began to feel that terrible fire, it began to clear itself, and to flash. On the other side I pressed on with the channels, and I had sent others onto the roof to keep off the fire, which by the greater force of that fire had caught the more; and on the garden side I had had certain boards set up and other carpets and cloths, which sheltered me from the water.

Chapter 77

Then, when I had given a remedy for all these great furies, in the loudest voice I said now to this man and now to that: "Bring here, take away there;" so that, seeing the said cake beginning to liquefy, all that company obeyed me with such willingness that every one of them did the work of three. Then I had a half loaf of tin taken, which weighed about 60 pounds, and I threw it on the cake inside the furnace, which, with the other helps both of wood and of stirring now with irons and now with poles, in a short space of time became liquid. Now, seeing that I had brought a dead man back to life, against the belief of all those ignorant people, such vigour came back to me that I did not notice whether I had any fever any more or any fear of death.

All at once a noise is heard with a very great flash of fire, so that it seemed exactly as if a thunderbolt had been created there in our presence; at which unaccustomed and fearful fright everybody was dismayed, and I more than the others. When that great noise and brightness had passed, we began to look one another in the face again; and seeing that the lid of the furnace had burst and had lifted so that the bronze was spilling out, at once I had the mouths of my mould opened and at the same time had the two plugs struck.

And seeing that the metal did not run with that quickness it usually did, knowing that the cause perhaps was that the alloy had been consumed by the strength of that terrible fire, I had all my plates and bowls and dishes of tin taken, which were about two hundred, and one by one I put them in front of my channels, and part of them I had thrown into the furnace; so that, everybody seeing that my bronze had become very well liquid, and that my mould was filling, they all helped me and obeyed me spiritedly and cheerfully; and I, now here and now there, gave orders, helped, and said: "Oh God, You who by Your immense powers rose again from the dead, and gloriously ascended to heaven!" so that in a moment my mould filled; on account of which I knelt down and with all my heart thanked God for it; then I turned to a dish of salad which was there on a poor bench, and with great appetite I ate and drank together with all that company; then I went off to bed sound and cheerful, because it was two hours before day; and as if I had never had any illness in the world, so sweetly I rested.

That good maidservant of mine, without my saying anything to her, had provided me with a fat little capon; so that, when I got out of bed, which was near the dinner hour, she came to meet me cheerfully, saying: "Oh, is this the man who felt himself dying? I believe that those blows and kicks you gave us last night, when you were so furious, that with that devilish fury you seemed to have, that so immeasurable fever of yours, perhaps frightened that you might give it some too, took itself off in flight."

And so all my poor little household, freed from so much terror and from such immeasurable labours, at once sent out to buy, in place of those tin plates and bowls, as many earthenware dishes, and we all dined cheerfully, and I never remember in my life either dining with greater gladness or with a better appetite. After dinner all those who had helped me came to find me, who cheerfully rejoiced together, thanking God for everything that had happened, and saying that they had learned and seen done things which were held impossible by the other masters. I too, somewhat boastful, thinking myself a little bit clever, gloried in it; and putting my hand in my purse, I paid and satisfied them all.

That bad man, my mortal enemy, Messer Pier Francesco Riccio, the Duke's majordomo, with great diligence tried to find out how the thing had gone; so that those two men, whom I had suspected of having made that cake for me, told him that I was not a man, but rather I was an out-and-out great devil, because I had done what the art could not do; with so many other great things, which would have been too much for a devil. Since they said far more than what had happened, perhaps as an excuse for themselves, the said majordomo wrote it at once to the Duke, who was at Pisa, in still more terrible terms and fuller of greater marvels than they had told him.

Chapter 78

Having let my cast work cool for two days, I began to uncover it very gently; and I found, first of all, the head of the Medusa, which had come out very well by virtue of the vents, as I said to the Duke that the nature of fire is to go upwards; then I went on to uncover the rest, and found the other head, that is the Perseus's, which had likewise come out very well; and this gave me much more wonder, because as is seen, it is a good deal lower than that of the Medusa. And because the mouths of the said work had been set on the top of the Perseus's head and by the shoulders, I found that at the end of the said head of the Perseus exactly all the bronze that was in my furnace had come to an end. And it was a marvellous thing that there was nothing at all left over from the pouring mouths, nor was anything wanting either; which gave me such wonder that it really seemed to be a miraculous thing, truly guided and handled by God.

I went on happily to finish uncovering it, and always found everything come out very well, until we got to the foot of the right leg that rests, where I found the heel come out; and going on, I saw it to be all full, so that on one side I greatly rejoiced and on the other I was half sorry, only because I had told the Duke that it could not come out. So, finishing uncovering it, I found that the toes of the said foot had not come out, and not only the toes, but there was a little wanting above the toes, so that nearly half of it was missing; and although it gave me that little extra labour, I was very glad of it, only to show the Duke that I understood what I was doing. And although a great deal more of that foot had come out than I had thought, the cause of it had been that from the said many various accidents the metal had been hotter than the rule of the art allows; and also from my having had to help it with the alloy in the way that has been said, with those tin plates, a thing that has never been used by anybody else.

Now, having seen my work come out so well, I went off at once to Pisa to find my Duke; who gave me as gracious a welcome as can be imagined in the world; and the Duchess did the same; and although that majordomo of theirs had told them the whole of it, it seemed to their Excellencies another and a more stupendous and marvellous thing to hear it told by me in my own voice; and when I came to that foot of the Perseus, which had not come out, as I had told His most illustrious Excellency beforehand, I saw him fill with wonder, and he told the Duchess of it, just as I had told him beforehand. Now, seeing those lords of mine so pleasant towards me, I then begged the Duke to let me go as far as Rome. So he kindly gave me leave, and told me to come back quickly to finish his Perseus, and made me letters of recommendation to his ambassador, who was Averardo Serristori: and it was the first years of Pope Julius del Monte.

Chapter 79

Before I left, I gave orders to my workmen to go on in the way I had shown them. And the reason why I went was that, having made for Bindo d'Antonio Altoviti a portrait of his head, as large as life, in bronze, and having sent it to him as far as Rome, he had put this portrait of his in a study of his, which was very richly adorned with antiques and other fine things; but the said study was not made for sculptures, nor for paintings either, because the windows came below the said fine works, so that, those sculptures and paintings having their light the wrong way, they did not show well, in the way they would have done if they had had their reasonable lights.

One day the said Bindo happened to be at his door, and Michelangelo Buonarroti the sculptor passing by, he begged him to be so good as to come into his house to see a study of his; and so he took him in. As soon as he had gone in, and seen it, he said: "Who has been the master who has portrayed you so well and in so fine a manner? And know that that head pleases me as much as, and somewhat better than, those antiques do; and yet there are good ones among them that are seen here; and if these windows were above them, as they are below them, they would show themselves so much better, that that portrait of yours among these many fine works would do itself great honour."

As soon as the said Michelangelo had left the said Bindo's house, he wrote me a most pleasant letter which ran thus: "My Benvenuto, I have known you these many years for the greatest goldsmith that ever there was any notice of; and now I shall know you for a sculptor of the same kind. Know that Messer Bindo Altoviti took me to see a head, his portrait, in bronze, and told me that it was from your hand; I had much pleasure in it; but it grieved me much that it was put in a bad light, for if it had its reasonable light, it would show itself the fine work that it is."

This letter was full of the most affectionate words and the most favourable towards me: so that before I left to go to Rome, I had shown it to the Duke, who read it with much affection, and said to me: "Benvenuto, if you write to him and make him want to come back to Florence, I would make him one of the Forty-Eight." So I wrote him a most affectionate letter, and in it I told him on the Duke's behalf a hundred times more than I had had orders for; and so as not to make a mistake, I showed it to the Duke before I sealed it, and said to His most illustrious Excellency: "My lord, I have perhaps promised him too much." He answered and said: "He deserves more than you have promised him, and I will perform more than that for him." To that letter of mine Michelangelo never made any answer, on account of which the Duke showed himself very much displeased with him.

Chapter 80

Now, when I had got to Rome, I went to lodge in the house of the said Bindo Altoviti: he at once told me how he had shown his bronze portrait to Michelangelo, and how he had praised it so much; so we talked about this at great length. But because he had in his hands twelve hundred gold scudi in gold of mine, which the said Bindo had kept for me along with five thousand of the same, which he had lent to the Duke, four thousand of which were his and mine were in his name, he gave me that profit of my share which came to me; which was the reason why I set about making him the said portrait. And because, when the said Bindo saw it in wax, he sent me a present of 50 gold scudi by one Ser Giuliano Paccalli a notary of his, who lived with him, which money I would not take and sent back by the same man, and afterwards I said to the said Bindo: "It is enough for me that you keep that money of mine alive; and that it earns me something" — I noticed that he had a bad mind towards me, because instead of making a fuss of me, as he was used to do, he showed himself stiff towards me; and although he kept me in the house, he never showed himself openly to me, but stayed sulky. Still with few words we settled it: I lost my workmanship on that portrait of his and the bronze too, and we came to terms that he should keep that money of mine at 15 per cent for my natural life.

Chapter 81

First of all I had gone to kiss the Pope's feet; and while I was talking with the Pope, there came up Messer Averardo Serristori, who was our Duke's ambassador; and because I had started certain discussions with the Pope, by which I believe I should easily have come to terms with him and would gladly have gone back to Rome because of the great difficulties I had in Florence; but I noticed that the said ambassador had worked against it.

I went to find Michelangelo Buonarroti and repeated to him that letter which from Florence I had written him on the Duke's behalf. He answered me that he was employed on the fabric of Saint Peter's, and that for that reason he could not leave. Then I told him that, since he had settled on the model of the said building, he could leave his Urbino, who would obey very well when he gave him his orders; and I added many other words of promise, saying them on the Duke's behalf. He at once looked at me fixedly, and sneering said: "And how are you content with him?" Although I said that I was most content, and that I was very well treated, he showed that he knew most of my troubles; and so he answered me that it would be difficult to be able to leave. Then I added that he would do better to go back to his own country, which was governed by a most just Lord and the greatest lover of the arts of any lord that was ever born into the world.

As I have said above, he had with him a workman of his who was from Urbino, who had been with him many years and had served him more as a boy and a servant than as anything else: and one could see why, for the said man had learned nothing of the art; and because I had pressed Michelangelo with so many good arguments that he did not know what to say on the spot, he turned to his Urbino in a way of asking him what he thought about it. This Urbino of his at once, in a boorish way of his, in a very loud voice said this: "I never mean to part from my Messer Michelangelo, until either I skin him or he skins me." At these foolish words I was forced to laugh, and without saying goodbye to him, with my shoulders down I turned and went away.

Chapter 82

After I had done my business so badly with Bindo Altoviti, by losing my bronze head and by giving him my money for my life, I was clear about what sort of thing the faith of merchants is, and so, discontented, I went back to Florence. At once I went to the Palace to visit the Duke; and His most illustrious Excellency was at Castello, above the Ponte a Rifredi. I found in the Palace Messer Pier Francesco Riccio, the majordomo, and when I wanted to come up to him to make the usual ceremonies, at once with immeasurable astonishment he said: "Oh, you are back!" and with the same astonishment, clapping his hands, he said: "The Duke is at Castello;" and turning his back on me he went off. I could neither know nor imagine why that beast had made those gestures.

At once I went off to Castello, and having gone into the garden, where the Duke was, I saw him from a distance, and when he saw me, he made a sign of being astonished, and let me know that I should go away. I, who had promised myself that His Excellency would make me the same caresses and greater still than he had made me when I went, now seeing so great an oddity, went back to Florence very discontented; and having taken up my business again, pressing on to bring my work to an end, I could not imagine from what such an accident could come: except that, noticing the way Messer Sforza and certain others of those closest to the Duke looked at me, the wish came on me to ask Messer Sforza what this meant; who, smiling, said: "Benvenuto, attend to being an honest man, and do not trouble about anything else."

A few days later I was given the chance of speaking to the Duke, and he made me certain clouded caresses and asked me what was being done in Rome: so as best I knew how I struck up a conversation, and told him of the head I had made in bronze for Bindo Altoviti, with all that had followed. I noticed that he stood listening to me with great attention: and I told him likewise the whole of the business of Michelangelo Buonarroti. At which he showed some indignation; and at the words of his Urbino, of that skinning he had spoken of, he laughed heartily; then he said: "So much the worse for him;" and I went away.

Certainly that Ser Pier Francesco, the majordomo, must have done me some ill office with the Duke, which did not succeed for him: for God, the lover of truth, defended me, as He has always up to this age of mine saved me from so many immeasurable dangers, and I hope He will save me until the end of this life of mine, troubled though it is; still I go forward, only by His power, with good spirit, and no fury of fortune or of perverse stars frightens me: only let God keep me in His grace.
