Book Two, Chapters 83 to 88

Chapter 83

Now hear a terrible thing that happened, most pleasant reader. With all the diligence I knew and could, I attended to bringing my work to an end, and in the evening I went to sit up in the Duke's wardrobe, helping those goldsmiths who worked there for His most illustrious Excellency; for most of those works they made were from my designs: and because I saw that the Duke took great pleasure both in seeing the work go on and in chatting with me, it also suited me to go there sometimes by day.

Being one day among others in the said wardrobe, the Duke came as usual and much more willingly, His most illustrious Excellency knowing that I was there; and as soon as he arrived he began to talk with me about many different and most pleasant things, and I answered him to the purpose, and I had so charmed him that he showed himself more pleasant to me than he had ever shown himself in the past. All at once one of his secretaries appeared, who, speaking in His Excellency's ear, since it was perhaps a matter of much importance, at once the Duke rose and went off into another room with the said secretary.

And because the Duchess had sent to see what His most illustrious Excellency was doing, the page said to the Duchess: "The Duke is talking and laughing with Benvenuto, and is in a thoroughly good humour." Hearing this, the Duchess at once came into the wardrobe and, not finding the Duke there, sat down beside us; and having watched us work a while, with great pleasantness she turned to me and showed me a string of large pearls, and truly very rare ones, and asking me what I thought of them, I told her that it was a very beautiful thing. Then Her most illustrious Excellency said to me: "I want the Duke to buy it for me; so, my Benvenuto, praise it to the Duke as much as you know and can in the world."

At these words I, with as much reverence as I knew, opened myself to the Duchess, and said: "My lady, I thought this string of pearls was Your most illustrious Excellency's; and because reason does not allow anybody ever to say certain things, once I know it is not Your most illustrious Excellency's, it falls to me to say them, and indeed it is necessary for me to say them; let Your most illustrious Excellency know that, this being very much my profession, I see in these pearls a great many defects, on account of which I would never advise Your Excellency to buy it." At these words of mine she said: "The merchant lets me have it for six thousand scudi: for if it had not one or two of those little defects, it would be worth more than twelve thousand." Then I said that even if that string were of altogether infinite goodness, I would never advise anybody to go as high as five thousand scudi; because pearls are not jewels; pearls are a fish bone and in the space of time they fail; but diamonds, and rubies and emeralds do not grow old, and sapphires: these four are jewels, and it is these one should buy.

At these words of mine, the Duchess, somewhat scornful, said to me: "I have a mind now for these pearls, and so I beg you to take them to the Duke, and praise them as much as you can and know in the world; and although you may seem to yourself to be telling some few lies, tell them to do me a service; for it will be good for you." I, who have always been the greatest friend of truth and the enemy of lies, and being under necessity, since I did not want to lose the favour of so great a princess, so, discontented, took those cursed pearls, and went with them into that other room, where the Duke had withdrawn. Who, as soon as he saw me, said: "Oh Benvenuto, what are you doing?" Uncovering those pearls, I said: "My lord, I come to show you a most beautiful string of pearls, most rare and truly worthy of Your most illustrious Excellency; and for eighty pearls, I do not believe that so many were ever put together that would show better in a string; so buy them, my lord, for they are miraculous." At once the Duke said: "I do not want to buy them, because they are not those pearls nor of that goodness you say, and I have seen them, and they do not please me." Then I said: "Forgive me, my lord, for these pearls exceed in infinite beauty all the pearls that were ever set in a string."

The Duchess had got up, and was standing behind a door and heard everything I said; so that, when I had said more than a thousand things beyond what I write, the Duke turned to me with a kindly look, and said to me: "Oh my Benvenuto, I know that you understand these things very well: and if these pearls were of those many rare virtues you attribute to them, it would not seem a hardship to me to buy them, both to please the Duchess and to have them; because things of this kind are necessary to me, not so much for the Duchess as for my other affairs of my sons and daughters." And I at these words of his, since I had begun to tell lies, went on telling them with still greater boldness, giving them the greatest colour of truth, so that the Duke should believe me, trusting the Duchess to help me when the time came. And because more than two hundred scudi would have come to me for making such a bargain, and the Duchess had hinted at it to me, I had made up my mind and disposed myself not to take a soldo of it, only for my own safety, so that the Duke should never think I did it out of greed.

Again the Duke with the most pleasant words went on to say to me: "I know that you understand these things very well: so if you are that honest man that I have always thought you to be, now tell me the truth." Then, my eyes reddening and becoming somewhat wet with tears, I said: "My lord, if I tell the truth to Your most illustrious Excellency, the Duchess becomes my mortal enemy, on account of which I shall be forced to go off with God, and the honour of my Perseus, which I have promised to this most noble School of Your most illustrious Excellency, my enemies will at once bring to shame; so I commend myself to Your most illustrious Excellency."

Chapter 84

The Duke, having realized that everything I had said had been said as it were by force, said: "If you have faith in me, do not fear anything in the world." Again I said: "Alas, my lord, how can it be that the Duchess should know nothing of it?" At these words of mine the Duke raised his hand in pledge and said: "Reckon that you have buried them in a little casket of diamonds." At these honourable words, I at once told the truth of what I understood about those pearls, and that they were not worth much more than two thousand scudi.

The Duchess, having heard us grow quiet, because we were speaking as low as can be, came forward, and said: "My lord, of your grace buy me this string of pearls, because I have the greatest wish for it, and your Benvenuto has said that he never saw a finer one." Then the Duke said: "I do not want to buy it." "Why, my lord, will Your Excellency not content me by buying this string of pearls?" "Because it does not please me to throw money away." Again the Duchess said: "Oh, how throw money away, when your Benvenuto, in whom you deservedly have such faith, has told me it is a bargain by more than three thousand scudi?" Then the Duke said: "My lady, my Benvenuto has told me that if I buy it, I shall be throwing my money away, because these pearls are neither round nor equal, and there are a good many old ones among them; and that this is true, now look at this one and this other, and look here and there: so they are not the thing for me."

At these words the Duchess looked at me with the worst possible spirit, and threatening me with her head she went away, so that I was quite tempted to go off with God and vanish out of Italy; but because my Perseus was almost finished, I would not fail to bring it out: but let every man consider in what heavy trouble I found myself. The Duke had ordered his doorkeepers in my presence always to let me go in through the rooms and wherever His Excellency was; and the Duchess had ordered those same men that every time I arrived in that palace, they should drive me away; so that as soon as they saw me, they at once left those doors and drove me away; but they took care that the Duke should not see them, so that if the Duke saw me before those wretches did, either he called me or he made me a sign to come in.

The Duchess called that broker Bernardone, of whose slackness and vile worthlessness she had complained so much to me, and commended herself to him, as she had done to me; who said: "My lady, leave it to me." This great rascal went before the Duke with this string in his hand. The Duke, as soon as he saw it, told him to get out of his sight. Then the said rascal with that ugly voice of his, which he sounded through his ugly ass's nose, said: "Eh! my lord, buy this string for that poor lady, who is dying of longing for it, and cannot live without it." And adding many other foolish gross words of his, and the Duke having grown tired of him, he said to him: "Either get out of my sight, or blow yourself up on the spot." This great rascal, who knew very well what he was doing, because if either by way of blowing himself up or by singing La bella Franceschina he could get the Duke to make that purchase, he won the Duchess's favour and moreover his brokerage, which came to several hundred scudi: and so he blew himself up. The Duke gave him several slaps on those ugly cheeks of his, and to get rid of him he hit him a little harder than he usually did. At these hard blows on those ugly cheeks of his, not only did they turn too red, but the tears came down. With them he began to say: "Eh! my lord, a faithful servant of yours, who tries to do good and is content to bear every sort of unpleasantness, so long as that poor lady is content."

The Duke having grown too tired of this wretched man, both from the slaps and for love of the Duchess, whom His most illustrious Excellency always wished to content, said at once: "Get out of my sight and bad luck to you, and go, make your bargain, for I am content to do everything the lady Duchess wants." Now here one sees the rage of bad fortune against a poor man and the shameful luck that favours a wretch: I lost all the Duchess's favour, which was a good cause for taking the Duke's from me too; and he won that heavy brokerage and their favour: so it is not enough to be an honest and skilled man.

Chapter 85

At this time the war of Siena broke out; and the Duke, wanting to fortify Florence, distributed the gates among his sculptors and architects; where to me were assigned the Porta al Prato and the little Arno gate, which is on the meadow where one goes to the mills; to the knight Bandinello the gate of San Frediano; to Pasqualino d'Ancona, the gate of San Pier Gattolini; to Giuliano di Baccio d'Agnolo, the carpenter, the gate of San Giorgio; to Il Particino, the carpenter, the gate of San Niccolò; to Francesco da Sangallo, the sculptor, called Il Margolla, was given the gate of the Croce; and to Giovanbattista, called Il Tasso, was given the gate of the Pinti: and so certain other bastions and gates to various engineers, whom I do not remember and who are not to my purpose either.

The Duke, who has truly always been of good wit, went round his city by himself; and when His most illustrious Excellency had well examined it and made up his mind, he called Lattanzio Gorini, who was a paymaster of his: and because this Lattanzio too took some pleasure in this profession, His most illustrious Excellency had him draw all the ways in which he wanted the said gates fortified, and to each of us he sent his own gate drawn out; so that, seeing the one that fell to me, and it seeming to me that the way was not according to right reason, but rather was thoroughly wrong, at once with this drawing in my hand I went off to find my Duke; and wanting to show His Excellency the defects of that drawing given me, no sooner had I begun to speak than the Duke turned on me furiously, and said: "Benvenuto, in making figures very well I shall yield to you, but in this profession I want you to yield to me; so keep to the drawing I have given you."

To these fierce words I answered as kindly as I knew how in the world and said: "Even in the fine way of making figures, my lord, I have learned from Your most illustrious Excellency; still we have always argued it a little together; so about this fortifying of your city, which matters much more than making figures, I beg Your most illustrious Excellency to be so good as to listen to me, and so, talking it over with Your Excellency, you will be the better able to show me the way I am to serve you." So that, with these most pleasant words of mine, he kindly set about disputing it with me; and when I had shown His most illustrious Excellency with living and clear reasons that in the way he had drawn for me it would not have been good, His Excellency said to me: "Oh go, and make a drawing yourself, and I shall see if it pleases me." So I made two drawings according to the reason of the true way of fortifying those two gates, and took them to him, and having recognized the true from the false, His Excellency pleasantly said to me: "Oh go, and do it your own way, for I am content." Then with great diligence I began.

Chapter 86

There was on guard at the Porta al Prato a Lombard captain: this was a man of a terrible robust shape, and with very boorish words; and he was presumptuous and most ignorant. This man at once began to ask me what I meant to do; to whom I pleasantly showed my drawings, and with extreme labour I tried to make him understand the way I meant to take. Now this boorish beast now shook his head, and now he turned this way and now that, often changing the setting of his legs, twisting the moustaches of his beard, which he had very large, and often pulling the fold of his cap down over his eyes, often saying: "By God, a plague on it! I do not understand this business of yours." So that, this beast having become wearisome to me, I said: "Then leave it to me to do, for I do understand it;" and turning my back on him to go about my business, this man began to threaten with his head; and with his left hand, putting it on the pommel of his sword, he made the point of it rise a little, and said: "Ho there, master, you will make me have a quarrel with you to the blood." I turned on him in great anger, because he had made me lose my temper, and said: "It will seem less labour to me to have a quarrel with you than to build this bastion at this gate." In a moment we both put our hands on our swords, and we did not draw them right out before there came up a number of honest men, both of our Florentines and other courtiers; and most of them shouted at him, telling him that he was in the wrong, and that I was a man to give him a good account of himself, and that if the Duke knew it, it would go hard with him. So he went about his business: and I began my bastion.

And when I had given the orders for the said bastion, I went to the other little Arno gate, where I found a captain from Cesena, the most courteous and gallant man I ever knew of that profession: he seemed to be a gentle young lady, and at need he was one of the bravest men and the most deadly that can be imagined. This gentleman watched me so closely that many times he made me shy: he wanted to understand and I pleasantly showed him: it is enough that we vied with each other as to who could make the greater fuss of the other, so that I made this bastion a great deal better than that one.

Having nearly finished my bastions, certain of Piero Strozzi's people having made a raid, the countryside of Prato had been so frightened that everything was being moved out of it, and for this reason all the carts of that district came loaded, everybody carrying his goods into the city. And because the carts touched one another, and there were a very great number of them, seeing such a disorder, I told the guards of the gates to see that at that gate there should not be a disorder such as happened at the gates of Turin; for if there were need to make use of the portcullis, it could not do its office, because it would be left hanging on one of those carts. Hearing these words of mine, that great beast of a captain turned on me with insulting words, and I answered him as much; so that we came nearer to doing far worse than that first time: still we were parted; and I, having finished my bastions, unexpectedly got several scudi, which came in useful to me, and I gladly went back to finish my Perseus.

Chapter 87

In these days certain antiques having been found in the district of Arezzo, among which was the Chimera, which is that bronze lion which is seen in the rooms next to the great hall of the Palace; and together with the said Chimera a quantity of small statuettes had been found, also of bronze, which were covered with earth and rust, and each of them was missing either the head or the hands or the feet; the Duke took pleasure in cleaning them up himself with certain little goldsmith's chisels. It happened that I had occasion to speak to His most illustrious Excellency; and while I was talking with him, he handed me a small hammer with which I struck those little chisels the Duke held in his hand, and in that way the said little figures were uncovered from the earth and the rust. So, going on for several evenings, the Duke set me to work, where I began to make again those limbs which were missing from the said little figures.

And His Excellency taking so much pleasure in that little bit of those small things, he made me work by day as well, and if I was slow in going there, His most illustrious Excellency sent for me. Several times I let His Excellency know that if I was drawn away from the Perseus by day, several difficulties would follow; and the first, which frightened me most, was that the long time I saw my work was taking should not be the cause of His most illustrious Excellency growing tired of it, as afterwards happened to me; the other was that I had several workmen, and when I was not present, they made two notable troubles. And the first was that they spoiled my work for me, and the other that they worked as little as possible; so that the Duke was content that I should go there only from 24 hours onwards.

And because I had so marvellously sweetened His most illustrious Excellency towards me, that in the evening when I came to him, he always increased his caresses to me. In these days they were building those new rooms towards the Lions; so that His Excellency, wanting to withdraw to a more private place, had had a certain little room fitted up for himself in these newly made rooms, and had ordered me to go through his wardrobe, where I passed secretly over the ceiling of the great hall, and through certain little passages I went most secretly to the said little room: whereas within a few days the Duchess deprived me of it, having all those conveniences of mine shut up; so that every evening when I arrived at the Palace, I had to wait a good while because the Duchess was in those antechambers through which I had to pass, at her privy; and as she was ailing, I never arrived once without disturbing her.

Now for this and for other reasons I had become so wearisome to her that in no way could she bear to see me; and with all this great discomfort and endless unhappiness of mine, I patiently went on going there; and the Duke had given such express orders that as soon as I knocked at those doors, they were opened to me, and without saying anything to me they let me go in everywhere; so that it sometimes happened that, coming in quietly and so unexpectedly through those private rooms, I found the Duchess at her privy; who at once fell out with me with such raging fury that I was frightened, and she always said to me: "When will you ever have finished mending these little figures? for by now this coming of yours has grown too wearisome to me." To whom I answered kindly: "My lady, my only patroness, I desire nothing else but to serve you with faith and with extreme obedience; and because these works, which the Duke has ordered me, will last many months, let Your most illustrious Excellency tell me if you do not want me to come here any more; I will not come in any way and let him call whom he likes; and even if the Duke calls me, I shall say that I feel ill and in no way will I ever come here." At these words of mine she said: "I do not say that you should not come here and I do not say that you should not obey the Duke; but it does seem to me that these works of yours never have an end."

Whether the Duke had got some hint of this, or however it may have been, His Excellency began again: as it came near 24 hours, he sent to call me; and the man who came to call me always said to me: "Take care not to fail to come, for the Duke is waiting for you;" and so I went on, with these same difficulties, several evenings. And one evening among others, coming in as usual, the Duke, who must have been talking with the Duchess about matters perhaps secret, turned on me with the greatest fury in the world; and I, somewhat frightened, wanting to withdraw quickly, all at once he said: "Come in, my Benvenuto, and go over there to your business, and I shall be with you shortly." While I was passing, Signor Don Grazia, a little child of very few years, took me by the cloak and made me the most pleasant little jokes such a baby can make; at which the Duke, wondering, said: "Oh, what a pleasant friendship this is that my children have with you!"

Chapter 88

While I was working at these trifles of no moment, the prince and Don Giovanni and Don Ferrando and Don Grazia stood over me all evening, and secretly from the Duke they kept pricking me: so I begged them of their grace to keep still. They answered me, saying: "We cannot." And I said to them: "What cannot be done is not wanted; now go on, then." All at once the Duke and the Duchess broke into laughter.

Another evening, having finished those four little bronze figures which are set in the base, which are Jupiter, Mercury, Minerva, and Danae the mother of Perseus with her little Perseus sitting at her feet, having had them carried into the said room where I worked in the evening, I set them in a row, raised a little above eye level, so that they made a very beautiful sight. Having heard of it, the Duke came somewhat earlier than usual; and because the person who reported it to His most illustrious Excellency must have put it much higher than it was, for he told him: "Better than the ancients," and such like things, my Duke came along together with the Duchess cheerfully talking of nothing but my work; and I at once got up and went to meet them. Who with those ducal and fine welcomes of his raised his right hand, in which he held a bergamot pear, larger than can be seen and most beautiful, and said: "Take this, my Benvenuto, plant this pear in the garden of your house." At those words I pleasantly answered, saying: "Oh my lord, does Your most illustrious Excellency say in earnest that I should plant it in the garden of my house?" Again the Duke said: "In the garden of the house, which is yours; have you understood me?" Then I thanked His Excellency, and the Duchess likewise, with the best ceremonies I knew how to make in the world.

Then they both sat down, opposite the said little figures, and for more than two hours they never talked of anything but the beautiful little figures; so that such an immoderate wish had come on the Duchess that she said to me then: "I do not want these fine little figures to go to waste on that base down in the square, where they would be in danger of being spoiled; rather I want you to arrange them for me in a room of mine, where they will be kept with that reverence their most rare excellence deserves." At these words I set myself against her with endless reasons; and seeing that she had made up her mind that I was not to put them in the base where they are, I waited for the next day and went to the Palace at twenty-two hours; and finding that the Duke and the Duchess had ridden out, having already got my base ready, I had the said little figures carried down, and at once leaded them in, as they were to stay.

Oh! when the Duchess heard of it, such anger grew in her that if it had not been for the Duke, who nobly helped me, I should have fared very badly: and both for that anger about the string of pearls and for this she worked so much that the Duke gave up that little pleasure of his; which was the cause of my not having to go there any more, and at once I went back to those same difficulties as before, as to getting into the Palace.
