Book Two, Chapters 89 to 96

Chapter 89

I went back to the Loggia, where I had already brought the Perseus and was finishing it with the difficulties already spoken of, that is without money, and with other accidents, half of which would have dismayed a man armed in diamonds. Still going on in my usual way, one morning among others, having heard mass at San Piero Scheraggio, there came in front of me Bernardone the broker, that wretched goldsmith, and by the Duke's kindness he was overseer of the mint; and as soon as he was barely outside the door of the church, the swine let go four cracks, which must have been heard from San Miniato. To whom I said: "Ah, swine, coward, ass, is that the sound of your filthy talents?" and I ran for a stick. He quickly withdrew into the mint, and I stood at the crack of my door, and outside I kept a little boy of mine to make me a sign when this swine came out of the mint. Now, having waited a good while, and growing tired of it, and that little anger having settled, considering that blows are not struck on terms, from which some trouble might come, I made up my mind to take my revenge in another way.

And because this happened around the feast of our Saint John, a day or two before it, I made four verses about him, and stuck them up in the corner of the church where people pissed and shat, and they ran like this:

	Here lies Bernardone, ass and hog,
	spy, thief, broker, into whom Pandora
	poured the greatest evils, and then that great
	sheep Master Bigoxen Bandinello carried them over from him.

The affair and the verses went round the palace, and the Duke and the Duchess laughed at them; and before he knew of it, a great quantity of people had stopped there, and were making the greatest laughter in the world: and because they looked towards the mint and fixed their eyes on Bernardone, his son Master Baccio, noticing it, at once in great anger tore them down and bit his finger, threatening with that ugly voice of his which comes out through his nose: he made a great show of bluster.

Chapter 90

When the Duke heard that all my work of the Perseus could be shown as finished, one day he came to see it and showed by many plain signs that it satisfied him greatly; and turning to certain lords who were with His most illustrious Excellency he said: "Although this work seems very beautiful to us, it has still to please the people; so, my Benvenuto, before you give it its last finish I would like you for love of me to open this front part a little, for half a day, to my Square, to see what the people say of it; because there is no doubt that from seeing it shut in like this to seeing it in the open field, it will show itself in a different way from what it shows shut in as it is."

At these words I said humbly to His most illustrious Excellency: "Know, my lord, that it will show half as well again. Oh, how does Your most illustrious Excellency not remember having seen it in the garden of my house, in which it showed itself so well in such a great width of space that Bandinello came through the garden of the Innocenti to see it, and with all his bad and worst nature, it forced him and he spoke well of it, who never spoke well of anybody in his life? I see that Your most illustrious Excellency believes him too much." At these words of mine, sneering a little scornfully, but still with many pleasant words, he said: "Do it, my Benvenuto, only for a little satisfaction of mine."

And when he had gone, I began to give orders for uncovering it; and because there was still a little gold wanting, and certain varnishes and other such small things which belong to the finish of a work, I muttered scornfully and complained, cursing that accursed day which was the cause of bringing me to Florence; because by now I saw the very great and certain loss I had made by my departure from France, and I could not see or know yet what good I might hope for from this lord of mine in Florence; because from the beginning to the middle and to the end, everything I had done had always been done to my own very damaging disadvantage; and so, discontented, the next day I uncovered it.

Now, as it pleased God, as soon as it was seen, there went up a shout so immeasurable in praise of the said work that this was the cause of consoling me somewhat. And the people never left off continually sticking up papers on the shoulders of the door, which held a little screen, while I gave it its finish. I say that on that same day, on which it was kept uncovered several hours, more than twenty sonnets were stuck up, all in the most immeasurable praise of my work; after I had covered it again, every day there were stuck up on it quantities of sonnets and of Latin verses and Greek verses; because it was vacation time at the University of Pisa, all those most excellent learned men and the scholars vied with one another.

But what gave me the greatest contentment, with hope of my greater welfare with my Duke, was that those of the art, that is sculptors and painters, they too vied as to who could speak best. And among the others, whom I valued most, was the able painter Jacopo da Pontormo, and more than he his excellent Bronzino, the painter, who was not content with having several stuck up there, but sent me some as far as my house by his Sandrino, which said such good things, in that fine way of his, which is very rare, that this was the cause of consoling me somewhat. And so I covered it up again, and pressed on to finish it.

Chapter 91

My Duke, although His Excellency had heard of this favour that had been done me over that little glimpse by this most excellent School, said: "I have great pleasure that Benvenuto has had this little contentment, which will be the reason why he will give it its wished-for finish sooner and with more diligence; but let him not think that afterwards, when it is seen wholly uncovered and when it can be seen all round, the people will speak in this way; rather all the defects in it will be discovered, and many will be laid to it that are not there; so let him arm himself with patience."

Now these were Bandinello's words said to the Duke, with which he cited the works of Andrea del Verrocchio, who made that fine Christ and Saint Thomas in bronze, which is seen on the front of Orsanmichele; and he cited many other works, right up to the admirable David of the divine Michelangelo Buonarroti, saying that it did not show well except from the front view; and then he spoke of his Hercules and Cacus and of the endless and shameful sonnets that had been stuck up on it, and he spoke ill of these people. My Duke, who believed him well enough, had prompted him to say those words, and thought for certain that it would in great part turn out that way, because that envious Bandinello never left off speaking ill; and once among many other times, that hangman Bernardone the broker being present, to bear out Bandinello's words, he said to the Duke: "Know, my lord, that making large figures is another kind of soup from making little ones: I do not mean to say that he has not made the little figures very well; but you will see that he will not succeed there." And with these gross words he mixed many others, plying his trade as a spy, in which he mixed a heap of lies.

Chapter 92

Now as it pleased my glorious Lord and immortal God, I finished it entirely, and one Thursday morning I uncovered the whole of it. At once, when it was not yet broad day, there gathered such an infinite quantity of people that it would be impossible to tell it, and all with one voice vied with one another as to who could speak best of it. The Duke stood at a low window of the Palace, which is above the door, and so, half hidden inside the window, he heard everything that was said of the said work: and after he had listened several hours, he got up with such heartiness and such contentment that turning to his Messer Sforza he said this: "Sforza, go and find Benvenuto and tell him from me that he has contented me much more than I expected, and tell him that I shall content him in such a way that I will make him wonder; so tell him to be of good cheer."

So the said Messer Sforza did me this glorious errand, which comforted me, both that day for this good news, and because the people pointed me out with their fingers to this man and that, as a marvellous and new thing. Among the others there were two gentlemen, who were sent by the Viceroy of Sicily to our Duke on their business. Now these two pleasant men came at me in the square, since I was pointed out to them as I passed by; so that in a rush they caught me up, and at once, with their caps in their hands, they made me the most ceremonious oration, which would have been too much for a pope: I still humbled myself as much as I could; but they overwhelmed me so much that I began to beg them, of their grace, that we should agree to get out of the square, because the people were stopping to look at me more fixedly than they did at my Perseus.

And in the midst of these ceremonies they were so bold as to ask me to go to Sicily, and that they would make me such terms that I should be content; and they told me how Fra Giovanagnolo of the Servites had made them a fountain full and adorned with many figures, but that they were not of that excellence they saw in the Perseus, and that they had made him rich. I did not let them finish saying all they would have liked to say, for I said to them: "I wonder greatly at you, that you should ask me to leave so great a lord, a lover of the arts more than any other prince that was ever born, and moreover finding myself in my own country, the school of all the greatest arts. Oh! if I had an appetite for great gain, I could have stayed in France in the service of that great King Francis, who gave me a thousand gold scudi for my keep, and moreover paid me for the making of all my works, so that every year I had cleared more than four thousand gold scudi a year; and I left in Paris the labours of four past years." With these and other words I cut short the ceremonies, and thanked them for the great praises they had given me, which are the greatest rewards that can be given to a man who labours with skill; and that they had made my will to do well grow so much that I hoped within a few years to come to show another work, which I hoped would please the admirable Florentine School much more than that one. The two gentlemen would have liked to pick up the thread of the ceremonies again; but with a doffing of my cap and with great reverence I said goodbye to them.

Chapter 93

After I had let two days go by, and seen that the great praises kept always growing, then I disposed myself to go and show myself to my lord Duke; who with great pleasantness said to me: "My Benvenuto, you have satisfied and contented me; but I promise you that I shall content you in such a way that I will make you wonder: and I tell you more, that I do not want tomorrow to go by." At these admirable promises, at once I turned all my greatest powers both of soul and of body in a moment to God, thanking Him in truth: and at the same moment I came up to my Duke, and, half weeping with joy, I kissed his robe; then I added, saying: "Oh my glorious lord, truly a most generous lover of the arts and of those men who labour in them; I beg Your most illustrious Excellency to do me the favour of letting me first go for a week to thank God; because I well know my own immeasurable great labour, and I know that my good faith has moved God to my help: for this and for every other miraculous succour, I want to go on pilgrimage for eight days, always thanking my immortal God, who always helps whoever truly calls on Him."

Then the Duke asked me where I wanted to go. To whom I said: "Tomorrow morning I shall set out and go to Vallombrosa, then to Camaldoli and to the Hermitage, and I shall go as far as the baths of Santa Maria and perhaps as far as Sestile, because I hear that there are fine antiques there: then I shall come back by way of San Francesco della Vernia, and always thanking God, contented I shall come back to serve you." At once the Duke cheerfully said to me: "Go, and come back, for you truly please me, but leave me two lines as a reminder, and leave the rest to me." At once I made four verses, in which I thanked His most illustrious Excellency, and gave them to Messer Sforza, who put them into the Duke's hand on my behalf: who took them; then he put them into the hand of the said Messer Sforza, and told him: "See that you put them before me every day, because if Benvenuto came back and found that I had not dispatched the matter, I believe he would kill me;" and so, laughing, His Excellency said that he should remind him of it. These very words Messer Sforza said to me that evening, laughing and also wondering at the great favour the Duke showed me: and pleasantly he said to me: "Go, Benvenuto, and come back, for I envy you."

Chapter 94

In the name of God I left Florence, always singing psalms and prayers in honour and glory of God for the whole of that journey; in which I had the greatest pleasure, because the season was very beautiful, being summer, and the journey and the country where I had never been before seemed to me so beautiful that I was left wondering and content. And because a young workman of mine had come as my guide, who was from the Baths, and was called Cesare, I was greatly made much of by his father and by all his household; among whom was an old man of more than seventy, a most pleasant man: this was the said Cesare's uncle, and he made profession of being a physician and surgeon, and dabbled somewhat in alchemy. This good man showed me how those Baths had a mine of gold and silver, and had me see many very beautiful things of that country; so that I had some of the greatest pleasures I ever had.

Having grown familiar with me in his own way, one day among others he said to me: "I do not want to fail to tell you a thought of mine, to which, if His Excellency would lend his ear, I believe it would be a very useful thing: and this is that around Camaldoli there is seen a pass so open that Piero Strozzi could not only pass safely, but he could rob Poppi without any resistance;" and with that, not only had he shown it to me in words, but he drew out of his pouch a sheet of paper, on which this good old man had drawn out all that country in such a way that the great danger could very well be seen and was plainly known to be real. I took the drawing and at once left the Baths, and as fast as I could, coming back by the way of Prato Magno and by San Francesco della Vernia, I got back to Florence: and without stopping, having only pulled off my boots, I went to the Palace.

And when I was by the Badia, I met my Duke, who was coming along by the way of the Palace of the Podestà: who, as soon as he saw me, gave me a most gracious welcome together with a little wonder, saying to me: "Oh why have you come back so soon? for I was not expecting you for another week." To whom I said: "For Your most illustrious Excellency's service I have come back, for I would gladly have stayed several days going about that most beautiful country." "And what good business?" said the Duke. To whom I said: "My lord, it is necessary that I tell you and show you things of great importance." So I went off with him to the Palace. When we got to the Palace he took me privately into a room where we were alone. Then I told him the whole of it, and showed him that little drawing; which he showed himself most grateful for. And when I told His Excellency that it was necessary to find a quick remedy for such a thing, the Duke stayed a little within himself, and then said to me: "Know that we are in agreement with the Duke of Urbino, who is to take care of it himself; but keep it to yourself." And with a great show of his good favour, I went back home.

Chapter 95

The next day I showed myself and the Duke, after a little conversation, cheerfully said to me: "Tomorrow without fail I mean to dispatch your business; so be of good cheer." I, who held it for the most certain thing, waited for the next day with great longing. When the longed-for day came, I went off to the Palace; and as by custom it always seems to happen that bad news is given with more diligence than good, Messer Iacopo Guidi, His most illustrious Excellency's secretary, called me with his mouth twisted and in a haughty voice, and having drawn himself all together, with his person all stiffened as though frozen, he began to speak in this manner: "The Duke says that he wants to know from you what you ask for your Perseus."

I was left bewildered and astonished: and I answered at once that I was never one to ask a price for my labours, and that this was not what His Excellency had promised me two days before. At once this man in a louder voice told me that he expressly commanded me on the Duke's behalf to say what I wanted for it, on pain of the entire disgrace of His most illustrious Excellency. I, who had promised myself not merely to have gained something by the great caresses made me by His most illustrious Excellency, but rather had promised myself to have gained the whole of the Duke's favour, because I never asked him for any greater thing than only his good grace: now this manner of doing it, unlooked for by me, made me come into such a fury: and all the more from its being put to me in the way that venomous toad did. I said that even if the Duke gave me ten thousand scudi, he would not be paying me for it, and that if I had ever thought of coming to such deserts, I would never have settled here. At once this spiteful fellow said a quantity of insulting words to me; and I did the like to him.

The next day after, as I was paying my respects to the Duke, His Excellency beckoned me; so I came up; and he in anger said to me: "Cities and great palaces are made with ten thousand ducats." To whom I answered at once that His Excellency would find endless men who would know how to make him cities and palaces; but that of Perseuses he would perhaps not find a man in the world who would know how to make him such a one. And at once I left without saying or doing anything else.

Some few days later, the Duchess sent for me and told me that I should refer the difference I had with the Duke to her, because she boasted that she would do something that would content me. To these kindly words I answered that I had never asked any greater reward for my labours than the good grace of the Duke, and that His most illustrious Excellency had promised it me; and that there was no need for me to refer to their most illustrious Excellencies what, from the first days when I began to serve them, I had freely referred to them altogether; and moreover I added that if His most illustrious Excellency gave me only a crazia, which is worth five farthings, for my labours, I would call myself content and satisfied, provided His Excellency did not deprive me of his good grace. At these words of mine, the Duchess, smiling a little, said: "Benvenuto, you would do best to do what I tell you;" and turning her back on me, she got up and left me. I, who thought I was doing my best in using those humble words, found that my worst came of it, because, although she had had that little anger with me, she had in her afterwards a certain way of acting, which was good.

Chapter 96

At this time I was very familiar with Girolamo degli Albizi, who was commissary of His Excellency's militia; and one day among others he said to me: "Oh Benvenuto, it would be well to put some order into this little unpleasantness you have with the Duke; and I tell you, if you had faith in me, I would have the heart to mend it; because I know what I am saying. When the Duke gets angry in earnest, you will come off very badly: let this be enough for you; I cannot tell you everything."

And because I had been told by somebody, perhaps a mischief-maker, after the Duchess had spoken to me, who said that he had heard it said that the Duke, on some occasion or other given him, had said: "For less than two farthings I will throw away the Perseus and so all the differences will be ended" — now because of this fear I told Girolamo degli Albizi that I referred the whole thing to him, and that whatever he did, I should be quite content with all of it, provided I remained in the Duke's favour. This gallant man, who understood the soldier's art very well, especially that of the militia men, who are all countrymen, but who took no pleasure in the art of sculpture and therefore understood nothing at all about it, so that, speaking with the Duke, he said: "My lord, Benvenuto has referred himself to me, and has begged me to commend him to Your most illustrious Excellency." Then the Duke said: "And I too refer myself to you, and shall be content with everything you judge." So that the said Girolamo made out a paper very ingeniously and much in my favour, and judged that the Duke should give me three thousand five hundred gold scudi in gold, which should be enough not as a reward for such a fine work, but only for a little keep for me; it was enough that I was content; with many other words, which altogether came to the said price. The Duke signed it very willingly, as much as I was discontented with it.

When the Duchess heard of it, she said: "It would have been much better for that poor man to have referred it to me, for I would have had him given five thousand gold scudi;" and one day when I had gone to the Palace, the Duchess said the same words to me in the presence of Messer Alamanno Salviati, and mocked me, telling me that all the trouble I had served me right.

The Duke ordered that I should be paid a hundred gold scudi in gold a month, until the said sum, and so it went on for some months. Then Messer Antonio de' Nobili, who had had the said commission, began to give me fifty of them, and afterwards sometimes he gave me twenty-five and sometimes he did not give them to me at all; so that, seeing myself so drawn out, I said affectionately to the said Messer Antonio, begging him to tell me the reason why he did not finish paying me. He too answered me kindly: in which answer it seemed to me that he opened himself a little too much, because — let whoever understands judge it — first he told me that the reason why he did not go on with my payment was the too great scarcity of money the Palace had, but that he promised me that as soon as money came, he would pay me; and he added, saying: "Alas! if I did not pay you, I should be a great rascal." I wondered to hear him say such a word, and by it I promised myself that when he could, he would pay me. On account of which quite the contrary followed, so that, seeing myself tormented, I grew angry with him and said many bold and choleric words to him, and reminded him of everything he had told me would happen. Still he died, and I am still owed five hundred gold scudi up to now, when we are near the end of the year 1566.

I was also still owed a remainder of my salaries, which it seemed to me they no longer reckoned on paying me, because about three years had passed; but a dangerous illness came on the Duke, so that he was forty-eight hours without being able to pass water; and seeing that the doctors' remedies did him no good, perhaps he turned to God, and for this he wanted everybody to be paid the allowances due to them, and I too was paid; but I was not paid the remainder of my Perseus.
