Book Two, Chapters 97 to 100

Chapter 97

I had almost half made up my mind to say nothing more about my unlucky Perseus; but because there is an occasion which forces me, and a notable one, I shall pick up the thread for a little, going back somewhat. I thought I was doing my best when I told the Duchess that I could no longer make a submission of what was no longer in my power, because I had told the Duke that I was content with everything His most illustrious Excellency wished to give me: and this I said thinking to make myself somewhat agreeable; and with that little bit of humility I was trying by every fit remedy to appease the Duke somewhat, because a few days before we came to the settlement by Albizi, the Duke had shown himself much displeased with me.

And the cause was that, when I was complaining to His Excellency of certain most foul robberies that were being done me by Messer Alfonso Quistello and Messer Iacopo Polverino, the fiscal, and more than all of them by Ser Giovanbattista Brandini of Volterra; so, putting these arguments of mine with some show of passion, I saw the Duke come into as great an anger as can ever be imagined. And when His most illustrious Excellency had come into this great fury, he said to me: "This case is like that of your Perseus, for which you have asked ten thousand scudi: you let yourself be too much overcome by your own interest; so I mean to have it valued, and I shall give you everything that is judged for me."

At these words I answered at once somewhat too boldly and half in anger — a thing which it is not fitting to use with great lords — and said: "Oh how is it possible that my work should be valued at its price, when there is not a man in Florence today who would know how to make it?" Then the Duke grew into a greater fury, and said a great many angry words, among which he said: "There is a man in Florence today who would know how to make one like it, and so he will know very well how to judge it." He meant Bandinello, knight of Saint James.

Then I said: "My lord, Your most illustrious Excellency has given me the means, so that I have made in the greatest School in the world a great and most difficult work, which has been praised more than any work that has ever been uncovered in this most divine School; and what makes me boldest has been that those excellent men, who know and who are of the art, such as Bronzino the painter, this man has taken pains and has made me four sonnets, saying the most choice and glorious words it is possible to say; and it is because of this admirable man, perhaps, that the whole city has been moved to such a great noise; and I say indeed that if he attended to sculpture as he does to painting, he might perhaps know very well how to do it. And I say more to Your most illustrious Excellency, that my master Michelangelo Buonarroti would indeed have made one like it, when he was younger, and would not have endured less labour than I have; but now that he is very old, he would certainly not do it; so that I do not believe that today there is notice of a man who would know how to carry it out. So my work has had the greatest reward I could wish for in the world: and all the more since Your most illustrious Excellency, not only has called yourself content with my work, but more than any other man you have praised it to me. Oh, what greater and what more honourable reward can be wished for? I say for a certainty that Your Excellency could not pay me in more glorious coin: nor with any treasure whatever can it be equalled, most certainly: so I am too well paid, and I thank Your most illustrious Excellency for it with all my heart."

At these words the Duke answered and said: "On the contrary, you do not think I have enough to be able to pay you for it; and I tell you that I shall pay you for it far more than it is worth." Then I said: "I did not imagine that I should have any other reward from Your Excellency, but I call myself most fully paid by that first one which the School has given me, and with this I mean to go off with God this very minute, without ever going back to that house Your most illustrious Excellency gave me, nor do I ever want to care to see Florence again." We were just by Santa Felicita and His Excellency was going back to the Palace. At these choleric words of mine the Duke at once turned in great anger and said to me: "Do not go, and take good care that you do not go;" so that I, half frightened, accompanied him to the Palace.

When His Excellency had got to the Palace, he called the bishop de' Bartolini, who was Archbishop of Pisa, and called Messer Pandolfo della Stufa, and told them to tell Baccio Bandinelli on his behalf to consider that work of mine, the Perseus, well, and to value it, because the Duke wanted to pay me its just price. These two honest men at once found the said Bandinello, and having done the errand to him, he told them that he had considered that work very well, and that he knew all too well what it was worth; but because he was at odds with me over other past matters, he did not want to meddle with my affairs in any way. Then these two gentlemen added and said: "The Duke has told us that, on pain of his disgrace, he commands you to set a price on it; and if you want two or three days to consider it well, take them: then tell us what you think that labour deserves." He answered that he had considered it very well, and that he could not fail in the Duke's commands, and that that work had come out very rich and beautiful, so that it seemed to him that it deserved sixteen thousand gold scudi and more. At once the good gentlemen reported it to the Duke, who was badly angered; and likewise they told it again to me. To whom I answered that in no way did I want to accept Bandinello's praises, seeing that this bad man speaks ill of everybody. These words of mine were repeated to the Duke, and it was for this that the Duchess wanted me to refer myself to her. All this is the pure truth: it is enough that I would have done best to let myself be judged by the Duchess, because I should have been paid quickly, and should have had that greater reward.

Chapter 98

The Duke let me know by Messer Lelio Torello, his auditor, that he wanted me to make certain scenes in low relief in bronze round the choir of Santa Maria del Fiore; and because the said choir was Bandinello's undertaking, I did not want to enrich his wretched works with my labours; and although the said choir was not his design, because he understood nothing in the world about architecture (the design was Giuliano di Baccio d'Agnolo's, the carpenter, who spoiled the dome): it is enough that there is no merit in it at all; and for the one and for the other reason I did not in any way want to do such a work, but I always said humanely to the Duke that I would do everything His most illustrious Excellency commanded me, so that His Excellency charged the Wardens of Santa Maria del Fiore to come to terms with me, and that His Excellency would give me only my allowance of the two hundred scudi a year and that for everything else he wanted the said Wardens to provide out of the funds of the said Works.

So that I appeared before the said Wardens, who told me all the orders they had from the Duke; and because with them it seemed to me that I could put my arguments much more safely, I began to show them that so many scenes in bronze would be a very great expense, all of which would be thrown away: and I gave all the reasons, by which they were quite convinced. The first was that that order of the choir was altogether wrong, and was made without any reason, nor was there seen in it either art, or convenience, or grace, or design; the other was that the said scenes had to be set so low that they would come too far below the eye, and that they would be a pissing place for dogs, and would continually be full of every filth; and that for the said reasons I in no way wanted to make them.

Only so as not to throw away the rest of my best years and not to serve His most illustrious Excellency, whom I so much desired to please and to serve; so, if His Excellency wanted to make use of my labours, let him let me make the middle door of Santa Maria del Fiore, which would be a work that would be seen, and would be much more to the glory of His most illustrious Excellency; and I would bind myself by contract that, if I did not make it better than that one which is the more beautiful, of the doors of San Giovanni, I would take nothing for my labours; but if I brought it off according to my promise, I was content that it should be valued, and then they should give me a thousand scudi less than it was valued at by the men of the art.

These Wardens were much pleased with what I had proposed to them, and went to speak of it to the Duke — and among the others there was Piero Salviati — thinking to tell the Duke something that would be most welcome to him; and it was quite the contrary; and he said that I always wanted to do the opposite of everything he wished me to do: and without any other conclusion the said Piero left the Duke.

When I heard this, at once I went off to find the Duke, who showed himself somewhat displeased with me; whom I begged to be so good as to listen to me, and so he promised me: so that I began at the beginning; and with so many fine arguments I gave him to understand the truth of the matter, showing His Excellency that it was a great expense thrown away: so that I had much softened him by telling him that if it did not please His most illustrious Excellency that that door should be made, it was necessary to make two pulpits for that choir, and that these would be two great works and would be to the glory of His most illustrious Excellency, and that I would make in them a great quantity of scenes in bronze, in low relief, with many ornaments: so I softened him and he ordered me to make the models.

I made several models and endured the greatest labours: and among the others I made one with eight sides, with much greater study than I had put into the others, and it seemed to me that it was much more convenient for the service it had to do. And because I had taken them several times to the Palace, His Excellency let me know by Messer Cesare, the keeper of the wardrobe, that I should leave them. After the Duke had seen them, I saw that of these His Excellency had chosen the least beautiful. One day His Excellency had me called, and in talking of these said models I told him and showed him with many reasons that the one with eight sides would have been much more convenient for such a service, and much more beautiful to see. The Duke answered me that he wanted me to make it square, because it pleased him much more that way; and so he talked with me very pleasantly a good while. I did not fail to say everything that occurred to me, in defence of the art. Whether the Duke knew that I was telling the truth, and still wanted it done his own way, a long time went by in which nothing was said to me.

Chapter 99

At this time the great marble for the Neptune had been brought by the river Arno and then taken along the Greve onto the road of Poggio a Caiano, so that it might afterwards be more easily brought to Florence by that level road, where I went to see it. And although I knew for a certainty that the Duchess out of her own favour had had it given to the knight Bandinello; not out of any envy I bore Bandinello, but rather moved by pity for the poor ill-fortuned marble (let a man beware, whatever the thing may be, when it is subject to a bad destiny, that in trying to save it from some plain harm, it happens that it falls into something much worse, as the said marble did into the hands of Bartolomeo Ammannati, of whom the truth shall be told in its place), when I had seen the most beautiful marble, I at once took its height and its thickness in every direction, and having gone back to Florence, I made several little models to the purpose.

Then I went to Poggio a Caiano, where the Duke was and the Duchess and the Prince their son; and finding them all at table, the Duke was eating apart with the Duchess, so that I set about entertaining the Prince. And having entertained him a good while, the Duke, who was in a room nearby, heard me, and with much favour had me called; and when I had come into their Excellencies' presences, with many pleasant words the Duchess began to talk with me: in which talk little by little I began to speak of that most beautiful marble I had seen; and I began to say how their ancestors had made their most noble School so full of excellence only by making all the talented men vie together in their professions; and in that excellent way had been made the admirable dome, and the most beautiful doors of San Giovanni, and so many other fine temples and statues, which made a crown of so much excellence for their city, which since the ancients had never had its equal.

At once the Duchess said to me in anger that she knew very well what I meant to say; and she said that in her presence I should never speak of that marble again, because I was displeasing her by it. I said: "Then do I displease you by wanting to be the advocate of your Excellencies, doing everything so that you may be better served? Consider, my lady: if your most illustrious Excellencies are content that everybody should make a model of a Neptune, even though you are resolved that Bandinello shall have it, this will be the cause of Bandinello, for his own honour, setting himself with greater study to make a fine model than he will do knowing that he has no competitors: and in this way you, my lords, will be much better served and you will not take away the spirit of the excellent School, and you will see who is roused to the good: I mean to the fine manner of this admirable art; and you, my lords, will show that you take pleasure in it and understand it."

The Duchess in great anger told me that I had made her sick of it, and that she wanted that marble to be Bandinello's, and she said: "Ask the Duke, for His Excellency too wants it to be Bandinello's." When the Duchess had spoken, the Duke, who had all this time been quiet, said: "It is twenty years since I had that fine marble quarried on purpose for Bandinello, and so I want Bandinello to have it, and let it be his."

At once I turned to the Duke, and said: "My lord, I beg Your most illustrious Excellency to do me the favour of letting me say four words to Your Excellency for your own service." The Duke told me to say everything I wanted, and that he would listen to me. Then I said: "Know, my lord, that that marble from which Bandinello made his Hercules and Cacus was quarried for that admirable Michelangelo Buonarroti, who had made a model of a Samson with four figures, which would have been the most beautiful thing in the world; and your Bandinello got out of it two figures alone, badly made and all patched together: on account of which the excellent School still cries out at the great wrong that was done to that fine marble. I believe that more than a thousand sonnets were stuck up on it, in reproach of that wretched work; and I know that Your most illustrious Excellency remembers it very well.

"And so, my worthy lord, if those men who had such a charge were so unwise that they took that fine marble from Michelangelo, for whom it had been quarried, and gave it to Bandinello, who spoiled it, as is seen; oh! will you ever allow that this still far more beautiful marble, even though it belongs to Bandinello, who would spoil it, should not be given to some other able man who would make something of it for you? See to it, my lord, that everybody who wishes may make a model and that then they may all be uncovered to the School, and Your most illustrious Excellency will hear what the School says; and Your Excellency with that good judgment of yours will know how to choose the best, and in this way you will not throw your money away, nor will you take away the excellent spirit of so admirable a School, which is today matchless in the world: which is all to the glory of Your most illustrious Excellency."

When the Duke had listened to me most kindly, he at once got up from the table and turning to me, said: "Go, my Benvenuto, and make a model, and win that fine marble for yourself, because you are telling me the truth, and I know it." The Duchess, threatening me with her head, said in scorn, muttering, I do not know what; and I made them my reverence, and went back to Florence, and it seemed a thousand years to me until I could set my hand to the said model.

Chapter 100

When the Duke came to Florence, without letting me know anything he came to my house, where I showed him two little models different from one another; and although he praised them both to me, he told me that one of them pleased him more than the other, and that I should finish well the one that pleased him, for it would be good for me: and because His Excellency had seen the one Bandinello had made and other men's too, His Excellency praised mine by far the more, as I was told by many of his courtiers, who had heard it.

Among the other notable things worth taking great account of, was that, the Cardinal of Santa Fiore having come to Florence, and the Duke taking him to Poggio a Caiano, on the way, as they passed, and seeing the said marble, the Cardinal praised it greatly, and then asked to whom His Excellency had assigned the working of it. The Duke said at once: "To my Benvenuto, who has made a very beautiful model of it." And this was repeated to me by men of good faith: and because of this I went off to find the Duchess and took her some pleasant little things of my art, which Her most illustrious Excellency held very dear; then she asked me what I was working at: to whom I said: "My lady, I have taken it as a pleasure to make one of the most laborious works that were ever made in the world: and this is a Crucifix of the whitest marble, on a cross of the blackest marble, and it is as large as a big living man."

At once she asked me what I meant to do with it. I said to her: "Know, my lady, that I would not give it to anybody who gave me two thousand gold ducats in gold for it; because no man ever set himself to such an extreme labour as such a work; nor would I have bound myself to make it for any lord whatever, for fear of being left in shame by it. I have bought the marbles with my own money, and I have kept a young man about two years, who has helped me, and between marbles and irons on which it is fixed, and wages, it costs me more than three hundred scudi; so that I would not give it for two thousand gold scudi; but if Your most illustrious Excellency will do me one entirely lawful favour, I will willingly make you a free present of it: I only beg Your most illustrious Excellency not to disfavour me, nor to favour me either, in the models which His most illustrious Excellency has ordered to be made of the Neptune for the great marble."

She said in great scorn: "Then you make no account at all of my help or my hindrance?" "On the contrary, I make great account of it, my lady; or why do I offer to give you what I value at two thousand ducats? But I trust so much to my laborious and disciplined studies, that I promise myself to win the palm, even if that great Michelangelo Buonarroti were in it, from whom, and never from anybody else, I have learned all I know: and it would be much dearer to me that he should make a model, who knows so much, than these others who know little; because with that so great master of mine I could gain a great deal, whereas with these others there is nothing to be gained." When I had said my words, she got up half in scorn, and I went back to my work, pressing on with my model as much as I could.

And when I had finished it, the Duke came to see it, and there were with him two ambassadors, that of the Duke of Ferrara and that of the Signory of Lucca, and so it pleased him greatly, and the Duke said to those lords: "Benvenuto truly deserves it." Then both the said men favoured me greatly, and more the ambassador of Lucca, who was a lettered person, and a doctor. I, who had drawn a little apart so that they might say everything they thought, hearing myself favoured, at once came up, and turning to the Duke, said: "My lord, Your most illustrious Excellency ought to take one more admirable care: to command that whoever wishes should make another model in clay, of exactly the size that comes out of that marble; and in that way Your most illustrious Excellency will see much better who deserves it; and I tell you: that if Your Excellency gives it to one who does not deserve it, you will not do a wrong to him who deserves it, rather you will do a great wrong to yourself, because you will get harm and shame by it; whereas doing the contrary, by giving it to one who deserves it, first of all you will get the greatest glory by it and will spend your treasure well, and men of talent will then believe that you take pleasure in these things and understand them."

As soon as I had said these words, the Duke shrugged his shoulders, and having started off to go away, the ambassador of Lucca said to the Duke: "My lord, this Benvenuto of yours is a terrible man." The Duke said: "He is much more terrible than you say; and it would have been good for him if he had not been so terrible, because by now he would have had things which he has not had." These very words were repeated to me by that same ambassador, as though reproving me that I ought not to behave so. To whom I said that I wished my lord well, as his affectionate and faithful servant, and did not know how to play the flatterer.

Then, several weeks having passed, Bandinello died; and it was believed that, besides his own excesses, this unhappiness, seeing himself lose the marble, was a good part of the cause.
