Book Two, Chapters 101 to 107

Chapter 101

The said Bandinello had heard that I had made that Crucifix I spoke of above: he at once set his hand to a piece of marble, and made that Pietà which is seen in the church of the Nunziata. And because I had dedicated my Crucifix to Santa Maria Novella, and had already fixed the hooks there to put it up, I only asked to make under the feet of my Crucifix, in the ground, a little coffin, to go into after I am dead. The said friars told me that they could not grant me such a thing without asking their Wardens; to whom I said: "Oh friars, why did you not ask the Wardens first about giving a place to my fine Crucifix, since without their leave you have let me put up the hooks and the other things?" And for this reason I would no longer give my so extreme labours to the church of Santa Maria Novella, although afterwards those Wardens came to find me and begged me for it.

At once I turned to the church of the Nunziata, and talking of giving it in the way I had wanted to give it to Santa Maria Novella, those good friars of the said Nunziata all in agreement told me to put it in their church, and to make my tomb there in whatever way seemed and pleased me best. Bandinello, having got wind of this, set himself with great diligence to finishing his Pietà, and asked the Duchess to get him that chapel which had belonged to the Pazzi; which was got with difficulty: and as soon as he had it, with great haste he set up his work there, which was not altogether finished when he died. The Duchess said that she had helped him in life and that she would help him in death too; and that although he was dead, I was never to plan on having that marble. Then Bernardone the broker told me one day, when we met in the country, whom the Duchess had given the marble to; to whom I said: "Oh unlucky marble! certainly in Bandinello's hands it had come off badly, but in Ammannati's hands it has come off a hundred times worse!"

I had had orders from the Duke to make the clay model, of the size that came out of the marble, and he had had me provided with wood and clay, and had a bit of a screen made for me in the loggia, where my Perseus is, and paid me a labourer. I set my hand to it with all the diligence I could, and made the skeleton of wood by my own good rule, and carried it happily to its finish, not caring to make it in marble, because I knew that the Duchess had made up her mind that I should not have it, and for this I did not care about it: I only liked to endure that labour, with which I promised myself that, when I had finished it, the Duchess, who was after all a person of wit, seeing that she would have seen it by then, I promised myself that she would have been sorry to have done so immeasurable a wrong to the marble and to herself.

One was being made by Giovanni the Fleming in the cloisters of Santa Croce, and one was being made by Vincenzio Danti of Perugia, in the house of Messer Ottaviano de' Medici; another was begun by Moschino's son at Pisa, and another was being made by Bartolomeo Ammannati in the Loggia, for they had divided it up among them.

When I had it all well roughed out, and wanted to begin to finish the head, to which I had already given a little first working, the Duke had come down from the Palace, and Giorgetto the painter had taken him into Ammannati's room, to let him see the Neptune, on which the said Giorgino had worked with his own hand for a great many days together with the said Ammannati and with all his workmen. While the Duke was looking at it, I was told that he was very little satisfied with it; and although the said Giorgino wanted to fill him up with those chatterings of his, the Duke shook his head, and turning to his Messer Gianstefano, said: "Go and ask Benvenuto if his giant is so far forward that he would be content to give me a little sight of it."

The said Messer Gianstefano very shrewdly and most kindly did me the errand on the Duke's behalf; and moreover he told me that if it did not seem to me that my work was yet fit to be shown, I should freely say so: because the Duke knew very well that I had had little help for so great an undertaking. I said that he should come and welcome, and although my work was little advanced, His most illustrious Excellency's understanding was such that he would very well judge what it might turn out when finished.

So the said gentleman did the errand to the Duke, who came willingly: and as soon as His Excellency entered the room, casting his eyes on my work, he showed himself much satisfied with it: then he went right round it, stopping at the four views, exactly as a man would have done who was most expert in the art; then he made many great signs and gestures of showing that it pleased him, and only said: "Benvenuto, you have only to give it a final skin;" then he turned to those who were with His Excellency, and said much good of my work, saying: "The small model which I saw at his house pleased me greatly; but this work of his has surpassed the goodness of the model."

Chapter 102

As it pleased God, who does everything for our good — I mean for those who acknowledge Him and who believe in Him, God always defends them — in these days there came before me a certain rascal from Vicchio, called Piermaria d'Anterigoli, and by nickname lo Sbietta: this man's trade is that of a shepherd, and because he is a close relative of Messer Guido Guidi, the physician and today provost of Pescia, I lent him my ears. He offered to sell me a farm of his for my natural life, which farm I did not want to go and see, because I wanted to finish my model of the giant Neptune; and also because there was no need for me to see it, since he was selling it to me by its income: which the said man had given me in a note of so many bushels of grain and of wine, oil and fodder and chestnuts and other advantages, which I reckoned that at the time we were then in, the said goods were worth much more than a hundred gold scudi in gold, and I gave him six hundred and fifty scudi counting the taxes.

So that, having left me a paper in his own hand that he meant always, for as long as I lived, to keep up the said incomes for me, I did not care to go and see the said farm; but I did inform myself, as best I could, whether the said Sbietta and Ser Filippo, his brother of the same blood, were in such good circumstances that I should be safe. So by many different persons who knew them, I was told that I was quite safe.

We called by agreement Ser Pierfrancesco Bertoldi, notary at the Merchants' Court; and the first thing I put into his hands everything that the said Sbietta meant to keep up for me, thinking that the said paper had to be named in the contract: so that the said notary, who drew it, attended to the twenty-two boundaries, which the said Sbietta named to him, and as I see it he did not remember to include in the said contract what the said seller had offered me; and I, while the notary wrote, was working; and because he took several hours to write, I did a great piece of the head of the said Neptune. So, having finished the said contract, Sbietta began to make the greatest fuss of me in the world, and I did the like to him. He made me presents of kids, cheeses, capons, curd cheeses and a great deal of fruit, so that I began to be half ashamed of it: and for these kindnesses I took him, every time he came to Florence, away from the inn; and many times he had one or another of his relatives with him, who came too; and in pleasant ways he began to tell me that it was a shame that I should have bought a farm, and that so many weeks had gone by now, and I could not make up my mind to leave my business a little to my workmen for three days and go and see it. He was able to do so much with his flattering me that in my ill hour I went to see it; and the said Sbietta received me in his house with so many caresses and with so much honour that he could not have done more for a duke; and his wife made more fuss of me than he did; and in this way we went on a good while, until everything came about that they had planned to do, he and his brother Ser Filippo.

Chapter 103

I did not fail to press on with my work of the Neptune, and had already roughed the whole of it out, as I said above, by a very good rule, which nobody before me had ever used or known; so that, although I was sure I should not have the marble for the reasons given above, I believed I should soon have finished, and at once let it be seen in the Square, only for my own satisfaction.

The season was warm and pleasant, so that, being so made much of by these two rascals, I set out one Wednesday, which was a double feast day, from my farm at Trespiano, and I had made a good breakfast, so that it was past twenty hours when I arrived at Vicchio; and at once I found Ser Filippo at the gate of Vicchio, who seemed to know that I was coming; so many caresses did he make me, and he took me to Sbietta's house, where his shameless wife was, and she too made me immeasurable caresses; to whom I gave a hat of the finest straw; because she said she had never seen a finer one. Sbietta was not there then.

As evening drew on, we all had supper together very pleasantly: then I was given an honourable room, where I rested in a very clean bed; and to two servants of mine the like was given, according to their rank. In the morning, when I got up, the same caresses were made me. I went to see my farm, which pleased me: and so much grain and other fodder was made over to me; and then, having come back to Vicchio, the priest Ser Filippo said to me: "Benvenuto, do not fear; for even if you have not found there the whole of what has been promised you, be of good cheer, for it will be made up to you and more, because you have had to do with honest men: and know that we have dismissed that farm labourer, because he is a bad one." This labourer was called Mariano Rosegli, who several times said to me: "Look well to your own affairs, for in the end you will know which of us is the greater rogue." This countryman, when he said these words to me, sneered in a certain bad way, shaking his head, as much as to say: "Just go along, and you will find out." I made a bit of a bad judgment of it, but I did not imagine anything of what happened to me.

Having come back from the farm, which is two miles away from Vicchio, towards the mountains, I found the said priest, who with his usual caresses was waiting for me; so we went to eat all together: this was not a dinner, but was a good luncheon. Then, going about Vicchio for a stroll, the market had already begun; I saw myself looked at by all those people of Vicchio as at something unusual to see, and more than by any of the others by an honest man, who has lived for many years in Vicchio, and his wife makes bread to sell. He has near there, about a mile off, certain good holdings of his own; still he is content to live in that way. This honest man lives in a house of mine, which is in Vicchio, which was made over to me with the said farm, which is called the farm of the Fonte; and he said to me: "I am in your house, and at the proper time I shall give you your rent; or if you want it in advance, I will do it in any way you like: it is enough that you and I shall always be in agreement."

And while we were talking, I saw that this man kept fixing his eyes on me: so that I, forced by such a thing, said to him: "Now tell me, my dear Giovanni, why have you looked at me so fixedly several times?" This honest man said to me: "I will gladly tell you, if you, as the man you are, will promise me not to say that I told you." So I promised him. Then he said to me: "Know that that wretched priest Ser Filippo, not many days ago, was boasting of the cleverness of his brother Sbietta, saying how he had sold his farm to an old man for his life, who would not get through the whole year. You have had to do with a pair of rascals, so try to live as long as you can, and open your eyes, because you need to; I do not want to tell you any more."

Chapter 104

Going about the market for a stroll, I found there Giovanbattista Santini, and he and I were taken to supper by the said priest; and, as I have said before, it was about twenty hours, and on my account we had supper at such an early hour, because I had said that in the evening I meant to go back to Trespiano: so that things were quickly got ready, and Sbietta's wife bestirred herself, and among the others a certain Cecchino Buti, their farm servant.

When the salads had been made, and we were beginning to want to sit down at table, that bad priest, giving a certain nasty little laugh of his, said: "You must forgive me, because I cannot have supper with you, for a matter of great importance has come up for me on my brother Sbietta's account: since he is not here, I must take his place." We all begged him and we could never turn him from it: he went off, and we began to have supper.

When we had eaten the salads out of certain large dishes in common, and they were beginning to give us boiled meat, a bowl came for each of us. Santini, who was at table opposite me, said: "They are giving you all crockery different from the rest: now did you ever see finer?" I told him that I had not noticed such a thing. He also told me that I should call Sbietta's wife to the table, who, she and that Cecchino Buti, were running backwards and forwards, all extraordinarily busy. At last I begged that woman so much that she came; who complained, saying to me: "My dishes have not pleased you. That is why you eat so little." When I had praised the supper several times, telling her that I had never eaten either with more appetite or better, at last I said that I was eating exactly as much as I needed. I would never have imagined why that woman pressed me so hard to eat.

When we had finished supper it was past twenty-one hours, and I wanted to get back to Trespiano that evening, so as to be able to go the next day to my work at the Loggia: so I said goodbye to them all, and having thanked the woman I set off.

I was not three miles off before it seemed to me that my stomach was burning, and I felt myself in such distress that it seemed a thousand years to me until I could reach my farm at Trespiano. As it pleased God I arrived at night, with great labour, and at once gave orders to go and rest. In the night I could never rest, and moreover my bowels were moved, which forced me several times to go to the privy, so that, when broad day had come, feeling myself burning in the fundament, I wanted to see what it was: I found the cloth very bloody.

At once I imagined I had eaten something poisonous, and over and over again I went examining myself as to what it could have been: and there came back into my memory those plates and bowls and little bowls, given me different from the others by the said wife of Sbietta; and how that bad priest, Sbietta's brother, having taken so much trouble to do me so much honour, then would not stay to supper with us; and there also came back into my memory the said priest's having said how his Sbietta had made such a fine stroke by having sold a farm to an old man for his life, who would never get through the year; for those words had been repeated to me by that honest man Giovanni Sardella. So that I made up my mind that they had given me in a little bowl of sauce, which was made very well and very pleasant to eat, a pinch of sublimate, because sublimate does all those harms which I saw I had; but because I am used to eating little sauce or seasoning with meat, other than salt, I happened to eat two mouthfuls of that sauce, because it was so good to the taste. And I went on remembering how the said wife of Sbietta pressed me many times in different ways, telling me to eat that sauce: so that I knew for a certainty that with that said sauce they had given me that little bit of sublimate.

Chapter 105

Finding myself afflicted in that way, I still went all the same to work on my giant in the said Loggia: so that in a few days afterwards the great illness so overcame me that it laid me up in bed. As soon as the Duchess heard that I was ill, she had the work of the unlucky marble given free to Bartolomeo Ammannati, who sent to tell me by Messer —— that I might do what I liked with my begun model, because he had won the marble.

This Messer —— was one of the lovers of the wife of the said Bartolomeo Ammannati; and because he was the most favoured as being courteous and discreet, this said Ammannato gave him every convenience, of which there would be great things to tell. Still I do not want to do as Bandinello, his master, did, who with his talk went outside the art; it is enough that I said I had always guessed it; and that he should tell Bartolomeo to work hard, so that he might show himself grateful to fortune for so great a favour, which she had so undeservedly done him.

So, discontented, I stayed in bed, and had myself treated by that most excellent man Master Francesco da Montevarchi, the physician, and together with him Master Raffaello de' Pilli treated me in surgery; because that sublimate had so burned my bowel in the fundament that I could not hold my excrement at all. And because the said Master Francesco, having seen that the poison had done all the harm it could, since it had not been enough to overcome the strength of the strong nature he found in me, said to me one day: "Benvenuto, thank God, because you have won; and do not fear, for I mean to cure you, to spite the rascals who have wanted to do you harm." Then Master Raffaellino said: "This will be one of the finest and one of the most difficult cures that there has ever been notice of: know, Benvenuto, that you have eaten a mouthful of sublimate." At these words Master Francesco cut in over his voice and said: "Perhaps it was some venomous grub." I said that I knew most certainly that it was poison and who had given it me: and here every one of us was silent. They attended to treating me more than six whole months; and I was more than a year before I could make use of my life.

Chapter 106

At this time the Duke went off to make his entry into Siena, and Ammannati had gone some months before to make the triumphal arches. A bastard son that Ammannati had, had stayed behind in the Loggia, and had taken away certain curtains that were over my model of the Neptune, which, since it was not finished, I kept covered. At once I went to complain to Signor Don Francesco, the Duke's son, who showed himself well disposed to me, and I told him how they had uncovered my figure for me, which was unfinished; that if it had been finished, I would not have cared about it. To this the said Prince answered me, threatening a little with his head, and said: "Benvenuto, do not care about its being uncovered, because they do so much the more against themselves; and if all the same you are content for me to have it covered for you, I will have it covered at once." And with these words His most illustrious Excellency added many others much in my favour, in the presence of many lords. Then I told him that I begged His Excellency to give me the means of being able to finish it, because I wanted to make a present of it together with the small model to His Excellency. He answered me that he willingly accepted the one and the other, and that he would have me given all the conveniences I asked for.

So I fed on this little bit of favour, which was the cause of the saving of my life; because, so many immeasurable troubles and unhappinesses having come on me at once, I saw myself failing: by that little bit of favour I comforted myself with some hope of life.

Chapter 107

The year having already gone by since I had the farm of the Fonte from Sbietta, and besides all the unpleasantnesses done me both of poisons and of their other robberies, seeing that the said farm did not yield me half of what they had offered me, and I had, besides the contracts, a paper in Sbietta's own hand, in which he bound himself before witnesses to keep up the said incomes for me, I went off to the lords Councillors; for at that time Messer Alfonso Quistello was alive and was the fiscal, and he sat with the lords Councillors; and among the Councillors were Averardo Serristori and Federigo de' Ricci: I do not remember all their names: there was also one of the Alessandri: it is enough that they were a set of men of great account.

Now, having told my case to the magistracy, they all with one voice wanted the said Sbietta to give me back my money, except Federigo de' Ricci, who at that time made use of the said Sbietta; so that they all condoled with me that Federigo de' Ricci was holding them back from dispatching the matter for me; and among the others Averardo Serristori with all the rest; although he made an extraordinary noise about it, and so did the man of the Alessandri: so that the said Federigo having held the thing up so long that the magistracy had come to the end of its term of office, the said gentleman found me one morning, after they had come out onto the square of the Nunziata, and without any respect in the world said in a loud voice: "Federigo de' Ricci has been able to do so much more than all the rest of us, that you have been murdered against our will."

I do not want to say anything else about this, because it would too much offend those who hold the supreme power of the government; it is enough that I was murdered at the pleasure of a rich citizen, only because he made use of that shepherd.
