Book Two, Chapters 108 to 113

Chapter 108

The Duke being at Livorno, I went to find him, only to ask him for my leave. Feeling my strength coming back to me, and seeing that I was not employed on anything, it grieved me to do so great a wrong to my studies; so that, having made up my mind, I went off to Livorno, and found the Duke there, who gave me a most gracious welcome. And because I stayed there several days, every day I rode out with His Excellency, and had plenty of leisure to be able to say everything I wanted, because the Duke went out of Livorno and rode four miles along the sea, where he was having a small fortress made, and so as not to be troubled by too many people, he was glad that I should talk with him.

So that one day, seeing very notable favours done me, I began deliberately to speak of Sbietta, that is of Piermaria d'Anterigoli, and said: "My lord, I want to tell Your most illustrious Excellency a marvellous case, by which Your Excellency will know the cause which hindered me from being able to finish my Neptune in clay, which I was working at in the Loggia. Let Your most illustrious Excellency know that I had bought a farm for my life from Sbietta." It is enough that I told the whole of it in detail, never staining the truth with anything false.

Now when I came to the poison, I said that, if I had ever been a servant welcome in the sight of His most illustrious Excellency, he ought, instead of punishing Sbietta or those who gave me the poison, to give them something good; because the poison was not enough to kill me; but it was exactly enough to purge me of a deadly viscous humour, which I had inside my stomach and my intestines; "which has worked in such a way that whereas, being as I was, I could have lived three or four years, this kind of medicine has done so much that I believe I have gained life for more than twenty years; and for this, with more willingness than ever, I thank God the more; and so it is true what I have sometimes heard said by certain people, who say: 'God sends us evil, that He may put good in.'" The Duke stood listening to me for more than two miles of the way, always with great attention; he only said: "Oh, bad people!" I concluded that I was obliged to them and went on to other pleasant talk.

I watched for a suitable day, and finding him pleasant as I wanted, I begged His most illustrious Excellency to give me my good leave, so that I might not throw away some years while I was still good for making something, and that as for what I was still owed of my Perseus, His most illustrious Excellency might give it me when it pleased him. And with this talk I spread myself with many long ceremonies in thanking His most illustrious Excellency, who answered me nothing at all in the world, but rather it seemed to me that he showed that he had taken it badly.

The next day after, Messer Bartolomeo Concino, the Duke's secretary, one of the chief ones, found me, and half blustering, said to me: "The Duke says that if you want your leave, he will give it you; but if you want to work, he will set you to work: if only you could do as much as His Excellency will give you to do!" I answered him that I desired nothing but to have work, and above all from His most illustrious Excellency more than from all the rest of the men in the world, be they pope or emperors or kings; I would more gladly serve His most illustrious Excellency for a soldo than anybody else for a ducat. Then he said to me: "If that is your mind, you are already agreed without saying anything more; so go back to Florence and be of good cheer, because the Duke wishes you well." So I went back to Florence.

Chapter 109

As soon as I was in Florence, there came to find me a certain man called Raffaellone Scheggia, a weaver of cloth of gold, who said this to me: "My Benvenuto, I want to bring you to an agreement with Piermaria Sbietta": to whom I said that nobody could bring us to an agreement but the lords Councillors, and that in this batch of Councillors Sbietta would not have a Federigo de' Ricci, who for a present of two fat kids, without caring either for God or for his own honour, would keep up so wicked a fight and do so foul a wrong to holy justice.

Having said these words, together with many others, this Raffaello always affectionately kept telling me that a thrush one could eat in peace was much better than a very fat capon, even if one were certain of having it, and having it in the midst of so much war: and he told me that the ways of lawsuits sometimes drag on so long that in that time I would have done better to spend it on some fine work, by which I would gain much greater honour and much greater profit. I, who knew that he was telling the truth, began to lend an ear to his words; so that in a short time he brought us to an agreement in this way: that Sbietta should take the said farm from me on lease for seventy gold scudi in gold a year, for the whole time during my natural life.

When we came to make the contract, which was drawn by Ser Giovanni di Ser Matteo da Falgano, Sbietta said that in the way we had talked of it, it would carry a heavier tax; and that he would not fail me — "and so it is well that we should make this lease from five years to five years" — and that he would keep his faith with me, without ever renewing any more lawsuits. And so that rascal of a priest, his brother, promised me too; and in the way described, of the five years, the contract was made.

Chapter 110

Wanting to go on to another subject, and to leave off for a while talking of this immeasurable villainy, I am forced first to tell what followed on the five years of the lease, at the end of which those two rascals would not keep up any of the promises they had made me, but rather wanted to give me back my farm and would not hold it on lease any more. On account of which I began to complain, and they flung the contract in my face; so that by way of their bad faith I could not help myself.

Seeing this, I told them that the Duke and the Prince of Florence would not put up with men being murdered so foully in their cities. Now this fright was of such force that they put upon me that same Raffaello Scheggia who had made that first agreement; and they said that they did not want to give me the gold scudi in gold, as they had given me for the five past years: to whom I answered that I wanted nothing less. The said Raffaello came to find me, and said: "My Benvenuto, you know that I am on your side: now they have referred the whole thing to me;" and he showed it me written in their own hand. I, who did not know that he was a close relative of theirs, thought this very good, and so I referred myself to him altogether and entirely.

This gallant man came one evening at half an hour into the night, and it was in the month of August, and with so many words of his he forced me to have the contract drawn, only because he knew that if it had been put off until morning, that trick he meant to play me would not have succeeded for him. So the contract was made, that he should give me sixty-five scudi in money a year of rent, in two payments every year, during the whole of my natural life. And although I shook myself and would not be patient about it at all, he showed the paper in my own hand, with which he moved everybody to put me in the wrong; and he said that he had done it all for my good and that he was on my side; and neither the notary nor the others knowing that he was their relative, they all put me in the wrong: on account of which I gave way in good time, and I shall try to live as long as I possibly can.

After this I made another mistake in the month of December following, 1566. I bought half the farm of the Poggio from them, that is from Sbietta, for two hundred scudi in money, which borders on that first one of mine of the Fonte, with three years' right of redemption, and I let it to them on lease. I did it to do them good. It would take far too long a spreading out in writing if I wanted to tell the great cruelties they have done me; I mean to refer it altogether and entirely to God, who has always defended me from those who have wanted to do me harm.

Chapter 111

Having entirely finished my marble Crucifix, it seemed to me that by setting it upright and putting it raised some braccia above the ground, it ought to show much better than keeping it on the ground; and although it showed well, once I had set it upright it showed a great deal better, so that I was very well satisfied with it: and so I began to show it to whoever wanted to see it.

As God willed, it was spoken of to the Duke and to the Duchess; so that when they came from Pisa, one day unexpectedly both their most illustrious Excellencies with all the nobility of their Court came to my house only to see the said Crucifix: which pleased them so much that the Duke and the Duchess never left off giving me endless praises; and so consequently all those lords and gentlemen who were present. Now when I saw that they were much satisfied, I began pleasantly to thank them, telling them that their having taken from me the labour of the marble of the Neptune had been the very cause of my having carried out such a work, in which nobody else had ever set himself before me; and although I had endured the greatest labour I ever endured in the world, it seemed to me that I had spent it well, and all the more since their most illustrious Excellencies praised it to me so much; and because I could never believe I should find anybody who could be worthier of it than their most illustrious Excellencies, I willingly made them a present of it; only I begged them, before they went away, to be so good as to come into the ground floor of my house.

At these words of mine they got up at once pleasantly, and left the workshop, and having come into the house they saw my little model of the Neptune and of the fountain, which the Duchess had never seen before that moment. It had such force in the Duchess's eyes that at once she raised a cry of wonder beyond reckoning; and turning to the Duke she said: "Upon my life, I did not think it a tenth part as beautiful." At these words the Duke said to her several times: "Oh, did I not tell you so?" And so between them they talked of it a good while, much to my honour; then the Duchess called me to her, and after many praises given me by way of excusing herself, for in the comment on those words she seemed almost to be asking my pardon, she then told me that she wanted me to have a marble quarried to my own liking, and wanted me to set to work on it. At those kindly words I said that if their most illustrious Excellencies gave me the conveniences, I would willingly for love of them set myself to such a laborious undertaking. To this the Duke at once answered and said: "Benvenuto, you shall be given all the conveniences you know how to ask for, and moreover what I shall give you of my own accord, which will be worth far more;" and with these pleasant words they went away, and left me quite content.

Chapter 112

Many weeks having gone by, and nothing being said about me; so that, seeing that no orders were given to do anything, I was half in despair. At this time the Queen of France sent Messer Baccio del Bene to our Duke to ask him for money on loan; and the Duke kindly served her in it, so it was said; and because Messer Baccio del Bene and I were very familiar friends, having recognized one another in Florence, we were very glad to see each other; so that he told me all those great favours His most illustrious Excellency was doing him; and in talking he asked me how I had great works in hand. On account of which I told him, as it had happened, the whole case of the great Neptune and of the fountain, and the great wrong the Duchess had done me.

At these words he told me on the Queen's behalf how Her Majesty had the greatest desire to finish the tomb of King Henry her husband, and that Daniele da Volterra had undertaken to make a great bronze horse, and that the time he had promised it for had gone by, and that a great deal of ornament was to go on the said tomb; so that if I wanted to go back to France to my castle, she would have me given all the conveniences I knew how to ask for, provided I had a mind to serve her. I told the said Messer Baccio to ask for me from my Duke; that if His most illustrious Excellency were content with it, I would willingly go back to France. Messer Baccio cheerfully said: "We shall go back together;" and he set it down as done.

So the next day, when he was speaking with the Duke, the talk came round to me; so that he told the Duke that, if it were with his good favour, the Queen would make use of me. To this the Duke at once answered and said: "Benvenuto is that able man the world knows; but now he no longer wants to work;" and having gone on to other talk, the next day I went to find the said Messer Baccio, who told me the whole of it again. At this I, who could hold back no longer, said: "Oh, if, since His most illustrious Excellency gave me nothing to do, I of my own accord have made one of the most difficult works that were ever made by anybody in the world, and it costs me more than two hundred scudi, which I have spent out of my poverty; oh, what would I have done, if His most illustrious Excellency had set me to work! I tell you truly that a great wrong is done me." The good gentleman repeated to the Duke everything I had answered. The Duke told him that he was joking, and that he wanted me for himself; so that several times I stirred up the matter of going off with God. The Queen would not talk about it any more so as not to displease the Duke, and so I was left quite thoroughly discontented.

Chapter 113

At this time the Duke went off, with all his Court and with all his sons, except the Prince who was in Spain: they went through the maremmas of Siena; and on that journey he came to Pisa. The Cardinal took the poison of that bad air first of all: so that a few days later a pestilential fever attacked him and in a short time killed him. This was the Duke's right eye: he was handsome and good, and it was the greatest loss. I let several days go by, until I thought that the tears would be dried: then I went off to Pisa.
