Book I: Clio -- The Conquests and Death of Cyrus

The Ionians who belong to the Panionion had the good fortune to build their cities in the finest climate of any people I know. No region to the north, south, east, or west of Ionia can match it: the lands in one direction suffer from cold and damp, those in another from heat and drought.

These Ionians don't all speak the same dialect -- they have four distinct variations. Their southernmost cities are Miletus, Myus, and Priene, settlements in Caria that share the same dialect. Then in Lydia there are Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedos, Teos, Clazomenae, and Phocaea -- these speak a completely different dialect from the first group but agree with each other. Of the three remaining Ionian cities, two are on islands -- Samos and Chios -- and one, Erythrae, is on the mainland. The people of Chios and Erythrae speak the same dialect, while the Samians have one all their own. That makes four dialects in total.

Now, of these Ionians, the Milesians were safe from danger because they'd made a treaty with Cyrus. The islanders had nothing to fear either, since the Phoenicians weren't yet Persian subjects and the Persians themselves were not a naval people.

The reason these Ionians separated themselves from the rest of the Ionian name was simply this: at that time, the entire Greek world was weak, and the Ionian branch was the weakest and least significant of all -- Athens being its only notable city. Most Ionians, including the Athenians, avoided the name and didn't want to be called Ionians. Even now, I notice that most of them are ashamed of it. But these twelve cities embraced the name proudly, built their own exclusive temple called the Panionion, and resolved to share it with no other Ionians -- and indeed, no others asked to share it, except the people of Smyrna.

This was similar to how the Dorians of the region now called the Five Cities -- formerly the Six Cities -- take care not to admit any of the neighboring Dorians to the temple of the Triopian Apollo, and even exclude their own members who break the temple's rules. In the games of the Triopian Apollo, the prizes used to be bronze tripods, and the rule was that winners couldn't take them home but had to dedicate them on the spot to the god. A man from Halicarnassus named Agasicles won a tripod, ignored this rule, and took it home and hung it on a nail. For that, the other five cities -- Lindos, Ialysos, Cameiros, Cos, and Cnidos -- expelled Halicarnassus from the temple.

As for why the Ionians formed exactly twelve cities and refused to admit more, I believe it's because when they lived in the Peloponnese, they had twelve divisions -- the same number as the Achaean divisions that exist today, the Achaeans being the people who drove them out. Starting from the Sicyon side, the twelve are: Pellene, Aegira, Aegae (where the river Crathis flows, giving its name to the Italian river), Bura, Helice (where the Ionians fled when beaten by the Achaeans), Aegion, Rhypes, Patrae, Pharae, Olenus (where the great river Peiros is), Dyme, and Tritaeae, the only one of these that's inland. These are now twelve Achaean divisions, and they were formerly twelve Ionian ones.

That's why the Ionians made twelve cities. As for the idea that these particular Ionians are somehow purer or nobler than other Ionians -- that's nonsense. A large portion of them are actually Abantes from Euboea, who aren't even Ionians by name. Mixed in with them are Minyans from Orchomenus, Cadmeians, Dryopians, Phocians who broke away from their own people, Molossians, Arcadian Pelasgians, Dorians from Epidaurus, and many other peoples. The proudest among them, those who set out from the town hall of Athens and consider themselves the most purely Ionian -- even they brought no women with them when they colonized. Instead, they took Carian women whose fathers they'd just killed.

Because of this slaughter, these women established a rule among themselves, bound by oaths and passed down to their daughters: they would never eat with their husbands, and no wife would ever call her husband by name. The reason was that the Ionians had killed their fathers, husbands, and children, and then married them by force. This happened at Miletus.

Some of these Ionians set Lycian princes over themselves, descendants of Glaucus and Hippolochus. Others were ruled by Pylian Cauconians descended from Codrus the son of Melanthus. Still others had rulers from both lines. Since these twelve cities cling to the Ionian name more than any others, let them be called pure Ionians if they insist. But in truth, all peoples who trace their descent from Athens and celebrate the festival of the Apaturia are Ionians. Everyone does keep this festival -- except the Ephesians and the Colophonians, who are the only Ionians excluded from it because of some murder they committed.

The Panionion itself is a sacred place on the north side of Mount Mycale, dedicated by common agreement of the Ionians to Poseidon of Helice. Mycale is a promontory on the mainland jutting westward toward Samos, where the Ionians used to gather from their cities to celebrate a festival they called the Panionia. (And here's something interesting: not only the Ionian festivals but all Greek festivals have names ending in the same letter, just like Persian names.)

Those, then, are the Ionian cities.

The Aeolian cities are these: Cyme (also called Phriconis), Larisa, Neon Teichos, Temnos, Cilla, Notion, Aegiroessa, Pitane, Aegaeae, Myrina, and Gryneia -- eleven ancient cities, since the twelfth, Smyrna, had been taken from them by the Ionians. These mainland Aeolian cities used to number twelve as well. The Aeolians had the good fortune to settle in more fertile land than the Ionians, though the climate isn't as pleasant.

Here's how the Aeolians lost Smyrna. They took in some men of Colophon who'd been driven out by their political rivals. These Colophonian exiles waited for a day when the people of Smyrna were outside the walls celebrating a festival of Dionysus. Then they shut the gates and seized the city. The whole Aeolian league came to the rescue, but they eventually settled the matter by agreement: the Ionians would return all the movable property, and in exchange the Aeolians would give up Smyrna. When the Smyrnaeans accepted these terms, the remaining eleven cities divided them up and made them citizens.

Those are the Aeolian cities on the mainland, apart from the settlements on Mount Ida, which are separate. In the islands, there are five cities on Lesbos -- the sixth, Arisba, was enslaved by the people of Methymna despite being their kin. There's one city on Tenedos and one in the so-called Hundred Isles. The Lesbians and the people of Tenedos, like the Ionian islanders, had nothing to fear. The remaining mainland cities agreed to follow wherever the Ionians led.

When the Ionian and Aeolian messengers reached Sparta -- they'd moved quickly -- they chose a Phocaean named Pythermos to speak for them all. He put on a purple cloak to attract as much attention as possible and draw a crowd of Spartans, and once admitted to the assembly, he spoke at length, asking the Spartans for help.

The Spartans refused. They voted not to help the Ionians, and the ambassadors were sent away. However, the Spartans did dispatch a fifty-oared ship to observe the situation with Cyrus and in Ionia. These men sailed to Phocaea and sent their most distinguished member, a man named Lacrines, to Sardis to deliver a message to Cyrus: the Spartans forbade him to harm any Greek city. They would not permit it.

When the herald said this, Cyrus reportedly asked the Greeks in his court who the Spartans were and how many of them there were, that they should send him such a message. When he heard the answer, he said to the Spartan herald: "I have never feared men who set aside a special place in the center of their city where they get together and cheat each other with false oaths. If I stay healthy, they won't be talking about the Ionians' troubles -- they'll have plenty of their own to worry about."

Cyrus hurled this insult at the Greeks in general because they have marketplaces where they buy and sell, something the Persians don't do at all -- they have no marketplaces whatsoever.

After this, Cyrus entrusted Sardis to a Persian named Tabalus and put a Lydian named Pactyas in charge of Croesus' gold and the rest of the Lydian treasure. Then he himself marched away to Ecbatana, taking Croesus with him. He wasn't concerned about the Ionians for the moment: Babylon still lay ahead of him, as did the Bactrians, the Sacae, and the Egyptians. He planned to deal with those himself and send another commander to handle the Ionians.

But as soon as Cyrus left Sardis, Pactyas stirred the Lydians into revolt against Tabalus and Cyrus. With all the gold of Sardis at his disposal, he hired mercenaries, persuaded the coastal peoples to join him, and marched on Sardis, besieging Tabalus in the citadel.

When Cyrus heard the news on the road, he said to Croesus: "How will this end, Croesus? The Lydians apparently won't stop making trouble -- for me or for themselves. I'm starting to think it might be best to sell them all into slavery. As it is, I've acted like a man who killed the father but spared the sons. I took you prisoner -- you, who were more than a father to the Lydians -- and then handed their city back to them. Should I really be surprised that they've revolted?"

Croesus, alarmed that Cyrus might destroy Sardis, replied: "Your Majesty, what you say is reasonable. But don't give way entirely to your anger. Don't destroy an ancient city that's blameless in both the previous trouble and this one. The previous trouble was my doing, and I'm the one paying for it. This time the guilty party is Pactyas, the man you put in charge. Let him be the one who's punished. But spare the Lydians. Instead, give them these orders, designed to make sure they never revolt or threaten you again: forbid them to own weapons. Order them to wear tunics under their cloaks and soft shoes on their feet. Command them to teach their sons to play the lyre and the harp and to become shopkeepers. Before long, Your Majesty, you'll see them turn from men into women, and you'll never have to worry about a revolt again."

Croesus suggested this because he thought it was better for the Lydians than being sold into slavery. He knew he couldn't change Cyrus' mind without a practical alternative, and he feared that even if the Lydians escaped the present danger, they might revolt again later and be wiped out entirely.

Cyrus was delighted with the suggestion. His anger cooled, and he agreed. He then appointed Mazares, a Mede, to carry out Croesus' recommendations for the Lydians and also to sell into slavery everyone who had joined Pactyas' revolt. Above all, Pactyas himself was to be brought to Cyrus alive.

Cyrus gave these orders on the road and continued his march toward Persia. Pactyas, hearing that an army was coming for him, fled in terror to Cyme. Mazares marched to Sardis and, finding Pactyas gone, first forced the Lydians to carry out Cyrus' orders. From that point on, the Lydians changed their entire way of life.

Then Mazares sent a message to Cyme demanding they hand over Pactyas. The people of Cyme decided to consult the oracle at Branchidae -- an ancient oracle near Miletus that all the Ionians and Aeolians regularly consulted. They sent messengers to ask the god what they should do about Pactyas so as to please the gods. The oracle's answer came back: hand him over to the Persians.

When the people of Cyme heard this, they were ready to comply. But a respected citizen named Aristodicus, the son of Heraclides, stopped them. He didn't trust the answer and suspected the messengers weren't reporting it accurately. So a second delegation was sent, with Aristodicus himself among them.

When they reached Branchidae, Aristodicus stepped forward and put the question himself: "Lord, the Lydian Pactyas came to us as a suppliant, fleeing a violent death at the hands of the Persians. They're demanding we hand him over. We fear Persian power, but we haven't dared surrender a suppliant until you tell us clearly what we should do."

The god gave the same answer: hand him over to the Persians.

At that point, Aristodicus deliberately walked around the entire temple, pulling down every sparrow's nest and every other bird's nest he could find. As he did this, a voice spoke from the inner shrine: "You! Most impious of men! How dare you do this? How dare you drag my suppliants from my temple?"

Aristodicus was ready with his answer: "Lord, so you protect your own suppliants, but you tell the people of Cyme to give up theirs?"

The god replied: "Yes, I tell you to do it -- so that you may be destroyed all the sooner for your impiety, and never again come to my oracle asking about the surrender of suppliants."

When the people of Cyme heard this, they wanted neither to be destroyed for handing Pactyas over nor besieged for sheltering him, so they sent him to Mytilene. The people of Mytilene were preparing to hand Pactyas over for a fee -- how much, I can't say for certain, because the deal was never completed. The people of Cyme, learning what was happening, sent a ship to Lesbos and spirited Pactyas away to Chios. But the Chians dragged him out of the temple of Athena Poliouchos and surrendered him. In exchange, they received the territory of Atarneus, a region of Mysia opposite Lesbos. The Persians took custody of Pactyas to hold him for Cyrus.

For a long time afterward, no one in Chios would use barley from Atarneus for any sacred offering or bake sacrificial cakes from its grain. Everything produced in that territory was excluded from all religious ceremonies.

With Pactyas dealt with, Mazares campaigned against the cities that had joined the siege of Tabalus. He enslaved the people of Priene, overran the entire Maeander plain, letting his army plunder it freely, and did the same to Magnesia. Then suddenly he fell sick and died.

After Mazares' death, Harpagos came down to take command -- the same Harpagos who was a Mede, the same man whom King Astyages had served that unspeakable dinner, the same man who'd helped give the kingdom to Cyrus. Appointed as general by Cyrus, Harpagos arrived in Ionia and began taking cities one by one. His method was to throw up siege mounds: once he had a city penned behind its walls, he piled up earthworks against them and stormed them.

The first Ionian city he attacked was Phocaea.

Now, the Phocaeans were the first Greeks to make long sea voyages. They were the ones who discovered the Adriatic, Tyrrhenia, Iberia, and Tartessus -- and they sailed not in round merchant ships but in fifty-oared war galleys. At Tartessus they befriended the king, whose name was Arganthonius. He ruled the Tartessians for eighty years and lived to be a hundred and twenty. He liked the Phocaeans so much that he first invited them to leave Ionia and settle anywhere they wanted in his own land. When they turned that down, he heard from them how Median power was growing and gave them money to build a wall around their city -- and he gave generously, for the circuit of that wall runs for many furlongs, all built of large, close-fitted stones.

That was how the Phocaean wall was built. When Harpagos brought his army and besieged the city, he sent word that he'd be satisfied if the Phocaeans would just knock down one battlement of their wall and consecrate one building. The Phocaeans, who were deeply opposed to subjection, asked for one day to deliberate and requested that Harpagos pull back his army from the walls while they discussed.

Harpagos said he knew perfectly well what they were planning, but he allowed them their day.

When the army withdrew, the Phocaeans immediately launched their fifty-oared galleys, loaded in their children, women, and all their portable property, along with the sacred images and offerings from their temples -- everything except the bronze, stone, and painted works -- and sailed away to Chios. The Persians took possession of an empty city.

The Chians refused to sell the Phocaeans the islands called the Oenussae, fearing they'd be turned into a trading center that would cut Chios out of commerce. So the Phocaeans set their course for Corsica, where twenty years earlier they'd founded a colony called Alalia on the advice of an oracle. (Arganthonius was dead by this time.)

Before heading to Corsica, they first sailed back to Phocaea and slaughtered the Persian garrison that Harpagos had left there. After that, they pronounced terrible curses on anyone who stayed behind, and they sank a lump of iron in the sea and swore that they would not return to Phocaea until that iron rose to the surface.

But as they were preparing to sail for Corsica, more than half the citizens were overcome with longing for their city and their homeland. They broke their oath and sailed back to Phocaea. Those who kept the oath weighed anchor from the Oenussae and sailed on.

When they reached Corsica, they lived for five years alongside the earlier colonists, building temples there. But they took to plundering all their neighbors, so the Tyrrhenians and Carthaginians formed an alliance against them, each contributing sixty ships. The Phocaeans manned their own sixty ships and sailed out to meet them in the Sardinian Sea.

In the sea battle that followed, the Phocaeans won what you might call a Pyrrhic victory: forty of their ships were destroyed, and the remaining twenty had their rams bent and were useless. They sailed back to Alalia, picked up their women, children, and whatever belongings their ships could carry, and abandoned Corsica, sailing to Rhegium in southern Italy.

As for the sailors from the destroyed ships, the Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians captured most of them, took them ashore, and stoned them to death. After this, the people of Agylla found that everything that passed by the place where the dead Phocaeans lay -- livestock, pack animals, people -- became crippled, twisted, or paralyzed. The people of Agylla sent to Delphi to find out how to atone for the crime, and the priestess instructed them to hold magnificent funeral rites and an ongoing festival of athletics and horse racing at the site, which they still do to this day.

That was the fate of some Phocaeans. Those who'd taken refuge at Rhegium went on to found a city in the land of Oenotria that is now called Hyele. They established it after learning from a man of Poseidonia that the oracle had meant them to found a temple to the hero Cyrnus, not to settle on the island of Corsica.

That is the story of Phocaea. The people of Teos behaved almost identically: when Harpagos took their walls with a siege mound, they all boarded their ships and sailed straight for Thrace, where they founded the city of Abdera. Before them, Timesios of Clazomenae had tried to establish a colony there but was driven out by the Thracians. He's now honored as a hero by the Teians in Abdera.

The Phocaeans and Teians were the only Ionians who chose to abandon their homes rather than accept subjection. The rest of the Ionians -- except for the Milesians -- did fight against Harpagos, and each people fought bravely for their own city. But when they were defeated, they stayed where they were and submitted to whatever was demanded of them. The Milesians, as I mentioned earlier, had their own treaty with Cyrus and remained undisturbed.

So Ionia was enslaved for the second time. Once Harpagos had conquered the mainland Ionians, the islanders saw what was happening and surrendered to Cyrus out of fear.

Even after this disaster, the Ionians continued to hold their gatherings at the Panionion. At one such assembly, I'm told, a man named Bias of Priene offered them the best advice anyone could have given: he proposed that all the Ionians should join together in one great expedition, sail to Sardinia, and found a single city for all Ionians. That way they'd escape subjection and prosper, inhabiting the largest island in the world and ruling over others. If they stayed in Ionia, he said, he didn't see how they could ever be free again.

That was the advice Bias gave after the catastrophe. But even before the fall of Ionia, Thales of Miletus -- who was of Phoenician descent -- had offered equally good counsel. He'd proposed that the Ionians establish a single central government at Teos, which was in the middle of Ionia. The other cities would continue to be inhabited, but they'd be treated like townships within one state.

Those were the two proposals. But neither was followed.

After subduing Ionia, Harpagos marched against the Carians, the Caunians, and the Lycians, bringing Ionian and Aeolian troops along as reinforcements.

The Carians originally came to the mainland from the islands. In ancient times, as subjects of King Minos, they were called Leleges and lived on the islands. They paid no tribute, as far as I can trace, but whenever Minos needed them, they crewed his ships. And since Minos conquered a lot of territory and was successful in his wars, the Carians were at that time by far the most famous nation in the world, alongside him. They produced three military innovations that the Greeks adopted: they were the first to attach crests to helmets, the first to put designs on shields, and the first to make shield handles -- before that, everyone who carried a shield used leather straps, hanging the shield from their neck and left shoulder.

Eventually, the Dorians and Ionians drove the Carians from the islands to the mainland. At least that's the Cretan version. The Carians themselves disagree entirely -- they claim they've always lived on the mainland and have always gone by the same name. As evidence, they point to an ancient temple of Carian Zeus at Mylasa, which is shared by the Mysians and Lydians as brother races of the Carians, since Lydus and Mysus were brothers of Car. Only these kinsman peoples may worship there -- anyone of a different race who happens to speak the same language is excluded.

The Caunians, in my opinion, have been there from the beginning as well, though they themselves claim to have come from Crete. Their language has either converged with Carian or the other way around -- I can't say which for certain. But their customs are quite different from both the Carians and everyone else. For instance, they think the finest thing in the world is to get together in large groups for drinking parties, organized by age or friendship, with men, women, and children all included. Also, after they'd established temples for foreign gods, they changed their minds and decided to worship only their own native deities. The entire young male population armed themselves, marched to the border of Calynda, beating the air with their spears, and declared that they were driving the foreign gods out of the country. Those are Caunian ways.

The Lycians originally came from Crete. In ancient times all of Crete was held by non-Greeks. When the sons of Europa -- Sarpedon and Minos -- fought over the kingdom, Minos won. He expelled Sarpedon and his followers, who then migrated to the land of Milyas in Asia. What's now called Lycia was then called Milyas, and its people were the Solymoi. While Sarpedon ruled them, they were called Termilae, the name the neighboring peoples still use for the Lycians. But when Lycus the son of Pandion came from Athens -- he too had been driven out, by his brother Aegeus -- and joined Sarpedon in the land of the Termilae, in time the people came to be called Lycians, after Lycus.

Lycian customs are partly Cretan and partly Carian, but they have one unique practice found nowhere else: they trace their descent through their mothers, not their fathers. If you ask a Lycian who he is, he'll recite his maternal ancestry, naming his mother's mother's mother. And if a female citizen marries a slave, the children are considered freeborn. But if a male citizen, even the most prominent man among them, takes a foreign wife or a concubine, his children have no civil rights.

The Carians were subdued by Harpagos without any notable resistance, either from themselves or from the Greeks living in their territory. Among these Greeks were the people of Cnidos, colonists from Sparta, whose territory juts out into the sea -- the peninsula called Triopion, starting from the coast of Bybassos. Since nearly all of Cnidos is surrounded by water (the Gulf of Ceramos to the north, the sea off Syme and Rhodes to the south), the only land connection is an isthmus about five furlongs wide. While Harpagos was conquering Ionia, the people of Cnidos began digging through this isthmus to make their territory an island.

But the workers kept getting injured at much higher rates than normal, in ways that seemed supernatural -- especially in their eyes, when they were breaking up the rock. They sent to Delphi to ask what was wrong. The priestess, as the people of Cnidos themselves report, answered in verse:

  "Don't fence the isthmus with towers or dig it through.
  Zeus would have made it an island, had he wished."

When the oracle spoke, the people of Cnidos stopped digging and surrendered to Harpagos without a fight.

Inland from Halicarnassus lived the Pedasians, among whom something remarkable happened: whenever disaster was about to strike them or their neighbors, the priestess of Athena grew a long beard. This happened three times. The Pedasians were the only people in the Carian region who held out against Harpagos for any length of time, giving him real trouble by fortifying a mountain called Lide.

Eventually the Pedasians too were overcome. When Harpagos marched his army into the plain of Xanthus in Lycia, the Lycians came out to fight, few against many, and displayed remarkable courage. But when they were defeated and pushed back inside their city, they gathered their wives, children, property, and slaves into the citadel and set fire to it, burning everything. Then, having sworn terrible oaths to one another, they marched out to meet the enemy and fought to the death. Every last man of Xanthus was killed.

The Lycians who live there now and claim to be from Xanthus are mostly immigrants. Only eighty households survived, and only because they happened to be away from home at the time.

That's how Harpagos took Xanthus. He captured Caunus in much the same way, the Caunians having largely followed the Lycians' example.

So while Harpagos was conquering the coast of Asia, Cyrus was doing the same in the interior, subjugating every nation and passing none by. I'll skip most of these campaigns, but I'll describe the ones that gave him the most trouble and are most worth telling.

Once Cyrus had brought everything else on the mainland under his control, he turned to the Assyrians. Assyria has many great cities, but the most famous and strongest -- the place where the seat of government had been established after the destruction of Nineveh -- was Babylon. And what a city it was.

Babylon lies in a vast plain. It's shaped as a square, with each side measuring about fifteen miles, making the total circuit about sixty miles. That's how big Babylon is -- and it was built on a scale of magnificence beyond any city I know of.

First, a wide, deep moat full of water runs around the entire city. Behind that stands a wall eighty-five feet thick and three hundred and forty feet high (using the royal cubit, which is about three inches longer than the standard cubit).

Now I should explain what they did with all the earth from the moat and how the wall was constructed. As they dug the moat, they formed the excavated earth into bricks and baked them in kilns. Using hot asphalt for mortar and inserting reed mats every thirty courses, they first lined the edges of the moat and then built the wall itself in the same fashion. Along the top of the wall they built single-story chambers facing each other on both sides, with enough space between them to drive a four-horse chariot. A hundred gates pierce the circuit of the wall, all made entirely of bronze -- posts, lintels, and all.

There's another city called Is, eight days' journey from Babylon, with a small river also called the Is that flows into the Euphrates. This river carries lumps of asphalt along with its water, and this is where the asphalt for Babylon's wall came from.

The city is divided in two by the Euphrates, which flows right through the middle. The Euphrates rises in Armenia and is a large, deep, swift river that empties into the Red Sea. On each side, the main wall curves down to the riverbank, and from there, ramparts of baked brick run along both banks of the stream. The city itself is full of three- and four-story buildings. The streets are laid out in straight lines, including the cross streets that lead down to the river. At the end of each cross street, there's a bronze gate in the river rampart that opens onto the water.

This outer wall serves as the city's main defense, but inside it runs a second wall, slightly thinner but hardly less strong. In the center of each of the two city halves stood a great building: in one half, the royal palace, enormous and heavily fortified; in the other, the temple of Zeus Belus, with bronze gates. The temple precinct is a square, each side measuring a quarter mile. It still existed in my time.

In the center of the precinct stands a solid tower, a furlong in length and width, and on this tower another tower is built, and another on that one, and so on -- eight towers in all. A ramp spirals up around the outside of all the towers, and about halfway up there's a landing with benches where climbers can rest. At the very top of the last tower stands a great chapel. Inside the chapel is a large, richly covered couch with a golden table beside it. There is no statue in the chapel. No human being spends the night there except one local woman, chosen by the god -- or so the Chaldean priests of this god claim.

These same priests say that the god himself comes regularly to the chapel and sleeps on the couch. I don't believe this, though similar things are reported at Egyptian Thebes, where a woman sleeps in the temple of the Theban Zeus. (Both these women are said to abstain from relations with men.) The same practice exists with the prophetess at Patara in Lycia, at least when there's an oracle operating there -- she's locked in the temple at night.

In the temple at Babylon there's another chapel at ground level containing a great golden seated statue of Zeus, with a large golden table beside it and a golden footstool and throne. The Chaldeans told me that eight hundred talents of gold went into making all of this. Outside this chapel stands a golden altar, and also a larger altar where full-grown animals are sacrificed (only suckling animals may be offered on the golden one). On the larger altar, the Chaldeans burn a thousand talents of frankincense every year at the god's festival.

In Cyrus' time, there was also a solid gold statue twelve cubits high -- about eighteen feet -- in these precincts. I didn't see this myself, but I'm reporting what the Chaldeans told me. Darius the son of Hystaspes had designs on this statue but didn't dare take it. Xerxes the son of Darius did take it -- and killed the priest who tried to stop him. Such is the magnificence of this temple, along with many private offerings.

Of the many rulers of Babylon, two were women, and I'll discuss both in more detail in my Assyrian history. The first, Semiramis, who lived five generations before the other, built the remarkable embankments on the plain that control the river, which before her time used to flood like a sea.

The second queen, Nitocris, was cleverer than Semiramis. She left behind monuments I'll describe, and she also made defensive preparations against the growing Median threat -- by that time Nineveh itself had fallen to the Medes. First, she altered the course of the Euphrates, which had previously flowed straight through the city. By digging channels upstream, she made the river so winding that it actually passes the same Assyrian village, Ardericca, three times. Even now, travelers sailing down the Euphrates from our sea to Babylon arrive at this one village on three separate days.

She also built massive embankments along both riverbanks. Then, well upstream of Babylon, she excavated a great basin for an artificial lake, digging just far enough from the river at every point to hit water. The lake's circumference was about fifty miles, and she used the excavated earth to build up the river embankments. When the basin was finished, she lined its edges with stone.

She had two purposes in doing all this -- making the river wind and creating the lake. The winding course slowed the river's current, and the lengthy detours would make any enemy's approach to Babylon much slower. She built these works on the side facing Media, the most direct route into Babylonian territory, to keep the Medes from learning about her kingdom's defenses.

There was another problem she solved as well. The city was divided in two by the river, and in earlier times, to cross from one half to the other you had to take a boat -- which must have been quite inconvenient. Nitocris found a solution while she was digging the lake. She had massive stones cut. When they were ready and the basin was excavated, she diverted the entire Euphrates into the lake bed. While the old riverbed was dry, she lined the banks with baked brick walls matching the city's main ramparts, and she built a bridge across the middle of the city, using the cut stones bound together with iron and lead. During the day, squared timbers were laid across the bridge for people to walk on. At night the timbers were removed, to prevent people from crossing in the dark and stealing from each other. When the lake had filled with water and the bridge was complete, she redirected the Euphrates back into its original channel. The excavated area became a useful swamp, and the city had its bridge.

This same queen devised another clever trick. Above the busiest gate in the city, she placed a tomb for herself, right over the gateway, with this inscription carved on it: "If any king of Babylon after me finds himself short of money, let him open this tomb and take as much as he needs. But don't open it for any other reason -- that won't go well for you."

This tomb went undisturbed until Darius became king. Darius thought it was absurd not to use this gate (he couldn't, because the corpse would have been directly above his head as he drove through) and equally absurd not to take the money when it was practically inviting him to do so. He opened the tomb. Inside he found no money at all, just the corpse and a new inscription: "If you weren't so insatiably greedy, you would not have opened the resting-places of the dead."

That was the kind of queen Nitocris was. It was her son, Labynetus -- bearing the same name as his father -- who ruled the Assyrians when Cyrus marched against them.

Now, when the Great King goes on campaign, he travels well supplied. He brings provisions and livestock from home, and he even brings water from the river Choaspes, which flows past Susa -- the only water the king will drink. This water is boiled and carried in silver vessels on a vast number of four-wheeled, mule-drawn wagons that accompany him wherever he goes.

On his way to Babylon, when Cyrus reached the river Gyndes -- which rises in the Matienian mountains, flows through Dardanian territory, and joins the Tigris, which passes the city of Opis and empties into the Red Sea -- when Cyrus, I say, was trying to cross this navigable river, one of his sacred white horses plunged in with a spirited leap and was swept away by the current and drowned.

Cyrus was furious at the river for this insolence. He vowed to make it so weak that even women could cross it in the future without getting their knees wet. He set aside his march to Babylon, divided his army in half, and on each bank of the river he marked out a hundred and eighty channels radiating in every direction. He set his entire army to digging. With so many men at work the job was finished, but they'd wasted the entire summer on it.

Having taken his revenge on the Gyndes by splitting it into three hundred and sixty channels, Cyrus waited for the following spring and then resumed his march on Babylon. The Babylonians marched out of the city to meet him. When the two armies engaged in front of the city, the Babylonians were beaten and driven back inside their walls.

But they already knew that Cyrus was a man who couldn't sit still, and they'd watched him attack one nation after another. So they'd stockpiled years' worth of food in advance. They felt no urgency about the siege. Meanwhile, Cyrus was getting nowhere -- much time passed with no progress.

Then -- whether someone else suggested it or he thought of it himself -- Cyrus came up with a plan. He stationed part of his army at the point where the Euphrates enters the city, and another part where it exits. He told his men that as soon as they saw the riverbed become passable, they should wade in and enter the city.

Having arranged his troops, Cyrus himself marched with the non-combat portion of his army to the same artificial lake that Queen Nitocris had created. He did exactly what she had done: he diverted the Euphrates through a channel into the lake, which was then a marsh, and the river level in the city dropped rapidly.

When the Persians stationed at the city walls saw the Euphrates had fallen to about mid-thigh depth, they waded in along the riverbed and entered Babylon. If the Babylonians had noticed what was happening, or had realized what Cyrus was doing, they could have trapped the Persians and destroyed them easily. They could have locked every gate along the riverfront and climbed the embankment walls, catching the invaders like fish in a trap. But as it happened, the Persians took them completely by surprise. The city was so enormous that, according to the residents, the people in the center of Babylon had no idea the outer districts had already been captured. They were in the middle of a festival, dancing and celebrating, and only learned the truth when it was far too late.

That was how Babylon fell for the first time.

As for the wealth of Babylon and how great it is, I'll demonstrate it with many proofs, including this one: to support the Great King and his army, the entire empire (apart from the regular tribute) has been divided into districts assigned to provide food for different months of the year. Out of twelve months, the territory of Babylon provides support for four -- and the whole rest of Asia covers the remaining eight. That means Babylonian territory alone accounts for a third of all Asia's wealth.

The governorship of this province -- satrapy, as the Persians call it -- was the richest of them all. When Tritantaechmes the son of Artabazus held it from the king, a full artab of silver (a Persian measure a bit larger than the Attic medimnos) came in to him every single day. As private property -- separate from his war horses -- he kept eight hundred stallions and sixteen thousand mares, each stallion serving twenty mares. He also kept so many Indian hunting dogs that four large villages on the plain were exempt from all other obligations just to provide food for the dogs.

That gives you an idea of the governor of Babylon's wealth. The land of Assyria itself gets little rain. The rainfall is just enough to sprout the grain, but the crops are grown to maturity by irrigation from the river -- not like Egypt, where the Nile itself rises and floods the fields, but by hand irrigation using water-lifting devices. The whole territory, like Egypt, is crisscrossed by canals. The largest canal is navigable by ship and runs southeast from the Euphrates to the Tigris, on which Nineveh stands.

This is, without question, the most productive grain-growing land I know of. It doesn't even try to grow figs, grapes, or olives. But for grain, it regularly yields two hundredfold, and in its best years three hundredfold. The leaves of the wheat and barley grow four fingers wide. As for the size of the trees that millet and sesame grow into -- I know from personal experience, but I won't mention it, since I'm well aware that what I've already said about the crops will be disbelieved by anyone who hasn't been there.

They use no olive oil, only sesame oil. Date palms grow across the whole plain, most of them fruit-bearing. From the dates they make food, wine, and honey. They tend their date palms the way others tend fig trees, and in particular they tie the fruit of the male palm to the female trees so that the gall-fly can enter the dates and ripen them, preventing them from falling off prematurely.

But the greatest marvel in all this land, after the city itself, is the boats. They're round and made entirely of leather. The frames are made of willow ribs, cut in the Armenian highlands, and around these they stretch hides to form the hull, without shaping a stern or pointing a prow -- just a round shape, like a shield. They stuff the boat with straw and send it downstream loaded with cargo, most often casks of date wine. Two men steer the craft, standing upright with two oars each -- one pulling, the other pushing. These boats come in all sizes. The largest can carry a cargo of five thousand talents' weight. And every boat carries a live donkey -- the bigger boats carry several.

Here's why: when they reach Babylon and sell their cargo, they auction off the willow ribs and the straw, but they load the hides onto their donkeys and drive them back to Armenia. You can't sail upstream against the Euphrates' powerful current -- that's why they make the boats of hide instead of wood. When they get back to Armenia, they build new boats the same way.

As for their clothing, the Babylonians wear a linen tunic reaching to their feet, then a woolen tunic over that, and then a white cloak wrapped around them. Their shoes are of a local style, somewhat like Boeotian slippers. They wear their hair long, bind turbans around their heads, and anoint their entire bodies with perfume. Every man carries a personal seal and a hand-carved walking stick. Each staff has a carved emblem on top -- an apple, a rose, a lily, an eagle, or some other device. It's not their custom to carry a staff without one.

Among Babylonian customs, the wisest in my opinion is this one, which I'm told the Eneti of Illyria also practice. Once a year in every village, when the girls reached marriageable age, they were all gathered together in one place. A crowd of men stood around them, and an auctioneer called each girl up one at a time, starting with the most beautiful. She was sold to the highest bidder. Then the next most beautiful, and so on. They were being sold as brides. The wealthy Babylonians who wanted to marry competed fiercely for the most beautiful girls. But the common men who wanted wives weren't looking for beauty -- they were willing to take the less attractive girls plus a cash payment.

Here's how it worked: when the auctioneer finished selling the most beautiful girls, he'd call up the least attractive one, or one who was physically disabled, and ask who'd accept the least amount of money to take her. She went to whoever asked for the smallest sum. The money came from the sale of the beautiful girls -- so the good-looking women effectively provided dowries for the plain or disabled ones. A father wasn't allowed to give his daughter in marriage to any man he chose, and a buyer couldn't take the girl home without providing guarantors that he would actually marry her. If the couple didn't get along, the law required him to return the money. Anyone was free to come from another village to buy.

This was their finest custom. Unfortunately, it no longer exists. Lately they've found another practice instead. Ever since the conquest brought poverty and ruin, the common people have taken to prostituting their daughters for income.

Their second wisest custom is this: they bring their sick out to the marketplace, because they don't use doctors. Passersby come up to the sick person and offer advice -- specifically, anyone who has suffered the same illness or knows someone who has. They're required to approach and share what remedy worked for them or for the person they knew. It's forbidden to walk past a sick person in silence without asking what's wrong.

They bury their dead in honey, and their funeral rites are similar to the Egyptian ones. After a Babylonian man sleeps with his wife, both of them sit by burning incense, and at dawn they bathe -- neither will touch anything until they've washed. The Arabians do likewise.

Now for the most shameful of Babylonian customs: every woman in the country is required to sit in the precinct of Aphrodite once in her life and have intercourse with a stranger. Many of the wealthy women, considering themselves too good to mingle with the rest, drive to the temple in covered carriages drawn by pairs of horses, with a large retinue of attendants. But most women do it this way: they sit in the sacred enclosure wearing wreaths of cord on their heads, and there are great numbers of them at any time, some arriving and others leaving. Roped-off lanes run in every direction through the crowd, and the male strangers walk along them making their selection.

Once a woman takes her seat, she doesn't go home until a stranger has tossed a silver coin into her lap and slept with her outside the temple. As he throws the coin, he must say: "I summon you in the name of the goddess Mylitta" -- Mylitta being the Assyrian name for Aphrodite. The coin can be any size -- she's not allowed to refuse it, since the act makes it sacred. She must go with the first man who throws a coin; she may not reject anyone. After she's done her duty to the goddess, she goes home, and from that point on, no gift however large can win her.

The attractive, tall women are released quickly. But the homely ones sometimes wait a very long time to fulfill the requirement -- some as long as three or four years. A similar custom exists in parts of Cyprus.

Those are the customs of the Babylonians. There are also three tribes among them that eat nothing but fish. They catch the fish, dry them in the sun, pound them in mortars, and strain the result through cloth. Then they either knead it into cakes or bake it like bread, according to taste.

When Babylon too had been conquered, Cyrus set his sights on the Massagetae. This nation is reputed to be both large and warlike. They live to the east, beyond the river Araxes, opposite the Issedones. Some say they're actually a Scythian people.

The Araxes is said by some to be larger than the Danube and by others to be smaller. They say it contains many islands about the size of Lesbos, and on these islands live people who dig up roots of all kinds in summer and eat them, and who have discovered certain tree fruits that they store when ripe and eat through the winter. They've also discovered other trees that produce a fruit with unusual properties: when they gather in groups, light a fire, and throw this fruit into the flames, they become intoxicated by the smoke, the way Greeks get drunk on wine. The more fruit they throw on the fire, the more intoxicated they become, until they stand up and start dancing and singing. That, they say, is how these islanders live.

As for the Araxes itself, it flows from the land of the Matienians (the same source as the Gyndes, which Cyrus divided into three hundred and sixty channels) and splits into forty branches. All but one end in swamps and marshes, where people are said to live who eat raw fish and wear seal skins. The one remaining branch flows with a clear, unbroken current into the Caspian Sea.

The Caspian is a sea entirely on its own, unconnected to any other body of water. The sea that the Greeks navigate, the ocean beyond the Pillars of Heracles called the Atlantic, and the Red Sea -- all of these are actually one interconnected body of water. But the Caspian is completely separate. It takes fifteen days to cross it by oar, and at its widest point, eight days. Along its western shore runs the Caucasus, the most extensive and highest of all mountain ranges. Many diverse peoples live in the Caucasus, subsisting mostly on wild forest products. Among them are said to be trees whose leaves, when pounded and mixed with water, can be used to paint figures on clothing -- figures that never wash out but age with the fabric as if woven in from the start. The people of this region, they say, have sexual intercourse in the open, like animals.

West of the Caspian, then, the Caucasus forms the boundary. Eastward, an endless plain stretches as far as the eye can see. The Massagetae occupy a large portion of this vast plain, and it was against them that Cyrus was eager to march. He had many reasons driving him on: first, his extraordinary birth and the conviction people had that he was more than a mere mortal; and second, his unbroken string of military successes. Wherever Cyrus led his army, no nation could escape.

The ruler of the Massagetae was a woman -- Queen Tomyris, who had taken power after her husband's death. Cyrus sent envoys to her, pretending he wanted to marry her. But Tomyris wasn't fooled: she understood that he was courting her kingdom, not her, and she rejected his advances.

When seduction failed, Cyrus stopped pretending. He marched openly to the Araxes and began building pontoon bridges for his army to cross, constructing towers on the boats that would carry his men across the river.

While this work was underway, Tomyris sent a herald with this message: "King of the Medes, stop pressing forward with what you're doing. You can't know whether it will end well for you or not. Stop, I say. Be king over your own people, and put up with the sight of me ruling mine. But since I know you won't take this advice -- since you'd choose anything over peace -- very well: if you're so eager to test yourself against the Massagetae, then stop your bridge-building. Cross into our land, and we'll withdraw three days' march from the river. Or if you'd rather host us in yours, do the same yourself."

Cyrus convened his senior advisors and put the question to them. They unanimously recommended inviting Tomyris into his territory.

But Croesus, who was present, disagreed. "Your Majesty," he said, "I told you once before that since Zeus gave me to you, I'd do whatever I could to ward off any harm I saw coming your way. My own bitter sufferings have taught me wisdom. If you think you're immortal and that you command an immortal army, then my advice would be useless. But if you know that you're mortal and that your soldiers are too, then understand this: there is a wheel of human fortune that spins around and never lets the same people be lucky forever.

"So here's my thinking, which is opposite to what these men are saying. If we let the enemy into our territory and we lose, you lose your whole empire -- because the Massagetae won't turn around and go home. They'll march straight into your provinces. But if you win on this side, the victory won't be as decisive as if you'd crossed into their land, defeated them, and pursued them into their own territory.

"Beyond that, it would be a disgrace for Cyrus the son of Cambyses to give ground before a woman.

"So my advice is this: cross the river, advance as far as they retreat, and then try to get the upper hand by doing the following. I hear the Massagetae know nothing about Persian luxuries and have never tasted the good life. So slaughter cattle without limit, prepare a magnificent feast in our camp, and lay out bowls of undiluted wine and food of every kind. Then leave behind your weakest troops to guard the feast and withdraw the rest toward the river. If I'm not mistaken, when the Massagetae see all that fine food, they'll fall on it. And after that, it will be time for us to prove ourselves."

These were the competing proposals. Cyrus abandoned the first plan and chose Croesus' strategy. He sent word to Tomyris to pull back, as he intended to cross into her territory. She withdrew as promised.

Cyrus then entrusted Croesus to the care of his son Cambyses, to whom he meant to leave the kingdom, with strict instructions to honor Croesus and treat him well -- especially if the campaign against the Massagetae went badly. Having sent them back to Persia, Cyrus crossed the river with his army.

After crossing the Araxes, that night in the land of the Massagetae, Cyrus had a dream. He saw the eldest son of Hystaspes with wings on his shoulders -- one wing overshadowing Asia, the other overshadowing Europe. Hystaspes was a man of the Achaemenid clan, the son of Arsames, and his eldest son was Darius, at that time a young man of about twenty who'd been left behind in Persia because he wasn't old enough for the campaign.

When Cyrus woke, he brooded on the vision. It seemed enormously significant. He summoned Hystaspes to a private meeting and said: "Hystaspes, your son has been caught plotting against me and my throne. I know this for certain, because the gods watch over me and show me everything that threatens me. Last night in my sleep I saw your eldest son with wings on his shoulders, overshadowing Asia with one and Europe with the other. This can only mean he's plotting against me. Go back to Persia immediately, and when I return after conquering these lands, make sure your son is there for me to question."

Cyrus said this because he believed Darius was conspiring against him. But in truth, the gods were showing him that he was destined to die there, and that his kingdom would pass to Darius.

Hystaspes replied: "Your Majesty, may there never be a Persian who plots against you. If there is, let him be destroyed as quickly as possible. You made the Persians free instead of slaves, rulers instead of the ruled. If a dream tells you my son is planning rebellion, I hand him over to you to do with as you see fit."

With that, Hystaspes crossed back over the Araxes and returned to Persia to watch his son Darius on Cyrus' behalf.

Cyrus advanced one day's march from the Araxes and carried out Croesus' plan. He and the best Persian troops withdrew toward the river, leaving behind the weakest soldiers with the feast. When a third of the Massagetae army attacked, they killed the men who'd been left behind -- though not without a fight. Then they saw the feast laid out before them, and once they'd conquered their enemies, they lay down and ate and drank until they fell asleep.

The Persians came back and slaughtered a great number of them, and took even more alive. Among the prisoners was the commander of the Massagetae army -- Spargapises, the son of Queen Tomyris.

When Tomyris learned what had happened to her army and her son, she sent a herald to Cyrus with this message:

"Cyrus, you bloodthirsty man, don't let this make you proud. It wasn't through courage in battle that you overcame my son -- it was through that fruit of the vine, the one that makes you Persians so crazy that evil words rise to your lips as the wine goes down. You set a trap with that drug and overpowered him. Now hear my good advice: give me back my son and leave this land unpunished, even though you've brutalized a third of the Massagetae army. But if you refuse, I swear by the Sun, lord of the Massagetae -- I will give you your fill of blood, insatiable as you are."

Cyrus ignored the message completely.

When Spargapises, the queen's son, sobered up and realized his situation, he begged Cyrus to free him from his chains. His request was granted. But the moment his hands were unbound, he killed himself.

And so Tomyris, since Cyrus would not listen, gathered her entire force and gave battle. This fight was, in my judgment, the fiercest of all the battles fought among non-Greek peoples. Here is how I'm told it went: first the two sides stood apart and shot arrows at each other. When all their arrows were spent, they fell on each other with spears and daggers and fought hand to hand for a very long time. Neither side would give way. Finally, the Massagetae won. Most of the Persian army was destroyed on the spot, and Cyrus himself died there, after a reign of twenty-nine years.

Tomyris then filled a leather bag with human blood and searched among the Persian dead for Cyrus' body. When she found it, she pushed his head down into the bag of blood and spoke over his corpse: "Though I live and have conquered you in battle, you destroyed me by capturing my son through treachery. But I warned you: I have given you your fill of blood."

Many stories are told about the end of Cyrus' life, but this account is the one I find most believable.

As for the Massagetae, they dress like the Scythians and live a similar life. Some are cavalry, some are infantry. They use both bows and spears, and they carry battle-axes. For everything they make, they use either gold or bronze: bronze for spear points, arrowheads, and battle-axes, and gold for decorating their headgear, belts, and arm-bands. They armor their horses' chests with bronze breastplates and use gold on their bridles, bits, and cheek-pieces. They have no iron or silver at all -- those metals don't exist in their land -- but gold and bronze they have in abundance.

These are their customs. Each man marries one wife, but the wives are shared. The Greeks say the Scythians do this, but it's actually the Massagetae: any man who desires a woman simply hangs his quiver on the front of her wagon and has relations with her freely.

They have no fixed limit for human life. But when a man grows very old, all his nearest relatives come together, slaughter him ceremonially along with some cattle, boil the flesh, and feast on it. This is considered the happiest way to die. A person who dies of disease is not eaten but buried in the ground -- they consider it a misfortune not to have lived long enough to be slaughtered.

They grow no crops. They live on livestock and fish, which they catch in abundance from the river Araxes, and they drink milk. The only god they worship is the Sun, and to him they sacrifice horses -- their logic being that to the swiftest of gods, they should offer the swiftest of mortal creatures.