Chapter 28: The Ionian Revolt Begins, and Aristagoras at Sparta

28. That much, then, Otanes achieved after he was made commander. After this there was a short break from troubles. Then troubles began to fall on the Ionians a second time, and they came from Naxos and Miletus. Naxos was richer than any of the other islands, and Miletus, at that very same time, had just reached the height of its prosperity and was the jewel of Ionia. But before this, for two generations, Miletus had suffered terribly from civil strife, until the Parians set it in order. The Milesians had chosen the Parians, out of all the Greeks, to reform their state.

29. This is how the Parians healed their divisions. Their best men came to Miletus, and seeing that the Milesians were in a badly ruined state, they said they wanted to go over the land. They did this, passing through the whole territory of Miletus, and wherever they saw a well-farmed field in the middle of that ruined countryside, they wrote down the name of the field's owner. When they had gone through the whole country and had found only a few such men, they went straight back to the city, called a general assembly, and put these men, the ones whose fields they had found well farmed, in charge of the state. They said they thought these men would take care of public affairs the way they had taken care of their own. And they ordered the rest of the Milesians, who had been split into factions before, to obey these men.

30. So that is how the Parians reformed the Milesians. But at the time I am speaking of, troubles began to come to Ionia from these two states in the following way. Certain men of the wealthier class were driven out of Naxos by the common people, and once in exile they came to Miletus. Now the man in charge of Miletus at that time happened to be Aristagoras son of Molpagoras. He was both the son-in-law and the cousin of Histiaeus son of Lysagoras, whom Darius was keeping at Susa. For Histiaeus was the tyrant of Miletus, and he happened to be at Susa at the time when the Naxians came; and these Naxians had been guest-friends of Histiaeus in earlier days. So when the Naxians arrived, they asked Aristagoras whether he might give them a force, so that they could return from exile to their own land. Aristagoras thought that if they went home with his help, he would become ruler of Naxos. But he used his guest-friendship with Histiaeus as a pretext, and he made them this proposal: "I can't promise to give you a force big enough to bring you back from exile against the will of the Naxians who control the state. I hear that the Naxians have an army 8,000 shields strong and many warships. But I will do everything I can to find a way, and this is my plan. It happens that Artaphernes is my friend. Artaphernes, you should know, is a son of Hystaspes and the brother of King Darius. He governs all the peoples of the coast of Asia, and he has a great army and many ships. I think this man will do whatever we ask of him." When the Naxians heard this, they handed the matter over to Aristagoras to manage as best he could. They told him to promise gifts and the costs of the expedition, which they said they would pay themselves. For they fully expected that when they appeared at Naxos, the Naxians would do whatever they told them, and so would the other islanders too. For of these islands, the Cyclades, not one was yet under Darius.

31. So Aristagoras went to Sardis and told Artaphernes that Naxos was an island not large in size, but beautiful all the same, with rich soil, close to Ionia, and full of wealth and slaves. "So send an expedition against this land," he said, "and bring back the men who are now exiled from it. If you do this, first, I have large sums of money ready for you, apart from the costs of the expedition, which it is only fair that we who lead it should pay. Second, you will win for the king not only Naxos itself but also the islands that depend on it, Paros and Andros and the others called the Cyclades. And starting out from these you will easily attack Euboea, a large and wealthy island, as big as Cyprus, and very easy to conquer. A hundred ships are enough to subdue them all." Artaphernes answered him in these words: "You are bringing good news to the king's house, and all your advice is good, except for the number of ships. Instead of one hundred, two hundred will be ready for you by the beginning of spring. But the king himself must approve this too."

32. When Aristagoras heard this, he went back to Miletus delighted. Meanwhile Artaphernes sent to Susa and reported what Aristagoras had said, and when Darius himself had approved it too, he got ready two hundred triremes and a very large force of Persians and their allies. He appointed as their commander Megabates, a Persian of the Achaemenid clan, a cousin both of himself and of Darius. (It was to this man's daughter, at least if the story is true, that Pausanias the Spartan, son of Cleombrotus, later got himself engaged, because he had conceived a desire to become tyrant of Greece.) Having made Megabates commander, Artaphernes sent the force off to Aristagoras.

33. Megabates took the force on board, together with the Naxians, and sailed, pretending to be heading for the Hellespont. But when he reached Chios, he steered his ships to Caucasa, so that he could cross from there to Naxos with a north wind. Then, since it was not fated that the Naxians should be destroyed by this expedition, something happened that I will now tell. As Megabates was making his rounds of the guards posted on the ships, it happened that on a ship from Myndus there was no one on watch. He was furious, and he ordered his spearmen to find the ship's captain, a man named Scylax, and tie him through one of his ship's oar-holes, with his head outside the ship and his body inside. When Scylax had been tied up this way, someone reported to Aristagoras that Megabates had tied up his guest-friend from Myndus and was treating him shamefully. So Aristagoras came and asked the Persian to release him. When he got nothing of what he asked for, he went himself and set Scylax loose. When Megabates was told of this, he was extremely angry and burst out in rage at Aristagoras. But Aristagoras answered him: "What business is this of yours? Didn't Artaphernes send you to obey me, and to sail wherever I order? Why are you meddling in things that are none of your concern?" That is what Aristagoras said. Megabates was enraged by this, and when night came he sent men in a ship to Naxos to tell the Naxians about all the danger that threatened them.

34. For the Naxians had not been expecting this expedition to be aimed at them at all. But when they were told, they at once brought everything they had in the fields inside the wall, stocked up food and drink as if for a siege, and strengthened their wall. So they were getting ready for the war that was coming at them. The others, meanwhile, crossed with their ships from Chios to Naxos, and when they attacked, they found the place well defended. They besieged it for four months. Then, when the money the Persians had brought with them had all been spent, and Aristagoras himself had spent a great deal on top of that, and the siege kept demanding more and more, they built a fortress for the Naxian exiles and went back to the mainland, having failed.

35. So Aristagoras was not able to keep his promise to Artaphernes. At the same time he was hard pressed by the demand to pay the costs of the expedition, and he was afraid, both because the force had failed and because he had made an enemy of Megabates. He supposed he would be stripped of his rule over Miletus. With all these fears together, he began to plan a revolt. For it also happened that just at this time the man with the marked head had come from Histiaeus at Susa, telling Aristagoras to revolt from the king. Histiaeus wanted to tell Aristagoras to revolt, but he had no other safe way to do it, since the roads were guarded. So he shaved the head of the most trusted of his slaves, marked it by pricking letters into the skin, and waited until the hair had grown back. As soon as it had grown, he sent him off to Miletus with no other instructions than this: when he got to Miletus, he was to tell Aristagoras to shave his hair off and look at his head. And the marks, as I said before, meant revolt. Histiaeus was doing this because he was deeply frustrated at being held at Susa. He had high hopes that if a revolt broke out, he would be sent down to the coast; but if nothing changed at Miletus, he expected never to go back there again.

36. So Histiaeus sent the messenger with this aim, and it happened that all these things came upon Aristagoras at the same moment. So he held a council with his supporters, and he told them both his own view and the message from Histiaeus. All the rest gave the same opinion, urging him to revolt, except Hecataeus the historian. First Hecataeus advised them not to go to war with the king of the Persians, listing all the nations Darius ruled and the extent of his power. When he could not persuade them of that, he advised next that they should make themselves masters of the sea. This could not happen in any other way, as far as he could see, he went on, because he knew the Milesians' forces were weak. But if they seized the treasures in the temple at Branchidae, the offerings that Croesus the Lydian had dedicated, he had high hopes that they could become masters of the sea. That way they would have the wealth to use themselves, and the enemy would not be able to carry it off as plunder. These treasures were of great value, as I showed in the first part of my history. This advice did not win the day. But they did decide to revolt, and to send one of their number by sea to Myus, to the force that had come back from Naxos and was there at the time, to try to seize the commanders who had sailed with the ships.

37. Iatragoras was sent to do this, and by a trick he seized Oliatus son of Ibanollis of Mylasa, Histiaeus son of Tymnes of Termera, Coes son of Erxander, to whom Darius had given Mytilene as a gift, Aristagoras son of Heraclides of Cyme, and many others. Then Aristagoras revolted openly and planned every harm he could against Darius. First, so that the Milesians would be willing to join his revolt, he pretended to give up his sole power and gave Miletus equality under the law. After that he did the same thing in the rest of Ionia too. Some of the tyrants he drove out; but the ones he had taken from the ships that had sailed with him to Naxos he handed over, because he wanted to please their cities, giving each man up to the city he came from.

38. Now the people of Mytilene, as soon as they had Coes in their hands, took him outside the city and stoned him to death. But the people of Cyme let their tyrant go, and most of the others let theirs go as well. So the tyrants were deposed in the different cities. And after deposing the tyrants, Aristagoras the Milesian told each people to appoint generals in their own cities, and then he himself set out as an envoy to Sparta; for he really did need to find some powerful ally.

39. Now at Sparta, Anaxandrides son of Leon was no longer alive and king, but had come to the end of his life, and Cleomenes son of Anaxandrides held the kingship. He had not gained it by merit, but by right of birth. For Anaxandrides had married his own sister's daughter, and he loved her very much, but no children were born to him by her. That being so, the ephors called him before them and said: "If you will not look out for your own interests in time, we still cannot allow the line of Eurysthenes to die out. So send away the wife you have now, since, as you know, she bears you no children, and marry another. If you do that, you will please the Spartans." He answered that he would do neither of these two things. They were not giving him honorable advice, he said, when they told him to send away the wife he had, though she had done him no wrong, and to bring another into his house. In short, he would not follow their advice.

40. At this the ephors and the Council of Elders consulted together and put this proposal to Anaxandrides: "Since we see that you are firmly attached to the wife you have now, agree to do this, and don't oppose it, or the Spartans may make some decision about you that nobody would want. We are not asking you to send away the wife you have. Go on giving her everything you give her now, but also take another wife into your house besides her, to bear you children." When they spoke to him this way, Anaxandrides agreed. So he had two wives, which was not at all the Spartan way.

41. Not long after this, the second wife gave birth to this Cleomenes we have been speaking of. And just as she was bringing an heir to the Spartan throne into the world, the first wife, who had been childless all that time before, somehow became pregnant, as it happened just at that very time. And though she really was with child, the relatives of the second wife, when they heard of it, made an uproar against her. They said she was making an empty boast and meant to pass off someone else's child as her own. Since they made such a show of outrage, when her time was close the ephors, who did not believe her either, sat around her and watched while she gave birth. She bore Dorieus, then right away conceived Leonidas, and right after him Cleombrotus. Some even say that Cleombrotus and Leonidas were twins. But the wife who had borne Cleomenes, the one who had come in after the first wife, the daughter of Primetades son of Demarmenus, never had another child.

42. Now Cleomenes, it is said, was not quite in his right mind but on the edge of madness, while Dorieus was the first of all the young men of his age, and he was confident that he would become king on merit. So he held that opinion. But when Anaxandrides died, the Spartans followed their usual custom and made the eldest, Cleomenes, king. Dorieus resented this and did not think it right to be ruled by Cleomenes. So he asked the Spartans for a body of men and led them off to found a colony. He did not ask the oracle at Delphi what land he should go to and settle, and he did none of the things that are usually done. Instead, in his anger he sailed off with his ships to Libya, with men from Thera as his guides. When he reached the Cinyps, he founded a settlement in the finest spot in all Libya, along the banks of the river. But in the third year he was driven out of there by the Macae, the Libyans and the Carthaginians, and he went back to the Peloponnese.

43. Then Antichares, a man of Eleon, advised him, on the strength of the oracles of Laius, to found a settlement at Heraclea in Sicily. The whole land of Eryx, he said, belonged to the Heraclids, since Heracles himself had won it. When Dorieus heard this, he went straight to Delphi to ask the oracle whether he would be able to conquer the land he was setting out for. The Pythia answered that he would conquer it. So Dorieus took with him the force he had led to Libya before and sailed along the coast of Italy.

44. Now at this time, the people of Sybaris say, they and their king Telys were about to march against Croton. The people of Croton were terrified and asked Dorieus to help them, and he agreed. So Dorieus joined them in their campaign against Sybaris and helped them take it. That is what the Sybarites say about what Dorieus and his men did. But the people of Croton say that no foreigner helped them in the war against the Sybarites except Callias of Elis, a seer and one of the descendants of Iamus. And he helped them this way, they say: he ran away from Telys, the tyrant of the Sybarites, when the sacrifices he was making for the expedition against Croton did not turn out favorable, and so he came over to them.

45. Those are the stories the two sides tell, and each of them offers the following evidence for its own. The Sybarites point to a sacred precinct and a temple beside the dried-up bed of the Crathis, which they say Dorieus set up to Athena "of the Crathis" after he had helped to take the city. Besides this, they consider Dorieus' own death the strongest evidence of all. He died, they think, because he went against the oracle he had been given. If he had not done anything on the side, but had stuck to what he had been sent to do, he would have conquered the land of Eryx and held it once he had conquered it, and he and his army would not have been destroyed. The people of Croton, on the other hand, point out that many special grants of land in the territory of Croton were given to Callias of Elis, which Callias' descendants still held in my own time, while nothing was given to Dorieus or to Dorieus' descendants. Yet if Dorieus had really helped them in the war with Sybaris, they say, he would have been given many times as much as Callias. That is the evidence the two sides produce, and we may each agree with whichever of them we find more believable.

46. Other Spartans also sailed with Dorieus as co-founders of the colony: Thessalus, Paraebates, Celeas and Euryleon. When they had reached Sicily with their whole force, they were defeated in battle by the Phoenicians and the people of Egesta and were killed. Of the co-founders, only Euryleon survived this disaster. He gathered together the survivors of the expedition and took over Minoa, the colony of Selinus, and helped the people of Selinus to free themselves from their tyrant Peithagoras. But afterward, when he had deposed Peithagoras, he seized the tyranny of Selinus himself and ruled there alone, though only for a short time. For the people of Selinus rose against him and killed him, even though he had fled for refuge to the altar of Zeus of the Marketplace.

47. Another man who went with Dorieus and died with him was Philip son of Butacides, a man of Croton. He had become engaged to the daughter of Telys the Sybarite, and for that he was exiled from Croton. Then, when the marriage fell through, he sailed away to Cyrene, and from there he set out and joined Dorieus with a trireme of his own, paying the costs of the crew himself. This man had won at the Olympic Games, and he was the most handsome Greek of his day. Because of his good looks he received from the people of Egesta something no one else ever received from them: they built a hero's shrine over his grave, and they still offer sacrifices to win his favor.

48. That is how Dorieus ended his life. But if he had put up with being ruled by Cleomenes and had stayed in Sparta, he would have been king of Sparta himself. For Cleomenes did not reign very long, and he died leaving no son to succeed him, only a daughter, whose name was Gorgo.

49. Anyway, Aristagoras, the tyrant of Miletus, arrived at Sparta while Cleomenes was king, and it was with him that he came to talk. He brought with him, as the Spartans say, a bronze tablet with a map of the whole earth engraved on it, with all the sea and all the rivers. When he came to talk with Cleomenes, he said this to him: "Don't be surprised, Cleomenes, at how eager I was to come here, for this is how things stand. That the sons of the Ionians should be slaves instead of free men is a disgrace and a grief, most of all to us ourselves, but of everyone else, most of all to you, since you are the leaders of Greece. So now I beg you, by the gods of Greece, to rescue the Ionians, your own kin, from slavery. And you can do it easily. For the foreigners are not brave fighters, while you have reached the very peak of courage in war. This is how they fight: with bows and arrows and a short spear, and they go into battle wearing trousers and with caps on their heads. So they are easy to beat. Besides, the people who live on that continent have more good things than all the other nations of the world put together: first gold, then silver and bronze, embroidered clothing, pack animals and slaves. All of it could be yours, if you wanted it. And these nations live next to each other in the order I will now show you. Here are the Ionians. Next to them are the Lydians, who not only live in a fertile land but are extremely rich in gold and silver." And as he said this he pointed to the map of the earth, which he had brought with him engraved on the tablet. "And here, next to the Lydians," Aristagoras went on, "are the Eastern Phrygians, who have more sheep and cattle than any people I know, and the richest crops as well. Next to the Phrygians are the Cappadocians, whom we call Syrians. Bordering on them are the Cilicians, whose land comes down to this sea here, where the island of Cyprus lies. They pay the king five hundred talents a year in tribute. Next to these Cilicians are the Armenians, here, as you can see, and they too have great numbers of sheep and cattle. Next to the Armenians are the Matienians, who hold this country here. And next to them is the land of Cissia, here, and in that land, on the banks of this river, the Choaspes, stands the city of Susa, where the great king lives and where his money is stored in treasuries. Once you have taken that city, you can boldly challenge Zeus himself in wealth. Tell me, can it really be that you feel you must risk battles against the Messenians and the Arcadians and the Argives, who are an even match for you, for land that is not large or very fertile, and for borders that are small, when these peoples have no gold or silver at all, the things that make a man want to fight and die? Can that be, I ask you, and will you choose that way now, when you could easily rule all of Asia?" That is what Aristagoras said, and Cleomenes answered: "My friend from Miletus, I will put off my answer until the day after tomorrow."

50. That is as far as they got that time. When the day set for the answer came and they met at the agreed place, Cleomenes asked Aristagoras how many days' journey it was from the Ionian sea to where the king lived. Now Aristagoras, who had been clever in everything else and had been handling Cleomenes well, made a mistake here. He should not have told him the truth, at least if he wanted to bring the Spartans out to Asia. But in fact he told him it was a journey of three months inland from the sea. Cleomenes cut short the rest of the description of the road that Aristagoras had started to give, and said: "My friend from Miletus, get out of Sparta before sunset. What you are saying does not sound good to Spartan ears, wanting to take them a three months' journey away from the sea."

51. After saying this, Cleomenes went home. But Aristagoras took up an olive branch, the sign of a suppliant, and went to Cleomenes' house. He went in as a suppliant and asked Cleomenes to send the child away and listen to him. For Cleomenes' daughter, whose name was Gorgo, was standing beside him; she happened to be his only child, and she was eight or nine years old. But Cleomenes told him to say what he wanted to say and not to hold back because of the child. Then Aristagoras began to promise him money if he would do what he was asking, starting with ten talents. When Cleomenes refused, Aristagoras kept raising the sum he offered, until at last he had promised fifty talents. At that the child cried out: "Father, the stranger will do you harm, unless you leave him and go." Cleomenes was pleased with the child's advice and went off into another room, and Aristagoras left Sparta altogether. He never got the chance to explain any further about the road inland from the sea to the king's residence.

52. As for this road, the truth is as follows. All along it there are royal stations with excellent inns, and the whole road runs through country that is inhabited and safe. Through Lydia and Phrygia there are twenty stations, covering ninety-four and a half parasangs, about 315 miles. After Phrygia comes the river Halys, where there is a gate you must pass through to cross the river, and a strong guard-post stands there. Then, after crossing into Cappadocia, it is twenty-eight stations, or 104 parasangs, about 347 miles, along this road to the borders of Cilicia. On the Cilician border you pass through two separate gates and go by two separate guard-posts. After passing these, it is three stations, fifteen and a half parasangs, about fifty-two miles, to travel through Cilicia. The boundary between Cilicia and Armenia is a river you can sail on, called the Euphrates. In Armenia there are fifteen stations with inns, covering fifty-six and a half parasangs, about 188 miles, and there is a guard-post on the way. Then, when you leave Armenia and enter the land of Matiene, there are thirty-four stations, covering 137 parasangs, about 457 miles. Four navigable rivers flow through this land, and they can only be crossed by ferry. First is the Tigris. The second and third are both called by the same name, though they are not the same river and do not flow from the same region: the first of these two flows from Armenia and the other from the land of the Matienians. The fourth river is called the Gyndes, the one Cyrus once split into three hundred and sixty channels. Going on from there into the land of Cissia, there are eleven stations, forty-two and a half parasangs, about 142 miles, to the river Choaspes, which is also navigable; and on it the city of Susa is built. These stations come to one hundred and eleven in all.

53. That is the number of stations with inns as you go up from Sardis to Susa. Now if the royal road has been measured correctly in parasangs, and if a parasang equals thirty stades, as it certainly does, then the distance from Sardis to what is called the palace of Memnon is 13,500 stades, which is 450 parasangs, about 1,500 miles. So if you travel 150 stades, about seventeen miles, a day, the journey takes exactly ninety days.

54. So Aristagoras of Miletus spoke correctly when he told Cleomenes the Spartan that the journey up from the sea to the king's residence took three months. But if anyone wants an even more exact figure than this, I will give him that too. We should also add the length of the road from Ephesus to Sardis. So I say that the whole distance from the Greek sea to Susa (for that is the name of the city of Memnon) is 14,040 stades, about 1,560 miles, since from Ephesus to Sardis is 540 stades, about sixty miles. And so the three months' journey is lengthened by three days.
