Chapter 30: The Old Feud with Aegina, and Socles on the Tyrants of Corinth

82. Now the grudge the Aeginetans already owed the Athenians had its beginning in this way. The land of the Epidaurians produced no crops for the people who lived there. So, because of this disaster, the Epidaurians went to Delphi to ask the oracle about it. The Pythia told them to set up statues of Damia and Auxesia, and said that once they had set these up, their luck would improve. The Epidaurians then asked a further question: should they make the statues of bronze or of stone? The Pythia told them to use neither, but to make them from the wood of a cultivated olive tree. So the Epidaurians asked the Athenians to let them cut down an olive tree, since they believed the Athenian olives were the most sacred. Some people even say that at that time there were no olive trees anywhere on earth except at Athens. The Athenians said they would allow it on one condition: that every year the Epidaurians would bring the proper offerings to Athena Polias, the guardian of the city, and to Erechtheus, the hero-king of early Athens. The Epidaurians agreed to these terms and got what they asked for. They made statues out of the olive wood and set them up, and their land bore crops again, and they went on doing for the Athenians what they had agreed to do.

83. Now during this time, and before it too, the Aeginetans were subject to the Epidaurians. Among other things, they used to cross over to Epidaurus to have their lawsuits against one another settled there. But after this time they built ships for themselves and, out of sheer stubbornness, revolted from the Epidaurians. Since they were now at odds with them, they kept doing them damage, for in fact they controlled the sea. Above all, they stole these very statues of Damia and Auxesia from them. They carried them off and set them up in the interior of their own island, at a place called Oea, about two and a quarter miles from their city. Once they had set them up in this spot, they worshipped them with sacrifices and with choruses of women who sang mocking, insulting songs. Ten men were appointed for each of the two goddesses to provide the choruses. The choruses insulted no man, only the women of the place. The Epidaurians had these same rites too; and they also have rites that may not be revealed.

84. Once these statues had been stolen, the Epidaurians stopped doing for the Athenians what they had agreed to do. So the Athenians sent to the Epidaurians and complained. The Epidaurians, though, argued that they were doing nothing wrong. As long as they had the statues in their country, they said, they had kept their agreement; but since they had been robbed of them, it was not fair that they should go on making the offerings. They told the Athenians to demand the offerings from the men of Aegina, who had the statues now. So the Athenians sent to Aegina and demanded the statues back. But the Aeginetans said they had no business with the Athenians at all.

85. The Athenians say that after this demand, the citizens sent out by the state went in a single trireme. When they reached Aegina, they tried to pull the statues off their bases, claiming that they were made of wood that belonged to Athens, so that they could carry them home. But they could not get hold of them that way (so the Athenians say), so they threw ropes around them and began to haul on them. Suddenly, as they hauled, there came thunder, and with the thunder an earthquake. The crew of the trireme who were hauling were driven out of their minds by these things. In that state they killed one another as if they were enemies, until in the end only one man out of all of them was left, and he went back alone to Phalerum.

86. That is how the Athenians say it happened. But the Aeginetans say that the Athenians did not come with just one ship. One ship, they say, or even a few more than one, they could easily have driven off, even if they had happened to have no ships of their own. Instead, they say, the Athenians sailed against their country with a large fleet, and they themselves gave way before them and did not fight a sea battle. But they cannot say for certain whether they gave way because they admitted they were not strong enough to fight at sea, or because they meant to do something like what they actually did. The Athenians, they say, since no one came out to fight them, landed from their ships and went for the statues. They could not pull them off their bases, so at last they threw ropes around them and began to haul, until the statues, as they were being hauled, both did the same thing. (And here they tell something I cannot believe, though someone else may.) They say that the statues fell on their knees in front of the Athenians, and have stayed in that position ever since. That, they say, is what the Athenians were doing. Meanwhile they themselves (so the Aeginetans say) had learned that the Athenians were about to attack them, and had got the Argives ready to help. Just as the Athenians had landed on Aeginetan soil, the Argives arrived to rescue them. They had crossed over unnoticed from Epidaurus to the island, and they fell on the Athenians before the Athenians had heard anything about it, cutting them off from the way back to their ships. And it was at this very moment that the thunder and the earthquake came upon them.

87. This is the account the Argives and the Aeginetans both give, and the Athenians too agree that only one of their men survived and came back to Attica. Only, the Argives say this one man was left alive when they destroyed the Athenian army, while the Athenians say the destroyer was the divine. But even this one man did not stay alive. He died, they say, in the following way. When he came back to Athens, he reported the disaster. The wives of the men who had gone on the expedition to Aegina heard it, and they were furious that he alone out of all of them had survived. So they gathered around this man and stabbed him with the brooch pins of their cloaks, each of them asking him where her husband was. That is how he was killed. And to the Athenians the women's deed seemed even more terrible than the disaster itself. Not knowing, it is said, how else to punish the women, they changed their style of dress to the Ionian. Before this, the Athenian women had worn Dorian dress, very like the Corinthian; now the Athenians changed it to the linen tunic, so that the women would have no use for brooches.

88. The truth is, though, that this style of dress is not Ionian in origin but Carian. The old Greek dress for women everywhere was the same as the one we now call Dorian. It is said, too, that because of these events the Argives and Aeginetans each made it a custom in their own country to have brooch pins made half as long again as the size then in use. Their women were to offer brooches above all in the temple of these two goddesses. And no Athenian pottery, or anything else made in Athens, was to be brought into the temple; instead, the custom from then on was to drink there only from pitchers made in their own lands.

89. From this time on, the women of the Argives and Aeginetans, because of the quarrel with the Athenians, went on wearing larger brooches than before, and they still do even in my time. And that is how the Athenians' hostility toward the Aeginetans began. So at this time, when the Thebans made war on the Athenians, the Aeginetans readily came to the help of the Boeotians, remembering what had happened over the statues. The Aeginetans, then, were raiding the coast of Attica, as I have said. The Athenians were determined to make war on the Aeginetans, but an oracle came to them from Delphi. It told them to wait for thirty years, counted from the time of the Aeginetans' wrong, and in the thirty-first year to mark out a sacred precinct for Aeacus, the hero who was Aegina's legendary ancestor, and then begin the war against the Aeginetans; then they would succeed as they wished. But if they attacked at once, it said, they would suffer a great deal of harm in the meantime and also do a great deal, but in the end they would conquer them. When the Athenians heard this report, they marked out a sacred precinct for Aeacus, the one that now stands next to the marketplace. But they could not bear to hear that they must wait thirty years, when they had suffered wrongs from the Aeginetans.

90. But while they were getting ready to take revenge, trouble arose from the Spartans and got in their way. The Spartans had learned what the Alcmaeonids had arranged with the Pythia, and what the Pythia had arranged against them and against the sons of Pisistratus. They were doubly upset: first, because they had driven into exile men who were their guest-friends, and second, because after they had done it the Athenians had shown them no gratitude at all. On top of this, they were spurred on by the oracles which said that they would suffer many wrongs at the hands of the Athenians. They had known nothing of these oracles before, but they knew of them now, because Cleomenes had brought them to Sparta. In fact, Cleomenes had taken them from the Acropolis of Athens. The sons of Pisistratus had owned them before and had left them in the temple when they were driven out, and Cleomenes picked them up after they had been left behind.

91. So at this time the Spartans had got hold of the oracles, and they saw that the Athenians were growing in power and were not at all willing to obey them. They realized that the Athenian people, now that it was free, was becoming a match for their own, whereas under tyrants it had been weak and ready to take orders. Seeing all this, they sent for Hippias son of Pisistratus to come from Sigeum on the Hellespont, where the family of Pisistratus goes for refuge. When Hippias came at their summons, the Spartans also sent for envoys from their other allies, and spoke to them as follows:

"Allies, we know in our own hearts that we have not acted rightly. Stirred up by false oracles, we drove into exile men who were very close friends of ours, bound to us as guest-friends, and who promised to keep Athens obedient to us. Then, having done that, we handed the city over to an ungrateful mob. As soon as it had raised its head, freed by our efforts, it threw out us and our king with insult and violence. And now, swollen with pride, it is growing in power, so that its neighbors first of all, the Boeotians and the Chalcidians, have already learned that they made a mistake, and perhaps others will learn it later on. But since we went wrong in doing what we have described, we will now try to take revenge on them, going there together with you. That is exactly why we sent for Hippias, whom you see here, and for you too, to come from your cities: so that with shared counsel and a shared army we might bring him back to Athens and give back to him what we once took away."

92. That is what they said; but most of the allies did not approve of their words. The rest kept silent, but Socles of Corinth spoke as follows:

"Surely now the sky will be below the earth, and the earth will be lifted up above the sky, and men will live in the sea, and fish will live where men lived before, now that you, Spartans, are doing away with free governments and preparing to bring tyranny back into our cities. There is nothing among men more unjust than tyranny, and nothing more murderous. If you really think it a good thing for cities to be ruled by tyrants, then set up a tyrant in your own state first, and after that try to set them up for others. As things are, you are treating your allies unfairly: you have never had any experience of tyrants yourselves, and at Sparta you take the greatest care that it never happens. If you had had experience of it, as we have, you would be able to offer better judgement about it than you do now.

"This is how the Corinthian state was arranged. The government was an oligarchy, and the oligarchs, who were called the Bacchiads, ran the state and married only among themselves. Now one of these men, named Amphion, had a daughter who was lame, and her name was Labda. Since none of the Bacchiads wanted to marry her, she was taken as wife by Aetion son of Echecrates, who came from the village of Petra but was by descent a Lapith, one of the race of Caeneus. Neither by this wife nor by any other did he have children, so he set off to Delphi to ask about having a family. As soon as he came in, the Pythia greeted him with these lines:

	'You deserve great honor, yet no one gives you honor.
	Labda is with child, and she will bear a rolling boulder that will crash
	down on the heads of the kings, and bring punishment on Corinth.'

"Somehow this answer given to Aetion was reported to the Bacchiads. An earlier oracle had come to Corinth that they had not been able to understand, an oracle that pointed to the same thing as Aetion's and said this:

	'An eagle is with child among the rocks, and will bear a lion,
	strong and savage, who will loosen the knees of many.
	Think this over well, Corinthians, you who live
	around the fair spring of Peirene and in steep Corinth.'

"This oracle, which had come to the Bacchiads earlier, had been a riddle to them. But afterward, when they heard the one that had come to Aetion, they understood the first one at once: it agreed with Aetion's. And understanding this one too, they kept quiet, intending to kill the child that would be born to Aetion. So as soon as his wife gave birth, they sent ten of their own number to the village where Aetion lived, to kill the child. When these men had come to Petra and gone into the courtyard of Aetion's house, they asked for the child. Labda had no idea why they had come. She supposed they were asking for the baby out of friendship for its father, so she brought it out and put it in the hands of one of them. Now they had decided on the way, it seems, that whichever of them first took the child would dash it to the ground. But when Labda brought it and handed it over, it so happened, by the hand of heaven, that the baby smiled at the man who had taken it. He saw this, and pity kept him from killing it. Moved by pity, he handed it to the next man, and he to the third. So it passed through the hands of all ten, handed from one to the next, since not one of them could bring himself to kill it. So they gave the child back to its mother and went outside. And then, standing by the door, they argued and blamed one another, especially the man who had taken the child first, because he had not done what they had agreed. At last, after some time, they decided to go in again and all share in the murder.

"But it was fated that evils would grow for Corinth from Aetion's offspring. For Labda was listening to all this as she stood right by the door. Afraid that they would change their minds, take the child a second time and kill it, she carried it off and hid it in the place she thought least likely to be found: a grain chest. She was sure that if they came back to search, they would look everywhere. And that is exactly what happened. When they came and searched and could not find it, they decided to go back and tell those who had sent them that they had done everything they had been ordered to do.

"So they went away and said this. After that, Aetion's son grew up, and because he had escaped this danger, he was given the name Cypselus, after the grain chest (in Greek, kypsele). When Cypselus had grown to manhood and was consulting the oracle, he was given an answer at Delphi that could be read two ways. Trusting in it, he made his attempt on Corinth and took control of it. The answer was this:

	'Happy indeed is the man who now comes into my house:
	son of Aetion, who will be king of famous Corinth,
	Cypselus, he and his sons, but his sons' sons no longer.'

"That was the oracle. And once Cypselus became tyrant, this is the kind of man he was: many of the Corinthians he drove into exile, many he robbed of their wealth, and far more of their lives.

"He ruled for thirty years and ended his life in prosperity, and his son Periander succeeded him as tyrant. At first Periander was gentler than his father. But after he had been in touch through messengers with Thrasybulus, the tyrant of Miletus, he became far more murderous even than Cypselus. He sent a messenger to Thrasybulus to ask what arrangement of affairs would be safest for him to make, so that he could govern his city best. Thrasybulus led the man who had come from Periander out of the city and went into a field of growing grain. As he walked through the crop, he kept questioning the messenger, over and over, about why he had come from Corinth; and all the while, whenever he saw an ear of grain standing taller than the rest, he cut its head off. As he cut the heads off, he threw them away, until in this way he had destroyed the finest and richest part of the crop. Then, having gone through the field, he sent the messenger away without offering a single word of advice. When the messenger got back to Corinth, Periander was eager to hear the advice he had been given. But the man said that Thrasybulus had given him none. He added that he was amazed Periander had sent him to such a man, for the man was out of his mind and was destroying his own property; and he told what he had seen Thrasybulus do.

"Periander understood what had been done. He saw that Thrasybulus was advising him to put to death the most outstanding of his citizens, and from then on he showed every kind of cruelty to the people of his city. Whatever killing and exiling Cypselus had left undone, Periander finished. And in a single day he stripped all the women of Corinth of their clothes, because of his own wife Melissa. He had sent messengers to the Thesprotians, on the river Acheron, to ask the oracle of the dead about some money a guest-friend had left with him for safekeeping. Melissa appeared, and said she would not tell where the money had been put, because she was cold and naked: the clothes he had buried with her were of no use to her, since they had not been burned. And as proof that she was telling the truth, she said, Periander had put his loaves into a cold oven. When this was reported back to Periander, the token convinced him, for he had had sex with Melissa after she was dead. Right after he got the message, he had it proclaimed that all the women of Corinth were to come out to the temple of Hera. So they came as if to a festival, in their finest clothes. He had hidden the spearmen of his bodyguard in ambush, and he stripped them all alike, the free women and their maidservants too. He gathered all their clothes into a pit and burned them, praying to Melissa as he did it. After he had done this and sent to her a second time, the ghost of Melissa told him where he had put the money his guest-friend had left with him.

"There, Spartans, you have it: that is what tyranny is, and those are its deeds. We Corinthians were amazed at first when we saw you sending for Hippias, and now we are even more amazed to hear you say these things. We call on the gods of Greece and beg you not to set up tyrannies in the cities. But if you will not give up your plan, and try to bring Hippias back against all justice, then know this: the Corinthians, for their part, do not consent to what you are doing."

93. That was the speech of Socles, the envoy of Corinth. Hippias answered him, calling on the same gods as he had, and said that the Corinthians, more than anyone, would surely long for the sons of Pisistratus when the appointed days came for them to be harassed by the Athenians. That was Hippias' answer, for he knew the oracles more exactly than any other man. But the rest of the allies, who had held themselves back for a while and kept silent, now heard Socles speak his mind, and every one of them spoke out and said what he felt. They sided with the Corinthian envoy and begged the Spartans not to do any violence to a Greek city.

94. So that plan came to nothing. When Hippias was sent away from there, Amyntas king of the Macedonians offered him Anthemus, and the Thessalians offered him Iolcus. But he accepted neither, and went back again to Sigeum. Pisistratus had taken this city by force of arms from the Mytilenians. Once he had it, he made his own illegitimate son Hegesistratus, born to him by a woman of Argos, tyrant of the place. But Hegesistratus did not keep what he received from Pisistratus without a fight. For the Mytilenians and the Athenians fought a long war, with their strongholds at Achilleum and at Sigeum respectively. The Mytilenians demanded the place back. The Athenians, for their part, refused, and argued that the Aeolians had no better claim to the land of Troy than they themselves and all the other Greeks who had helped Menelaus take revenge for the carrying off of Helen.

95. While they were fighting this war, among the many and various things that happened in the battles, there was this. Once, in a fight the Athenians were winning, Alcaeus the poet ran away. He himself escaped, but the Athenians kept his armor and hung it up on the walls of the temple of Athena at Sigeum. Alcaeus wrote a song about this and sent it to Mytilene, telling his own misfortune to a man named Melanippus, a friend of his. In the end, Periander son of Cypselus made peace between the Athenians and the Mytilenians, for they referred the matter to him to decide. He made peace between them on condition that each side should keep the land it then held.

96. That is how Sigeum came under Athenian rule. Meanwhile, when Hippias had come back to Asia from Sparta, he left no stone unturned. He stirred up hostility between the Athenians and Artaphernes, and he did everything he could to bring Athens under the rule of himself and Darius. That, then, was what Hippias was doing. When the Athenians heard of it, they sent envoys to Sardis and tried to keep the Persians from listening to the exiled Athenians. But Artaphernes ordered them, if they wanted to be saved, to take Hippias back. When this answer was reported, the Athenians were not at all inclined to accept it. And since they did not accept it, it became the settled view among them at once that they were enemies of the Persians.
