Chapter 32: The Battle of Lade, the Fall of Miletus, and the End of Histiaeus

1. So Aristagoras, after causing Ionia to revolt, came to his end in this way. Meanwhile Histiaeus, the tyrant of Miletus, had been let go by Darius and had arrived at Sardis. When he came from Susa, Artaphernes, the governor of Sardis, asked him why he supposed the Ionians had revolted. Histiaeus said that he could not tell. What is more, he expressed surprise at what had happened, pretending that he knew nothing about the state of affairs. But Artaphernes saw that he was being dishonest, and since he knew the truth about the revolt, he said: "This is how it is with you and these matters, Histiaeus. You stitched this shoe, and Aristagoras put it on."

2. That is what Artaphernes said about the revolt. Histiaeus was afraid of Artaphernes, because Artaphernes understood the business, so as soon as night fell the next evening he ran away to the coast. He had deceived King Darius: he had promised to bring Sardinia, the largest of the islands, under the king's control, and instead he was trying to take over the leadership of the Ionians in their war against Darius. He crossed over to Chios, and there the Chians put him in chains, accusing him of working on Darius' orders to overthrow their government. But when the Chians learned the whole story and heard that he was an enemy of the king, they set him free.

3. Then the Ionians asked Histiaeus why he had pressed Aristagoras so urgently to revolt from the king and had brought so great a disaster on the Ionians. He did not by any means tell them the real reason. Instead he told them that King Darius had decided to move the Phoenicians out of their country and settle them in Ionia, and to settle the Ionians in Phoenicia; and that, he said, was why he had sent the message. In this way he tried to frighten the Ionians, though the king had never decided anything of the kind.

4. After this Histiaeus used a messenger, a man of Atarneus named Hermippus, to send letters to some Persians at Sardis, written as though he had already talked over a revolt with them. But Hermippus did not deliver the letters to the men he was sent to. He took them instead and handed them to Artaphernes. Artaphernes, seeing everything that was going on, told Hermippus to carry Histiaeus' letters on and deliver them to the men they were meant for, and then to hand over to him the replies the Persians sent back to Histiaeus. Once all this had been found out, Artaphernes put many of the Persians to death.

5. So the plan at Sardis came to nothing. When Histiaeus had been let down in this hope, the Chians tried to bring him back to Miletus, at his own request. But the Milesians had been glad before to be rid of Aristagoras, and they were by no means eager to take another tyrant into their country, now that they had had a taste of freedom. In fact, when Histiaeus tried to get back into Miletus by force, under cover of night, one of the Milesians wounded him in the thigh. Driven away from his own city, he went back to Chios. From there, since he could not persuade the Chians to give him ships, he crossed over to Mytilene and tried to persuade the people of Lesbos to give him some. They manned eight triremes and sailed with Histiaeus to Byzantium. They stationed themselves there and seized the ships sailing out of the Black Sea, except those whose crews said they were ready to do whatever Histiaeus told them.

6. While Histiaeus and the men of Mytilene were doing this, a great army, both a fleet and a land force, was getting ready to attack Miletus itself. The Persian commanders had joined their forces into one single army and were marching on Miletus, counting the other towns of less importance. Of the fleet, the most eager were the Phoenicians, and with them served the Cyprians, who had just been conquered, and the Cilicians and the Egyptians.

7. So these forces were advancing on Miletus and the rest of Ionia. Meanwhile the Ionians, when they heard of it, sent delegates chosen from among themselves to the Panionium. When the delegates arrived there and talked it over, they decided not to gather a land army to face the Persians. The Milesians would defend their walls by themselves, and the Ionians would man their fleet, leaving out not a single ship, and then gather as soon as possible at Lade to fight a sea battle in defense of Miletus. Lade is a small island lying opposite the city of Miletus.

8. Then the Ionians manned their ships and came to Lade, and with them came the Aeolians who live on Lesbos. They were drawn up in this order. The eastern end of the line was held by the Milesians themselves, who supplied eighty ships. Next to them were the men of Priene with twelve ships and the men of Myus with three. Next to the men of Myus were the men of Teos with seventeen ships, and after the men of Teos, the Chians with a hundred. After them were stationed the men of Erythrae and of Phocaea, the first with eight ships and the second with three. Next to the Phocaeans were the Lesbians with seventy ships. Last of all, holding the western end of the line, were the Samians with sixty ships. All together these came to 353 triremes.

9. Those were the Ionian ships, and the ships on the non-Greek side numbered six hundred. When these too had arrived off the coast of Miletus, and the whole land army was there as well, the Persian commanders learned how many ships the Ionians had. They were afraid that they might not be able to beat them. In that case they would not be able to take Miletus, since they would not control the sea, and at the same time they would be in danger of being punished by Darius. With this in mind they gathered the tyrants of the Ionians. These men had been driven out of their cities by Aristagoras of Miletus and had fled to the Persians, and they happened to be taking part in the expedition against Miletus. The commanders called together those of them who were there and spoke to them like this: "Men of Ionia, now let each of you show that he is a benefactor of the king's house. That is, let each of you try to separate his own people from the rest of the alliance. Make them an offer, and promise them at the same time that they will suffer nothing unpleasant because of the revolt: neither their temples nor their homes will be burned, and they will be treated no worse than they were before. But if they will not do this, and are determined to fight it out with us, then threaten them, and tell them what will truly happen to them. If they are beaten in the battle, they will be made slaves. We will make their sons eunuchs, we will carry their young girls off to Bactria, and we will hand their land over to others."

10. That is what they said, and the tyrants of Ionia each sent a message by night to his own people, telling them this. But the Ionians who received these messages stood firm and would not consider betraying their cause. Each people thought the Persians were sending this message to them alone.

11. This happened as soon as the Persians arrived at Miletus. After this the Ionians who had gathered at Lade held meetings. Others no doubt made speeches to them too, but above all the Phocaean commander Dionysius, who said this: "Men of Ionia, our fortunes stand on a razor's edge: whether we will be free or slaves, and slaves who are treated as runaways at that. So if you are willing to take on hardships now, you will have hard work for the time being, but you will be able to beat the enemy and be free. But if you go on being soft and undisciplined, I have no hope that you will escape paying the king the penalty for your revolt. So do as I say, and put yourselves in my hands. If the gods give us a fair fight, I promise you that either the enemy will not fight us at all, or, if he does, he will be badly beaten."

12. When they heard this, the Ionians put themselves in Dionysius' hands. Every day he would take the ships out in single file, so that he could train the rowers by having the ships break through each other's line, and so that the marines on board would be armed and ready. Then for the rest of the day he would keep the ships at anchor. So he kept the Ionians working the whole day long. For seven days they put up with it and did what he ordered. But on the day after that, the Ionians, who were not used to such hard work and were worn out by the labor and the hot sun, said to one another: "Which of the gods have we offended, to fill up our share of misery like this? We have surely handed ourselves over to a Phocaean, a fraud, who brings only three ships. He has got us in his hands and is treating us so badly that we will never recover. Many of us have already fallen sick, and many more are likely to suffer the same thing soon. It would be better for us to put up with anything else in the world than these miseries, and better to face the slavery that is coming, whatever it turns out to be, than to be crushed by the one we have now. Come on, let's not obey him any more." That is what they said, and at once every one of them refused to obey him. They pitched their tents on the island like an army camp and stayed in the shade, and they would not go on board their ships or do any training.

13. When the Samian commanders saw what the Ionians were doing, they at last accepted the offer that Aeaces son of Syloson had sent them earlier at the Persians' bidding, asking them to leave the Ionian alliance. The Samians accepted this offer because they saw how completely undisciplined the Ionians were. At the same time it was clear to them that it was impossible to beat the king's power, and they knew well that even if they beat the fleet Darius had there now, another five times as large would come against them. So they seized on this excuse, and as soon as they saw that the Ionians refused to do their duty, they thought it would be a gain for themselves to save their temples and their own property. This Aeaces, whose offer the Samians accepted, was the son of Syloson son of Aeaces. He had been tyrant of Samos, and like the other tyrants of Ionia he had been deprived of his power by Aristagoras of Miletus.

14. So when the Phoenicians sailed out to attack, the Ionians also put out their ships against them, sailing in single file. When they came close and the battle began, I cannot say for certain from that point on which of the Ionians proved themselves cowards and which proved themselves brave in this sea battle, because they all blame each other. But it is said that the Samians, as they had agreed with Aeaces, then raised their sails, left their place in the line, and sailed off home to Samos, all except eleven ships. The captains of these stayed in their places and fought in the battle, refusing to obey the commanders of their squadron. Because of this the Samian state granted them the honor of having their names, and their fathers' names too, inscribed on a pillar as men who had proved themselves brave, and this pillar still stands in their marketplace. Then the Lesbians, when they saw the ships next to them in the line running away, did the same as the Samians had done, and so did most of the Ionians.

15. Of those who stayed and fought, the Chians were hit hardest, because they did brilliant deeds and refused to play the coward. As I said before, they had supplied a hundred ships, and on each of them forty picked men from among their citizens served as marines. When they saw most of their allies deserting them, they did not think it right to behave like the cowards among them. Left with only a few of their allies, they kept on fighting and kept breaking through the enemy's line, until at last, after they had captured many enemy ships, they lost most of their own.

16. The Chians then fled home to their own island with the rest of their ships. But the Chians whose ships had been disabled by damage were chased, and they fled for refuge to Mycale. There they ran their ships aground and left them, and went on overland on foot. On the way the Chians entered the territory of Ephesus. They came into it at night, at a time when the women of the place were celebrating the Thesmophoria. The Ephesians had not heard beforehand what had happened to the Chians, and when they saw an armed band entering their land, they were quite sure these men were robbers who had come after the women. So they turned out in full force to the rescue and killed the Chians.

17. That was the fate of these men. But Dionysius the Phocaean, when he saw that the Ionian cause was lost, captured three enemy ships and sailed away. He did not go back to Phocaea, because he knew very well that it would be made slaves along with the rest of Ionia. Instead he sailed at once straight for Phoenicia. There he sank some merchant ships and took a great deal of plunder, and then he sailed on to Sicily. With Sicily as his base he became a pirate, though he never plundered any Greeks, only Carthaginians and Etruscans.

18. So the Persians, having beaten the Ionians in the sea battle, besieged Miletus by land and by sea. They dug mines under the walls and brought every kind of siege engine against it. In the sixth year after the revolt of Aristagoras they took the city completely and made the people slaves, so that the disaster agreed with the oracle that had been given about Miletus.

19. For when the Argives were consulting the oracle at Delphi about the safety of their city, they were given an oracle with two parts. One part was about the Argives themselves, while the part added on at the end was about the Milesians. The part about the Argives I will record when I reach that point in my history. But what the oracle said about the Milesians, who were not there, is this:

	"And at that time, Miletus, you plotter of evil deeds,
	you will be made a feast and a glorious prize for many.
	Your wives will wash the feet of the long-haired men,
	and others will tend my temple at Didyma."

These things came upon the Milesians at the time I am speaking of. Most of their men were killed by the Persians, who wear their hair long, and their women and children were treated as slaves. The temple at Didyma, with its shrine and the seat of the oracle, was plundered and then burned. I have often mentioned the treasures in this temple in other parts of my history.

20. After this the Milesians who had been taken prisoner were brought to Susa. King Darius did them no further harm. He settled them on the sea called the Erythraean, the Persian Gulf, in the city of Ampe, where the river Tigris flows past on its way out to the sea. Of the land of Miletus, the Persians kept for themselves the country around the city and the plain, and they gave the hill country to the Carians of Pedasa to own.

21. When the Milesians suffered this at the hands of the Persians, the people of Sybaris, who had lost their own city and were living in Laus and Scidrus, did not repay them in kind. When Sybaris was taken by the men of Croton, all the Milesians, from the young men up, had shaved their heads and gone into deep mourning; for these two cities were bound by closer ties of friendship than any others we know of. The Athenians were not like the Sybarites. They made it plain that they were grieved at the capture of Miletus, in many other ways and especially in this one. When Phrynichus wrote a play called "The Capture of Miletus" and put it on the stage, the whole audience burst into tears. The Athenians fined the poet a thousand drachmas for reminding them of their own misfortunes, and they ordered that no one should ever put on that play again.

22. So Miletus was stripped of its old inhabitants. But among the Samians, the men of property were not at all happy with the deal their fleet's commanders had made with the Persians. They held a meeting right after the sea battle, and they decided to sail away and found a colony before their tyrant Aeaces arrived in the country, rather than stay behind and be slaves to the Persians and to Aeaces. For just at this time the people of Zancle in Sicily were sending messengers to Ionia, inviting the Ionians to come to the "Fair Shore," because they wanted to found a city of Ionians there. This place called the Fair Shore is in the land of the Sicels, the native people of Sicily, on the side of the island that faces Tyrrhenia. So when the Zanclaeans made this invitation, the Samians alone of all the Ionians set out, taking with them those Milesians who had escaped. And in the course of this business, here is what happened.

23. On their way to Sicily the Samians reached Locri Epizephyrii, the Locri of the West. At that same time the people of Zancle, along with their king, whose name was Scythes, were camped around a town of the Sicels, trying to capture it. When Anaxilaus, the tyrant of Rhegium, saw this, since he was on bad terms with the Zanclaeans, he got in touch with the Samians and persuaded them to leave the Fair Shore alone, where they were sailing, and seize Zancle instead, since it was now left without men to defend it. The Samians did as he said and took Zancle. When the Zanclaeans learned that their city was in enemy hands, they set out to rescue it, and they called in Hippocrates, the tyrant of Gela, who was their ally, to help them. But when Hippocrates had come up with his army to rescue them, first he put Scythes, the ruler of the Zanclaeans, in chains, on the grounds that he was to blame for the loss of the city, and with him his brother Pythogenes, and he sent them off to the town of Inycus. Then he betrayed the rest of the Zanclaeans by coming to terms with the Samians and exchanging oaths with them. In return for this the Samians had promised that Hippocrates would receive as his share half of all the movable goods and the slaves in the city, and everything out in the countryside. So he put most of the Zanclaeans in chains and kept them as his own slaves. But the leading men among them, three hundred in number, he handed over to the Samians to be put to death. The Samians, however, did not do it.

24. Scythes, the ruler of the Zanclaeans, escaped from Inycus to Himera, and from there he went to Asia and up to the court of Darius. Darius considered him the most honest of all the men who had come up to him from Greece. For he got the king's permission to go away to Sicily, and then came back again from Sicily to the king; and at last he died among the Persians, an old man and very rich. So the Samians, having escaped the rule of the Persians, had won themselves the fine city of Zancle without any effort.

25. After the sea battle that was fought for Miletus, the Phoenicians, on the Persians' orders, brought Aeaces son of Syloson back to Samos, because he had been of great service to them and had done great things for them. Of all who had revolted from Darius, the Samians alone did not have their city or their temples burned, because of the ships that deserted in the sea battle. Then, after the capture of Miletus, the Persians at once took possession of Caria. Some of the cities submitted to them of their own free will, and others they brought over by force.

26. That is how these things turned out. Meanwhile Histiaeus of Miletus was at Byzantium, seizing the Ionians' merchant ships as they sailed out of the Black Sea, when the news reached him of what had happened at Miletus. He handed over his business in the Hellespont to Bisaltes son of Apollophanes, a man of Abydos, while he himself sailed with the Lesbians to Chios. When a garrison of the Chians would not let him land, he fought them at the place in Chian territory called the "Hollows." Histiaeus killed many of them. Then, using Polichne in Chios as his base, he and the Lesbians conquered the rest of the Chians too, since they had suffered heavy losses in the sea battle.

27. Heaven usually, I suppose, gives some sign beforehand when great disasters are about to fall on a city or a people. And the Chians too had had remarkable signs before these events. First, when they had sent a chorus of a hundred young men to Delphi, only two came home again; the other ninety-eight were struck down by a plague and died. Second, in their city at about the same time, a little before the sea battle, the roof fell in on some children while they were being taught their letters in school, so that of 120 children only one escaped. These were the signs heaven showed them beforehand. After that the sea battle came upon them and brought their state to its knees, and since the Chians had suffered such heavy losses, Histiaeus conquered them without difficulty.

28. From there Histiaeus led an expedition against Thasos, with a large force of Ionians and Aeolians. While he was camped around the town of Thasos, news came to him that the Phoenicians were sailing up from Miletus to conquer the rest of Ionia. When he heard this, he left Thasos unconquered and hurried to Lesbos himself, taking his whole army with him. Then, since his army was short of food, he crossed over from Lesbos to harvest the grain in Atarneus, and also the grain in the plain of the Caicus, which belonged to the Mysians. In those parts there happened to be a Persian named Harpagus in command of a sizable army. He fought Histiaeus after he had landed, took Histiaeus himself prisoner, and destroyed most of his army.

29. This is how Histiaeus was taken prisoner. The Greeks were fighting the Persians at Malene in the district of Atarneus. When they had been fighting hand to hand for a long time, the cavalry at last charged and fell on the Greeks; in fact it was the cavalry that decided the battle. So when the Greeks had been put to flight, Histiaeus, trusting that the king would not put him to death for the wrong he had just done, was seized with a love of life. When he was being caught in his flight by a Persian, and was just about to be run through at the moment of his capture, he spoke in Persian and told the man who he was: Histiaeus of Miletus.

30. Now if he had been taken prisoner and brought to King Darius, he would not, I think, have suffered any harm; Darius would have forgiven him the crime he was charged with. But as it was, for this very reason, and so that he would not escape punishment and become powerful with the king again, Artaphernes, the governor of Sardis, and Harpagus, the man who had captured him, put him to death on the spot when he reached Sardis on his way to the king. They impaled his body, but they embalmed his head and sent it up to Darius at Susa. When Darius learned of this, he blamed the men who had done it, because they had not brought Histiaeus up to him alive. He ordered that Histiaeus' head be washed and properly cared for, and then buried as the head of a man who had been a great benefactor both of the king himself and of the Persians.

31. That is what happened to Histiaeus. Meanwhile the Persian fleet wintered near Miletus, and when it put to sea again the next year, it easily conquered the islands lying off the mainland, Chios, Lesbos and Tenedos. Whenever they took one of the islands, the Persians, as each was conquered, swept it clear of its people with a dragnet. This is how they do it. The men link hands, each holding the hand of the next, and stretch in a line from the sea on the north to the sea on the south, and then they march across the whole island, hunting the people out of it. They also took the Ionian cities on the mainland in the same way, except that they did not sweep off the inhabitants like this, because it was not possible.

32. Then the Persian commanders proved that their threats against the Ionians, made when the two sides were camped facing each other, had not been empty. When they conquered the cities, they picked out the best-looking boys and castrated them, making them eunuchs, and they carried off the most beautiful girls by force to the king. And not only this: they also burned the cities, temples and all. So the Ionians had been made slaves for the third time, first by the Lydians and then twice in a row by the Persians.

33. Leaving Ionia, the fleet went on to conquer all the places on the left-hand side of the Hellespont as you sail in; those on the right had already been conquered by the Persians themselves, coming at them by land. The cities on the European side of the Hellespont are these. First comes the Chersonese, which has many cities in it; then Perinthus, the forts along the Thracian border, Selymbria, and Byzantium. The people of Byzantium, and the people of Chalcedon across the strait from them, did not even wait for the Phoenician ships to come. They had left their own land first and gone away into the Black Sea, and there they settled in the city of Mesambria. So the Phoenicians burned the places I have named and then headed for Proconnesus and Artace. When they had set fire to these too, they sailed back to the Chersonese to destroy the remaining cities, the ones they had not sacked when they put in there before. But they did not sail against Cyzicus at all, because the people of Cyzicus had already submitted to the king of their own accord, even before the Phoenicians sailed in. They had made terms with Oebares son of Megabazus, the Persian governor at Dascylium.

34. In the Chersonese, then, the Phoenicians took all the cities except Cardia. Up to that time the tyrant of these cities had been Miltiades son of Cimon son of Stesagoras. An earlier Miltiades, the son of Cypselus, had won this rule in the way I will now describe. The people who lived in this Chersonese were Thracians called the Dolonci. These Dolonci were being hard pressed in a war with the Apsinthians, so they sent their kings to Delphi to consult the oracle about the war. The Pythia answered that they must bring into their country, as the founder of a settlement, the first man who offered them hospitality on their way back from the temple. So the Dolonci went along the Sacred Way through the lands of the Phocians and the Boeotians, and since no one invited them in, they turned aside and came to Athens.

35. At that time Pisistratus held power in Athens, but Miltiades son of Cypselus was also a man of some influence. He came from a family rich enough to keep four-horse chariot teams. The family was descended in the beginning from Aeacus and the nymph Aegina, though in more recent times it had been Athenian; the first of the house to become an Athenian was Philaeus son of Ajax. This Miltiades was sitting in the porch of his house when he saw the Dolonci going by, wearing clothes that were not Athenian in style and carrying spears. He called out to them, and when they came over, he offered them a place to stay and his hospitality. They accepted, and after he had entertained them they told him everything the oracle had said. When they had told it, they asked him to do as the god had said. As soon as Miltiades heard it, he was inclined to agree, because he was tired of Pisistratus' rule and wanted to be out of the way. So he set out at once for Delphi to ask the oracle whether he should do what the Dolonci were asking of him.

36. The Pythia told him to do it too. So Miltiades son of Cypselus, who had already won the four-horse chariot race at Olympia, took with him every Athenian who wanted to join the expedition, sailed with the Dolonci, and took possession of the land; and the people who had invited him made him their tyrant. The first thing he did was build a wall across the isthmus of the Chersonese, from the city of Cardia to Pactye, so that the Apsinthians could not invade the land and do them harm. At this point the isthmus is about four miles across, and from this isthmus the Chersonese inside it is about forty-seven miles long in all.

37. When Miltiades had walled off the neck of the Chersonese and had kept the Apsinthians out in this way, the first people he made war on were the people of Lampsacus. The Lampsacenes laid an ambush and took him prisoner. Now Miltiades had become a friend of Croesus the Lydian. So when Croesus heard what had happened, he sent word to the Lampsacenes, ordering them to let Miltiades go; if not, he threatened to wipe them out like a pine tree. The Lampsacenes went round in circles arguing over what Croesus could mean by this threat, that he would wipe them out like a pine tree. At last one of the older men worked out the truth, with difficulty. He said that the pine is the only tree that, once it has been cut down, never puts out any new shoots, but dies and is gone for good. So the Lampsacenes, out of fear of Croesus, set Miltiades free and let him go.

38. So Miltiades escaped, thanks to Croesus. But later he died without leaving a son, and he passed his power and his property to Stesagoras, the son of Cimon, his half-brother on his mother's side. The people of the Chersonese still offer sacrifices to Miltiades since his death, as the custom is for a city's founder, and they hold a contest of horse races and athletics in his honor, in which no one from Lampsacus is allowed to compete. After this there was war with the Lampsacenes, and Stesagoras too died without a son. He was struck on the head with an axe in the town hall by a man who pretended to be a deserter, but who turned out in fact to be an enemy, and a rather hot-tempered one at that.

39. After Stesagoras had died in this way, Miltiades son of Cimon, the brother of the dead Stesagoras, was sent out in a trireme to the Chersonese to take over the government. The sons of Pisistratus sent him. They had treated him well at Athens too, pretending that they had had no part in the death of his father Cimon; how that death came about I will explain in another part of my history. When Miltiades arrived in the Chersonese, he stayed shut up in his house, apparently paying honor to the memory of his brother Stesagoras. When the leading men of the Chersonese in every town heard of this, they gathered from all the cities and came in a body to offer their sympathy, and when they arrived he had them thrown in chains. So Miltiades held the Chersonese, keeping a force of five hundred mercenaries. He married Hegesipyle, the daughter of Olorus, king of the Thracians.

40. Now this Miltiades son of Cimon had only recently come back to the Chersonese at the time I am speaking of. After he came back, worse misfortunes fell on him than the ones that had already happened. Two years before this he had been driven out of the country by the Scythians. The nomad Scythians, provoked by King Darius, had joined forces in a body and marched as far as this Chersonese. Miltiades had not waited for them to attack, but had fled from the Chersonese, until at last the Scythians went away and the Dolonci brought him back again. All this happened two years before the troubles that now pressed on him.

41. But now, when he learned that the Phoenicians were at Tenedos, he loaded five triremes with the property he had at hand and sailed off for Athens. He set out from the city of Cardia and was sailing across the Gulf of Melas. As he was passing along the coast of the Chersonese, the Phoenicians came upon his ships. Miltiades himself escaped to Imbros with four of his ships, but the fifth was caught by the Phoenicians as they chased him. It happened that the captain of this ship was Metiochus, the eldest of Miltiades' sons, whose mother was not the daughter of Olorus the Thracian but another woman. The Phoenicians captured him along with his ship. When they found out that he was Miltiades' son, they took him up to the king, thinking that they would earn a great deal of gratitude for it. For it was Miltiades who had given his opinion to the Ionians that they should do as the Scythians said, back when the Scythians asked them to break up the bridge of boats and sail home. But when the Phoenicians brought Metiochus son of Miltiades up to Darius, Darius did him no harm at all. On the contrary, he did him a great deal of good. He gave him a house and property and a Persian wife, and the children she bore him have been counted as Persians. Meanwhile Miltiades made his way from Imbros to Athens.

42. During this year the Persians did nothing more against the Ionians that led to conflict, but in this same year they did the following things, which were very much to the Ionians' advantage. Artaphernes, the governor of Sardis, sent for envoys from all the cities and made the Ionians agree among themselves to settle their disputes by law and not to raid one another's land. He forced them to do this. He also measured their territories in parasangs, which is what the Persians call a distance of thirty stades, about three and a third miles. Using this measure, he fixed an amount of tribute for each people. That tribute has stayed unchanged from that time down to my own day, just as Artaphernes fixed it; and he fixed it at nearly the same amount for each people as it had been before.
