Chapter 33: Mardonius in Thrace, Earth and Water, and Cleomenes against Demaratus

43. These measures made for peace among the Ionians. But at the beginning of spring, after the king had removed all the other commanders, Mardonius son of Gobryas came down to the coast. He brought with him a very large army and a very large fleet. He was a young man, and he had recently married Artozostra, the daughter of King Darius. When Mardonius reached Cilicia at the head of this army, he went on board a ship himself and sailed on with the rest of the fleet, while other commanders led the land army to the Hellespont. Mardonius sailed along the coast of Asia and came to Ionia. And here I will report something that will amaze those Greeks who refuse to believe that Otanes, speaking to the seven Persians, gave it as his opinion that the Persians ought to be governed by the people. For Mardonius removed all the Ionian tyrants and set up democracies in the cities. After doing this he hurried on to the Hellespont. When a huge number of ships and a large land army had been gathered there, they crossed the Hellespont in the ships and began to march through Europe. Their goal was Eretria and Athens.

44. Those two cities, that is, were their excuse for the expedition. But what they had in mind was to conquer as many of the Greek cities as they could. First, with the fleet, they conquered the Thasians, who did not even lift a hand to defend themselves. Then with the land army they made the Macedonians their subjects, adding them to the peoples they already ruled; for all the nations east of the Macedonians had already come under their power before this. So they crossed from Thasos to the mainland opposite and went along close to the shore as far as Acanthus. Then, setting out from Acanthus, they tried to round Mount Athos. But as they were sailing around it, a violent north wind fell on them. They could do nothing against it, and it handled them very roughly, wrecking a great many of their ships on Athos. In fact, it is said that three hundred ships were destroyed and more than twenty thousand men. For the sea around Athos is full of sea monsters, and some of the men were seized by these and died that way; others were dashed against the rocks; some did not know how to swim and drowned for that reason; and others died of the cold.

45. That is what happened to the fleet. Meanwhile, while Mardonius and the land army were camped in Macedonia, the Brygian Thracians attacked them by night. The Brygians killed many of them and wounded Mardonius himself. Even so, not even the Brygians escaped being enslaved by the Persians, for Mardonius did not leave that region until he had made them his subjects. But once he had conquered them, he led his army back home, since he had suffered heavy losses, with his land army in the fighting against the Brygians and with his fleet in the voyage around Athos. So this expedition went back to Asia having won no glory in its struggles.

46. In the year after this, Darius first sent a messenger to the Thasians, whose neighbors had accused them of planning a revolt. He ordered them to pull down the wall around their town and bring their ships to Abdera. The fact was that the Thasians, having been besieged by Histiaeus of Miletus, and having large revenues coming in at the same time, were spending their money on building warships and on surrounding their city with a stronger wall. Their revenues came from the mainland and from the mines. From the gold mines at Scapte Hyle there generally came in eighty talents a year, and from the mines on Thasos itself somewhat less than that. Altogether the Thasians, who paid no taxes on what their land produced, generally had a revenue from the mainland and the mines of two hundred talents a year, and in the best years three hundred.

47. I saw these mines myself. By far the most remarkable of them were the ones discovered by the Phoenicians who first settled this island together with Thasos; the island got the name it has now from this Thasos, the Phoenician. These Phoenician mines are in the part of Thasos between the places called Aenyra and Coenyra, opposite Samothrace, where there is a great mountain that has been turned completely upside down in the search for metal. So much for that. At the king's command the Thasians tore down their walls and brought all their ships to Abdera.

48. After this Darius began to test the Greeks, to find out what they meant to do: whether they would make war on him or surrender themselves. So he sent heralds out, assigning them to different places all over Greece, and ordered them to demand earth and water for the king. He sent these to Greece. At the same time he was sending other heralds to the tribute-paying cities of his own along the coast, ordering them to build warships and also transport ships for horses.

49. So they were busy preparing these. Meanwhile, when the heralds arrived in Greece, many of the peoples on the mainland gave what the Persian demanded, and so did all the islanders the heralds came to with their demand. The islanders gave earth and water to Darius, and among them were the Aeginetans. As soon as they had done so, the Athenians went after them hard. They believed the Aeginetans had given it out of hostility to themselves, meaning to join the Persians in an attack on Athens; and they were also glad to get hold of an excuse against them. So they went back and forth to Sparta, accusing the Aeginetans of what they had done and charging them with having betrayed Greece.

50. Because of this accusation, Cleomenes son of Anaxandrides, king of the Spartans, crossed over to Aegina, meaning to arrest the Aeginetans who were most to blame. But when he tried to seize them, some of the Aeginetans resisted him, above all Crius son of Polycritus. Crius said that Cleomenes would not get away with carrying off a single Aeginetan. He was doing this, Crius said, without the authority of the Spartan state, because the Athenians had bribed him to do it; otherwise he would have come with the other king to arrest them. He said this because of a message he had received from Demaratus. As Cleomenes was leaving Aegina, he asked Crius what his name was, and Crius told him the truth. Cleomenes, playing on the name, which means "Ram" in Greek, said to him: "Well then, Ram, you had better plate your horns with bronze now, because you are about to run into big trouble."

51. Meanwhile Demaratus son of Ariston had stayed behind in Sparta and was making accusations against Cleomenes. Demaratus too was king of the Spartans, but of the junior house. This house is junior in no other way, since both houses descend from the same ancestor; but the house of Eurysthenes has always been honored more, apparently because he was the elder brother.

52. For the Spartans, who on this point disagree with all the poets, say that it was Aristodemus son of Aristomachus son of Cleodaeus son of Hyllus, while he was their king, who led them himself into the land they now hold, and not the sons of Aristodemus. Not long afterward, they say, Aristodemus' wife, whose name was Argeia, gave birth to twins. She was the daughter, they say, of Autesion son of Tisamenes son of Thersander son of Polynices. Aristodemus lived just long enough to see his children, and then he fell sick and died. The Spartans of that time decided, following their established custom, to make the elder of the children their king. But they did not know which one to choose, because the two were alike and the same size. When they could not tell them apart (or even before this), they asked the mother. She said that even she could not tell one from the other. She said this although in fact she knew perfectly well, because she wanted both of them to become kings somehow. So the Spartans were at a loss, and being at a loss, they sent to Delphi to ask what they should do. The Pythia told them to treat both children as their kings, but to give more honor to the elder. That, they say, was the answer the priestess gave them. But the Spartans were still at a loss how to find out which was the elder, until a Messenian named Panites gave them a suggestion. Panites suggested that the Spartans watch the mother and see which of the children she washed and fed first. If she was seen to do it always in the same order, then they would have everything they were looking for and wanted to find out. But if she too was uncertain and did it in a different order at different times, it would be clear to them that she knew no more than anyone else, and they would have to try some other way. So the Spartans, following the Messenian's advice, watched the mother of Aristodemus' sons, and they found that she always gave first place to the firstborn, both in feeding and in washing; for she did not know why she was being watched. So they took the child its mother favored and brought it up at public expense as the firstborn, and it was named Eurysthenes, while the other was called Procles. When the two grew up, they say, though they were brothers, they quarreled with each other their whole lives long, and their descendants have gone on the same way.

53. That is the account the Spartans give, and they alone of all the Greeks. But what follows I write according to what the Greeks in general say. I mean that these kings of the Dorians are correctly listed by the Greeks back as far as Perseus the son of Danae (leaving out the god, Zeus, who was Perseus' father), and are shown to be Greek by descent; for even at that time they were already counted as Greeks. I said "as far as Perseus" and did not take the line back any higher, because no mortal father is named for Perseus, the way Amphitryon is named as the mortal father of Heracles. So I had good reason, as you can see, to say "correctly as far as Perseus." But if you trace their ancestors back generation by generation from Danae the daughter of Acrisius, the leaders of the Dorians will turn out to be Egyptians by direct descent.

54. That is how I have traced the line according to the Greeks' account. But according to the story the Persians tell, Perseus himself was an Assyrian who became a Greek, and Perseus' ancestors were not Greeks. As for the ancestors of Acrisius, who according to this account were not related to Perseus at all, the Persians say that they were Egyptians, just as the Greeks say.

55. Let that be enough said about these matters. How and by what deeds these men, who were Egyptians, came to hold the royal scepter over the Dorians, I will leave out, since others have told it. But I will speak of the things other writers have not dealt with.

56. These are the royal privileges the Spartans have given their kings. First, two priesthoods: of Zeus Lacedaemon and of Zeus Uranius, "Zeus of the Sky." Next, the right to make war on any land they please; no Spartan may stand in the way of this right, and anyone who does falls under a curse. When they go out on campaign, the kings go out first and come back last. A hundred picked men guard them on campaign. On their expeditions they may use as many cattle for sacrifice as they wish, and they take the hides and the chines of all the animals that are sacrificed.

57. Those are their privileges in war. In peace, the following has been granted to them. Whenever a sacrifice is made at public expense, the kings have the right to sit down to the feast before everyone else. The servers begin with them, and serve each of them a double portion of everything the other guests get. They have the first pouring of the libations, and the hides of the animals sacrificed. On the first day of every month, and on the seventh, each of them is given at public expense a full-grown animal for sacrifice in the temple of Apollo, along with a bushel and a half of barley meal and a Laconian "quarter" of wine. At all the games they have seats of honor set apart for them. It is also their privilege to appoint whichever citizens they like as protectors of foreigners, the official hosts of visiting strangers, and each king chooses two "Pythians." The Pythians are men sent to consult the god at Delphi, and they eat with the kings at public expense. If the kings do not come to the public dinner, the rule is that two quarts of barley meal apiece and half a pint of wine are sent out to them at their houses. If they are present, they are given a double share of everything; and they are honored in this same way when private citizens invite them to dinner. The kings also have charge of the oracles that are given, though the Pythians know them as well. The rule is that the kings alone decide the following cases, and only these: who should marry a girl who has inherited her father's property, if her father has not engaged her to anyone; and cases about the public roads. And if a man wants to adopt a son, he must do it in the presence of the kings. They also sit in council with the Elders, who number twenty-eight. If the kings do not come, the Elders most closely related to them hold the kings' privileges and cast two votes for them besides their own, which makes three in all.

58. These are the rights the Spartan state has granted its kings while they are alive. After they die they receive the following. Horsemen ride all through Laconia announcing what has happened, and in the city women go around beating on bronze kettles. Whenever this happens, two free people from every household, a man and a woman, must go into mourning, and heavy penalties are laid down for those who fail to do it. Now the Spartans' custom at the deaths of their kings is the same as that of the non-Greek peoples of Asia; for most non-Greeks follow the same customs at the deaths of their kings. Whenever a king of the Spartans dies, a fixed number of the "dwellers around" (the free men of the Laconian towns, who are not Spartan citizens) must come from all over Lacedaemon, not counting the Spartans themselves, to the funeral.

59. When many thousands of these men, and of the helots (the serfs of the Spartans), and of the Spartans themselves, have gathered in one place, with their women mixed among them, they beat their foreheads with a will and wail without end, saying that this king, the one who has died most recently, was the best of them all. Whenever one of their kings is killed in war, they make an image of him and carry it out for burial on a couch spread with fine coverings. After they have buried him, no assembly meets for ten days and there is no meeting to elect officials; instead they mourn through those days. In another way, too, the Spartans are like the Persians. When a king dies and another takes the throne, the new king, on coming to power, frees any Spartan who owed a debt to the king or to the state. Among the Persians, likewise, the king who comes to the throne cancels the tribute that all the cities owe him in arrears.

60. In this point the Spartans are also like the Egyptians: their heralds, flute-players and cooks inherit their fathers' trades. A flute-player is the son of a flute-player, a cook of a cook, and a herald of a herald. Other men do not push into the job because they have loud, clear voices and so shut these out of it; they carry on the trade they inherited from their fathers.

61. That is how these things are done. At the time I am speaking of, while Cleomenes was on Aegina working for the common good of Greece, Demaratus was bringing charges against him, not so much because he cared about the Aeginetans as because he was envious and jealous of him. So Cleomenes, after he came back from Aegina, made plans to remove Demaratus from the kingship, and he attacked him through the following matter. When Ariston was king in Sparta, he had married two wives, but no children were born to him. Since he would not admit that he himself was the cause of this, he married a third wife. This is how he married her. He had a friend, a Spartan, to whom he was closer than to any other citizen. It happened that this man's wife was by far the most beautiful woman in Sparta, and what is more, she had become the most beautiful after being the ugliest. As a baby she had been plain to look at. Her nurse saw that she was the daughter of rich people and yet was ugly, and she saw too that the parents were unhappy about it. Taking all this in, the nurse came up with a plan. Every day she carried the child to the temple of Helen, which is in the place called Therapne, above the temple of Phoebus Apollo. Each time she carried her there, she stood her in front of the statue and prayed the goddess to free the child from her ugliness. Once, the story goes, as the nurse was leaving the temple, a woman appeared to her and asked what she was carrying in her arms. The nurse told her she was carrying a child. The woman asked her to show it to her, but the nurse refused, because the parents had forbidden her to show the child to anyone. But the woman kept urging her in every way to show it. So the nurse, seeing how badly the woman wanted to see the child, showed it to her. Then the woman stroked the child's head and said that she would be the most beautiful of all the women in Sparta. And from that day on her looks changed. Later, when she was old enough to marry, she married Agetus son of Alcides, the friend of Ariston I spoke of.

62. Now Ariston, it seems, was always burning with desire for this woman, so he came up with a plan. He made an agreement with his friend, whose wife she was: he would give his friend any one thing from his own possessions that the friend chose, and he asked his friend to make him the same offer in return. The friend had no fears for his wife, since he saw that Ariston had a wife too, so he agreed; and on these terms they swore oaths to each other. Then Ariston, for his part, gave Agetus whatever it was that Agetus had chosen from his treasures. And when he came to claim the same from him in return, he tried to take his friend's wife away from him. Agetus said that he agreed to give anything but this one thing. But at last, forced by his oath and by the trick that had been played on him, he let her be taken from him.

63. So Ariston sent away his second wife and brought the third into his house. And this wife, in less than the full ten months, gave birth to the Demaratus we have been speaking of. One of his servants brought him the news that a son had been born to him while he was sitting in council with the ephors. Ariston knew when he had taken the woman as his wife, and he counted up the months on his fingers and swore an oath, saying, "He can't be mine." The ephors heard this, but at the time they thought nothing of it. The child grew up, and Ariston was sorry for what he had said, since he believed that Demaratus was certainly his own son. He named him Demaratus, which means "Prayed for by the People," for this reason: before all this happened, the Spartan people had all prayed together that a son might be born to Ariston, who was the most famous of all the kings Sparta had ever had.

64. That is why he was named Demaratus. As time went on Ariston died, and Demaratus became king. But it was fated, it seems, that these things should come out and cost Demaratus his throne. And so Demaratus had fallen out badly with Cleomenes, once before, when he led his army away from Eleusis, and now above all, when Cleomenes had crossed over to arrest the Aeginetans who had gone over to the Persians.

65. So Cleomenes, eager for revenge, made an arrangement with Leotychides son of Menares son of Agis, who was of the same royal house as Demaratus. The deal was that if Cleomenes made him king in place of Demaratus, Leotychides would go with him against the Aeginetans. Now Leotychides had become a bitter enemy of Demaratus for the following reason. Leotychides had been engaged to Percalus, the daughter of Chilon son of Demarmenus, but Demaratus plotted against him and robbed him of his marriage, carrying Percalus off first and making her his own wife. That was how Leotychides' hatred of Demaratus began. And now, urged on by Cleomenes, Leotychides swore a formal charge against Demaratus, saying that he was not the lawful king of the Spartans because he was not Ariston's son. After making this charge he brought a lawsuit against him. He dragged up the old words Ariston had spoken when his servant brought him the news that a son was born to him, when Ariston counted up the months and swore that the child was not his. Basing his case on these words, Leotychides set out to prove that Demaratus was not Ariston's son and was not the lawful king of Sparta. As witnesses he brought forward the ephors who happened to have been sitting in council with Ariston at the time and had heard him say it.

66. In the end, since there was a dispute about these matters, the Spartans decided to ask the oracle at Delphi whether Demaratus was Ariston's son. Cleomenes arranged for the question to be put to the Pythia, and then he won over Cobon son of Aristophantus, the most powerful man in Delphi. Cobon persuaded Perialla, the prophetess of the oracle, to say what Cleomenes wanted said. So when the envoys sent to consult the god asked their question, the Pythia ruled that Demaratus was not Ariston's son. Later, however, all this came out. Cobon was banished from Delphi, and Perialla the prophetess was removed from her office.

67. That is how Demaratus came to be deposed. But he became an exile and went to the Persians because of an insult, which I will now tell. After he was deposed, Demaratus held a public office he had been elected to. It was the time of the Gymnopaedia, the festival of the Naked Youths, and Demaratus was there watching. Leotychides, who was now king himself in place of Demaratus, sent his servant to ask Demaratus, to mock and insult him, what it was like to be an official after having been king. Demaratus, stung by the question, answered that he himself had now tried both, but Leotychides had not; this question, though, he said, would be the beginning for the Spartans either of countless troubles or of countless blessings. After saying this he covered his head and left the theater for his own house. He made preparations at once and sacrificed an ox to Zeus, and after the sacrifice he called for his mother.

68. When his mother came, he put some of the animal's innards into her hands and pleaded with her, saying: "Mother, I beg you, in the name of all the other gods and above all of Zeus here, the guardian of our house, tell me the truth: who is really my father? Leotychides said in our quarrel that you were already pregnant by your former husband when you came to Ariston. And others tell an even sillier story: that you slept with one of the servants, the man who looked after the donkeys, and that I am his son. So I beg you by the gods to tell me the truth. If you have done any of the things people say, you're not the only one; many other women have done the same. And there's a common rumor in Sparta that Ariston was not able to father children, since otherwise his earlier wives would have had children too."

69. That is what he said, and she answered him: "My son, since you plead with me so earnestly to tell you the truth, I will tell you the whole truth. When Ariston had brought me into his house, on the third night a phantom came to me that looked like Ariston. It slept with me, and then it put on me the garlands it was wearing. The phantom left at once, and after that Ariston came. When he saw me wearing garlands, he asked who had given them to me. I said that he had, but he would not admit it. So I began to swear to it, and I said he was wrong to deny it, since he had come in, I said, only a little while before, slept with me, and given me the garlands. When Ariston saw that I was swearing to it, he realized that this was the work of the gods. For one thing, the garlands turned out to come from the hero's shrine that stands by the courtyard gate of the house, the one they call the shrine of Astrabacus. For another, the seers answered that it was this same hero who had come to me. So there you have it, my son, everything you want to know. Either you were fathered by this hero, and the hero Astrabacus is your father, or Ariston is your father; for I conceived you that night. As for the point your enemies hold on to hardest, saying that Ariston himself, when your birth was announced, declared in front of many people that you were not his son because the full time, the ten months, had not yet passed: he blurted that out because he did not know about such things. For women give birth at nine months and even at seven, and not all of them after a full ten months. And I gave birth to you, my son, at seven months. Not long afterward Ariston himself realized that he had spoken foolishly. So do not believe any other stories about your birth, for you have heard the whole truth. And as for Leotychides and the people who tell these stories, may their own wives bear them children by donkey-keepers!"

70. That is what she said. Demaratus, having learned what he wanted to know, packed supplies for a journey and set out for Elis, pretending that he was going to Delphi to consult the oracle. But the Spartans suspected that he was trying to escape, and they went after him. As it happened, Demaratus had already crossed over from Elis to Zacynthus before they got there. The Spartans crossed after him, laid hands on him, and took his servants away from him. But since the people of Zacynthus refused to hand him over, he crossed from there to Asia, to King Darius. Darius received him as a guest with great honor and also gave him land and cities. That is how Demaratus came to Asia, and such was the fortune he had met with. He had won distinction among the Spartans in many ways, both by his deeds and by his advice, and above all he had won them a victory at Olympia in the four-horse chariot race. He was the only one of all the kings Sparta ever had who did this.

71. After Demaratus was deposed, Leotychides son of Menares succeeded to the kingship. He had a son, Zeuxidemus, whom some of the Spartans called Cyniscus. This Zeuxidemus never became king of Sparta, because he died before Leotychides, leaving a son, Archidemus. After losing Zeuxidemus, Leotychides married a second wife, Eurydame, the sister of Menius and daughter of Diactorides. By her he had no son, only a daughter, Lampito, whom Leotychides gave in marriage to Archidemus son of Zeuxidemus.

72. But Leotychides himself did not grow old in Sparta. He paid for what he had done to Demaratus, in this way. He led a Spartan army in an invasion of Thessaly, and when he could have brought the whole country under control, he took bribes amounting to a large sum. He was caught in the act, there in the camp, sitting on a glove full of money. So he was put on trial and banished from Sparta, and his house was torn down. He went into exile at Tegea and died there.
