Chapter 37: Xerxes Decides on War, and the Dream

1. When the news of the battle fought at Marathon reached Darius son of Hystaspes, the king was angrier than ever. He had been furious with the Athenians even before this, because of their attack on Sardis, but now his indignation was far greater, and he was far more eager to march against Greece. So he sent messengers at once to the various cities and ordered them to get an army ready. He assigned each people a much larger share than they had supplied before, and not only warships but also horses, provisions and transport ships. When these orders went round, all Asia was in turmoil for three years, because the best men everywhere were being enlisted for the expedition against Greece and were getting ready for it. In the fourth year, however, the Egyptians, whom Cambyses had conquered, revolted from the Persians. Then Darius was even more eager to march, and against both nations.

2. While Darius was preparing to set out against Egypt and against Athens, a great quarrel broke out among his sons over who should hold the supreme power. According to Persian custom, they said, he must not set out on his campaigns until he had named one of them king. Darius had three sons born to him before he became king, by his first wife, the daughter of Gobryas, and four more after he became king, by Atossa the daughter of Cyrus. The eldest of the first group was Artobazanes, and the eldest of the later group was Xerxes. Since they did not have the same mother, the two of them were rivals. Artobazanes argued that he was the eldest of all the sons, and that it was a custom held by all mankind that the eldest should rule. Xerxes argued that he was the son of Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, and that it was Cyrus who had won the Persians their freedom.

3. Darius had not yet announced his decision when it happened that Demaratus son of Ariston arrived in Susa at this very time. He had been stripped of his kingship in Sparta and had sent himself into exile from Laconia. When this man heard of the dispute between Darius' sons, he came to Xerxes (so the story goes) and advised him to add something to the arguments he was already making. Xerxes should say, Demaratus suggested, that he had been born to Darius when Darius was already king and held supreme power over the Persians, while Artobazanes had been born when Darius was still a private citizen. It was therefore neither fitting nor just that anyone else should have the honor ahead of him. Even in Sparta, Demaratus pointed out, this was the custom: if some sons were born before their father became king, and another was born later, while he was reigning, the succession to the kingdom belonged to the one born later. So Xerxes used Demaratus' suggestion, and Darius, seeing that what he said was just, named him king. My own opinion, however, is that Xerxes would have become king even without this advice, because Atossa held all the power.

4. Having named Xerxes to the Persians as their king, Darius was ready to set out on his campaigns. But in the year after this, and after the revolt of Egypt, Darius himself died, after reigning thirty-six years in all. So he never got his revenge, either on the Egyptians who had revolted or on the Athenians.

5. When Darius was dead, the kingdom passed to his son Xerxes. At first Xerxes was not at all eager to march against Greece, though he went on gathering an army against Egypt. But Mardonius son of Gobryas, who was Xerxes' cousin (his mother was Darius' sister), was always at his side, and he had more influence with him than any other Persian. He kept saying things like this: "Master, it is not right that the Athenians should do the Persians such great harm and not pay the penalty for what they have done. For now, why not finish the work you have in hand? Then, when you have tamed Egypt, which has risen against us so insolently, march an army against Athens. That way men will speak well of you, and in future everyone will think twice before attacking your land." That much of his argument was about revenge. To it he would add that Europe was a very beautiful country, that it grew every kind of cultivated fruit tree, that it was wonderfully fertile, and that the king alone of all mortals deserved to own it.

6. He kept saying these things because he had an appetite for risky ventures and wanted to be governor of Greece under the king himself. In time he won Xerxes over and persuaded him to do it, because other things also worked on his side and helped him persuade Xerxes. First, messengers had come from Thessaly, sent by the Aleuadae, inviting the king to invade Greece and showing great zeal for his cause. (These Aleuadae were the kings of Thessaly.) Second, the sons of Pisistratus who had come up to Susa were inviting him too. They used the same arguments as the Aleuadae, and they offered him something more besides. There was an Athenian named Onomacritus, who delivered oracles and had also collected and arranged the oracles of Musaeus, the legendary poet and seer. The Pisistratids had brought this man up with them to Susa, after first making up their old quarrel with him. For Onomacritus had been banished from Athens by Hipparchus son of Pisistratus. Lasus of Hermione had caught him slipping into the works of Musaeus an oracle of his own, which said that the islands lying off Lemnos would disappear under the sea. That was why Hipparchus banished him, though before that he had consulted him a great deal. Now, however, Onomacritus had come up to Susa with them. Whenever he came into the king's presence, the sons of Pisistratus praised him in grand terms, and he recited some of the oracles. If any of them foretold disaster for the Persians, he said nothing about it. Instead he picked out the most favorable ones, and told how it was fated that a Persian would yoke the Hellespont with a bridge, and he described how the march would go. So he kept pressing Xerxes with oracles, while the sons of Pisistratus and the Aleuadae pressed him with their advice.

7. Once Xerxes had been persuaded to make war on Greece, he marched first against the rebels, in the year after Darius' death. He crushed them and reduced all Egypt to a far harsher slavery than it had known under Darius, and he handed over the government of the country to his own brother Achaemenes, a son of Darius. Later, while he was governor of Egypt, this Achaemenes was killed by Inaros son of Psammetichus, a Libyan.

8. After conquering Egypt, Xerxes was about to take the expedition against Athens in hand. So he called together an assembly of the leading Persians, both to hear their opinions and to tell them all, face to face, what he meant to do. When they had gathered, Xerxes spoke to them as follows:

"Persians, I am not going to be the first to bring in a new custom among you. I received this one from others, and I will follow it. As I am told by those older than I am, we have never yet sat still since we took over this supremacy from the Medes, when Cyrus overthrew Astyages. It is a god who leads us this way, and when we busy ourselves with many things, it turns out well for us. About the nations that Cyrus and Cambyses and my father Darius conquered and added to our empire, there is no need for me to speak: you know them well. As for me, from the day I inherited this throne I sit on, I have always thought hard about how I might not fall short of those who held this high place before me, nor add less power to the empire of the Persians. And thinking hard about it, I find a way by which we can win glory, and a land no smaller and no worse than the one we have now (and in fact richer in what it produces), and at the same time get our vengeance and our revenge. That is why I have called you together now, to tell you what I have in mind to do.

"I intend to yoke the Hellespont with a bridge and march an army through Europe against Greece, so that I can punish the Athenians for everything they have done to the Persians and to my father. You saw how my father Darius was also planning to march against these men. But he has died, and he never got his revenge on them. I, though, on his behalf and on behalf of the rest of the Persians, will not stop until I have taken Athens and burned it, since they wronged me and my father without any provocation. First they came to Sardis with Aristagoras of Miletus, our slave, and set fire to the sacred groves and the temples. And second, you all know well, I think, what they did to us when we landed in their country, at the time when Datis and Artaphernes were in command of our army.

"For these reasons I have decided to march against them, and when I count up what we stand to gain, I find these good things, as you will hear. If we conquer these people and their neighbors, who live in the land of Pelops the Phrygian, we will make the Persian land border on nothing but the sky of Zeus. The sun will look down on no land that borders ours. With your help I will make all lands into one land, once I have passed through the whole of Europe. For I am told the situation is this: once the people I have just mentioned are out of the way, there is no city of men left, and no race of human beings, that will be able to stand up to us in battle. So those who have wronged us will bear the yoke of slavery, and so will those who have done us no wrong.

"Here is how you will please me best. Whenever I signal to you the time you should come, every one of you must report, and report eagerly. And whoever comes with the best-equipped force, to him I will give the gifts our country counts most honorable. That is how this must be done. But so that I may not seem to you to be following my own advice alone, I put the matter before you for discussion, and I invite any of you who wishes to give his opinion."

9. With that he stopped, and after him Mardonius spoke: "Master, you are the best not only of all the Persians who have lived before you, but of all who will come after. In everything else you have said, your words have hit on what is best and truest, and on top of that you will not allow the Ionians who live in Europe to make fools of us, when they have no right to. It would be a strange thing indeed if we have conquered Sacae, Indians, Ethiopians, Assyrians and many other great nations, who never did the Persians any wrong, and keep them as our subjects, simply because we wanted to enlarge our empire, and yet we do not take revenge on the Greeks, who wronged us without provocation.

"What should we be afraid of? Their numbers? The size of their wealth? We know how they fight, and we know their resources are weak. Besides, we have already conquered their sons, I mean the ones settled in our land who are called Ionians, Aeolians and Dorians. I myself have tried marching against these men before, under orders from your father. I marched as far as Macedonia, and came close to reaching Athens itself, and no one came out to fight me.

"It is true that the Greeks do make war, but from what I hear they go about it very foolishly, out of stubbornness and lack of skill. When they have declared war on one another, they look for the finest, flattest stretch of ground they can find, and they go down there and fight. The result is that even the winners come away with heavy losses, and as for the losers, I won't even mention them, because they are wiped out completely. Since they all speak the same language, they ought to use heralds and messengers to settle their differences, any way at all rather than by battle. And if they absolutely must fight each other, each side ought to find the place where it is hardest to beat, and make its stand there. So the Greeks, since their way of war is no good, did not even make up their minds to fight me when I had marched as far as Macedonia.

"Who, then, is likely to stand against you, my king, and offer you war, when you are leading the whole multitude of Asia and the whole of your fleet? For my part, I don't think the Greek states have grown as bold as that. But if after all I turn out to be wrong, and they are carried away by reckless folly and come out to fight us, they will learn that we are the best soldiers in the world. Whatever happens, let us leave nothing untried. Nothing comes about by itself; everything men achieve comes from trying."

10. With these words Mardonius had smoothed the way for Xerxes' proposal, and he stopped. The other Persians kept silent and did not dare to offer an opinion against what had been proposed. Then Artabanus son of Hystaspes, who was Xerxes' uncle, his father's brother, and who relied on that relationship, spoke as follows:

"My king, if opposing opinions are not spoken, it is impossible to choose the better one; you have to accept whatever has been said. But if opposing opinions are spoken, then you can choose. It is like pure gold: we cannot tell it is pure when it lies by itself, but when we rub it on the touchstone beside other gold, then we can tell which is better. I advised your father Darius, my own brother, not to march against the Scythians, a people who have no settled city anywhere on earth. But he expected to conquer those nomad Scythians, and he did not listen to me. He marched, and he came back having lost many good men from his army. You, my king, are planning to march against men far better than the Scythians, men said to be excellent fighters both at sea and on land. What there is to fear in this, it is only right that I should tell you.

"You say you will yoke the Hellespont with a bridge and march an army through Europe to Greece. Now suppose we happen to be beaten, either on land or at sea, or even both, for these men are said to be brave fighters. (And we can judge for ourselves that it is true, since the Athenians on their own destroyed that great army that came to Attica with Datis and Artaphernes.) Or suppose they do not win on both. Still, if they attack with their ships and win a sea battle, and then sail to the Hellespont and break up the bridge, that alone, my king, will put us in great danger.

"I am not guessing at this out of any wisdom of my own. I am only guessing at the kind of disaster that very nearly fell on us the last time, when your father had yoked the Thracian Bosporus and bridged the Danube, and had crossed over to attack the Scythians. At that time the Scythians tried every kind of plea to persuade the Ionians, who had been given the job of guarding the bridges over the Danube, to break up the crossing. And at that time, if Histiaeus the tyrant of Miletus had gone along with the opinion of the other tyrants and had not opposed them, the power of the Persians would have come to an end. Yet it is a frightening thing even to hear it said that the whole power of the king once hung on a single human being.

"So do not plan to run into any such danger when there is no need. Do as I say instead. Dismiss this assembly for now. Then later, whenever you see fit, once you have thought it over carefully by yourself, announce whatever seems best to you. For I hold that good planning is the greatest gain there is. Even if something goes against us, the plan was no less good; it was simply defeated by bad luck. But a man who planned badly, if luck goes with him, has stumbled on a prize by chance, and his plan was bad all the same.

"You see how the god strikes with his thunderbolts the creatures that stand out above the rest, and does not let them show off, while the small ones do not provoke his jealousy at all. You see also how he always hurls his bolts at the tallest buildings and the tallest trees. For the god likes to cut down everything that stands out above the rest. In the same way a huge army is destroyed by a small one, in a way like this: when the god grows jealous of them and sends panic among them, or thunder from the sky, they are destroyed utterly, in a way they did not deserve. For the god does not allow anyone but himself to think big thoughts.

"Besides, hurrying any business breeds failures, and great losses usually come from them. But in waiting there are many good things, and even if they do not look good at first, in time you will find that they are.

"That is my advice to you, my king. But you, son of Gobryas, Mardonius, stop talking nonsense about the Greeks. They do not deserve to be belittled. By slandering the Greeks you are urging the king himself to march against them, and that, I think, is exactly what you are straining every nerve to bring about. Don't let it happen. Slander is a terrible thing: in slander there are two wrongdoers and one victim. The slanderer does wrong because he speaks against someone who is not there. The listener does wrong because he believes the story before he finds out the truth of it. And the man who is not present when the words are spoken is wronged by both: slandered by the one, and taken for a bad man by the other.

"But if we really must march against these men, then come: let the king himself stay at home in the land of the Persians, and let the two of us stake our sons on it. Then you lead the army by yourself, choosing whatever men you like and taking as large an army as you think fit. If things turn out for the king the way you say, let my sons be put to death, and let me be put to death with them. But if they turn out the way I predict, let your sons suffer that, and you with them, if you ever come home. And if you are not willing to submit to this test, but are set on leading an army against Greece no matter what, then I say this: those left behind here will one day hear that Mardonius has done the Persians great harm and lies torn apart by dogs and birds somewhere in the land of the Athenians, or else perhaps in the land of the Spartans, unless it has happened even before that, along the way. And they will hear that you have learned at last what kind of men you are persuading the king to march against."

11. That was what Artabanus said. Xerxes was furious, and answered him: "Artabanus, you are my father's brother, and that will save you from getting the reward your foolish words deserve. But I lay this disgrace on you, since you are a coward with no spirit in you: you will not march with me against Greece, but stay here with the women. And I will accomplish everything I said even without your help. May I not be descended from Darius son of Hystaspes, son of Arsames, son of Ariaramnes, son of Teispes, or from Cyrus son of Cambyses, son of Teispes, son of Achaemenes, if I do not take revenge on the Athenians! For I know well that if we keep quiet, they will not. They will march against our land again, if we can judge by what they have already done, since they burned Sardis and marched into Asia. So it is impossible for either side to back away from this quarrel. The question before us is whether we act or are acted on: whether all these lands of ours fall under the Greeks, or all of theirs under the Persians. In our hostility there is no middle way. So it is right for us, since we were wronged first, to take our revenge. That way I will also find out what this terrible thing is that I am going to suffer if I lead an army against these men, men whom Pelops the Phrygian, a slave of my forefathers, conquered so thoroughly that to this day both the people themselves and their land are named after the man who conquered them."

12. That was how far the talk went. But later, when night came on, Artabanus' opinion kept tormenting Xerxes. He made the night his counselor, and he decided that it was not at all in his interest to march against Greece. Having made this new decision, he fell asleep, and in the night, as the Persians tell it, he saw a vision like this. Xerxes dreamed that a tall, handsome man came and stood over him and said: "So you are changing your mind, Persian, about leading an army against Greece, now that you have proclaimed that the Persians are to gather their forces? You do wrong to change your mind, and the one who stands here before you will not forgive you for it. Go the way you decided to go in the daytime."

13. When he had said this, Xerxes dreamed that the man flew away. When day came, Xerxes paid no attention to this dream. He called together the same Persians he had assembled before and said to them: "Persians, forgive me for changing my plans so quickly. My judgment has not yet come to its full strength, and those who urge me to do what I said never leave me alone for long. When I first heard Artabanus' opinion, my youthful temper boiled over, so that I threw out words I should not have said to a man older than I am. But now I admit he is right, and I will follow his advice. So consider that I have changed my mind about marching against Greece, and stay quietly at home."

14. When the Persians heard this they were delighted, and they bowed down before him. But when night came on, the same dream came again and stood over Xerxes as he slept and said: "Son of Darius, so it is plain that you have given up this expedition in front of the Persian assembly, and that you have paid no attention to my words, as if you had heard them from nobody at all. So be quite sure of this: if you do not set out on your march at once, this is what will come of it for you. Just as you became great and mighty in a short time, so you will quickly be brought low again."

15. Xerxes was badly shaken by fear of the vision. He leapt up from his bed and sent a messenger to summon Artabanus. When he came, Xerxes said to him: "Artabanus, at first I lost my head, when I spoke foolish words to you in return for your good advice. But not long after I changed my mind and saw that I ought to do what you had suggested. But I cannot do it, though I want to. Ever since I turned around and changed my mind, a dream keeps visiting me, and it will not allow me to do it at all. Just now it has left me with a threat. Now, if it is a god who sends it to me, and it is his absolute will that an army should go against Greece, this same dream will fly to you as well, and give you the same orders it has given me. And it occurs to me that this might happen if you take all my clothes and put them on, and then sit on my throne, and after that lie down to sleep in my bed."

16. That was what Xerxes said to him. At first Artabanus was unwilling to obey, because he did not think himself worthy to sit on the royal throne. But at last, when he was pressed further, he did as he was told, though first he said this:

"In my judgment, my king, it is equally good for a man to be wise himself or to be willing to follow good advice from someone else. You have both of these good things, but the company of bad men leads you astray. It is like what they say of the sea, the most useful of all things to mankind: the blasts of wind that fall on it keep it from behaving according to its own nature. As for me, when you insulted me, I was not hurt so much by that. What hurt me was this. Two opinions were put before the Persians. One tended to increase arrogance. The other tended to check it, and said what a bad thing it is to teach the soul always to want more than it has. And when these two opinions were put before us, you chose the one that was more dangerous both for yourself and for the Persians.

"Now that you have turned to the better plan, you say that when you were ready to give up the expedition against the Greeks, a dream sent by some god kept haunting you and forbidding you to abandon the enterprise. But here too you are mistaken, my son. This has nothing divine about it. I am many years older than you, and I will tell you what kind of thing these dreams are that come drifting to men in their sleep. The visions in our dreams mostly take the shape of whatever we were thinking about during the day. And in these past days we have been very much taken up with this campaign.

"But if after all this is not what I take it to be, and there is something divine in it, then you have said everything there is to say: let it appear to me too, as it did to you, and give me orders. But if it wants to appear to me at all, it is not any more bound to appear to me if I am wearing your clothes than if I am wearing my own, or any more if I am resting in your bed than in mine. Surely this thing, whatever it is, that appears to you in your sleep is not so foolish that it will see me and think I am you, just because I am wearing your clothes. What we have to find out now is this: whether it will take no notice of me and not see fit to appear to me, whether I have my own clothes on or yours, but go on haunting you. If it really does keep haunting you, I will be inclined to say myself that it is divine. But if you have made up your mind that it shall be done this way, and there is no turning you from it, and I must go to sleep in your bed, very well: let it appear to me too, when I have done these things. But until then I will hold to the opinion I have now."

17. Having said this, Artabanus did what he was told, expecting to prove that Xerxes was talking nonsense. He put on Xerxes' clothes, sat on the royal throne, and after that went to bed. And when he had fallen asleep, the same dream that had been coming to Xerxes came to him. It stood over Artabanus and said: "So you are the one who is trying to talk Xerxes out of marching against Greece, pretending that you are looking out for him? But you will not get away unpunished, either in the future or now, for trying to turn aside what is fated to happen. As for Xerxes, what he must suffer if he disobeys has already been shown to the man himself."

18. That was how the dream seemed to Artabanus to threaten him, and at the same moment it seemed about to burn out his eyes with red-hot irons. He leapt up from his bed with a loud cry, and sitting down beside Xerxes, he told him the whole vision of the dream from start to finish. Then he said to him: "My king, I have seen many great things brought down by lesser ones, and so I urged you not to give in to every impulse of your youth, since I knew how bad it is to want too many things. I remembered how Cyrus' march against the Massagetae turned out, and also Cambyses' march against the Ethiopians, and I myself took part with Darius in the campaign against the Scythians. Knowing these things, I believed that as long as you stayed quiet, all men would count you fortunate. But since there is a push from heaven, and, it seems, a destruction sent by the gods is taking hold of the Greeks, I am changing my mind myself, and I reverse my opinion. Tell the Persians the message heaven has sent you, and order them to carry out the preparations you first commanded. And see to it that nothing is lacking on your side, since the god is putting this into your hands." After this was said, both of them were encouraged by the vision. As soon as it was day, Xerxes told the Persians about it, and Artabanus, who before had been the only one to come forward and argue against the plan, now came forward to urge it on.

19. Xerxes was now eager to make the expedition, and after this a third vision came to him in his sleep. When the Magi heard it, they explained that it referred to dominion over the whole earth, and meant that all mankind would be his subjects. The vision was this. Xerxes dreamed that he had been crowned with a wreath of olive, and that shoots growing from the olive tree spread over the whole earth, and that after that the wreath, set on his head as it was, vanished. When the Magi had interpreted the vision this way, every one of the Persians who had been assembled went straight home to his own province and set about carrying out the orders with every kind of zeal, each man wanting to win for himself the gifts that had been offered. And so Xerxes went on gathering his army, searching every region of the continent.
