Chapter 45: Athens Abandoned, the Acropolis Taken, and the Council at Salamis

40. Meanwhile the Greek fleet, after leaving Artemisium, put in at Salamis at the request of the Athenians. The Athenians asked them to put in at Salamis for this reason: they wanted to move their children and their wives out of Attica to a place of safety, and also to discuss what they ought to do. In their present situation they meant to make new plans, because their expectations had let them down. They had expected to find the Peloponnesians waiting in full force for the invaders in Boeotia. They found nothing of the kind. Instead they were told that the Peloponnesians were building a wall across the Isthmus of Corinth, because they valued the safety of the Peloponnese above everything else and were keeping guard over that, and that they were ready to let everything else go. When they learned this, the Athenians asked the fleet to put in at Salamis.

41. So the others brought their ships to land at Salamis, but the Athenians crossed over to their own country. When they arrived, they made a proclamation that every Athenian should save his children and his household as best he could. Most of them sent their families to Troezen, but some sent them to Aegina and some to Salamis. They were eager to get them out of danger, partly because they wanted to obey the oracle, and especially for another reason, which was this. The Athenians say that a great serpent lives in the temple and guards the Acropolis. They not only say this; they even set out monthly offerings for it, as if it really were there, and the offering is a honey-cake. This honey-cake had always been eaten up before, but at this time it was left untouched. When the priestess announced this, the Athenians left the city much more readily and eagerly than before, since even the goddess, as they believed, had abandoned the Acropolis. Then, when everything they owned had been moved out of danger, they sailed to join the fleet in its camp.

42. When the ships that came from Artemisium had put in at Salamis, the rest of the Greek navy heard of it and came over from Troezen in groups to join them, for they had been ordered beforehand to gather at Pogon, the harbor of the Troezenians. So many more ships were gathered now than had fought at Artemisium, and from more cities. The admiral in command of the whole was the same man as at Artemisium, Eurybiades son of Eurycleides, a Spartan but not of the royal house. But the Athenians supplied by far the largest number of ships, and the ones that sailed best.

43. These were the peoples who joined the muster. From the Peloponnese: the Spartans, with sixteen ships; the Corinthians, with the same number as at Artemisium; the Sicyonians, with fifteen ships; the Epidaurians, with ten; the Troezenians, with five; and the men of Hermione, with three. All of these except the Hermionians are of Dorian and Macednian stock, and they made their last migration from Erineus and Pindus and the land of Dryopis. But the people of Hermione are Dryopians, who were driven out by Heracles and the Malians from the land now called Doris.

44. Those were the Peloponnesians in the fleet. From the mainland outside the Peloponnese came the following. The Athenians supplied more ships than all the rest, one hundred and eighty, and they served alone. The Plataeans did not fight beside the Athenians in the sea battle at Salamis, because when the Greeks were leaving Artemisium and had come near Chalcis, the Plataeans landed on the opposite shore of Boeotia and set about moving their households to safety. So, being busy rescuing their families, they had been left behind. As for the Athenians: in the days when the Pelasgians held what is now called Greece, the Athenians were Pelasgians and were named Cranai. In the time of King Cecrops they came to be called Cecropidae. Then, when Erechtheus took over the power, their name was changed to Athenians; and after Ion son of Xuthus became the Athenians' commander, they were called Ionians after him.

45. The Megarians supplied the same number of ships as at Artemisium. The Ambraciots came to help the rest with seven ships, and the Leucadians with three; these two peoples are Dorians by descent, from Corinth.

46. Of the islanders, the Aeginetans supplied thirty ships. They had other ships manned as well, but they were using those to guard their own land, and they fought in the sea battle at Salamis with the thirty that sailed best. The Aeginetans are Dorians from Epidaurus, and their island used to be called Oenone. After the Aeginetans came the Chalcidians, with the twenty ships they had had at Artemisium, and the Eretrians with their seven; these are Ionians. Next came the Ceans, with the same number as before; they are Ionians by descent, from Athens. The Naxians supplied four ships. Their fellow citizens had sent them out to join the Persians, as the other islanders had done; but they ignored these orders and came over to the Greeks, urged on by Democritus, a man of good standing among the citizens and at that time the captain of a trireme. The Naxians are Ionians, originally from Athens. The Styrians supplied the same ships as at Artemisium, and the men of Cythnus one ship and one fifty-oared galley; both of these peoples are Dryopians. The Seriphians, the Siphnians and the Melians also served with the rest, for they were the only islanders who had not given earth and water to the Persian king.

47. All the peoples named so far lived on the near side of the land of the Thesprotians and the river Acheron. The Thesprotians border on the land of the Ambraciots and the Leucadians, and those two were the ones who came from farthest away to serve. Of all the people who live beyond these limits, the men of Croton were the only ones who came to help Greece in her danger. They sent one ship, and its captain was Phayllus, a man who had won three victories at the Pythian games. The men of Croton are Achaeans by descent.

48. All the others in the fleet supplied triremes, but the Melians, Siphnians and Seriphians supplied fifty-oared galleys. The Melians, who are descended from the Spartans, supplied two; the Siphnians and Seriphians, who are Ionians from Athens, one each. The total number of ships, not counting the fifty-oared galleys, was 378.

49. When the commanders from the cities I have named had gathered at Salamis, they began their discussion. Eurybiades proposed that anyone who wished should give his opinion on where, in the territory the Greeks still controlled, he thought it best to fight a sea battle. Attica had already been given up, and so it was the remaining territory that he was asking about. Most of the speakers agreed on one view: that they should sail to the Isthmus and fight a sea battle there in defense of the Peloponnese. Their reasoning was that if they were beaten in a sea battle at Salamis, they would be trapped and besieged on an island where no help could reach them, but at the Isthmus they could get ashore among their own people.

50. While the commanders from the Peloponnese were arguing this way, an Athenian arrived with news that the invaders had reached Attica and that the whole country was being laid waste with fire. The army that had marched with Xerxes through Boeotia had burned the city of the Thespians, whose people had left it and gone to the Peloponnese, and the city of the Plataeans as well. Now it had come to Athens and was laying waste everything in that region. Xerxes had burned Thespiae and Plataea because the Thebans told him that these cities were not on the Persian side.

51. So the invaders reached Attica three months after crossing the Hellespont, where their march began, counting the one month they spent there while they crossed over into Europe. It was the year when Calliades was archon at Athens, the magistrate who gave the year its name. They took the lower city, which was deserted. Then they found that there were still a few Athenians left in the temple on the Acropolis, either temple stewards or poor men. These men had barricaded the entrance to the Acropolis with doors and a fence of timber and were trying to defend themselves against the enemy's attacks. They had not gone over to Salamis, partly because of their poverty, and also because they thought that they alone had worked out the meaning of the oracle the Pythia had given the Athenians: that the "wooden bulwark" would never be taken. This, they believed, was the safe refuge the oracle meant, and not the ships.

52. So the Persians took up a position on the hill facing the Acropolis, which the Athenians call the Hill of Ares, and besieged them in this way: they wrapped tow, a coarse flax fiber, around their arrows, set it alight, and shot them at the fence. Even so, the Athenians under siege kept on defending themselves, although they had reached the last extremity of distress and their fence had failed them. They would not listen to terms of surrender when the sons of Pisistratus brought them forward. Instead they went on defending themselves and came up with all sorts of devices against the enemy. Among other things, they rolled down great boulders whenever the invaders came near the gates. So for a long time Xerxes was at a loss, unable to take them.

53. In the end, however, a way in appeared for the invaders out of their difficulties, since according to the oracle the whole mainland of Attica was fated to come under the Persians. This is how it happened. On the front side of the Acropolis, but behind the gates and the road leading up to the entrance, there was a spot where no one was on guard, and where no one would have thought any man could climb up. Here, by the shrine of Aglaurus the daughter of Cecrops, some men climbed up, even though the place is a sheer cliff. When the Athenians saw that they had climbed up onto the Acropolis, some of them threw themselves down from the wall and died, while others took refuge in the inner chamber of the temple. The Persians who had climbed up went first to the gates and opened them, and then they killed the suppliants. When they had killed them all, they plundered the temple and set fire to the whole Acropolis.

54. Then Xerxes, now in complete possession of Athens, sent a messenger on horseback to Susa to report his success to Artabanus. On the day after he sent the herald, he called together the Athenian exiles who were traveling with him and told them to go up to the Acropolis and offer sacrifices in their own way. Perhaps he had seen some vision in a dream that made him give this order, or perhaps he had misgivings because he had set fire to the temple. The Athenian exiles did as they were told.

55. Now I will explain why I have mentioned this. On this Acropolis there is a temple of Erechtheus, who is said to have been born from the Earth, and in it there is an olive tree and a pool of salt water. According to the story the Athenians tell, Poseidon and Athena set these there as tokens of their claims when they were competing for the land. It so happened that this olive tree was burned by the invaders along with the rest of the temple. But on the day after the fire, when the Athenians whom the king had ordered to sacrifice went up to the temple, they saw that a shoot about a foot and a half long had sprung up from the stump. They reported this.

56. Meanwhile the Greeks at Salamis, when they heard what had happened to the Acropolis of the Athenians, were so badly shaken that some of the commanders did not even wait for a vote on the question that had been put. They rushed to their ships and began hoisting their sails, meaning to get away fast. Those who stayed behind finally decided to fight at sea in defense of the Isthmus. Night came on, and they broke up from the council and went to their ships.

57. When Themistocles reached his ship, an Athenian named Mnesiphilus asked him what they had decided. When Themistocles told him that they had resolved to take the ships to the Isthmus and fight a sea battle in defense of the Peloponnese, Mnesiphilus said: "Then if they sail away from Salamis with the ships, you won't fight any more sea battles for your country at all. They will all head off to their own cities, and neither Eurybiades nor anyone else will be able to hold them back or stop the fleet from breaking up. Greece will be ruined by bad decisions. If there is any way at all, go and try to undo what has been decided. Perhaps you can persuade Eurybiades to change his plans and stay here."

58. Themistocles liked this advice very much. Without a word in reply, he went to Eurybiades' ship. When he got there, he said that he wanted to discuss a matter of common concern with him, and Eurybiades told him to come aboard and say whatever he wished. Then Themistocles sat down beside him and repeated everything he had heard Mnesiphilus say, passing it off as his own thinking and adding a good deal more. At last, by pressing hard, he persuaded Eurybiades to come off his ship and call the commanders together in council.

59. When they had gathered, before Eurybiades could even put forward the business he had called the commanders together for, Themistocles began to speak at length and with great force, since he was very eager to get his way. While he was speaking, the Corinthian commander, Adeimantus son of Ocytus, said: "Themistocles, at the games, those who start before the signal are beaten with rods." Themistocles defended himself: "Yes, but those who are left behind at the start never win the crown."

60. This time he answered the Corinthian mildly. And to Eurybiades he did not now say any of what he had said before, that if they sailed from Salamis they would scatter in all directions, because it would not be proper for him to accuse the allies to their faces. Instead he took a different line of argument. "It is in your power now to save Greece," he said, "if you will take my advice and stay here and fight a sea battle here, and not take the advice of those among these men who tell you to move the ships to the Isthmus. Listen to both plans and compare them. If you fight at the Isthmus, you will be fighting in the open sea, and that is the last place it suits us to fight, since our ships are heavier and fewer than the enemy's. Second, you will lose Salamis and Megara and Aegina, even if we succeed in everything else. For their army will come along with their fleet, and so you will lead them to the Peloponnese yourself and put all of Greece at risk.

"But if you do what I say, you will find these advantages in it. First, if we fight in narrow waters with few ships against many, and the battle goes the way we can reasonably expect, we will have much the better of it. Fighting at sea in a narrow space works in our favor; fighting in a wide-open space works in theirs. Then again, Salamis will be saved, where our children and wives have been taken for safety. And there is this to be gained as well, which is what you all care about most: by staying here you will be fighting for the Peloponnese just as much as if the battle were at the Isthmus, and, if you are wise, you will not lead the enemy to the Peloponnese. And if what I expect comes true and we win with our ships, the invaders will not come to you at the Isthmus or advance any farther than Attica. They will retreat in disorder, and we will gain by saving Megara and Aegina and Salamis, where an oracle actually tells us we will defeat our enemies. When men make reasonable plans, reasonable results generally follow. But when they do not, heaven does not usually choose to go along with human plans."

61. When Themistocles said this, Adeimantus the Corinthian attacked him a second time. He told him to be quiet, since he had no country, and urged Eurybiades not to put to the vote the proposal of a man who was a citizen of no city. Themistocles, he said, could offer opinions to the council if he could show that he had a city, but not otherwise. He made this objection because Athens had been taken and was held by the enemy. At that Themistocles said many harsh things about him and about the Corinthians as well. He declared that he and his people really did have a city and a country greater than the Corinthians', as long as they had two hundred ships fully manned, for none of the Greeks could beat off the Athenians if they came to attack them.

62. Having made this point, he turned to Eurybiades and spoke still more urgently: "If you stay here, and by staying here prove yourself a brave man, all is well. If not, you will bring about the ruin of Greece, for all our strength in this war depends on the ships. No, do as I advise. But if you will not, we will pick up our households at once and sail to Siris in Italy, which has been ours since ancient times, and the oracles say we are destined to settle it. And you, when you are left alone, robbed of allies like us, will remember what I said."

63. When Themistocles said this, Eurybiades was persuaded to change his mind. In my opinion, he changed it mainly because he was afraid the Athenians would leave them if he took the ships to the Isthmus; for if the Athenians abandoned them and left, the rest would no longer be strong enough to fight the enemy. So he chose this plan: to stay where they were and decide the matter there with a sea battle.

64. So the men at Salamis, after their skirmish of words, began preparing for a sea battle there, since Eurybiades had decided on it. As day came on, just as the sun rose, an earthquake was felt both on land and at sea. They resolved to pray to the gods and to call on the sons of Aeacus to come and help them. And as they had resolved, so they did. They prayed to all the gods, and then they called Ajax and Telamon to their aid from Salamis itself, where the fleet was, and they sent a ship to Aegina to bring Aeacus himself and the other sons of Aeacus.

65. Dicaeus son of Theocydes, an Athenian who was an exile and had won a high reputation among the Persians at this time, told the following story. At the time when the land of Attica, deserted by the Athenians, was being ravaged by Xerxes' army, he happened to be with Demaratus the Spartan in the Thriasian plain. He saw a cloud of dust rising from Eleusis, as if raised by a crowd of about 30,000 men, and the two of them wondered what men could be raising it. Then all at once they heard the sound of voices, and Dicaeus recognized the sound as the mystic cry "Iacchus!" But Demaratus, who knew nothing of the sacred rites held at Eleusis, asked him what it was that was making the sound. Dicaeus said: "Demaratus, some great disaster is surely about to strike the king's army. It is perfectly plain, since Attica is deserted, that whatever is making this sound comes from the gods, and that it is going from Eleusis to help the Athenians and their allies. If it comes down on the Peloponnese, then the king himself and his army on the mainland are in danger. But if it turns toward the ships at Salamis, the king is in danger of losing his fleet. The Athenians celebrate this festival every year for the Mother and the Daughter, and any of them who wishes, and any of the other Greeks too, is initiated into the mysteries. The sound of voices you hear is the cry 'Iacchus!' that they raise at this festival." To this Demaratus said: "Keep quiet, and don't tell this story to anyone else. If these words of yours are reported to the king, you will lose your head, and neither I nor any other man on earth will be able to save you. So keep quiet, and the gods will take care of this expedition." That was Demaratus' advice. After the cloud of dust and the sound of voices, a mist rose into the air and was carried toward Salamis, to the camp of the Greeks. And so, Dicaeus said, they understood that Xerxes' fleet was doomed to be destroyed. That was the account Dicaeus son of Theocydes gave, calling on Demaratus and others as witnesses.

66. Meanwhile the men assigned to Xerxes' fleet, after viewing the disaster of the Spartans at Trachis, crossed over from there to Histiaea. They waited three days, then sailed through the Euripus, and in another three days they had reached Phalerum. In my judgment they were no fewer in number, by land and by sea, when they attacked Athens than when they had arrived at Sepias and Thermopylae. For against those of them who died in the storm, and those killed at Thermopylae and in the sea battles at Artemisium, I set those who had not yet joined the king at that time: the Malians, Dorians, Locrians and Boeotians (who joined him in full force, except the Thespians and Plataeans), and also the people of Carystus, Andros and Tenos, along with all the other islanders except the five cities whose names I mentioned before. For the farther the Persian king advanced into the heart of Greece, the more peoples went along with him.

67. So all these came to Athens except the Parians, who had stayed behind at Cythnus to wait and see how the war would turn out. When all the rest had come to Phalerum, Xerxes himself came down to the ships, wanting to visit them and to hear the views of the men who sailed in them. When he had arrived and taken his seat in a prominent place, the tyrants of the various nations and the commanders of the squadrons were summoned from their ships and came before him. They took their seats in the order of rank the king had given each of them: first the king of Sidon, then the king of Tyre, and after them the rest. When they were seated in order, Xerxes sent Mardonius to test each one by asking whether he should fight a sea battle.

68. So Mardonius went around asking them, beginning with the king of Sidon. All the others gave the same opinion, advising him to fight at sea. But Artemisia said this: "Mardonius, please tell the king this from me, from one who has proved herself not the worst in the sea battles fought off Euboea and has done deeds as good as anyone's. Master, it is right for me to tell you the opinion I really hold, and to say what I happen to think is best for your cause. And this is what I say: spare your ships and do not fight a sea battle. Their men are as much stronger than your men at sea as men are stronger than women. Why must you take the risk of a sea battle at all? Don't you hold Athens, the city you set out on this campaign to take? And don't you hold the rest of Greece? No one stands in your way. Those who did stand against you got what they deserved.

"Now I will tell you how I think things will turn out for your enemies. If you do not rush into a sea battle, but keep your ships here close to land, and either stay here yourself or even advance into the Peloponnese, then what you came to do, Master, will easily be done. The Greeks cannot hold out against you for long. You will soon scatter them, and they will run off to their own cities. For they have no food with them on this island, as I hear, and if you march your army against the Peloponnese, it is not likely that the men who came from there will stay put. They will have no wish to fight a battle in defense of Athens.

"But if you rush to fight at once, I am afraid that damage to the fleet may bring ruin on the army as well. And consider this too, my king: good men tend to have bad servants, and bad men good ones. You are the best of all men, and you have bad servants, the ones who are counted as your allies: the Egyptians, the Cyprians, the Cilicians and the Pamphylians, who are no use at all."

69. When she said this to Mardonius, those who were friendly to Artemisia were upset at her words, thinking she would be punished by the king for urging him not to fight at sea. But those who envied and resented her, because she had been honored above all the allies, were delighted by her opposition, thinking that now she was finished. But when the opinions were reported to Xerxes, he was very pleased with Artemisia's. He had thought highly of her even before, and now he praised her still more. Even so, he gave orders to follow the advice of the majority. He thought that off Euboea his men had held back deliberately because he was not there himself, whereas now he had arranged to watch them as they fought the sea battle.

70. So when the order was passed to put out to sea, they took their ships out toward Salamis and quietly drew them up in their stations along the shore. There was not enough daylight left for them to fight, since night had come on, but they made their preparations to fight the next day. The Greeks, meanwhile, were gripped by fear and dismay, especially the ones from the Peloponnese. They were dismayed because they were staying at Salamis to fight for the land of the Athenians, and if they were beaten they would be cut off and trapped on an island, leaving their own land unguarded. And in fact the invaders' army was marching toward the Peloponnese that very night.

71. Yet every possible step had been taken to keep the invaders from getting into the Peloponnese by land. As soon as the Peloponnesians heard that Leonidas and his men had died at Thermopylae, they hurried together from their cities and took up a position at the Isthmus. Their commander was Cleombrotus son of Anaxandrides, the brother of Leonidas. Once in position at the Isthmus, they destroyed the Scironian Road, and after that, having agreed on it among themselves, they began to build a wall across the Isthmus. There were tens of thousands of them, and every man joined in the work, so it went forward fast. Stones and bricks and timbers and baskets full of sand were carried to it without a break, and the men who had come to help never stopped working, night or day.

72. These were the Greeks who came in full force to the Isthmus to defend their country: the Spartans, the Arcadians of every district, the Eleans, the Corinthians, Sicyonians, Epidaurians, Phliasians, Troezenians and Hermionians. These were the ones who came to help Greece in her danger and who were anxious for her. The rest of the Peloponnesians did not care. And by this time the Olympic and Carnean festivals were already over.

73. Seven peoples live in the Peloponnese. Two of them are native to the soil and are settled now where they lived in ancient times: the Arcadians and the Cynurians. One people, the Achaeans, never left the Peloponnese, but long ago they did leave their own land, and they now live in land that was not theirs. The remaining four peoples came in from outside: the Dorians, the Aetolians, the Dryopians and the Lemnians. The Dorians have many famous cities; the Aetolians have Elis alone; the Dryopians have Hermione and Asine, which is opposite Cardamyle in Laconia; and the Lemnians have all the Paroreatae. The Cynurians, who are native to the soil, seem to be the only Ionians among them, but they have become Dorians completely, through being ruled by the Argives and through the passing of time. They are the people of Orneae and the countryside around it. Of these seven peoples, all the cities except the ones I listed just now stood aside and did nothing. And if I may speak freely, by standing aside they were in fact taking the Persians' side.

74. So the men at the Isthmus were throwing themselves into the work I have described, since they were now running a race with their very survival at stake, and they did not expect the fleet to win any brilliant success. The men at Salamis, though they heard about this work, were dismayed all the same, fearing not so much for themselves as for the Peloponnese. For a while they talked about it privately, one man muttering to the next, and they wondered at Eurybiades' folly. But in the end it broke out into the open. So a meeting was held, and much was said on the same points as before. Some said they ought to sail away to the Peloponnese and risk everything in its defense, rather than stay and fight for a land the enemy had already captured. But the Athenians, Aeginetans and Megarians urged that they should stay where they were and defend themselves.

75. Then, when Themistocles saw that the Peloponnesians were about to outvote him, he slipped out of the meeting unnoticed. Once outside, he sent a man in a boat to the Persian camp, with instructions on what to say. This man's name was Sicinnus. He was a servant of Themistocles and tutor to his children. After these events Themistocles had him enrolled as a citizen of Thespiae, when the Thespians were admitting new citizens, and made him a rich man. At this time Sicinnus came in the boat and said this to the commanders of the invaders: "The commander of the Athenians has sent me secretly, without the knowledge of the other Greeks. As it happens, he favors the king's cause and would rather see your side win than the Greeks. He sent me to tell you that the Greeks are panic-stricken and are planning to run away. Now you have the chance to do a splendid deed, if you do not let them escape. They are not of one mind with one another, and they will not stand up to you. Instead you will see them fighting a sea battle against each other, those on your side against those who are not."

76. Having delivered this message, Sicinnus went away. The commanders believed the message, and first they landed a large force of Persians on the little island of Psyttalea, which lies between Salamis and the mainland. Then, at midnight, they moved the western wing of their fleet out to sea and around toward Salamis, and the ships stationed around Ceos and Cynosura also put out, and they filled the whole strait with their ships as far as Munychia. They put their ships out for this reason: so that the Greeks could not even escape, but would be trapped at Salamis and pay the price for the battles at Artemisium. And they landed Persians on the little island called Psyttalea for this reason: when the battle came, they could save the men of one side and kill those of the other, since that was where the men and the wrecks were most likely to be washed ashore, for the island lay right in the path of the coming battle. They did all this in silence, so that the enemy would not find out.

77. So they made these preparations in the night, without getting any sleep at all. As for oracles, I cannot argue that they are not true. I have no wish to try to discredit them when they speak clearly, when I look at things like the one that follows:

	"But when they bridge with their ships the sacred shore of the goddess,
	Artemis of the golden sword, and you, sea-washed Cynosura,
	driven by a frenzied hope, after plundering shining Athens,
	then divine Justice will quench Excess, the firstborn of Insolence,
	raging to overturn all things and panting fiercely for bloodshed.
	Bronze will clash with bronze, and Ares will redden the sea,
	staining its waves with blood. Then a day of freedom for Greece
	comes from far-seeing Zeus and from Victory, lady and mother."

When I look at things like this, and when Bacis speaks so clearly, I do not dare to raise objections about oracles myself, and I will not accept them from others.

78. Meanwhile there was fierce argument among the commanders at Salamis. They did not yet know that the invaders were surrounding them with their ships, but thought they were still in the positions they had seen them in by day.

79. While the commanders were quarreling, Aristides son of Lysimachus crossed over from Aegina. He was an Athenian who had been ostracized by the people, that is, banished by their vote. From what I hear of his character, I believe he was the best and most honorable man in Athens. This man came to the council and called Themistocles out. Themistocles was not his friend; he was his bitterest enemy. But because of the size of the present danger, Aristides put all that out of his mind and called him out, because he wanted to talk with him. He had already heard that the Peloponnesians were pressing to take the ships away to the Isthmus. So when Themistocles came out to him, Aristides said this: "At any other time when the chance arises, and especially at this moment, we ought to compete with each other over which of us can do more for our country. I tell you that it makes no difference now whether the Peloponnesians say much or little about sailing away from here. I have seen it with my own eyes, and I tell you that now, even if the Corinthians and Eurybiades himself want to sail out, they won't be able to. We are surrounded by the enemy. So go in and tell them this."

80. Themistocles answered: "That is very good advice, and the news you bring is good too, since you have come and seen with your own eyes what I wanted to happen. You should know that what the Persians are doing was done at my suggestion. When the Greeks would not come to a battle of their own free will, they had to be brought to it against their will. But since you have come with good news, report it to them yourself. If I tell them, they will think I have made it up, and I won't convince them; they will think the enemy is doing no such thing. So come forward and speak yourself, and tell them how things stand. When you have told them, if they believe you, that will be best. But if they don't believe it, it will make no difference to us, since they won't be able to run away any longer if we are surrounded on all sides, as you say."

81. So Aristides came forward and told them. He said that he had come from Aegina and had barely slipped past the blockading ships without being seen, since the whole Greek camp was surrounded by Xerxes' ships, and he advised them to get ready to defend themselves. After saying this he withdrew. And again an argument broke out among them, because most of the commanders did not believe the report.

82. While they were still doubting, a trireme manned by men of Tenos arrived, deserting from the enemy. Its captain was Panaetius son of Sosimenes, and it brought them the whole truth. For this deed the Tenians were inscribed at Delphi on the tripod, among those who had defeated the invaders. With this ship that deserted at Salamis, and the Lemnian ship that had deserted earlier and come over at Artemisium, the Greek fleet was brought up to a full 380 ships. Before this it had been two ships short of that number.
