Chapter 47: The Retreat of the King, and Alexander of Macedon at Athens

113. Xerxes and his army, meanwhile, stayed on for a few days after the sea battle, and then they all began to march away toward Boeotia, by the same road they had come. Mardonius thought it was a good idea to escort the king on his way, and he also thought it was now too late in the year to carry on the war. It would be better, he thought, to spend the winter in Thessaly and then, at the start of spring, to make his attempt on the Peloponnese. When they reached Thessaly, Mardonius chose his men. First he took all the Persians called the "Immortals," except only their commander Hydarnes, because Hydarnes said he would not be left behind by the king. After them he took, from the other Persians, those who wore breastplates, and the corps of a thousand cavalry; also the Medes, the Sacae, the Bactrians and the Indians, both infantry and cavalry. These peoples he took whole. From the other allies he picked out a few men at a time, choosing those who looked fine and those he knew had done good service. He chose more Persians than men of any other single nation, and these wore collars of twisted metal and bracelets. After them came the Medes, who in fact were not fewer in number than the Persians, only weaker in body. The result was that there were 300,000 men in all, counting the cavalry.

114. During this time, while Mardonius was choosing his army and Xerxes was in Thessaly, an oracle had come from Delphi to the Spartans. It told them to demand satisfaction from Xerxes for the killing of Leonidas, and to accept whatever he gave them. So the Spartans sent a herald as fast as they could. He found the whole army still in Thessaly, came before Xerxes, and spoke these words: "King of the Medes, the Spartans and the sons of Heracles of Sparta demand satisfaction from you for a killing, because you killed their king while he was fighting to defend Greece." Xerxes laughed and then said nothing for some time. After that he pointed to Mardonius, who happened to be standing beside him, and said: "Then Mardonius here will give them satisfaction, the kind they deserve to have."

115. The herald accepted this answer and left. Xerxes left Mardonius in Thessaly and went on himself in a hurry to the Hellespont. He reached the place where the crossing was in thirty-five days, bringing back next to nothing of his army, you might say. Wherever they came on the march, whatever people they came to, they seized that people's crops and ate them. If they found no crops, they ate the grass growing out of the ground, and they stripped the bark off the trees and pulled down the leaves and devoured them, from cultivated trees and wild ones alike. They left nothing behind them; that is what hunger drove them to. Then plague broke out in the army too, and dysentery, which killed men along the way. Some of the sick the king left behind, ordering the cities he happened to be passing through at the time to take care of them and feed them. He left some in Thessaly, some at Siris in Paeonia, and some in Macedonia. In these parts he had also left behind the sacred chariot of Zeus when he was marching against Greece, but on his way back he did not get it back. The Paeonians had given it to the Thracians, and when Xerxes asked for it again, they said the mares had been carried off while they were out at pasture by the Thracians of the upper country, who live around the source of the Strymon.

116. It was here, too, that a Thracian, the king of the Bisaltians and of the Crestonian country, did a deed of extraordinary horror. He had said that he would never of his own free will be a subject of Xerxes, and he had gone off up into Mount Rhodope; and he had also forbidden his sons to march against Greece. But they, either because they did not care about his orders or because they had a sudden longing to see the war, marched with the Persian. When they came home, all six of them unhurt, their father gouged out their eyes for it.

117. That was the reward they got. As for the Persians, when they had passed on out of Thrace and come to the crossing, they hurried over the Hellespont to Abydos in the ships, because they found the floating bridges no longer stretched across: a storm had broken them up. While they stayed there for a time, they were given more food than they had had on the way. From eating without restraint to satisfy their hunger, and from the change of water as well, many of the men in the army who had survived until then died. The rest reached Sardis with Xerxes.

118. There is also another story told, which goes like this. When Xerxes, marching away from Athens, came to Eion on the Strymon, he went no farther by road from there. He handed his army over to Hydarnes to lead back to the Hellespont, while he himself boarded a Phoenician ship and set out for Asia. As he sailed, a wind from the Strymon caught him, violent and raising great waves. The storm tossed him more and more, and the ship was heavily loaded, because there were a great many Persians on deck, the ones traveling with Xerxes. At that the king grew frightened. He shouted to the pilot and asked whether there was any way for them to be saved. The pilot said: "Master, there is none, unless we find some way to get rid of all these extra passengers." Then, they say, when Xerxes heard this, he said: "Persians, now let each of you show how much he cares for the king. My safety, it seems, depends on you." That, they say, is what he said, and the Persians bowed down before him and leaped into the sea. So the ship was lightened and came safely to Asia. As soon as they had landed, they say, Xerxes did two things. First he gave the pilot a gold wreath, for saving the king's life; then he cut off his head, for causing the deaths of so many Persians.

119. That is the other story told about Xerxes' return, but I for my part cannot believe it at all, either in other respects or in this matter of what happened to the Persians. If the pilot had really said this to Xerxes, I don't believe one person in ten thousand would disagree with me about what the king would have done. He would have sent the men on deck down below into the hold, since they were Persians, and Persians of the highest rank. Then, from the rowers, who were Phoenicians, he would have thrown into the sea the same number of men. In fact, as I said before, he made his way back to Asia by road, together with the rest of the army.

120. Here is strong evidence that this is so. Xerxes is known to have come to Abdera on his way back, and to have made a pact of guest-friendship with its people and presented them with a Persian sword of gold and a tiara spangled with gold. And as the people of Abdera themselves say (though I for my part cannot believe it at all), it was there that he loosened his belt for the first time on his flight back from Athens, because he thought himself safe. Now, Abdera lies farther toward the Hellespont than the river Strymon and Eion, where the story says he boarded the ship.

121. The Greeks, meanwhile, when it turned out that they could not take Andros, turned toward Carystus. They laid waste the land of the Carystians and then left and went to Salamis. First of all they set apart the first fruits of the spoils for the gods. Among these were three Persian triremes. One was to be dedicated at the Isthmus, and it was still there in my time; another at Sunium; and the third to Ajax, there at Salamis where they were. After this they divided the spoils among themselves and sent the first fruits to Delphi. From these a statue was made, eighteen feet tall, holding the beak of a ship in its hand. This statue stands in the same place as the golden statue of Alexander the Macedonian.

122. When the Greeks had sent the first fruits to Delphi, they asked the god, on behalf of all of them, whether the first fruits he had received were full and acceptable to him. He said that from the Greeks in general he had received enough, but not from the Aeginetans, and he demanded from them the prize for bravery they had won in the sea battle at Salamis. When the Aeginetans heard this, they dedicated three golden stars set on a bronze ship's mast, which stand in the corner close to Croesus' mixing bowl.

123. After the spoils were divided, the Greeks sailed to the Isthmus to give the prize for bravery to the Greek who had proved himself most deserving of it in this war. When they got there, the commanders cast their votes at the altar of Poseidon, choosing out of them all who was first in merit and who was second. Every one of them voted for himself for first place, each man thinking that he himself had been the best. But for second place most of the votes agreed, and they gave it to Themistocles. So for first place each of them had only his own vote, while for second place Themistocles was far ahead of the rest.

124. The Greeks would not make a decision on this out of envy, and they sailed away each to his own city without deciding. Even so, Themistocles was talked about and admired all over Greece as by far the cleverest man of all the Greeks. And since the men who had fought at Salamis had not honored him for his victory, even though he had come first in the voting, he went straight to Sparta after this, wanting to be honored there. The Spartans gave him a fine welcome and great honors. They gave Eurybiades a wreath of olive as the prize for bravery, and to Themistocles too they gave a wreath of olive, for his wisdom and skill. They also presented him with the finest chariot in Sparta. After praising him highly, they escorted him on his way home with three hundred picked Spartans, the ones called the "Horsemen," as far as the border of Tegea. He is the only man we know of to whom the Spartans ever gave an escort on his way.

125. But when he came back to Athens from Sparta, Timodemus of Aphidnae attacked him. This Timodemus was one of Themistocles' enemies, though not otherwise a man of any importance, and he was mad with envy. He threw Themistocles' trip to Sparta in his face, saying that it was because of Athens that he had received those honors from the Spartans, not because of himself. Timodemus kept on saying this over and over, until Themistocles said: "Here is how it is. If I had been a native of Belbina, that little island, I would never have been honored like this by the Spartans. But neither would you, my friend, even though you are an Athenian." So much for those matters.

126. Artabazus son of Pharnaces, meanwhile, a man already well thought of among the Persians and even more so after the events at Plataea, was escorting the king as far as the crossing with 60,000 men of the army Mardonius had chosen for himself. When the king was in Asia and Artabazus, on his march back, came near Pallene, he found that Mardonius was wintering in Thessaly and Macedonia and was in no hurry for him to come and join the rest of the army. So he thought it would not be right to pass by without enslaving the people of Potidaea, whom he found in revolt. For when the king had marched past them and the Persian fleet had fled from Salamis, the people of Potidaea had openly revolted from the Persians, and so had the others who live in Pallene.

127. So Artabazus began to besiege Potidaea. He also suspected that the people of Olynthus were planning to revolt from the king, so he began to besiege that city too. It was held by Bottiaeans who had been driven out of the area around the Thermaic Gulf by the Macedonians. When he had taken the city by siege, he led these men out to a lake and slaughtered them there. He handed the city over to Critobulus of Torone to govern, and to the people of Chalcidice; and that is how the Chalcidians came to possess Olynthus.

128. After taking this city, Artabazus attacked Potidaea in earnest. While he was hard at work at this, Timoxenus, the commander of the troops from Scione, came to an agreement with him to betray the town. How he managed it at first I cannot say, because that is not reported. In the end, though, it went like this. Whenever Timoxenus wrote a note he wanted to send to Artabazus, or Artabazus one he wanted to send to Timoxenus, they wound it around the notched end of an arrow, put the feathers over the paper, and shot it to a place they had agreed on. But it came out that Timoxenus was trying to betray Potidaea. Artabazus shot an arrow at the agreed spot, missed it, and hit a man of Potidaea in the shoulder. When he was hit, a crowd gathered around him, as usually happens in wartime. They took the arrow at once, found the paper, and carried it to the commanders. Troops from the rest of Pallene were there as allies too. When the commanders had read the paper and discovered who the traitor was, they decided not to convict Timoxenus of treason in public, for the sake of the city of Scione, so that the people of Scione would not be thought traitors for all time to come.

129. That is how Timoxenus was found out. When Artabazus had been besieging the town for three months, the sea drew back in a great ebb that lasted a long time. The Persians, seeing that the water had become shallow, tried to get through into the Pallene peninsula. But when they had gone two-fifths of the way, with three-fifths still to go before they would be in Pallene, a great flood tide came in on them, higher than ever before, so the local people say, though high tides there are frequent. Those of them who could not swim drowned, and those who could were killed by the men of Potidaea, who came out at them in boats. The cause of the high tide and the flood, and of what happened to the Persians, was this, according to the Potidaeans: these same Persians who were destroyed by the sea had committed sacrilege against the temple of Poseidon and his statue in the suburb of their town. And in saying that this was the cause, I think they are right. Artabazus led the survivors of his army away to Thessaly to join Mardonius. That is how things went for the men who escorted the king on his way.

130. What was left of Xerxes' fleet, after it reached Asia in its flight from Salamis and had ferried the king and his army across from the Chersonese to Abydos, spent the winter at Cyme. When spring came, it gathered early at Samos, where some of the ships had even spent the winter. Most of the fighting men on board were still Persians and Medes. Mardontes son of Bagaeus and Artayntes son of Artachaees came to command them, and sharing the command with them was Ithamitres, Artayntes' nephew, whom Artayntes himself had chosen. Since they had taken a heavy blow, they did not go any farther west, and no one forced them to. They stayed at Samos and kept watch over Ionia so that it would not revolt, with three hundred ships, counting the Ionians'. They did not expect the Greeks to come to Ionia; they thought the Greeks would be content to guard their own land, judging from the fact that they had not chased them as they fled from Salamis but had been happy then to go home. So at sea the Persians had lost heart, but on land they thought Mardonius would have much the better of it. They stayed at Samos, then, making plans to do their enemies some harm if they could, and at the same time listening for news of how things would turn out for Mardonius.

131. The Greeks were stirred into action both by the coming of spring and by Mardonius' presence in Thessaly. Their land army had not yet begun to gather when the fleet arrived at Aegina, one hundred and ten ships. Its commander and admiral was Leotychides son of Menares, son of Hegesilaus, son of Hippocratides, son of Leotychides, son of Anaxilaus, son of Archidemus, son of Anaxandrides, son of Theopompus, son of Nicander, son of Charilaus, son of Eunomus, son of Polydectes, son of Prytanis, son of Euryphon, son of Procles, son of Aristodemus, son of Aristomachus, son of Cleodaeus, son of Hyllus, son of Heracles. He was of the other of Sparta's two royal houses. All of these men had been kings of Sparta except the two named first after Leotychides. The commander of the Athenians was Xanthippus son of Ariphron.

132. When all the ships had arrived at Aegina, envoys from Ionia came to the Greek camp. A little before this they had also gone to Sparta and asked the Spartans to set Ionia free. One of them was Herodotus son of Basilides. These men had banded together and plotted to kill Strattis, the tyrant of Chios. There had been seven of them at first, but when one of the plotters informed on them and their plot against him was discovered, the other six escaped from Chios. They went to Sparta, and now to Aegina, asking the Greeks to sail across to Ionia. But it was all they could do to bring the Greeks as far as Delos. Everything beyond that frightened the Greeks. They had no experience of those parts, everything there seemed to them to be full of soldiers, and they were convinced that it was as far to Samos as to the Pillars of Heracles. So it happened that at the same time the Persians, struck with fear, did not dare sail any farther west than Samos, and the Greeks, though the Chians begged them, did not dare go any farther east than Delos. So fear kept guard over the space between them.

133. The Greeks, then, sailed to Delos. Mardonius, meanwhile, had been wintering in Thessaly. From there he sent a man named Mys, a native of Europus, around to the various oracles, with orders to go and consult every one of them that he could be allowed to try. What he wanted to find out from the oracles when he gave these orders I cannot say, because that is not reported. My own guess is that he sent to ask about his present situation and nothing else.

134. This Mys is known to have gone to Lebadea and to have paid one of the local men to go down into the cave of Trophonius. He also went to the oracle of the Phocians at Abae. And when he first came to Thebes, he not only consulted Ismenian Apollo (there you can consult the god through sacrificed victims, just as at Olympia) but also paid a foreigner, a man who was not a Theban, to lie down and sleep in the temple of Amphiaraus. No Theban is allowed to seek a prophecy in that temple, and here is why. Amphiaraus, through his oracles, told the Thebans to choose which of two things they wanted: to have him as their prophet or as their ally in war, and to do without the other. They chose to have him as their ally in war. That is why no Theban is allowed to sleep in that temple.

135. After this, the Thebans say, something happened that seems to me a very great marvel. It seems that this Mys of Europus, on his round of all the oracles, came also to the sacred precinct of Ptoan Apollo. This temple is called the Ptoum. It belongs to the Thebans and lies above Lake Copais, at the foot of the mountains, very near the town of Acraephia. When the man called Mys came to this temple, three men went with him, chosen from the citizens and sent by the state to write down whatever the god would say in his prophecy. At once, it is said, the god's prophet began to prophesy in a foreign language. The Thebans who had come with Mys were amazed to hear a foreign language instead of Greek, and they did not know what to make of it. Then, it is said, Mys, the man from Europus, snatched the tablet they had brought from them and wrote on it what the prophet was saying; and he said that the prophet was answering in the Carian language. When he had written it down, he left and went back to Thessaly.

136. Mardonius read what the oracles had said, whatever that was. After this he sent Alexander son of Amyntas, the Macedonian, to Athens as his envoy. He sent him partly because the Persians were related to Alexander by marriage. Alexander's sister Gygaea, the daughter of Amyntas, had married a Persian, Bubares, and had borne him that Amyntas who lived in Asia, named after his mother's father, to whom the king gave Alabanda, a great city of Phrygia, to hold. Mardonius was also sending him because he had learned that Alexander was the official guest-friend and a benefactor of the Athenians. That way, he thought, he would have the best chance of winning the Athenians over to his side. He had heard that they were a numerous people and brave in war, and he knew besides that they more than anyone else had brought about the disasters the Persians had suffered at sea. If they joined him, he thought, he would easily be master of the sea (and that would in fact have been the case), while on land he believed he was already much stronger. So he reckoned that his power would be far greater than that of the Greeks. Perhaps, too, the oracles had told him this in advance, advising him to make the Athenians his allies, and he was sending in obedience to their advice.

137. Now, this Alexander's ancestor seven generations back was that Perdiccas who first became tyrant of the Macedonians, and he won the throne in the following way. Three brothers, descendants of Temenus, fled from Argos to the Illyrians: Gauanes, Aeropus and Perdiccas. From the Illyrians they crossed over into upper Macedonia and came to the town of Lebaea. There they worked for wages as farm hands in the king's household. One looked after the horses, the second the cattle, and the youngest, Perdiccas, the sheep and goats. In the old days even the people who ruled over men were poor in money, not just the common people, and the king's wife cooked their food for them herself. Whenever she baked bread, the loaf of the boy, their servant Perdiccas, rose to twice its natural size. When this kept happening, again and again, she told her husband. As soon as he heard it, he concluded that it was an omen and pointed to something great. So he called in the farm hands and told them to leave his land. They said that it was only right that they should be paid the wages they were owed before they went. Now, it happened that the sun was shining down into the house through the smoke hole in the roof. When the king heard them talk about wages, heaven had taken away his wits, and he said: "This is the pay I give you, and it is what you deserve," and he pointed to the sunlight. Gauanes and Aeropus, the older brothers, stood there stunned when they heard this. But the boy happened to have a knife in his hand, and he said: "We accept what you give, my king." He traced a line with his knife around the patch of sunlight on the floor of the house. When he had traced the line around it, he three times scooped up the sunlight into the fold of his robe. Then he left, and his brothers with him.

138. So they went away. Then one of the men sitting near the king told him what the boy had done, and how the youngest of them had accepted what was given with some purpose in mind. When the king heard this he was angry, and he sent horsemen after them to kill them. Now, there is a river in this country to which the descendants of these men from Argos sacrifice as their savior. As soon as the sons of Temenus had crossed it, this river rose in such a flood that the horsemen could not get across. So the brothers came to another part of Macedonia and settled near the place called the gardens of Midas son of Gordias, where roses grow wild, each with sixty petals and a scent sweeter than any others. It was in these gardens, too, that Silenus was caught, as the Macedonians tell it. Above the gardens rises a mountain called Bermius, which no one can climb because of the cold. When they had taken possession of that region, they used it as their base and went on to conquer the rest of Macedonia as well.

139. Alexander was descended from this Perdiccas as follows. Alexander was the son of Amyntas, Amyntas was the son of Alcetes, Alcetes' father was Aeropus, Aeropus' father was Philip, Philip's father was Argaeus, and Argaeus' father was Perdiccas, the one who first won the kingdom.

140. That, then, was Alexander son of Amyntas' descent. When he came to Athens on Mardonius' errand, he said this: "Athenians, Mardonius has this to say. 'A message has come to me from the king, and this is what it says: "I forgive the Athenians all the wrongs they have done me. Now, Mardonius, do this. First, give them back their land. Then let them choose another land besides, whichever they want, and live under their own laws. And rebuild all their temples, which I burned, if they are willing to make a treaty with me." Since this message has come to me, I must do it, unless you stop me. And so I say this to you now. Why are you so mad as to wage war against the king? You will never defeat him, and you cannot hold out against him forever. You have seen the great size of Xerxes' army and what it did, and you have heard about the force I have with me now. So even if you get the better of us and win (and if you have any sense you can have no hope of that), another army many times as large will come. So do not try to match yourselves against the king, only to lose your land and be forever running for your lives. Make peace with him instead. You have the most honorable chance to make peace you could have, since the king himself has taken this road. Make an alliance with us, then, honestly and without deceit, and stay free.'

"That is what Mardonius told me to say to you, Athenians. As for me, I will say nothing about my own goodwill toward you, since this would not be the first time you have learned of it. But I ask you to do as Mardonius says, because I can see that you will not be able to fight Xerxes forever. If I saw that you had the strength for it, I would never have come to you with this message. The king's power is more than human, and his arm is very long. So if you do not come to terms at once, when they are offering you such great terms for a treaty, I am afraid for you. Of all your allies, you live the most squarely on the road the armies travel, and you are always the ones destroyed, alone, because the land you hold lies out by itself, between the armies that are fighting each other. No, be persuaded. It is a great thing for you that, of all the Greeks, you are the only ones whose wrongs the Great King forgives and whose friend he wants to be."

141. That is what Alexander said. The Spartans had heard that Alexander had come to Athens to bring the Athenians to make a treaty with the Persians. They remembered the oracles which said that they and the other Dorians were destined to be driven out of the Peloponnese by the Medes and the Athenians together, and they had been very much afraid that the Athenians would make a treaty with the Persians. So they had at once decided to send envoys. It happened that the Spartan envoys were brought in to speak at the same time as Alexander, because the Athenians had waited for them, dragging out the time. They were quite sure that the Spartans would hear that an envoy had come from the Persians to make a treaty, and that when they heard it, they would send envoys of their own as fast as they could. So the Athenians did it on purpose, to let the Spartans see where they stood.

142. So when Alexander had finished speaking, the envoys from Sparta spoke right after him and said: "The Spartans have sent us to ask you not to do anything new that would harm Greece, and not to accept the foreigner's proposals. That would not be just in any way, or honorable, for any of the Greeks to do, and least of all for you, for many reasons. It was you who stirred up this war, when we wanted nothing of the kind. The fight began over your territory, but now it involves all of Greece. Besides, it is not to be endured that you Athenians, who started all of this, should turn out to be the cause of slavery for the Greeks, when you have always, from ancient times, been known as the liberators of many. We do feel for you in your sufferings, because you have lost two harvests and your property has been in ruins for a long time now. To make up for this, the Spartans and their allies offer to feed your wives and all the members of your households who cannot fight, for as long as this war lasts. But do not let Alexander the Macedonian win you over by making Mardonius' words sound smooth. It suits him to do it, since he is a tyrant himself and is working with a tyrant. But it does not suit you, if you have any sense, because you know that there is no faith or truth in barbarians."

That was what the envoys said.

143. The Athenians answered Alexander like this: "We know well enough ourselves that the Persians' forces are many times greater than ours, so there is no need for you to throw that in our faces. All the same, because we long for freedom, we will defend ourselves as best we can. Do not try to persuade us to make a treaty with the foreigner, because we will not be persuaded. Now take this message back to Mardonius from the Athenians: As long as the sun keeps the course it keeps now, we will never come to terms with Xerxes. We will go out to defend ourselves against him, trusting in the gods and the heroes as our allies, the ones he had no respect for when he burned their houses and their sacred images. And from now on, do not come before the Athenians with any proposals like these, and do not think you are doing them a service by urging them to do what is wrong. We do not want anything unpleasant to happen to you at the hands of the Athenians, since you are their official guest-friend and their friend."

144. That was their answer to Alexander. To the envoys from Sparta they said this: "It was natural enough, no doubt, for the Spartans to be afraid that we would make a treaty with the foreigner. But it seems an unworthy fear for men who know the spirit of the Athenians so well. There is not so much gold anywhere on earth, nor any land so far beyond all others in beauty and richness, that we would take it as our price for going over to the Persians and enslaving Greece. There are many great reasons that would stop us from doing this, even if we wanted to. First and greatest, the statues and houses of the gods that have been burned or thrown down in ruins. We are bound to avenge them to the utmost, rather than come to terms with the man who did these things. Second, there is our Greekness: we are of one blood and one language, we share the temples of the gods and the sacrifices, and our ways of life are the same. It would not be right for the Athenians to betray all this. And know this, if you did not know it before: as long as a single Athenian is left alive, we will never come to terms with Xerxes. Still, we admire the care you have shown for us, in thinking of us now that our property has been destroyed and in being willing to feed our households. As far as you are concerned, the kindness has been done in full. But we will go on holding out as best we can and will not be a burden to you in any way. Now, things being as they are, send out an army as quickly as you can. As we judge it, the foreigner will be here invading our land before long, as soon as he hears our answer, that we will do none of the things he asked of us. So before he gets here into Attica, the right thing is for you to come to our help quickly in Boeotia." That was the Athenians' answer, and with it the envoys went away back to Sparta.
