Chapter 49: The Seers, the Waiting Game, and the Night Retreat at Plataea

33. When everyone had been drawn up by nations and by divisions, both sides offered sacrifice on the next day. For the Greeks the man who sacrificed was Tisamenus son of Antiochus, since he was the seer who went with this army. He was an Elean by birth, of the family of the Iamids, a line of prophets, but the Spartans had made him one of their own people. This is how it happened. When Tisamenus went to Delphi to ask the oracle about having children, the Pythia answered that he would win five of the greatest contests. He missed the meaning of the oracle and took up athletics, thinking he was going to win athletic contests. He trained for the pentathlon, the "five contests," and came within one wrestling fall of winning at the Olympic games, where he was matched against Hieronymus of Andros. The Spartans, however, saw that the oracle given to Tisamenus was not about athletic contests but about contests of war. So they tried to hire him with money, to make him a leader in their wars alongside their kings, who were descended from Heracles. But he saw that the Spartans set great store on winning him over as a friend, and once he saw that, he raised his price. He let them know that he would do what they wanted if they made him a citizen of their state with full rights, but for no other payment. When the Spartans first heard this they were indignant and dropped their request altogether. But in the end, when great terror of this Persian army was hanging over them, they gave way and agreed. Then he, seeing that they had changed their minds, said that even this was no longer enough for him, not on these terms alone. His brother Hegias must also be made a Spartan citizen, on the same terms as he was.

34. In saying this he was following the example of Melampus, if one may compare a king's power with mere citizenship. For Melampus too made a demand. When the women of Argos had been seized by madness and the Argives tried to hire him to come from Pylos and cure their women of the disease, he asked as his payment for half of the royal power. The Argives would not allow this and went away. But later, when more of their women went mad, they finally accepted what Melampus had asked for and went to offer it to him. Then he, seeing that they had changed their minds, raised his demand. He said he would not do what they wanted unless they also gave his brother Bias a third share of the royal power. And the Argives, driven into a corner, agreed to this too.

35. In just the same way the Spartans, who needed Tisamenus very badly, agreed to everything he asked. And when they had agreed to this demand too, Tisamenus the Elean, now a Spartan, served them as their seer and helped them win five of the greatest contests. These two were the only men ever made fellow citizens of the Spartans. The five contests were these. The first was this one at Plataea. After it came the contest at Tegea, fought against the Tegeans and the Argives; then the one at Dipaea against all the Arcadians except the Mantineans; after that the contest with the Messenians at Ithome; and last of all the one at Tanagra against the Athenians and Argives. That was the last of the five contests to be won.

36. This Tisamenus, then, brought by the Spartans, was now acting as seer for the Greeks in the land of Plataea. For the Greeks the sacrifices were favorable if they only defended themselves, but not if they crossed the Asopus and started a battle.

37. Mardonius too was eager to start a battle, but he found the sacrifices unfavorable to that plan; for him too they were favorable only if he defended himself. He also sacrificed in the Greek manner, and his seer was Hegesistratus, an Elean and the most famous of the Telliads, another family of prophets. Some time before these events the Spartans had captured him and put him in chains, intending to put him to death, because he had done them a great deal of harm. In this desperate situation, knowing that he was running a race for his life and was likely to suffer a great deal of torture before he died, he did something that can hardly be believed. He was held fast in wooden stocks bound with iron. Somehow an iron blade had been smuggled in, and he got hold of it and at once carried out the bravest deed of any we know. First he worked out how much of his foot he would have to lose to get the rest of it out of the stocks, and then he cut off the front part of his own foot. After that, since he was still watched by guards, he broke through the wall and escaped to Tegea. He traveled by night, and by day he went into the woods and rested there. So although the Spartans searched for him with their whole force, he reached Tegea on the third night. The Spartans were filled with amazement, both at his courage, when they saw the piece of foot that he had cut off lying there, and at the fact that they could not find him. So he escaped them at that time and took refuge at Tegea, which was then on bad terms with the Spartans. When he was healed and had got himself a wooden foot, he became the Spartans' open enemy. In the end, however, his hatred of the Spartans did him no good. They caught him while he was working as a seer on Zacynthus, and put him to death.

38. But the death of Hegesistratus came later than the events at Plataea. Now he was at the Asopus, hired by Mardonius for no small sum, sacrificing and working hard for him, both because of his hatred of the Spartans and because of the money he was making. But the sacrifices were not favorable for a battle, either for the Persians themselves or for the Greeks on their side (these had a seer of their own, Hippomachus of Leucas). Meanwhile men kept streaming into the Greek camp, and the Greeks were growing in number. So Timagenides son of Herpys, a Theban, advised Mardonius to put a guard on the pass over Cithaeron. The Greeks, he said, were streaming in every day, and this way he would cut off large numbers of them.

39. By the time he gave Mardonius this advice, the two armies had been sitting facing each other for eight days. Mardonius saw that the advice was good, and when night came he sent the cavalry to the pass over Cithaeron that leads toward Plataea, which the Boeotians call the "Three Heads" and the Athenians the "Oak Heads." The cavalry did not go for nothing. They caught five hundred pack animals coming down into the plain, carrying provisions from the Peloponnese to the army, along with the men who were driving the carts. Having taken this prize, the Persians slaughtered them, sparing neither animal nor man. When they had had their fill of killing, they rounded up the rest and drove them into the camp to Mardonius.

40. After this they waited two more days, and neither side wanted to start a battle. The Persian army came forward as far as the Asopus to test the Greeks, but neither side would cross the river. Mardonius' cavalry, though, kept attacking and doing the Greeks harm. The Thebans, who were very strongly on the Persians' side, pushed the war hard and kept leading the cavalry on, right up to the point of fighting; from there the Persians and Medes took over and were the ones who showed their courage.

41. For ten days, then, nothing more happened than this. But on the eleventh day, with the two armies still facing each other at Plataea, the Greeks had by now grown much more numerous, and Mardonius was greatly annoyed at the delay. Then Mardonius son of Gobryas and Artabazus son of Pharnaces, whom Xerxes valued as he valued few other Persians, met to talk. As they discussed it, these were the opinions they gave. Artabazus thought they should move the whole army as quickly as possible and go to the walled city of Thebes, where great stores of grain had been brought in for them, and fodder for their animals. They should settle down there quietly and get the job done this way. They had, he said, great quantities of gold, both coined and uncoined, and of silver and of drinking cups. He advised them to send these around to the Greeks without holding back, especially to the leading men in each city. Those men, he said, would quickly hand over their freedom. And he advised them not to risk a battle. His opinion, then, was the same as the Thebans', since he too had some real foresight. But Mardonius' opinion was fiercer and more stubborn, and he was not at all inclined to give way. He said he thought their army was far stronger than the Greeks', and his advice was to fight as quickly as possible and not let the Greeks gather in still greater numbers than had gathered already. As for Hegesistratus' sacrifices, they should let them be and not try to force a good omen, but follow the Persian custom and fight.

42. When he gave his judgment this way, no one opposed him, and so his opinion carried the day, because it was he, not Artabazus, to whom the king had given command of the army. So he summoned the commanders of the divisions and the generals of the Greeks who were on his side, and asked whether they knew of any oracle about the Persians which said they would be destroyed in Greece. Those he had summoned said nothing, some because they did not know the oracles, others because they knew them but did not think it safe to speak. So Mardonius himself said, "Since you either know nothing or don't dare to speak, I will tell you, because I know very well. There is an oracle that says the Persians are destined to come to Greece, plunder the temple at Delphi, and after plundering it, die to the last man. Well, since we know this, we will not go to that temple and we will not try to plunder it, and for that reason we will not die. So all of you who wish the Persians well can be glad, as far as this goes, and rest assured that we will beat the Greeks." After he had spoken to them this way, he gave orders to prepare everything and put it all in order, because at dawn the next day there would be a battle.

43. Now this oracle that Mardonius said referred to the Persians was, as I know for my part, made about the Illyrians and the army of the Enchelians, and not about the Persians at all. But there is the oracle that Bacis made about this battle:

	When the Greeks gather together, and foreign voices cry out,
	where the Thermodon flows, by the banks of the grassy Asopus,
	there very many shall fall, before their fated time,
	the bow-carrying Medes, when the day of their doom comes near.

These sayings, and others like them composed by Musaeus, I know referred to the Persians. The river Thermodon flows between Tanagra and Glisas.

44. After the questions about the oracles and Mardonius' speech of encouragement, night came on and the guards were posted. Late in the night, when all seemed quiet throughout the camps and the men were in their deepest sleep, Alexander son of Amyntas, the commander and king of the Macedonians, rode his horse up to the Athenians' guard posts and asked to speak with their generals. Most of the guards stayed at their posts, but some ran to the generals. When they reached them, they said that a man had come riding on a horse out of the Persian camp. He would reveal nothing else, they said; he only named the generals and said he wanted to speak with them.

45. When the generals heard this, they went with the men to the guard posts at once. When they got there, Alexander spoke to them. "Athenians," he said, "I am leaving these words with you as a trust. I charge you to keep them secret and tell no one but Pausanias, or you will be my ruin. I would not be saying them if I did not care so much for the safety of all Greece, since I am a Greek myself by ancient descent and I would not want to see Greece enslaved instead of free. I tell you, then, that Mardonius and his army cannot get the sacrifices to come out the way they want; otherwise you would have fought long ago. But now he has decided to let the sacrifices be and to start a battle at dawn, because, I suspect, he is afraid you will gather in greater numbers. So get ready. And if after all Mardonius puts off the battle and does not start it, stay where you are and hold out patiently, because they have provisions for only a few more days. And if this war ends the way you hope, then every one of you ought to remember me too, and my own freedom, since for the sake of the Greeks I have done so dangerous a thing out of goodwill toward you, wanting to show you what Mardonius intends, so that the enemy will not fall on you before you are expecting them. I am Alexander the Macedonian." Having said this, he rode back to the camp and to his own position.

46. Then the Athenian generals went to the right wing and told Pausanias what they had heard from Alexander. At this news Pausanias was struck with fear of the Persians, and he said, "Since the battle is coming at dawn, it is right that you Athenians should take your stand facing the Persians, and we facing the Boeotians and the Greeks who are now posted opposite you. Here is why: you know the Medes and their way of fighting, since you fought them at Marathon, while we have had no experience of these men and know nothing about them. Not one of the Spartans has ever tried his strength against the Medes in battle, but we do have experience of the Boeotians and Thessalians. So it is right that you should take up your arms and come over to this wing of the army, and that we should go to the left wing." To this the Athenians answered, "From the very beginning, as soon as we saw the Persians being drawn up opposite you, it occurred to us to say the very thing you have now suggested before we could say it. But we were afraid our words might not please you. Since you have brought it up yourselves, know that your words have pleased us, and we are ready to do as you say."

47. Both sides were content with this, and as dawn broke they began to change places with each other. But the Boeotians noticed what was happening and reported it to Mardonius. When he heard it, he at once tried to change positions himself, moving the Persians over so that they would face the Spartans. When Pausanias learned that this was happening, he realized that his move had been seen, and he led the Spartans back again to the right wing. And Mardonius did the same on his left.

48. When they had been brought back to their original positions this way, Mardonius sent a herald to the Spartans, who said, "Spartans, the people here say you are very brave men. They admire you because you do not run away in war or leave your post, but stand your ground and either destroy your enemies or die yourselves. But none of this, it now seems, is true. Before we even joined battle and came to hand-to-hand fighting, we saw you running away already and leaving your post, wanting the Athenians to try us first, while you lined up against our slaves. These are not the actions of brave men at all. We were very much deceived in you. Because of your reputation we expected you to send us a herald, challenging us and wanting to fight the Persians alone. We were ready to do that, but we found you saying nothing of the kind; instead, you were cowering in fear. So since you did not make the offer first, we make it first. Why don't we fight right now, you for the Greeks, since you have the reputation of being the best of them, and we for the non-Greeks, with equal numbers on each side? If we decide that the others should fight too, let them fight afterward. If on the other hand we decide they should not, and that it is enough for us alone to fight, then let us fight it out to the end, and whichever of us wins, let that side be counted the winner for its whole army."

49. When the herald had said this, he waited for some time, and then, since no one gave him any answer, he left and went back. When he got back he reported to Mardonius what had happened to him. Mardonius was overjoyed and puffed up by this empty victory, and he sent the cavalry to attack the Greeks. The horsemen rode out against them and did harm to the whole Greek army, hurling javelins and shooting arrows at them, since they were mounted archers and therefore hard to come to grips with. They also churned up and choked the spring of Gargaphia, from which the whole Greek army drew its water. Only the Spartans were posted near this spring, and it was some distance from the rest of the Greeks, depending on where each happened to be posted, while the Asopus was close at hand. But when they were kept away from the Asopus, they would go back and forth to this spring, since the horsemen and archers would not let them fetch water from the river.

50. This, then, was the state of things. With the army cut off from its water and harassed by the cavalry, the Greek generals met to consult about this and other matters, coming to Pausanias on the right wing. For other things troubled them even more than what I have described. They had no more provisions, and their servants, who had been sent to the Peloponnese to get them, had been cut off by the cavalry and could not reach the camp.

51. The generals, conferring together, decided that if the Persians put off the battle for that day, they would move to the Island. This is about a mile from the Asopus and the spring of Gargaphia, where they were then camped, and it lies in front of the city of Plataea. If anyone asks how there can be an island on the mainland, this is how it is. Higher up, as the river flows down from Cithaeron to the plain, it splits into two, with about a third of a mile between its two channels, and then it joins up again into one stream. Its name is Oeroe, and the people who live there say she is the daughter of Asopus. That was the place they decided to move to, so that they could have plenty of water and the cavalry could not harm them as it did now, when they were right opposite it. They planned to move when the second watch of the night had come, so that the Persians would not see them setting out and send the cavalry after them to harass them. They also planned, once they had reached this place, around which, as I said, Oeroe the daughter of Asopus flows, splitting into two streams as she runs down from Cithaeron, to send half the army to Cithaeron that same night, to bring in their servants who had gone to fetch the provisions, since these were cut off up in Cithaeron.

52. After they had made this decision, they had endless trouble all that day, with the cavalry pressing on them. But when the day was ending and the cavalry's attacks had stopped, as night was falling and the agreed time for leaving their position had come, most of them set out and began to move off. They did not, however, have any intention of going to the place they had agreed on. On the contrary, once they had started moving, they gladly seized the chance to escape from the cavalry toward the city of Plataea, and in their flight they got as far as the temple of Hera. This temple stands in front of the city of Plataea, about two and a quarter miles from the spring of Gargaphia. When they arrived there, they halted in front of the temple.

53. So these were camping around the temple of Hera. Pausanias, seeing them leaving the camp, gave the word to the Spartans too to take up their arms and follow the others who had gone ahead, supposing that these were going to the place they had agreed to go to. Then, when all the other commanders were ready to obey Pausanias, Amompharetus son of Poliades, the commander of the Pitane division, said that he would not run from the foreigners, and that he would not, of his own free will, bring disgrace on Sparta. He was amazed at what he saw being done, since he had not been present at the earlier meeting. Pausanias and Euryanax were very upset that he would not obey them, and still more that, since he refused, they would be forced to leave the Pitane division behind. They were afraid that if they left it behind to carry out what they had agreed with the other Greeks, Amompharetus himself and the men with him would be left behind and destroyed. With this in mind they kept the Spartan army from moving, and meanwhile they tried to persuade him that he was wrong to act this way.

54. So they were urging Amompharetus, who alone of the Spartans and Tegeans had been left behind. Meanwhile the Athenians stayed quietly where they had been posted, because they knew the Spartan way of thinking, and that the Spartans tended to say one thing and mean another. When the army began to move, they sent one of their own horsemen to see whether the Spartans were trying to set out, or whether in fact they had no intention at all of pulling back, and they told him to ask Pausanias what they should do.

55. When the messenger came to the Spartans, he saw that they were still in their position and that their leaders had fallen into a quarrel. Euryanax and Pausanias had both been urging Amompharetus not to put himself and his men at risk by staying behind, alone of all the Spartans. They could not persuade him at all, and in the end they had come to an outright quarrel, just as the Athenian messenger arrived and stood beside them. In the heat of the argument Amompharetus picked up a rock in both hands and set it down at Pausanias' feet. With this pebble, he said, he was casting his vote not to run from the foreigners, by which he meant the Persian army. Pausanias called him a madman who was out of his mind. Then he told the Athenian messenger, who was asking what he had been sent to ask, to report how things stood with them. At the same time he asked the Athenians to come over toward the Spartans and to do as the Spartans did about the retreat.

56. So the messenger went back to the Athenians. When dawn found the Spartans still arguing with one another, Pausanias, who had stayed where he was all this time, gave the signal and led all the rest away over the low hills. He supposed that Amompharetus would not stay behind once the other Spartans had left, and in this he was in fact right. The Tegeans went with them too. Meanwhile the Athenians, following their orders, were moving in the opposite direction from the Spartans. The Spartans were keeping to the hills and the lower slopes of Cithaeron for fear of the cavalry, while the Athenians were marching below, toward the plain.

57. As for Amompharetus, at first he did not believe that Pausanias would ever dare to leave him and his men behind, and he insisted that they stay there and not abandon their post. But when Pausanias and his troops were well on their way, he saw that they really had left him behind. So he had his division take up their arms and led them at a walking pace toward the main body. The main body, after going about a mile, waited for Amompharetus' division, halting at the river Moloeis, at a place called Argiopium, where there is also a temple of Demeter of Eleusis. It waited there so that if Amompharetus and his division did not leave the place where they had been posted but stayed on, it could come back and help them. So Amompharetus and his men were coming up to join them, and at the same moment the enemy's cavalry began to attack in full force. For the horsemen did on this day what they had been in the habit of doing every day. Seeing the place empty where the Greeks had been posted on the days before, they kept riding farther and farther forward, and as soon as they caught up with the Greeks they began to attack them.
