Chapter V: Dimensional Constants and the Number of Fundamental Units

The essential result which we have obtained in the \(\Pi\) theorem is in the restriction which it places on the number of arguments of the arbitrary function. The fewer the arguments, the more restricted the function, and the greater our information about the answer. Thus if the problem is such that there are four variables, and three fundamental kinds of unit, our analysis shows that there is only one dimensionless product, which we can determine, and that some function of this product is zero. This is equivalent to saying, in this special case, that the product itself is some constant, and we have complete information as to the nature of the solution, except for the numerical value of the constant. This was the nature of the solution which we found for the pendulum problem. If it had not been for the dimensional analysis, any conceivable relation between the four arguments might have been possible, and we should have had absolutely no information about the solution. Similarly, if there are two more variables than fundamental kind of quantity, there will be two dimensionless products. The solution is an arbitrary function of these two products put equal to zero, which may be solved for one of the products as a function of the other. This was the case with the heat transfer problem already treated. It certainly gives more information to know that the solution is of this form than merely to know that there is some function of the five variables which vanishes, which was all that we could say before we applied our analysis.

It is to our advantage, evidently, that the number of arguments which are to be connected by the functional relation should be as small as possible. Now the variables which enter the functional relation to which our analysis has been applied comprise all the variables which can change in numerical magnitude under the conditions of the problem. These variables are of two kinds. First are the physical variables, which are the measures of certain physical quantities, and which may change in magnitude over the domain to which our result is to apply. The numbers measuring these physical quantities may also change when the size of the fundamental units changes. In the second place, there may be other arguments of the nature of coefficients in the equation which do not change in numerical magnitude when the physical system alone changes, but which change in magnitude when the size of the fundamental measuring units changes. It is these which we have called dimensional constants. Now in any actual case we are interested only in the physical problem, and are interested in finding a relation between the physically variable quantities. The dimensional constants are to be regarded as an evil, to be tolerated only if they make possible more information about the physical variables.

We thus see that the \(\Pi\) theorem applies to the aggregate of physical variables and dimensional constants, whereas we are interested primarily in the physical variables alone. If the number of dimensional constants is so great that the number of arguments of the arbitrary function allowed by the \(\Pi\) theorem is equal to or greater than the number of physical variables alone, then we are no better off after applying our \(\Pi\) theorem than before. Now we have already seen that in the worst possible case the number of dimensional constants cannot exceed the number of physical variables, for any empirical equation can be made complete by the introduction of a dimensional constant with each physical variable. Furthermore, it is almost always true that the number of physical variables is equal to or greater than the number of fundamental units. Hence, if the number of dimensional constants is equal the number of physical variables, the number of dimensionless products is greater than or at most equal to the number of physical variables. In the general case, therefore, the \(\Pi\) theorem gives no new information. Hence it is of the utmost importance to keep down to the minimum the number of dimensional constants used in the equation.

When, therefore, shall we expect dimensional constants, and in any particular problem how shall we find what they are, and what are their dimensional formulas? The answer to this question is closely related to the answer to the question of how we shall choose the list of physical quantities between which we are to search for a relation. We have seen that it does not do to merely ask ourselves "Does the result depend on this or that physical quantity?" for we have seen in one problem that although the result certainly does "depend" on the action of the atomic forces, yet we do not have to consider the atomic forces in our analysis, and they do not enter the functional relation.

To answer the question of what variables to include demands a background of a great deal of physical experience. If we are to treat a certain problem by the methods of mechanics we must have enough background to be assured that the problem is a problem in mechanics, and involves essentially no elements that are not treatable by the ordinary equations of mechanics. We must know that certain aspects of the problem can be neglected, and that certain others alone are essential as far as certain features of behavior go. No one would say that in any problem of mechanics the atomic forces are not essential, but our experience shows that they combine into certain complexes, which may be sufficiently characterized by an analysis which does not go down to the ultimate component parts, and that the results of our analysis, which disregards many even essential aspects of the situation, have validity under certain conditions whose restrictions are not irksome. The experience involved in judgments of this sort reaches so far back that we know almost by instinct whether a problem is suitable for mechanical treatment or not. And if the problem is capable of mechanical treatment, we know, by the very definition of what we mean by a mechanical system, what the equations are which the motion of the component parts of the system conform to, and what the form of the equations is. In the same way, we know by instinct whether a system is a thermodynamic system, or an electrical system, or a chemical system, and in each case, because we know what we mean when we say that a phenomenon is of such or such a nature, we know what are the laws which govern the variations of the system, and the elements which must be considered in formulating the relations between the parts. But a very wide background of experience, extending over many generations, was necessary before we could say that this particular group of phenomena is mechanical or electrical, or, in general, that the phenomenon is physical.

Now my point of view is essentially that precisely the same experience which is demanded to enable us to say whether a system is mechanical or electrical is the experience which is demanded in order to enable us to make a dimensional analysis. This experience will in the first place inform us what physical variables to include in our list, and will in the second place tell us what dimensional constants are demanded in any particular problem.

Let us for the present forget what we know of dimensional analysis and imagine ourselves approaching a new problem. In the first place we decide in the light of the experience of all the ages what the nature of the problem is. Suppose that we decide that it is mechanical. Then we know that the motion of the system is governed by the laws of mechanics, and we know what these laws are. We write down certain equations of motion of the system. We are careful to include all the equations of motion, so that the system of equations by which we have described the relations between the parts of the system has a unique solution. Then we are convinced, because of our past experience, that we have essentially represented all the elements of the situation, that our equations correspond to the reality at least as far as certain aspects of the phenomenon go, and the solution of the equations will correctly represent the behavior of the system which we have thus analyzed. We are not disappointed. The fact that our predictions turn out to be verified means merely that we have become masters of a certain group of natural phenomena.

Now the astute observer (Fourier¹ was the first astute observer) notices that the equations by which the relation of the component parts of the system is analyzed are expressed in such a general form that they remain true when the size of the fundamental units is changed. For instance, the equation stating that the force acting on a particular part of our mechanical system is equal to the mass of that part times its acceleration remains true however the size of the fundamental units is changed, because in every system of units which we use for mechanical purposes, the unit of force is defined so that force has this relation to mass and acceleration. Every one of the fundamental equations of motion is in the same way a complete equation. The final solution is obtained from the equations of motion by a purely mathematical process, which has no relation to the size of the fundamental units. It follows, therefore, in general, that the final result will also be complete, in the sense that the equation expressing the final result is a complete equation.

Dimensional analysis may, therefore, be applied to the results which we obtain by solving the equations of motion. (We use equations of motion in a general sense, applying to thermodynamic and electrical as well as mechanical systems.) Now the arguments of the function which we finally obtain by solving the equations of motion can obviously be only those quantities which we put into the original equations of motion, for the mathematical operations can introduce no new arguments.

*In particular, the dimensional constants which enter the final relation are those, and those only, which we had to use in writing down the equations of motion. This is the entire essence of the question of dimensional constants.*

With regard to the dimensional formulas of dimensional constants, we may merely appeal to experience with the observation that all such constants are of the form of products of powers of the fundamental quantities. But it is evident on reflection, that any law of nature can be expressed in a form in which the dimensional formulas of the constants are of this type, by the device, already adopted, of introducing dimensional constants as factors with the measured quantities in such a way as to make the equation complete. We will hereafter assume that the equations of motion (which are merely expressions of the laws of nature governing phenomena) are thrown into such a form that the dimensional constants are of this type; this is seen to involve no real restriction.

It appears, therefore, that *dimensional analysis is essentially of the nature of an analysis of an analysis.* We must know enough about the situation to know what the general nature of the problem is, and what the elements are which would be introduced in writing down the equations determining the motion (in the general sense) of the system. Then, knowing the nature of the elements, we can obtain certain information about the necessary properties of any relations which can be deduced by mathematical manipulations with the elements. In so far as our knowledge of the underlying laws of nature is adequate we may have confidence in the result, but the result can have no validity not pertaining to the equations of motion, and is in no way different from all our other knowledge. The result is approximate, as the laws of motion are approximate, a restriction which is imposed by the very nature of knowledge itself.

The man applying dimensional analysis is not to ask himself "On what quantities does the result depend?" for this question gets nowhere, and is not pertinent. Instead we are to imagine ourselves as writing out the equations of motion at least in sufficient detail to be able to enumerate the elements which enter them. It is not necessary to actually write down the equations, still less to solve them. Dimensional analysis then gives certain information about the necessary character of the results. It is here of course that the advantage of the method lies, for the results are applicable to systems so complicated that it would not be possible to write the equations of motion in detail.

It is to be especially noticed that the results of dimensional analysis cannot be applied to any system whose fundamental laws have not yet been formulated in a form independent of the size of the fundamental units. For instance, dimensional analysis would certainly not apply to most of the results of biological measurements, although such results may perfectly well have entire physical validity as descriptions of the phenomena. It would seem that at present biological phenomena can be described in complete equations only with the aid of as many dimensional constants as there are physical variables. In this case, we have seen, dimensional analysis has no information to give. In a certain sense, the mastery of a certain group of natural phenomena and their formulation into laws may be said to be coextensive with the discovery of a restricted group of dimensional constants adequate to coördinate all the phenomena.

Let us apply this view of the nature of dimensional constants to the problem which we have already considered of the electromagnetic mass of a spherical distribution of electricity. This is evidently a problem in electrodynamics, and must be solved by the use of the field equations. These field equations consist of certain mathematical operators operating on certain combinations of the electric and magnetic forces and the velocity of light. In this particular problem we want to solve the equations in such a form as to get the electromagnetic mass; this is the integral throughout space of a constant times the energy density, which in turn is given by the distribution of the forces, which are determined by the distribution of the charge. Hence if there is a relation of the form which we suspect, the forces will eliminate from the final result. There is, however, no reason to think that the characteristic constant "\(c\)" of the equations will also eliminate from the result, and we must therefore seek for a relation between the total charge, the mass, the radius, and the constant of the field equations, which is the velocity of light. This relation we have already found, and checked against the results of a detailed solution of the field equations applied to this particular problem.

We have seen that dimensional constants are going to enter the final result only in so far as they enter the equations of motion. Now a dimensional constant in an equation of motion is an expression of a physical relation which is so universal as to be characteristic of all the phenomena embraced in the particular group which we are considering. Such a universal physical relation may be treated in two ways. We may leave the dimensional constant in the equations as an explicit statement of the relation, as is done in the field equations of electrodynamics, or we may define our fundamental units with this relation in view, thus obtaining a system of units in which the dimensional constant has disappeared but in which the number of units which may be regarded as fundamental has been restricted in such a way that all units belonging to the system automatically bear the experimental relation to each other. The system of units so obtained is of value only in treating that group of phenomena to which the law in question applies. Thus it is a result of experience that the mass times the acceleration of a body is proportional to the force acting upon it. In this statement of the experimental facts there is no restriction whatever upon the units of mass, or length, or time, or force. The factor of proportionality will change in numerical magnitude whenever any one of the four fundamental units is changed in size. But now, instead of being bothered by a continually changing factor of proportionality, we may arbitrarily say that this factor shall be unity in all systems which we will consider, and we will bring this result about by defining the unit of force in our new system to be such that the force acting on a body is equal to the mass times the acceleration. We have in this way obtained a system of units adapted to dealing with all those physical systems in which the laws of motion involve a statement of the physical relation between force, mass, and acceleration, but if the physical system should be such that this relation is not involved in the motion of the system, then we would be unduly restricting ourselves by using the mechanical system of units.

These considerations as to the possible systems of units answer the question previously raised, as in the fourth problem of the introduction, for example, as to the number of kinds of units which we shall take as fundamental. The answer depends entirely upon the particular problem, and will involve the physical relations which are necessary to a complete expression of the motion of the parts. In any ordinary problem of dynamics, for example, the relation between force and mass and acceleration is essentially involved in the equations of motion. This relation may be brought into the equations either by the use of four fundamental kinds of unit, force, mass, length, and time, with the corresponding dimensional constant of proportionality, or by using the ordinary mechanical units of mass, length, and time, in which force is defined so that the experimental relationship is always satisfied, and the dimensional constant has disappeared. In either case the results of the dimensional analysis are the same. For the difference between the number of fundamental units and the number of variables, which determines the number of arguments of the unknown function, is the same in either case, because when the number of units is augmented by one by including the force, the number of variables is also augmented by one by including the dimensional constant, and the difference remains constant. If, however, the problem were such that the experimental relation between force, mass, and acceleration is not involved in the equations of motion of the system, then the ordinary mechanical units would be inappropriate, because we would obtain less information when using them. For we could in this case use four fundamental units without introducing a corresponding dimensional constant into the list of variables, so that the difference between the number of variables and the units would be less by one when using four than when using three fundamental units, and the arguments of the function would be fewer in number, which is desirable. We shall meet an example illustrating this point later.

References

(1) Fourier, Theorie de Chaleur, 160.

As dealing with the general question of the proper number of fundamental units may be mentioned

E. Buckingham, Nat. 96, 208, and 396, 1915.
