NEARLY all of the following seventy-two Problems are veritable
"Pillow-Problems", having been solved, in the head, while lying awake
at night. (I have put on record the exact dates of some.) No. 37 and
one or two others belong to the daylight, having been solved while
taking a solitary walk; but every one of them was worked out, to the
very end, before drawing any diagram or writing down a single word of
the solution. I generally wrote down the answer, first of all:
and afterwards the question and its solution. For example, in
No. 70, the very first words I wrote down were as follows:—"(1) down
back-edge; up again; down again; and so on; (2) about 0.7 of
the way down the back-edge; (3) about 18° 18′; (4) about 14°." These
answers are not quite correct; but at least they are genuine, as
the results of mental work only. "A poor thing, Sir, but
mine own!"

My motive, for publishing these Problems, with their mentally-worked
solutions, is most certainly not any desire to display powers
of mental calculation. Mine, I feel sure, are nothing out-of-the-way;
and I have no doubt there are many mathematicians who could produce,
mentally, much shorter and better solutions. It is not for such
persons that I intend my little book; but rather for the much larger
class of ordinary mathematicians, who perhaps have never tried
this resource, when mental occupation was needed, and who will, I hope,
feel encouraged—by seeing what can be done, after a little practice,
by one of average mathematical powers—to try the experiment for
themselves, and find in it as much advantage and comfort as I have done.

The word "comfort" may perhaps sound out of place, in connection with
so entirely intellectual an occupation; but it will, I think,
come home to many who have known what it is to be haunted by some
worrying subject of thought, which no effort of will is able to banish.
Again and again I have said to myself, on lying down at night, after
a day embittered by some vexatious matter, "I will not think
of it any more! I have gone through it all, thoroughly. It can do no
good whatever to go through it again. I will think of something
else!" And in another ten minutes I have found myself, once more, in
the very thick of the miserable business, and torturing myself, to no
purpose, with all the old troubles.

Now it is not possible—this, I think, all psychologists will admit—by
any effort of volition, to carry out the resolution "I will not
think of so-and-so." (Witness the common trick, played on a child, of
saying "I'll give you a penny, if you'll stand in that corner for five
minutes, and not once think of strawberry-jam." No human child
ever yet won the tempting wager!) But it is possible—as I am
most thankful to know—to carry out the resolution "I will
think of so-and-so." Once fasten the attention upon a subject so
chosen, and you will find that the worrying subject, which you desire
to banish, is practically annulled. It may recur, from time to
time—just looking in at the door, so to speak; but it will find itself
so coldly received, and will get so little attention paid to it, that
it will, after a while, cease to be any worry at all.

Perhaps I may venture, for a moment, to use a more serious tone, and to
point out that there are mental troubles, much worse than mere worry,
for which an absorbing subject of thought may serve as a remedy. There
are sceptical thoughts, which seem for the moment to uproot the firmest
faith; there are blasphemous thoughts, which dart unbidden into the
most reverent souls; there are unholy thoughts, which torture, with
their hateful presence, the fancy that would fain be pure. Against
all these some real mental work is a most helpful ally. That
"unclean spirit" of the parable, who brought back with him seven others
more wicked than himself, only did so because he found the chamber
"swept and garnished", and its owner sitting with folded hands: had he
found it all alive with the "busy hum" of active work, there
would have been scant welcome for him and his seven!

My purpose—of giving this encouragement to others—would not be so
well fulfilled had I allowed myself, in writing out my solutions, to
improve on the work done in my head. I felt it to be much more
important to set down what had actually been done in the head,
than to supply shorter or neater solutions, which perhaps would be much
harder to do without paper. For example, a Long-Multiplication sum
(say the multiplying together of two numbers of 7 digits) is no doubt
best done, on paper, by beginning at the unit-end, and writing
out 7 rows of figures, and adding up the columns in the usual way. But
it would be very difficult indeed—to me quite impossible—to do
such a thing in the head. The only chance seems to be to begin
with the millions, and get them properly grouped; then
the hundred-thousands, adding the results to the previous one; and
so on. Very often it seems to happen, that the easiest mental
process looks decidedly lengthy and round-about when committed to paper.

When I first tried this plan, easy geometrical problems were all I
could manage; and, even in these, I had to pause from time to time, in
order to re-draw the diagram, which would persist in getting
'rubbed-out'. Algebraical problems I avoided at first, owing to the
provoking fact that, if one single co-efficient escaped the memory,
there was no resource but to begin the calculation all over again.
But I soon got over both these difficulties, and found myself able to
remember fairly large numerical co-efficients, and also to retain,
in the mind's eye, fairly complex diagrams, even to the extent of
finding my way from one part of the diagram to another. The
lettering of the diagrams proved such a troublesome thing to
keep in the memory, that I almost gave up using it, and learned to
recognise Points by their situation only. In my MS. of No. 53, I
find the following memorandum:—

"I had never set myself this Problem before the week ending Ap. 6,
1889. I tried it, two or three nights, lying awake; and finally worked
it out on the night of Ap. 6/7. All the conclusions were
worked out mentally before any use was made of pen and paper. While
working it, I did not give names to any Points, except A,
B, C, and P: I merely thought of them by their positions
(e. g. 'the foot of the perpendicular from P on BC')."

If any of my readers should feel inclined to reproach me with having
worked too uniformly in the region of Common-place, and with never
having ventured to wander out of the beaten tracks, I can proudly point
to my one Problem in 'Transcendental Probabilities'—a subject in
which, I believe, very little has yet been done by even the most
enterprising of mathematical explorers. To the casual reader it may
seem abnormal, and even paradoxical; but I would have such a reader ask
himself, candidly, the question "Is not Life itself a Paradox?"

To give the Reader some idea of the process of construction of these
Problems, I will give the biography of No. 63. The history of one is,
to a great extent, the history of all.

It was begun during the night of Sept. 3/4, 1890, and
completed during the following night. The idea had occurred to me, a
short time previously, that something interesting might be found in the
subject of what I may call 'partially-regular' Solids. The 'regular'
Solids are provokingly few in number; and it would be hopeless to
find any question, connected with them, that has not already been
exhaustively analysed: some also of the 'partially-regular' Solids (e.
g. rhomboidal crystals) have probably been similarly treated; but there
seemed to be room for the invention of other such Solids.

Accordingly, I devised a Solid enclosed, above and below, by 2 equal
and parallel Squares, having their centres in the same vertical line,
and the upper one twisted round so that its sides should be parallel to
the diagonals of the lower Square. Then I imagined the upper one raised
until its corners formed the vertices of 4 equilateral Triangles, whose
bases were the sides of the lower one. The Solid, thus obtained, was
evidently enclosed by 2 Squares and 8 equilateral Triangles: and the
Problem I set myself was to obtain its Volume.

There was no great difficulty in proving that the distance between the
2 Squares (taking each side as equal to '2') was 2^/34.
But, when I looked about for some Trigonometrical method for
calculating the Volume, despair soon seized upon me! A calculable Prism
could be cut out of the middle of the Solid, I saw: but the
outlying projections completely baffled me. After a while, the happy
idea occurred to me of trying Algebraical Geometry, and regarding
each facet as the base of a Pyramid, having its vertex at the centre
of the Solid, which I decided to take as the Origin. I saw at once
that I could calculate the co-ordinates of all the vertical Points,
thence obtain equations to the Planes containing the facets, and thence
calculate their distances from the Origin, which would be the altitudes
of the Pyramids. Also it was evident that a sample Pyramid would
suffice. I worked out a value for the Volume, that first night; but the
thing got into a tangle, and I felt pretty sure I had got it wrong.

The next night I began again, and worked it all through from the
beginning. In the morning the answer was clear in my memory,
and I wrote it down at once; and did not write out the Problem, and
its solution, until later in the day, when I was well pleased to find
the written proof confirm the result I had arrived at in the hours of
darkness.

It is not, perhaps, much to be wondered at that, when these Problems
came to be re-written and arranged for publication, a good many
mistakes were discovered. Some were so bad as quite to spoil the
solutions in which they occurred: these Problems I have omitted
altogether. The others I have corrected, in the solutions as given
in Chapter III: but, that I may not be credited with an amount of
accuracy, as a computator, which I am well aware I do not possess, I
here append a list of them.

In No. 7, in the denominator '2 sin A', I forgot the '2'.

In No. 10, I failed to notice that the 3 coins might also be a
half-crown and 2 shillings.

In No. 13, in the last line but one, I put '2bc·ca', instead of
'4bc·ca'.

In No. 32, I brought out the arithmetical value as '358520', instead of
'358550'.

In No. 38, I got the decimal wrong, making it 0.476 instead of
0.478, and thus brought out the answer as 0.042 instead
of 0.044.

In No. 44, I said that the denominator would be of the form (10ⁿ - 1)·10^m.
This last factor is superfluous: i.e. m = 0.

In No. 50, I made a mistake near the end, bringing out
41/108, instead of 50/108.

In No. 55, I put 'tan' for 'sin'.

In No. 57, in the last paragraph, I replaced the denominator
'a sin B sin C' by (what I imagined to be its equivalent) '2m'.
Apparently I was under the delusion that 'a sin B sin C' was the
same thing as 'sin A·bc'!

In No. 70, section (3), I forgot to add in the 0.45, thus
making the answer half a degree wrong. And, in section (4), I forgot
to add in the 0.53, thus again making the answer half a degree
wrong.

Let me, in conclusion, gratefully acknowledge the valuable assistance I
have received from Mr. F. G. Brabant, M.A., of Corpus Christi College,
Oxford, who has most patiently and carefully gone through my proofs,
first working out each result independently, and has thus detected many
mistakes which had escaped my notice. He has also supplied, for No. 59,
a much neater answer than mine, viz. abc/3·√(cos A cos B cos C).

Other mistakes may perchance, having eluded us both, await the
penetrating glance of some critical reader, to whom the joy of
discovery, and the intellectual superiority which he will thus discern,
in himself, to the author of this little book, will, I hope, repay to
some extent the time and trouble its perusal may have cost him!

C. L. D.

CH. CH., OXFORD. 
May, 1893.

FOOTNOTES:

[1]
In the trigonometrical Problems, I have used the symbols
⫙ and ⌓, to represent the words 'sine' and 'cosine'.
