Chapter Two: On the Liberty of Thought and Discussion

(Part 1 of 3)

The time has gone by, it is to be hoped, when anyone would need to defend "the liberty of the press" as one of the safeguards against corrupt or tyrannical government. No argument, we may suppose, is needed now against letting a legislature or an executive whose interests are not the people's prescribe opinions to them and decide what doctrines or arguments they are to be allowed to hear. Besides, this side of the question has been put so often and so triumphantly by earlier writers that it need not be dwelt on here. English law on the subject of the press is as servile today as it was under the Tudors, but there is little danger of its actually being enforced against political discussion, except during some temporary panic when fear of insurrection drives ministers and judges out of their senses; and generally speaking, in constitutional countries there is no reason to fear that the government, whether fully answerable to the people or not, will often try to control the expression of opinion — except where in doing so it makes itself the mouthpiece of the general intolerance of the public. Let us suppose, then, that the government is entirely at one with the people, and never thinks of using coercive power except in agreement with what it takes to be their voice. Even so, I deny that the people have any right to use such coercion, either themselves or through their government. The power is illegitimate in itself. The best government has no more title to it than the worst. It is as harmful, or more harmful, when used in accordance with public opinion as when used against it. If all mankind minus one were of one opinion, and only one person were of the contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind. If an opinion were a personal possession of no value to anyone but its owner, and being obstructed in the enjoyment of it were simply a private injury, it would make some difference whether the injury was inflicted on a few people or on many. But the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is that it robs the human race — posterity as much as the present generation, and those who disagree with the opinion still more than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the chance to exchange error for truth; if it is wrong, they lose what is almost as great a benefit: the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth that is produced by its collision with error.

Footnote: These words had hardly been written when, as if to give them an emphatic contradiction, the Government Press Prosecutions of 1858 took place. That ill-judged interference with the liberty of public discussion has not, however, led me to alter a single word in the text, nor has it in the least weakened my conviction that, moments of panic aside, the era of pains and penalties for political discussion has passed away in this country. For in the first place the prosecutions were not persisted in, and in the second they were never, properly speaking, political prosecutions. The offence charged was not criticising institutions, or the acts or persons of rulers, but circulating what was held to be an immoral doctrine, the lawfulness of tyrannicide. If the arguments of this chapter have any validity, there ought to be the fullest liberty to profess and discuss, as a matter of ethical conviction, any doctrine at all, however immoral it may be thought. It would therefore be irrelevant and out of place to examine here whether the doctrine of tyrannicide deserves that name. I shall content myself with saying that the subject has at all times been one of the open questions of morals; that the act of a private citizen in striking down a criminal who, by raising himself above the law, has put himself beyond the reach of legal punishment or control, has been accounted by whole nations, and by some of the best and wisest of men, not a crime but an act of exalted virtue; and that, right or wrong, it is not of the nature of assassination but of civil war. As such, I hold that instigating it in a specific case may properly be punished, but only if an overt act has followed, and if at least a probable connection can be established between the act and the instigation. And even then it is not a foreign government but the very government attacked that alone, in the exercise of self-defence, can legitimately punish attacks on its own existence.

We must consider these two hypotheses separately, since each has its own distinct branch of the argument. We can never be sure that the opinion we are trying to stifle is a false one; and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still.

* * *

First, then: the opinion someone is trying to suppress by authority may possibly be true. Those who want to suppress it deny its truth, of course; but they are not infallible. They have no authority to settle the question for all mankind and shut every other person out from the means of judging. To refuse a hearing to an opinion because they are sure it is false is to assume that *their* certainty is the same thing as *absolute* certainty. All silencing of discussion is an assumption of infallibility. Its condemnation may be allowed to rest on this common argument, which is none the worse for being common.

Unfortunately for the good sense of mankind, the fact that they are fallible carries nothing like the weight in their practical judgment that is always granted to it in theory. Everyone knows perfectly well that he is fallible, but few think it necessary to take any precautions against their own fallibility, or to entertain the idea that some opinion they feel very certain of may be one of the examples of the error they admit they are liable to. Absolute princes, and others who are used to unlimited deference, generally feel this complete confidence in their own opinions on nearly every subject. People more fortunately placed, who sometimes hear their opinions disputed and are not entirely unused to being set right when they are wrong, place the same unbounded reliance only on those of their opinions that are shared by everyone around them, or by the people they habitually defer to; for the less confidence a man has in his own solitary judgment, the more implicitly he usually trusts in the infallibility of "the world" in general. And the world, to each individual, means the part of it he comes into contact with: his party, his sect, his church, his class in society. A man may be called almost liberal and broad-minded by comparison if it means anything so comprehensive as his own country or his own age. Nor is his faith in this collective authority at all shaken by his knowing that other ages, countries, sects, churches, classes and parties have thought, and still think, the exact opposite. He hands over to his own world the responsibility of being right against the dissenting worlds of other people, and it never troubles him that it was mere accident that decided which of these many worlds he relies on — that the same causes which made him a Churchman in London would have made him a Buddhist or a Confucian in Peking. Yet it is as evident in itself as any amount of argument could make it that ages are no more infallible than individuals, since every age has held many opinions that later ages have thought not only false but absurd; and it is as certain that many opinions now general will be rejected by future ages as it is that many once general are rejected by the present one.

The objection likely to be made to this argument would probably run something like this. There is no greater assumption of infallibility in forbidding the spread of error than in anything else that is done by public authority on its own judgment and responsibility. Judgment is given to men so that they may use it. Are they to be told they should not use it at all, because it can be used wrongly? To prohibit what they think harmful is not to claim exemption from error but to fulfil the duty that lies on them, fallible as they are, of acting on their conscientious conviction. If we were never to act on our opinions because those opinions might be wrong, we should leave all our interests uncared for and all our duties undone. An objection that applies to all conduct can be no valid objection to any conduct in particular. It is the duty of governments, and of individuals, to form the truest opinions they can, to form them carefully, and never to impose them on others unless they are quite sure of being right. But when they are sure (such reasoners may say), it is not conscientiousness but cowardice to shrink from acting on their opinions, and to let doctrines they honestly think dangerous to the welfare of mankind, in this life or another, be scattered abroad unchecked, merely because other people in less enlightened times persecuted opinions now believed to be true. Let us take care, it may be said, not to make the same mistake — but governments and nations have made mistakes in other things too, which nobody denies are fit subjects for the exercise of authority: they have laid on bad taxes and made unjust wars. Ought we therefore to lay on no taxes, and, under whatever provocation, make no wars? Men and governments must act to the best of their ability. There is no such thing as absolute certainty, but there is assurance enough for the purposes of human life. We may, and must, assume our opinion to be true as a guide to our own conduct; and we are assuming no more than that when we forbid bad men to corrupt society by spreading opinions we regard as false and harmful.

My answer is that we are assuming very much more. There is all the difference in the world between presuming an opinion to be true because it has not been refuted although every opportunity of contesting it has been open, and assuming its truth for the purpose of not permitting it to be refuted. Complete liberty to contradict and disprove our opinion is the very thing that entitles us to assume its truth for purposes of action; and on no other terms can a being with human faculties have any rational assurance of being right.

When we look at the history of opinion, or at the ordinary conduct of human life, what is it that keeps both of them from being worse than they are? Certainly not the inherent force of human understanding: on any matter that is not self-evident there are ninety-nine people wholly incapable of judging it for every one who is capable, and the capacity of the hundredth is only comparative, since most of the eminent men of every past generation held many opinions now known to be mistaken, and did or approved numerous things nobody would defend today. Why is it, then, that on the whole rational opinions and rational conduct predominate among mankind? If they really do predominate — and they must, unless human affairs are now, and always have been, in a nearly desperate state — it is owing to one quality of the human mind, the source of everything respectable in man as an intellectual or a moral being: that his errors can be corrected. He is capable of putting his mistakes right by discussion and experience. Not by experience alone. There must be discussion, to show how the experience is to be interpreted. Wrong opinions and practices gradually give way to fact and argument; but facts and arguments must be brought before the mind before they can have any effect on it. Very few facts can tell their own story without comment to bring out their meaning. Since the whole strength and value of human judgment rests on the one property that it can be set right when it is wrong, we can rely on it only when the means of setting it right are kept constantly to hand. Take any person whose judgment really deserves confidence: how has it come to deserve it? Because he has kept his mind open to criticism of his opinions and his conduct. Because it has been his habit to listen to everything that could be said against him, to profit by whatever was just in it, and to set out for himself, and on occasion for others, why what was fallacious was fallacious. Because he has felt that the only way a human being can come near to knowing the whole of a subject is by hearing what can be said about it by people of every variety of opinion, and studying every way it can be looked at by every cast of mind. No wise man ever got his wisdom in any other way, and it is not in the nature of human intelligence to become wise by any other means. The steady habit of correcting and completing his own opinion by comparing it with other people's, so far from causing doubt and hesitation when he comes to act on it, is the only stable foundation for a just reliance on it. Knowing everything that can obviously be said against him, and having taken up his position against all comers — knowing that he has looked for objections and difficulties instead of avoiding them, and has shut out no light that could be thrown on the subject from any quarter — he has a right to think his judgment better than that of any person, or any multitude, who has not gone through the same process.

It is not asking too much that what the wisest of mankind, the people best entitled to trust their own judgment, find necessary before they may rely on it, should be submitted to by that mixed collection of a few wise and many foolish individuals called the public. The most intolerant of churches, the Roman Catholic Church, admits and listens patiently to a "devil's advocate" even at the canonisation of a saint. The holiest of men, it seems, cannot be admitted to posthumous honours until everything the devil could say against him has been heard and weighed. If even Newton's philosophy were not open to question, mankind could not feel as completely assured of its truth as they now do. The beliefs we have most warrant for have no safeguard to rest on but a standing invitation to the whole world to prove them unfounded. If the challenge is not taken up, or is taken up and the attempt fails, we are still far from certainty; but we have done the best the present state of human reason allows, and have neglected nothing that could give the truth a chance of reaching us. If the lists are kept open we may hope that if there is a better truth it will be found when the human mind is capable of receiving it; and meanwhile we may rely on having come as near the truth as is possible in our own day. This is the amount of certainty a fallible being can attain, and this is the only way of attaining it.

It is strange that men should admit the validity of the arguments for free discussion but object to their being "pushed to an extreme", not seeing that unless the reasons are good in an extreme case, they are not good in any case. It is strange that they should imagine they are not assuming infallibility when they allow that there should be free discussion of every subject that could possibly be *doubtful*, but hold that some particular principle or doctrine should not be open to question because it is *so certain* — that is, because *they are certain* that it is certain. To call a proposition certain while there is anyone who would deny its certainty if he were allowed to, but who is not allowed to, is to assume that we and those who agree with us are the judges of certainty, and judges who need not hear the other side.

In the present age — which has been described as "destitute of faith, but terrified at scepticism", in which people feel sure not so much that their opinions are true as that they would not know what to do without them — the claim that an opinion should be protected from public attack rests not so much on its truth as on its importance to society. There are, we are told, certain beliefs so useful, not to say indispensable, to well-being that it is as much the duty of governments to uphold them as to protect any other of the interests of society. In a case of such necessity, and so squarely in the line of their duty, something short of infallibility may (it is argued) warrant governments, and even oblige them, to act on their own opinion when it is confirmed by the general opinion of mankind. It is also often argued, and still more often thought, that none but bad men would want to weaken these wholesome beliefs, and that there can be nothing wrong in restraining bad men and prohibiting what only such men would wish to do. This way of thinking makes the justification of restraints on discussion a question not of the truth of doctrines but of their usefulness, and flatters itself that it thereby escapes the responsibility of claiming to be an infallible judge of opinions. But those who satisfy themselves this way do not see that the assumption of infallibility has merely been shifted from one point to another. The usefulness of an opinion is itself a matter of opinion — as disputable, as open to discussion, and as much in need of discussion as the opinion itself. There is just as much need of an infallible judge of opinions to decide that an opinion is harmful as to decide that it is false, unless the condemned opinion has full opportunity to defend itself. And it will not do to say that the heretic may be allowed to argue for the usefulness or harmlessness of his opinion but forbidden to argue for its truth. The truth of an opinion is part of its usefulness. If we want to know whether it is desirable that a proposition should be believed, is it possible to leave out of account whether or not it is true? In the opinion not of bad men but of the best men, no belief that is contrary to truth can be really useful; and can you stop such men from urging that plea when they are charged with wickedness for denying some doctrine they are told is useful but believe to be false? Those on the side of received opinions never fail to take every possible advantage of this plea. You do not find *them* handling the question of usefulness as though it could be entirely separated from the question of truth; on the contrary, it is above all because their doctrine is "the truth" that knowing it or believing it is held to be so indispensable. There can be no fair discussion of the question of usefulness when so vital an argument may be used on one side but not on the other. And in point of fact, where law or public feeling does not allow the truth of an opinion to be disputed, it is just as little willing to allow its usefulness to be denied. The most it will allow is some slight qualifying of its absolute necessity, or of the positive guilt of rejecting it.

To bring out more fully the mischief of refusing a hearing to opinions because we have condemned them in our own judgment, it will be as well to fix the discussion on a concrete case; and I choose, by preference, the cases least favourable to me — the ones where the argument against freedom of opinion is thought strongest, both on the score of truth and on that of usefulness. Let the opinions attacked be belief in God and in a future life, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality. To fight the battle on such ground gives a great advantage to an unfair opponent, since he is sure to say (and many who have no wish to be unfair will say it inwardly): Are these the doctrines you do not think certain enough to be taken under the protection of the law? Is belief in God one of the opinions that you hold it an assumption of infallibility to feel sure of? But I must be allowed to point out that it is not feeling sure of a doctrine, whatever it may be, that I call an assumption of infallibility. It is undertaking to decide the question *for others*, without letting them hear what can be said on the other side. And I denounce and condemn that claim no less when it is put forward on the side of my own most solemn convictions. However positive anyone's belief may be — not only in the falsity of an opinion but in its pernicious consequences, and not only in its pernicious consequences but (to use expressions I altogether condemn) in its immorality and impiety — if, acting on that private judgment, even backed by the public judgment of his country or his contemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its own defence, he assumes infallibility. And so far from the assumption being less objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, that is the case of all others in which it is most fatal. These are exactly the occasions on which the men of one generation commit those dreadful mistakes that fill posterity with astonishment and horror. It is among such cases that we find the instances memorable in history where the arm of the law has been used to root out the best men and the noblest doctrines — with deplorable success as far as the men were concerned, though some of the doctrines have survived to be invoked, as if in mockery, in defence of the same treatment of those who dissent from *them*, or from their received interpretation.

Mankind can hardly be reminded too often that there was once a man named Socrates, between whom and the legal authorities and public opinion of his time there took place a memorable collision. Born in an age and a country abounding in individual greatness, he was handed down to us by those who knew both him and the age best as the most virtuous man in it; while *we* know him as the head and prototype of all later teachers of virtue, the source equally of Plato's lofty inspiration and Aristotle's judicious utilitarianism — *i maëstri di color che sanno*, the masters of those who know, the two headsprings of ethical philosophy as of all other. This acknowledged master of all the eminent thinkers who have lived since, whose fame is still growing after more than two thousand years and all but outweighs the whole remainder of the names that make his native city illustrious, was put to death by his countrymen after a judicial conviction for impiety and immorality. Impiety, in denying the gods the state recognised — indeed his accuser claimed (see the *Apologia*) that he believed in no gods at all. Immorality, in being by his doctrines and his teaching a "corrupter of youth". Of these charges the tribunal, there is every reason to believe, honestly found him guilty, and condemned the man who of all then born had probably deserved best of mankind to be put to death as a criminal.

To pass from this to the only other instance of judicial iniquity whose mention, after the condemnation of Socrates, would not be an anticlimax: the event that took place on Calvary rather more than eighteen hundred years ago. The man who left on the memory of those who witnessed his life and his conversation such an impression of moral grandeur that eighteen centuries since have worshipped him as the Almighty in person, was ignominiously put to death — as what? As a blasphemer. Men did not merely mistake their benefactor; they mistook him for the exact opposite of what he was, and treated him as that monster of impiety which they themselves are now held to have been for their treatment of him. The feelings with which mankind now regard these lamentable transactions, especially the later of the two, make them extremely unjust in their judgment of the unhappy men who took part in them. To all appearance these were not bad men — not worse than men commonly are, rather the contrary: men who possessed in full measure, or a little more than full measure, the religious, moral and patriotic feelings of their time and their people; exactly the sort of men who in all times, our own included, have every chance of going through life blameless and respected. The high priest who tore his garments when the words were spoken that, by every idea of his country, constituted the blackest guilt, was in all probability quite as sincere in his horror and indignation as most respectable and pious men now are in the religious and moral sentiments they profess; and most of those who now shudder at his conduct would, if they had lived in his time and been born Jews, have acted exactly as he did. Orthodox Christians who are tempted to think that those who stoned the first martyrs to death must have been worse men than they are themselves ought to remember that one of those persecutors was Saint Paul.

Let us add one more example, the most striking of all if the impressiveness of an error is measured by the wisdom and virtue of the man who falls into it. If anyone in possession of power ever had grounds for thinking himself the best and most enlightened of his contemporaries, it was the Emperor Marcus Aurelius. Absolute monarch of the whole civilised world, he preserved all his life not only the most unblemished justice but — what was less to be expected from his Stoic upbringing — the tenderest heart. The few failings attributed to him were all on the side of indulgence, while his writings, the highest ethical product of the ancient mind, differ scarcely at all, if they differ, from the most characteristic teachings of Christ. This man, a better Christian in everything but the dogmatic sense of the word than almost any of the ostensibly Christian sovereigns who have reigned since, persecuted Christianity. Placed at the summit of everything humanity had so far achieved, with an open and unfettered intellect, and a character that led him of his own accord to embody the Christian ideal in his moral writings, he still failed to see that Christianity was going to be a good and not an evil to the world whose welfare he felt so deeply. He knew that the society of his day was in a deplorable state. But such as it was, he saw, or thought he saw, that it was held together and kept from getting worse by belief in and reverence for the received gods. As a ruler of mankind he thought it his duty not to let society fall to pieces, and he could not see how, if its existing ties were removed, any others could be formed to knit it together again. The new religion openly aimed at dissolving those ties; so unless it was his duty to adopt that religion, it seemed to be his duty to put it down. And since the theology of Christianity did not appear to him true or of divine origin; since this strange history of a crucified God was not credible to him, and since a system that professed to rest entirely on a foundation so wholly unbelievable to him could not be foreseen by him to be the renewing force that, after every qualification, it has in fact proved — the gentlest and most amiable of philosophers and rulers, under a solemn sense of duty, authorised the persecution of Christianity. To my mind this is one of the most tragic facts in all history. It is a bitter thought, how different a thing the Christianity of the world might have been if the Christian faith had been adopted as the religion of the empire under Marcus Aurelius instead of Constantine. But it would be equally unjust to him and false to the truth to deny that no plea which can be urged for punishing anti-Christian teaching was unavailable to Marcus Aurelius for punishing, as he did, the spread of Christianity. No Christian believes more firmly that atheism is false and tends to dissolve society than Marcus Aurelius believed the same things of Christianity — he who of all men then living might have been thought the most capable of appreciating it. Unless someone who approves of punishing the spread of opinions flatters himself that he is a wiser and better man than Marcus Aurelius, more deeply versed in the wisdom of his time and more raised above it in intellect, more earnest in his search for truth or more single-minded in his devotion to it once found, let him abstain from that assumption of the joint infallibility of himself and the multitude which the great Antoninus made with such unfortunate results.

Aware that the use of punishment to restrain irreligious opinions cannot be defended by any argument that would not also justify Marcus Antoninus, the enemies of religious freedom, when hard pressed, occasionally accept the consequence and say, with Dr Johnson, that the persecutors of Christianity were in the right; that persecution is an ordeal truth ought to pass through, and always does pass through successfully, legal penalties being in the end powerless against truth, though sometimes usefully effective against mischievous errors. This form of the argument for religious intolerance is remarkable enough not to be passed over without notice.

A theory that maintains truth may justifiably be persecuted because persecution cannot possibly do it any harm cannot be accused of being deliberately hostile to the reception of new truths; but we cannot praise the generosity of its dealings with the people to whom mankind owes them. To reveal to the world something that deeply concerns it and that it did not know before, to prove to it that it has been mistaken on some vital point of temporal or spiritual interest, is as important a service as a human being can render his fellow creatures; and in certain cases — the early Christians, the Reformers — those who think with Dr Johnson believe it to have been the most precious gift that could be given to mankind. That the authors of such splendid benefits should be repaid with martyrdom, that their reward should be to be treated as the vilest of criminals, is not on this theory a deplorable error and misfortune for humanity to mourn in sackcloth and ashes, but the normal and justifiable state of things. On this doctrine, the man who puts forward a new truth should stand as, in the legislation of the Locrians, the proposer of a new law had to stand: with a rope round his neck, to be tightened on the spot if the public assembly did not adopt his proposal there and then on hearing his reasons. People who defend this way of treating benefactors can hardly be supposed to set much value on the benefit; and I believe this view of the matter is mostly confined to the sort of person who thinks new truths may have been desirable once, but that we have had enough of them now.
