Chapter Two: On the Liberty of Thought and Discussion

(Part 3 of 3)

How far doctrines intrinsically fitted to make the deepest impression on the mind may remain in it as dead beliefs, never realised in the imagination, the feelings or the understanding, is shown by the way most believers hold the doctrines of Christianity. By Christianity here I mean what all churches and sects count as such: the maxims and precepts contained in the New Testament. These are regarded as sacred and accepted as laws by everyone professing Christianity. Yet it is hardly too much to say that not one Christian in a thousand guides or tests his own conduct by reference to those laws. The standard he does refer it to is the custom of his nation, his class, or his religious denomination. So he has, on the one hand, a collection of ethical maxims which he believes were granted to him by infallible wisdom as rules to govern him by; and on the other, a set of everyday judgments and practices which go a certain distance with some of those maxims, not so far with others, stand in direct opposition to some, and are on the whole a compromise between the Christian creed and the interests and suggestions of worldly life. To the first of these standards he gives his homage; to the second his real allegiance. All Christians believe that the blessed are the poor and humble and those the world ill-treats; that it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven; that they should judge not, lest they be judged; that they should swear not at all; that they should love their neighbour as themselves; that if someone takes their cloak they should give him their coat as well; that they should take no thought for the morrow; that if they would be perfect they should sell everything they have and give it to the poor. They are not insincere when they say they believe these things. They do believe them, as people believe what they have always heard praised and never heard discussed. But in the sense of a living belief that regulates conduct, they believe these doctrines just up to the point at which it is customary to act on them. The doctrines in their entirety are useful for pelting opponents with, and it is understood that they are to be put forward, where possible, as the reasons for whatever people do that they think praiseworthy. But anyone who reminded them that the maxims require an infinity of things they never even think of doing would gain nothing but a place among those very unpopular characters who pretend to be better than other people. The doctrines have no hold on ordinary believers; they are not a power in their minds. They have a habitual respect for the sound of them, but no feeling that spreads from the words to the things they signify and forces the mind to take *them* in and conform itself to the formula. Whenever conduct is concerned, they look round for Mr A and Mr B to direct them how far to go in obeying Christ.

Now we may be quite sure that this was not how it stood with the early Christians — far from it. If it had been, Christianity would never have grown from an obscure sect of the despised Hebrews into the religion of the Roman empire. When their enemies said "See how these Christians love one another" — a remark nobody is likely to make now — they certainly had a much livelier feeling of what their creed meant than they have ever had since. And that is probably the chief reason why Christianity now makes so little progress in extending its territory, and after eighteen centuries is still nearly confined to Europeans and the descendants of Europeans. Even among the strictly religious, who are very much in earnest about their doctrines and attach far more meaning to many of them than people in general, it commonly happens that the part which is comparatively alive in their minds is the part shaped by Calvin, or Knox, or someone else much closer to them in character. The sayings of Christ lie passively beside these in their minds, producing hardly any effect beyond what comes of merely listening to words so gentle and pleasant. There are many reasons, no doubt, why the doctrines that are the badge of a sect keep more of their vitality than those common to every recognised sect, and why teachers take more trouble to keep their meaning alive; but one reason certainly is that the distinctive doctrines are questioned more, and have to be defended more often against open opponents. Both teachers and learners go to sleep at their posts as soon as there is no enemy in the field.

The same thing is generally true of all traditional doctrines — those of prudence and knowledge of life as much as those of morals or religion. Every language and every literature is full of general observations about life, both what it is and how to conduct oneself in it: observations everybody knows, which everybody repeats or hears with agreement, which are accepted as truisms, and yet whose meaning most people first truly learn when experience, usually of a painful kind, has made them real. How often, smarting under some unforeseen misfortune or disappointment, does a person call to mind some proverb or common saying familiar to him all his life, whose meaning, if he had ever felt it before as he feels it now, would have saved him from the calamity. There are indeed reasons for this besides the absence of discussion: there are many truths whose full meaning *cannot* be realised until personal experience has brought it home. But much more of the meaning even of these would have been understood, and what was understood would have been far more deeply impressed on the mind, if the man had been used to hearing it argued for and against by people who did understand it. Mankind's fatal tendency to stop thinking about something as soon as it is no longer in doubt is the cause of half their errors. A living author has put it well: "the deep slumber of a decided opinion".

But what! (it may be asked) Is the absence of unanimity an indispensable condition of real knowledge? Must some part of mankind persist in error to enable anybody to realise the truth? Does a belief stop being real and vital as soon as it is generally accepted, and is a proposition never thoroughly understood and felt unless some doubt of it remains? As soon as mankind have unanimously accepted a truth, does the truth die inside them? The highest aim and best result of improved intelligence has been thought until now to be uniting mankind more and more in acknowledging all important truths; and does the intelligence only last as long as it has not achieved its object? Do the fruits of conquest perish by the very completeness of the victory?

I claim nothing of the kind. As mankind improve, the number of doctrines no longer disputed or doubted will constantly increase, and the well-being of mankind may almost be measured by the number and gravity of the truths that have reached the point of being uncontested. The ending of serious controversy on one question after another is one of the necessary incidents of the consolidation of opinion — a consolidation as beneficial when the opinions are true as it is dangerous and harmful when they are mistaken. But though this gradual narrowing of the bounds of diversity of opinion is necessary in both senses of the word, being at once inevitable and indispensable, we are not obliged to conclude that all its consequences must be beneficial. Losing so important an aid to the intelligent and living grasp of a truth as the necessity of explaining it to opponents or defending it against them, though not enough to outweigh the benefit of its universal recognition, is no trifling drawback from that benefit. Where this advantage can no longer be had, I confess I should like to see the teachers of mankind trying to provide a substitute for it — some contrivance for making the difficulties of the question as present to the learner's mind as they would be if an opposing champion were pressing them on him, eager for his conversion.

But instead of looking for contrivances of that kind, they have lost the ones they used to have. The Socratic dialectic, so magnificently displayed in Plato's dialogues, was a contrivance of exactly this description. It was essentially a negative discussion of the great questions of philosophy and life, directed with consummate skill towards convincing anyone who had merely adopted the commonplaces of received opinion that he did not understand the subject — that he attached no definite meaning as yet to the doctrines he professed — so that, becoming aware of his ignorance, he might be put in the way of attaining a stable belief resting on a clear grasp both of what the doctrines mean and of the evidence for them. The school disputations of the Middle Ages had a somewhat similar object. They were meant to make sure that the pupil understood his own opinion and, by necessary corollary, the opinion opposed to it, and could set out the grounds of the one and refute those of the other. These later contests had the incurable defect that the premises appealed to were taken from authority and not from reason, and as a discipline for the mind they were in every respect inferior to the powerful dialectic that formed the intellects of the *Socratici viri*, the men of Socrates' circle. But the modern mind owes far more to both than it is generally willing to admit, and present modes of education contain nothing that in the smallest degree takes the place of either. A person who gets all his instruction from teachers or books, even if he escapes the besetting temptation of contenting himself with cramming, is under no compulsion to hear both sides; and accordingly knowing both sides is far from a frequent accomplishment, even among thinkers. The weakest part of what anybody says in defence of his opinion is what he means as a reply to opponents. It is the fashion of the present time to disparage negative logic — the kind that points out weaknesses in a theory or errors in a practice without establishing positive truths. Such negative criticism would be poor enough as an ultimate result; but as a means of attaining any positive knowledge or conviction worth the name it cannot be valued too highly, and until people are again systematically trained in it there will be few great thinkers, and a low general average of intellect, in any but the mathematical and physical departments of thought. On any other subject nobody's opinions deserve the name of knowledge except so far as he has either had forced on him by others, or gone through by himself, the same mental process that would have been required of him in carrying on an active controversy with opponents. When it is absent it is so indispensable and yet so difficult to create; how much worse than absurd, then, to forgo it when it offers itself spontaneously. If there are people who contest a received opinion, or who would if law or opinion let them, let us thank them for it, open our minds to listen to them, and be glad that somebody is doing for us what we otherwise ought — if we care about either the certainty or the vitality of our convictions — to do with much greater labour for ourselves.

* * *

There is still one of the principal reasons why diversity of opinion is an advantage left to speak of, and it will go on being an advantage until mankind reach a stage of intellectual advancement that at present seems incalculably distant. So far we have considered only two possibilities: that the received opinion may be false and some other opinion consequently true; or that, the received opinion being true, a conflict with the opposite error is essential to any clear grasp and deep feeling of its truth. But there is a commoner case than either: where the conflicting doctrines, instead of one being true and the other false, share the truth between them, and the nonconforming opinion is needed to supply the remainder of a truth of which the received doctrine embodies only a part. Popular opinions on subjects not open to the senses are often true, but seldom or never the whole truth. They are a part of the truth — sometimes a larger part, sometimes a smaller — but exaggerated, distorted, and cut off from the truths that ought to accompany and limit them. Heretical opinions, on the other hand, are generally some of these suppressed and neglected truths bursting the bonds that held them down, and either seeking reconciliation with the truth contained in the common opinion or confronting it as an enemy, setting themselves up with the same exclusiveness as the whole truth. The second case has been the more frequent so far, since in the human mind one-sidedness has always been the rule and many-sidedness the exception. So even in revolutions of opinion, one part of the truth usually sets while another rises. Even progress, which ought to add, for the most part only substitutes one partial and incomplete truth for another, the improvement consisting chiefly in this: that the new fragment of truth is more wanted, better suited to the needs of the time, than the one it displaces. Prevailing opinions being partial in this way even when they rest on a true foundation, every opinion that embodies any of the portion of truth the common opinion leaves out ought to be considered precious, however much error and confusion may be mixed with that truth. No sober judge of human affairs will feel obliged to be indignant because those who force truths on our notice that we should otherwise have overlooked overlook some of the truths we see. He will think, rather, that as long as popular truth is one-sided it is on the whole desirable that unpopular truth should have one-sided champions too, since they are usually the most energetic and the most likely to compel reluctant attention to the fragment of wisdom they proclaim as if it were the whole.

Thus in the eighteenth century, when nearly all the educated, and all the uneducated who were led by them, were lost in admiration of what is called civilisation and of the marvels of modern science, literature and philosophy, and, greatly overrating how unlike the men of modern times were to the men of antiquity, indulged the belief that the whole difference was in their own favour — with what a salutary shock did the paradoxes of Rousseau explode like bombshells in the middle of it, dislocating the compact mass of one-sided opinion and forcing its elements to recombine in a better form and with new ingredients. Not that the current opinions were on the whole further from the truth than Rousseau's were; on the contrary, they were nearer to it, and contained more positive truth and much less error. Nevertheless there lay in Rousseau's doctrine, and has floated down the stream of opinion along with it, a considerable amount of exactly those truths the popular opinion lacked; and these are the deposit left behind when the flood subsided. The superior worth of simplicity of life, and the enervating and demoralising effect of the shackles and hypocrisies of artificial society, are ideas that have never been entirely absent from cultivated minds since Rousseau wrote, and in time they will produce their due effect — though at present they need asserting as much as ever, and asserting by deeds, since on this subject words have nearly exhausted their power.

In politics, again, it is almost a commonplace that a party of order or stability and a party of progress or reform are both necessary elements of a healthy political life, until one or the other has so enlarged its mental grasp as to be a party of order and of progress equally, knowing and distinguishing what is fit to be kept from what ought to be swept away. Each of these ways of thinking gets its usefulness from the deficiencies of the other; but it is largely the opposition of the other that keeps each within the bounds of reason and sanity. Unless opinions favourable to democracy and to aristocracy, to property and to equality, to cooperation and to competition, to luxury and to abstinence, to sociability and to individuality, to liberty and to discipline, and all the other standing antagonisms of practical life, are expressed with equal freedom and pressed and defended with equal talent and energy, there is no chance of both elements getting their due; one scale is sure to go up and the other down. Truth in the great practical concerns of life is so much a matter of reconciling and combining opposites that very few minds are capacious and impartial enough to make the adjustment anywhere near correctly, and it has to be made by the rough process of a struggle between combatants fighting under hostile banners. On any of the great open questions just listed, if either of the two opinions has a better claim than the other not merely to be tolerated but to be encouraged and supported, it is the one that happens at that particular time and place to be in a minority. That is the opinion which for the time being represents the neglected interests, the side of human well-being that is in danger of getting less than its share. I am aware that in this country there is no intolerance of differences of opinion on most of these topics. They are brought forward to show, by admitted and multiplied examples, how universal it is that only through diversity of opinion is there, in the present state of human intellect, any chance of fair play for all sides of the truth. Where there are people to be found who form an exception to the apparent unanimity of the world on some subject, it is always probable, even if the world is in the right, that the dissenters have something worth hearing to say for themselves, and that truth would lose something by their silence.

It may be objected: "But *some* received principles, especially on the highest and most vital subjects, are more than half-truths. Christian morality, for instance, is the whole truth on that subject, and if anyone teaches a morality that differs from it, he is wholly in error." As this is the most important case of all in practice, none could be fitter for testing the general rule. But before pronouncing on what Christian morality is or is not, it would be as well to settle what is meant by Christian morality. If it means the morality of the New Testament, I am surprised that anyone who gets his knowledge of that from the book itself can suppose it was announced, or intended, as a complete doctrine of morals. The Gospel always refers back to a pre-existing morality, and confines its precepts to the particulars in which that morality was to be corrected or superseded by a wider and higher one; and it expresses itself, moreover, in the most general terms, often impossible to interpret literally, and with the impressiveness of poetry or eloquence rather than the precision of legislation. It has never been possible to extract a body of ethical doctrine from it without eking it out from the Old Testament — that is, from a system elaborate indeed, but in many respects barbarous, and intended only for a barbarous people. St Paul, a declared enemy of this Judaical way of interpreting his Master's doctrine and filling out his scheme, equally assumes a pre-existing morality, namely that of the Greeks and Romans, and his advice to Christians is largely a system of accommodation to it, even to the extent of giving an apparent sanction to slavery. What is called Christian, but should rather be called theological, morality was not the work of Christ or the Apostles, but is of much later origin, having been gradually built up by the Catholic church of the first five centuries; and though it has not been adopted wholesale by moderns and Protestants, it has been much less modified by them than might have been expected. For the most part, indeed, they have contented themselves with cutting off the additions made to it in the Middle Ages, each sect filling the gap with fresh additions suited to its own character and tendencies. That mankind owe a great debt to this morality and to its early teachers, I should be the last person to deny; but I do not hesitate to say of it that in many important points it is incomplete and one-sided, and that unless ideas and feelings it does not sanction had contributed to the formation of European life and character, human affairs would be in a worse state than they are now. Christian morality, so called, has all the marks of a reaction: it is in great part a protest against paganism. Its ideal is negative rather than positive; passive rather than active; innocence rather than nobleness; abstinence from evil rather than energetic pursuit of good. In its precepts, as has been well said, "thou shalt not" predominates unduly over "thou shalt". In its horror of sensuality it made an idol of asceticism, which has gradually been compromised away into an idol of legality. It holds out the hope of heaven and the threat of hell as the appointed and appropriate motives for a virtuous life, and in this it falls far below the best of the ancients, and does what it can to give human morality an essentially selfish character by disconnecting each man's sense of duty from the interests of his fellow creatures, except so far as a self-interested inducement is offered him for consulting them. It is essentially a doctrine of passive obedience; it teaches submission to whatever authorities are found established — who are not indeed to be actively obeyed when they command what religion forbids, but who are not to be resisted, far less rebelled against, for any amount of wrong done to ourselves. And while in the morality of the best pagan nations duty to the state holds even a disproportionate place, encroaching on the just liberty of the individual, in purely Christian ethics that great department of duty is scarcely noticed or acknowledged. It is in the Koran, not the New Testament, that we read the maxim: "A ruler who appoints any man to an office, when there is in his dominions another man better qualified for it, sins against God and against the State." What little recognition the idea of an obligation to the public gets in modern morality comes from Greek and Roman sources, not from Christian ones — just as, even in the morality of private life, whatever we have of magnanimity, high-mindedness, personal dignity, even the sense of honour, comes from the purely human and not the religious part of our education, and could never have grown out of a standard of ethics in which the only worth professedly recognised is that of obedience.

I am as far as anyone from pretending that these defects are necessarily inherent in Christian ethics, in every way it can be conceived, or that the many requirements of a complete moral doctrine which it does not contain cannot be reconciled with it. Far less would I suggest this of the doctrines and precepts of Christ himself. I believe that the sayings of Christ are all that I can see any evidence of their having been intended to be; that they are irreconcilable with nothing a comprehensive morality requires; that everything excellent in ethics can be brought within them, with no more violence to their language than has been done to it by everyone who has ever tried to deduce from them any practical system of conduct at all. But it is quite consistent with this to believe that they contain, and were meant to contain, only a part of the truth; that many essential elements of the highest morality are among the things not provided for, and not intended to be provided for, in the recorded utterances of the founder of Christianity, and that they have been thrown aside entirely in the system of ethics erected on the basis of those utterances by the Christian Church. That being so, I think it a great error to persist in trying to find in the Christian doctrine that complete rule for our guidance which its author intended it to sanction and enforce but only partly to supply. I believe, too, that this narrow theory is becoming a grave practical evil, greatly reducing the value of the moral training and instruction that so many well-meaning people are now at last exerting themselves to promote. I much fear that by trying to form the mind and the feelings on an exclusively religious type, and discarding those secular standards (as for want of a better name they may be called) which used to coexist with Christian ethics and supplement it, taking some of its spirit and infusing some of theirs into it, the result will be — and even now is — a low, abject, servile type of character, which, however it may submit to what it takes to be the Supreme Will, is incapable of rising to the conception of Supreme Goodness or of sympathising with it. I believe that other ethics than any that can be developed from exclusively Christian sources must exist side by side with Christian ethics to produce the moral regeneration of mankind, and that the Christian system is no exception to the rule that in an imperfect state of the human mind the interests of truth require a diversity of opinions. It is not necessary that in ceasing to ignore the moral truths not contained in Christianity, men should ignore any of those it does contain. Such prejudice, or oversight, when it happens, is altogether an evil; but it is one we cannot hope to be always free of, and must be regarded as the price paid for an inestimable good. The exclusive claim made by a part of the truth to be the whole must be, and ought to be, protested against; and if a reactionary impulse should make the protesters unjust in their turn, this one-sidedness, like the other, may be lamented but must be tolerated. If Christians want to teach unbelievers to be just to Christianity, they should themselves be just to unbelief. It can do truth no service to shut our eyes to the fact, known to everyone with the most ordinary acquaintance with literary history, that a large proportion of the noblest and most valuable moral teaching has been the work not only of men who did not know the Christian faith, but of men who knew it and rejected it.

I do not pretend that the most unlimited use of the freedom to state every possible opinion would put an end to the evils of religious or philosophical sectarianism. Every truth that men of narrow capacity are in earnest about is sure to be asserted, inculcated, and in many ways even acted on, as though no other truth existed in the world, or at any rate none that could limit or qualify the first. I acknowledge that the tendency of all opinions to become sectarian is not cured by the freest discussion, and is often heightened and exacerbated by it, the truth that ought to have been seen and was not being rejected all the more violently for being proclaimed by people regarded as opponents. But it is not on the impassioned partisan that this collision of opinions works its beneficial effect; it is on the calmer and more disinterested bystander. The formidable evil is not the violent conflict between parts of the truth but the quiet suppression of half of it. There is always hope while people are forced to listen to both sides; it is when they attend to only one that errors harden into prejudices and truth itself stops having the effect of truth by being exaggerated into falsehood. And since few mental attributes are rarer than the judicial faculty that can sit in intelligent judgment between two sides of a question when only one is represented before it by an advocate, truth has no chance except in proportion as every side of it, every opinion that embodies any fraction of it, not only finds advocates but is so advocated as to be listened to.

* * *

We have now recognised, on four distinct grounds, the necessity of freedom of opinion and freedom of the expression of opinion to the mental well-being of mankind, on which all their other well-being depends. Let us briefly recapitulate them.

First, if any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for all we can certainly know, be true. To deny this is to assume our own infallibility.

Second, though the silenced opinion may be an error, it may, and very commonly does, contain a portion of truth; and since the general or prevailing opinion on any subject is rarely or never the whole truth, it is only by the collision of opposing opinions that the rest of the truth has any chance of being supplied.

Third, even if the received opinion is not only true but the whole truth, unless it is allowed to be, and actually is, vigorously and earnestly contested, most of those who accept it will hold it in the manner of a prejudice, with little comprehension or feeling of its rational grounds.

And fourth, not only that, but the meaning of the doctrine itself will be in danger of being lost, or weakened, and stripped of its vital effect on character and conduct — the dogma becoming a mere formal profession, useless for good, but cluttering the ground and preventing the growth of any real, heartfelt conviction from reason or personal experience.

Before leaving the subject of freedom of opinion, I should take some notice of those who say that the free expression of all opinions should be permitted on condition that the manner is temperate and does not go beyond the bounds of fair discussion. Much might be said about the impossibility of fixing where these supposed bounds lie; for if the test is offence to those whose opinion is attacked, experience shows, I think, that this offence is given whenever the attack is telling and powerful, and that any opponent who presses them hard, and whom they find it difficult to answer, appears to them an intemperate opponent if he shows any strong feeling on the subject. But this, though an important consideration in practice, is absorbed in a more fundamental objection. Undoubtedly the manner of asserting an opinion, even a true one, may be very objectionable and may justly incur severe censure. But the principal offences of the kind are mostly impossible to bring home to conviction, except by accidental self-betrayal. The gravest of them is to argue sophistically, to suppress facts or arguments, to misstate the elements of the case, or to misrepresent the opposing opinion. But all this, even in the most aggravated degree, is so continually done in perfect good faith by people who are not considered ignorant or incompetent, and who in many other respects may not deserve to be, that it is rarely possible on adequate grounds to stamp the misrepresentation conscientiously as morally culpable; and still less could the law presume to interfere with controversial misconduct of that kind. As for what is commonly meant by intemperate discussion — invective, sarcasm, personal attack and the like — denouncing these weapons would deserve more sympathy if it were ever proposed to forbid them equally to both sides. But it is only ever wanted to restrain their use against the prevailing opinion; against the unprevailing one they may be used not only without general disapproval but with a good chance of earning the user the praise of honest zeal and righteous indignation. Yet whatever mischief comes of their use is greatest when they are employed against the comparatively defenceless, and whatever unfair advantage any opinion can derive from this way of asserting it accrues almost exclusively to received opinions. The worst offence of this kind a controversialist can commit is to stigmatise those who hold the contrary opinion as bad and immoral men. To slander of that sort, holders of any unpopular opinion are peculiarly exposed, because they are generally few and without influence, and nobody but themselves cares much whether they get justice. But from the nature of the case this weapon is denied to those who attack a prevailing opinion: they can neither use it with safety to themselves nor, if they could, would it do anything but recoil on their own cause. In general, opinions contrary to those commonly received can only get a hearing by studied moderation of language and the most careful avoidance of unnecessary offence, from which they hardly ever depart even slightly without losing ground; while unmeasured abuse used on the side of the prevailing opinion really does deter people from professing contrary opinions and from listening to those who do. In the interest of truth and justice, therefore, it is far more important to restrain this use of abusive language than the other; and if a choice had to be made, there would be much more need to discourage offensive attacks on unbelief than on religion. It is obvious, though, that law and authority have no business restraining either, while opinion ought in every instance to reach its verdict on the circumstances of the individual case, condemning everyone, on whichever side of the argument he places himself, in whose way of arguing there appears either a want of candour, or malice, bigotry, or intolerance of feeling — but not inferring these vices from the side a person takes, even if it is the opposite side to our own; and giving deserved honour to everyone, whatever opinion he holds, who has the calmness to see and the honesty to state what his opponents and their opinions really are, exaggerating nothing to their discredit and keeping nothing back that tells, or could be supposed to tell, in their favour. This is the real morality of public discussion; and though it is often violated, I am glad to think that there are many controversialists who observe it to a great extent, and a still greater number who conscientiously try to.
