Chapter Three: On Individuality, as One of the Elements of Well-Being

(Part 2 of 2)

I insist so emphatically on the importance of genius, and on the necessity of letting it unfold freely both in thought and in practice, because although I know nobody will deny the point in theory, I also know that almost everybody is in reality completely indifferent to it. People think genius a fine thing if it enables a man to write an exciting poem or paint a picture. But in its true sense, originality in thought and action, nobody says it is not admirable and yet nearly everybody thinks at heart that they can do very well without it. Unhappily this is too natural to be surprising. Originality is the one thing unoriginal minds cannot feel the use of. They cannot see what it is to do for them — how should they? If they could see what it would do for them, it would not be originality. The first service originality has to render them is to open their eyes; and once that is fully done, they would have a chance of becoming original themselves. Meanwhile, remembering that nothing was ever yet done that somebody was not the first to do, and that every good thing in existence is the fruit of originality, let them be modest enough to believe that there is something still left for originality to accomplish, and let them be sure that the less they are conscious of needing it, the more they need it.

In sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid, to real or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things throughout the world is to make mediocrity the ruling power among mankind. In ancient history, in the Middle Ages, and to a diminishing degree through the long transition from feudalism to the present, the individual was a power in himself; and if he had either great talents or a high social position, he was a considerable power. At present individuals are lost in the crowd. In politics it is almost a triviality to say that public opinion now rules the world. The only power deserving the name is that of masses, and of governments while they make themselves the mouthpiece of the tendencies and instincts of masses. This is as true of the moral and social relations of private life as of public affairs. Those whose opinions go by the name of public opinion are not always the same sort of public: in America they are the whole white population, in England chiefly the middle class. But they are always a mass — that is to say, collective mediocrity. And what is an even greater novelty, the mass now take their opinions not from dignitaries in Church or State, from recognised leaders, or from books. Their thinking is done for them by men much like themselves, addressing them or speaking in their name, on the spur of the moment, through the newspapers. I am not complaining of all this. I do not claim that anything better is compatible, as a general rule, with the present low state of the human mind. But that does not stop the government of mediocrity from being mediocre government. No government by a democracy or a numerous aristocracy, either in its political acts or in the opinions, qualities and tone of mind it fosters, ever did or could rise above mediocrity, except so far as the sovereign Many have let themselves be guided — as in their best times they always have been — by the counsel and influence of a more gifted and better instructed One or Few. The beginning of all wise or noble things comes, and must come, from individuals; generally at first from one individual. The honour and glory of the average man is that he is capable of following that lead, that he can respond inwardly to wise and noble things and be led to them with his eyes open. I am not endorsing the sort of "hero worship" that applauds the strong man of genius for forcibly seizing the government of the world and making it do his bidding in spite of itself. All he can claim is the freedom to point out the way. The power of compelling others into it is not only inconsistent with the freedom and development of everybody else, but corrupting to the strong man himself. It does seem, though, that now that the opinions of masses of merely average men have everywhere become or are becoming the dominant power, the counterweight and corrective to that tendency would be a more and more pronounced individuality in those who stand on the higher summits of thought. It is in these circumstances above all that exceptional individuals should be encouraged, rather than deterred, from acting differently from the mass. At other times there was no advantage in their doing so unless they acted not only differently but better. In this age the mere example of nonconformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to custom, is itself a service. Precisely because the tyranny of opinion is such as to make eccentricity a reproach, it is desirable, in order to break through that tyranny, that people should be eccentric. Eccentricity has always abounded where and when strength of character has abounded, and the amount of eccentricity in a society has generally been proportional to the amount of genius, mental vigour and moral courage it contained. That so few now dare to be eccentric marks the chief danger of the time.

I have said that it is important to give the freest possible scope to uncustomary things, so that in time it may appear which of them are fit to be turned into customs. But independence of action and disregard of custom do not deserve encouragement solely for the chance they give that better ways of acting, and customs more worthy of general adoption, may be struck out; nor is it only people of decided mental superiority who have a just claim to lead their lives in their own way. There is no reason why all human existences should be constructed on one pattern, or on a small number of them. If a person has any tolerable amount of common sense and experience, his own way of laying out his existence is the best — not because it is the best in itself, but because it is his own way. Human beings are not like sheep, and even sheep are not indistinguishably alike. A man cannot get a coat or a pair of boots to fit him unless they are either made to his measure or he has a whole warehouse to choose from; and is it easier to fit him with a life than with a coat? Are human beings more alike in their whole physical and spiritual make-up than in the shape of their feet? If it were only that people have different tastes, that is reason enough for not trying to shape them all to one model. But different people also need different conditions for their spiritual development, and can no more live healthily in the same moral atmosphere and climate than the whole variety of plants can in the same physical one. The very things that help one person to cultivate his higher nature are hindrances to another. The same way of life is a healthy stimulus to one, keeping all his faculties of action and enjoyment in their best order, while to another it is a distracting burden that suspends or crushes all inner life. Such are the differences between human beings in their sources of pleasure, their susceptibility to pain, and the effect different physical and moral agencies have on them, that unless there is a corresponding diversity in their ways of life, they neither get their fair share of happiness nor grow to the mental, moral and aesthetic stature their nature is capable of. Why, then, should tolerance, as far as public feeling is concerned, extend only to tastes and ways of life that extort acquiescence by the sheer number of their adherents? Nowhere, except in some monastic institutions, is diversity of taste entirely unrecognised: a person may without blame like or dislike rowing, or smoking, or music, or athletic exercise, or chess, or cards, or study, because both those who like each of these things and those who dislike them are too numerous to be put down. But the man, and still more the woman, who can be accused either of doing "what nobody does" or of not doing "what everybody does" is the object of as much disparaging remark as if he or she had committed some grave moral offence. People need a title, or some other badge of rank or of the regard of people of rank, before they can indulge at all in the luxury of doing as they like without damage to their reputation. Indulge at all, I repeat: for anyone who allows himself much of that indulgence runs the risk of something worse than disparaging speeches. He is in danger of a commission *de lunatico* — an inquiry into his sanity — and of having his property taken from him and given to his relations.

Footnote: There is something both contemptible and frightful in the sort of evidence on which, in recent years, any person can be judicially declared unfit to manage his own affairs, and after his death can have his disposal of his property set aside, if there is enough of it to pay the costs of the litigation — which are charged on the property itself. All the minute details of his daily life are pried into, and whatever is found that looks unlike absolute commonplace when seen through the perceiving and describing faculties of the lowest of the low is laid before the jury as evidence of insanity, and often with success, the jurors being little if at all less coarse and ignorant than the witnesses; while the judges, with that extraordinary ignorance of human nature and human life which continually astonishes us in English lawyers, often help to mislead them. These trials speak volumes about the state of feeling and opinion among the common run of people with regard to human liberty. So far from setting any value on individuality, so far from respecting the right of each individual to act, in matters that harm nobody, as seems good to his own judgment and inclination, judges and juries cannot even conceive that a person in a state of sanity could want such freedom. In former days, when it was proposed to burn atheists, charitable people used to suggest putting them in a madhouse instead. It would be nothing surprising nowadays to see this done, and the doers applauding themselves because instead of persecuting for religion they had adopted so humane and Christian a way of treating these unfortunates — not without a silent satisfaction at their having got their deserts.

There is one feature of the present direction of public opinion peculiarly calculated to make it intolerant of any marked show of individuality. The general run of mankind are not only moderate in intellect but also moderate in their inclinations. They have no tastes or wishes strong enough to incline them to do anything unusual, and consequently they do not understand those who have, and class all such people with the wild and intemperate, whom they are used to looking down on. Now, in addition to this general fact, we have only to suppose that a strong movement has set in for the improvement of morals, and it is obvious what to expect. In our day such a movement has set in; a good deal has actually been achieved in the way of greater regularity of conduct and discouragement of excess; and there is a philanthropic spirit abroad, for which there is no more inviting field than the moral and prudential improvement of our fellow creatures. These tendencies of the times make the public more disposed than in most earlier periods to prescribe general rules of conduct and to try to make everybody conform to the approved standard. And that standard, stated or unstated, is to desire nothing strongly. Its ideal of character is to have no marked character at all: to maim by compression, like a Chinese lady's foot, every part of human nature that stands out prominently and tends to make the person markedly different in outline from commonplace humanity.

As usually happens with ideals that exclude half of what is desirable, the present standard of approval produces only an inferior imitation of the other half. Instead of great energies guided by vigorous reason, and strong feelings strongly controlled by a conscientious will, its result is weak feelings and weak energies, which can therefore be kept in outward conformity to rule without any strength of will or of reason. Energetic characters on any large scale are already becoming merely traditional. There is now hardly any outlet for energy in this country except business. What energy is spent there may still be counted considerable. The little that is left over from that employment is spent on some hobby, which may be a useful, even a philanthropic hobby, but is always some one thing, and generally a thing of small dimensions. The greatness of England is now all collective: individually small, we seem capable of anything great only through our habit of combining — and with this our moral and religious philanthropists are perfectly content. But it was men of another stamp than this who made England what it has been, and men of another stamp will be needed to prevent its decline.

The despotism of Custom is everywhere the standing obstacle to human advancement, being in unceasing antagonism to that disposition to aim at something better than the customary which is called, according to circumstances, the spirit of liberty, or of progress, or of improvement. The spirit of improvement is not always a spirit of liberty, for it may aim at forcing improvements on an unwilling people; and the spirit of liberty, so far as it resists such attempts, may ally itself locally and temporarily with the opponents of improvement. But the only unfailing and permanent source of improvement is liberty, since under it there are as many possible independent centres of improvement as there are individuals. The progressive principle, in either shape, whether as the love of liberty or the love of improvement, is opposed to the sway of Custom, and involves at least emancipation from that yoke; and the contest between the two makes up the chief interest of the history of mankind. The greater part of the world has, properly speaking, no history, because the despotism of Custom is complete there. This is the case over the whole East. Custom is there in all things the final appeal; justice and right mean conformity to Custom; nobody but some tyrant drunk with power thinks of resisting the argument from Custom. And we see the result. Those nations must once have had originality: they did not spring out of the ground populous, literate and skilled in many of the arts of life. They made themselves all this, and were then the greatest and most powerful nations in the world. What are they now? The subjects or dependants of tribes whose forefathers wandered in the forests while theirs had magnificent palaces and gorgeous temples, but over whom Custom held only a divided rule with liberty and progress. It appears that a people may be progressive for a certain length of time and then stop. When does it stop? When it stops possessing individuality. If a similar change should overtake the nations of Europe, it will not take exactly the same shape. The despotism of Custom that threatens these nations is not precisely a standing still. It outlaws singularity, but it does not rule out change, provided everyone changes together. We have discarded the fixed costumes of our forefathers; everyone must still dress like everyone else, but the fashion may change once or twice a year. So we take care that when there is change it shall be for change's sake and not from any idea of beauty or convenience — for the same idea of beauty or convenience would not strike the whole world at the same moment and be thrown aside by everyone at the same later moment. But we are progressive as well as changeable. We are constantly making new inventions in mechanical things and keeping them until they are superseded by better ones; we are eager for improvement in politics, in education, even in morals, though in the last our idea of improvement consists chiefly in persuading or forcing other people to be as good as ourselves. It is not progress we object to; on the contrary, we flatter ourselves that we are the most progressive people who ever lived. It is individuality that we make war on. We should think we had done wonders if we had made ourselves all alike — forgetting that the unlikeness of one person to another is generally the first thing that draws either of them to notice the imperfection of his own type and the superiority of another, or the possibility of producing something better than either by combining the advantages of both. We have a warning example in China: a nation of much talent and, in some respects, even wisdom, thanks to the rare good fortune of having been provided at an early period with a particularly good set of customs, the work in some measure of men to whom even the most enlightened European must grant, with certain reservations, the title of sages and philosophers. They are remarkable, too, for the excellence of their machinery for impressing the best wisdom they have on every mind in the community as far as possible, and for making sure that those who have absorbed most of it occupy the posts of honour and power. Surely the people who did this have discovered the secret of human progressiveness and must have kept themselves steadily at the head of the movement of the world. On the contrary, they have become stationary, and have stayed so for thousands of years; and if they are ever to be further improved, it must be by foreigners. They have succeeded beyond all hope in the very thing English philanthropists are working at so industriously — making a people all alike, all governing their thoughts and conduct by the same maxims and rules; and these are the fruits. The modern regime of public opinion is, in an unorganised form, what the Chinese educational and political systems are in an organised one; and unless individuality can successfully assert itself against this yoke, Europe, in spite of its noble ancestry and its professed Christianity, will tend to become another China.

What is it that has preserved Europe from this fate so far? What has made the European family of nations an improving instead of a stationary portion of mankind? Not any superior excellence in them, which, where it exists, exists as the effect and not the cause, but their remarkable diversity of character and culture. Individuals, classes and nations have been extremely unlike one another. They have struck out a great variety of paths, each leading to something valuable; and although at every period those who travelled by different paths have been intolerant of one another, and each would have thought it an excellent thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel his road, their attempts to thwart each other's development have rarely had any lasting success, and each has in time put up with receiving the good the others had to offer. Europe is, in my judgment, wholly indebted to this plurality of paths for its progressive and many-sided development. But it is already beginning to possess this benefit in a considerably smaller degree. It is decidedly advancing towards the Chinese ideal of making all people alike. Monsieur de Tocqueville, in his last important work, remarks how much more the Frenchmen of the present day resemble one another than even those of the last generation did. The same remark might be made of Englishmen to a far greater degree. In a passage already quoted from Wilhelm von Humboldt, he points to two things as necessary conditions of human development, because necessary to make people unlike one another: freedom, and variety of situations. The second of these conditions is diminishing in this country every day. The circumstances that surround different classes and individuals and shape their characters are becoming more alike daily. Formerly different ranks, different neighbourhoods, different trades and professions lived in what might be called different worlds; at present, largely in the same one. Comparatively speaking, they now read the same things, listen to the same things, see the same things, go to the same places, have their hopes and fears fixed on the same objects, have the same rights and liberties, and the same means of asserting them. Great as the differences of position that remain may be, they are nothing to those that have ceased. And the assimilation is still going on. All the political changes of the age promote it, since they all tend to raise the low and lower the high. Every extension of education promotes it, because education brings people under common influences and gives them access to the general stock of facts and sentiments. Improvements in the means of communication promote it, by bringing the inhabitants of distant places into personal contact and keeping up a rapid flow of people moving house from one place to another. The increase of commerce and manufactures promotes it, by spreading the advantages of easy circumstances more widely and opening every object of ambition, even the highest, to general competition, so that the desire to rise is no longer the mark of a particular class but of every class. An agency more powerful even than all of these in producing a general similarity among mankind is the complete establishment, in this and other free countries, of the ascendancy of public opinion in the state. As the various social eminences that let those entrenched on them disregard the opinion of the multitude are gradually levelled; as the very idea of resisting the will of the public, when it is positively known that the public has a will, disappears more and more from the minds of practical politicians, there ceases to be any social support for nonconformity — any substantial power in society which, being itself opposed to the ascendancy of numbers, has an interest in taking under its protection opinions and tendencies at odds with the public's.

The combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of influences hostile to individuality that it is not easy to see how it can hold its ground. It will do so with increasing difficulty unless the intelligent part of the public can be made to feel its value — to see that it is good that there should be differences, even when they are not for the better, even when, as it may appear to them, some are for the worse. If the claims of individuality are ever to be asserted, the time is now, while much is still lacking to complete the enforced assimilation. It is only in the earlier stages that any stand can be successfully made against the encroachment. The demand that all other people shall resemble ourselves grows by what it feeds on. If resistance waits until life is reduced *nearly* to one uniform type, all deviations from that type will come to be considered impious, immoral, even monstrous and contrary to nature. Mankind rapidly become unable to conceive diversity once they have been for some time unaccustomed to seeing it.
