Chapter Four: On the Limits of Society's Authority over the Individual

(Part 1 of 2)

What, then, is the rightful limit to the individual's sovereignty over himself? Where does the authority of society begin? How much of human life should be assigned to individuality, and how much to society?

Each will get its proper share if each has what particularly concerns it. To individuality should belong the part of life in which it is chiefly the individual who has an interest; to society, the part which chiefly interests society.

Society is not founded on a contract, and no good purpose is served by inventing one in order to deduce social obligations from it; but everyone who receives the protection of society owes something in return for the benefit, and the mere fact of living in society makes it indispensable that each should be bound to observe a certain line of conduct towards the rest. This conduct consists, first, in not injuring one another's interests — or rather certain interests which, either by express legal provision or by tacit understanding, ought to be regarded as rights; and second, in each person's bearing his share, to be fixed on some equitable principle, of the labours and sacrifices incurred in defending the society or its members from injury and molestation. Society is justified in enforcing these conditions at all costs on those who try to withhold them. Nor is this all society may do. An individual's acts may be hurtful to others, or lacking in due consideration for their welfare, without going so far as to violate any of their established rights. The offender may then be justly punished by opinion, though not by law. As soon as any part of a person's conduct affects the interests of others prejudicially, society has jurisdiction over it, and the question whether the general welfare will or will not be promoted by interfering becomes open to discussion. But there is no room for raising any such question where a person's conduct affects nobody's interests but his own, or need not affect them unless they choose — everyone concerned being of full age and of the ordinary amount of understanding. In all such cases there should be perfect freedom, legal and social, to do the thing and take the consequences.

It would be a great misunderstanding of this doctrine to suppose it a doctrine of selfish indifference, pretending that human beings have no business with one another's conduct in life and should not concern themselves with anyone else's doing well or being well unless their own interest is involved. Far from any reduction, there is need of a great increase in disinterested effort to promote the good of others. But disinterested benevolence can find instruments for persuading people to their good other than whips and scourges, of either the literal or the metaphorical kind. I am the last person to undervalue the self-regarding virtues; they are only second in importance to the social ones, if even second. It is equally the business of education to cultivate both. But even education works by conviction and persuasion as well as by compulsion, and it is by conviction and persuasion alone that the self-regarding virtues should be taught once the period of education is over. Human beings owe each other help in distinguishing the better from the worse, and encouragement to choose the one and avoid the other. They should be forever stimulating each other to greater exercise of their higher faculties, and to directing their feelings and aims more towards wise objects instead of foolish ones, and elevating instead of degrading ones. But neither one person nor any number of people is warranted in telling another human creature of mature years that he shall not do with his life, for his own benefit, what he chooses to do with it. He is the person most concerned in his own well-being. The interest anyone else can have in it, except in cases of strong personal attachment, is trifling compared with his own; the interest society has in him individually, apart from his conduct towards others, is fractional and altogether indirect; while with respect to his own feelings and circumstances the most ordinary man or woman has means of knowledge immeasurably beyond anything anyone else can possess. Society's interference to overrule his judgment and his purposes in what concerns only himself must be grounded on general presumptions, which may be entirely wrong, and even if right are as likely as not to be misapplied to individual cases by people no better acquainted with the circumstances of those cases than someone looking at them from outside. In this department of human affairs, then, individuality has its proper field of action. In the conduct of human beings towards one another it is necessary that general rules should for the most part be observed, so that people may know what to expect; but in each person's own concerns, his individual spontaneity is entitled to free exercise. Considerations to help his judgment and exhortations to strengthen his will may be offered to him by others, even pressed on him; but he himself is the final judge. All the errors he is likely to commit against advice and warning are far outweighed by the evil of letting others constrain him to what they think is his good.

I do not mean that the feelings with which others regard a person ought not to be affected in any way by his self-regarding qualities or deficiencies. That is neither possible nor desirable. If he is outstanding in any of the qualities that conduce to his own good, he is so far a proper object of admiration. He is that much nearer the ideal perfection of human nature. If he is grossly deficient in those qualities, a feeling the opposite of admiration will follow. There is a degree of folly, and a degree of what may be called (though the phrase is not unobjectionable) lowness or depravity of taste, which, though it cannot justify doing harm to the person who shows it, necessarily and properly makes him an object of distaste, or in extreme cases even of contempt; a person could not have the opposite qualities in due strength without feeling this. Though he does nobody any wrong, a person may act in such a way as to compel us to judge him, and feel towards him, as a fool or as a being of an inferior order; and since this judgment and this feeling are a fact he would rather avoid, it is doing him a service to warn him of it beforehand, as of any other disagreeable consequence he is exposing himself to. It would be a good thing, indeed, if this good office were much more freely performed than common notions of politeness at present allow, and if one person could honestly tell another that he thinks him at fault without being considered ill-mannered or presumptuous. We also have a right to act in various ways on our unfavourable opinion of someone — not so as to oppress his individuality, but in the exercise of ours. We are not bound, for instance, to seek his company; we have a right to avoid it, though not to parade the avoidance, since we have a right to choose the company we find most agreeable. We have a right, and it may be our duty, to warn others against him if we think his example or his conversation likely to have a bad effect on those he associates with. We may give others preference over him in optional good offices, except the ones that tend to his improvement. In these various ways a person may suffer very severe penalties at the hands of others for faults that directly concern only himself; but he suffers these penalties only in so far as they are the natural and, so to speak, spontaneous consequences of the faults themselves, and not because they are deliberately inflicted on him for the sake of punishment. A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self-conceit; who cannot live within moderate means; who cannot restrain himself from harmful indulgences; who pursues animal pleasures at the expense of the pleasures of feeling and intellect, must expect to sink in other people's opinion and to have a smaller share of their goodwill. But he has no right to complain of this, unless he has earned their favour by special excellence in his social relations and so established a claim on their good offices that is not affected by his failings towards himself.

What I contend for is that the inconveniences strictly inseparable from other people's unfavourable judgment are the only ones a person should ever be subjected to for the portion of his conduct and character that concerns his own good but does not affect other people's interests in their dealings with him. Acts injurious to others require entirely different treatment. Encroaching on their rights; inflicting any loss or damage on them not justified by his own rights; falsehood or duplicity in dealing with them; unfair or ungenerous use of advantages over them; even selfishly refraining from defending them against injury — these are fit objects of moral condemnation and, in grave cases, of moral retribution and punishment. And not only these acts but the dispositions that lead to them are properly immoral, and fit subjects for disapproval that may rise to abhorrence. Cruelty of disposition; malice and ill nature; that most antisocial and odious of all passions, envy; dissimulation and insincerity; anger on insufficient cause, and resentment out of proportion to the provocation; the love of domineering over others; the desire to grab more than one's share of advantages, the *πλεονεξἱα* of the Greeks; the pride that takes gratification from the humiliation of others; the egotism that thinks the self and its concerns more important than everything else and settles every doubtful question in its own favour — these are moral vices and make up a bad and odious moral character. They are unlike the self-regarding faults mentioned before, which are not properly immoralities and, to whatever pitch they are carried, do not amount to wickedness. They may be proof of any amount of folly, or of a want of personal dignity and self-respect; but they are only a subject of moral condemnation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to take care of himself. What are called duties to ourselves are not socially obligatory unless circumstances make them at the same time duties to others. The term duty to oneself, when it means anything more than prudence, means self-respect or self-development; and nobody is accountable to his fellow creatures for any of these, because for none of them is it good for mankind that he should be held accountable to them.

The distinction between the loss of regard a person may rightly incur through a lack of prudence or of personal dignity, and the condemnation he deserves for an offence against the rights of others, is not merely a distinction in name. It makes a vast difference both to our feelings and to our conduct towards him whether he displeases us in things we think we have a right to control him in, or in things we know we have not. If he displeases us, we may express our distaste, and we may keep our distance from a person as from a thing that displeases us; but we shall not therefore feel called on to make his life uncomfortable. We shall reflect that he already bears, or will bear, the whole penalty of his error. If he spoils his life by mismanaging it, we shall not for that reason want to spoil it further. Instead of wanting to punish him, we shall rather try to lighten his punishment by showing him how he may avoid or cure the evils his conduct tends to bring on him. He may be to us an object of pity, perhaps of dislike, but not of anger or resentment; we shall not treat him as an enemy of society. The worst we shall think ourselves justified in doing is leaving him to himself, if we do not step in benevolently by showing an interest in him or a concern for him. It is quite otherwise if he has broken the rules necessary for the protection of his fellow creatures, individually or collectively. The evil consequences of his acts then fall not on himself but on others, and society, as the protector of all its members, must retaliate on him — must inflict pain on him for the express purpose of punishment, and must take care that it is severe enough. In the one case he is an offender at our bar, and we are called on not only to sit in judgment on him but, in one shape or another, to carry out our own sentence. In the other it is no part of our business to inflict any suffering on him, except what may incidentally follow from our using the same liberty in managing our own affairs that we allow him in his.

Many people will refuse to admit the distinction drawn here between the part of a person's life that concerns only himself and the part that concerns others. How, it may be asked, can any part of a member of society's conduct be a matter of indifference to the other members? Nobody is an entirely isolated being; it is impossible for a person to do anything seriously or permanently hurtful to himself without the mischief reaching at least his near connections, and often far beyond them. If he damages his property, he does harm to those who derived support from it directly or indirectly, and usually reduces, by a greater or smaller amount, the general resources of the community. If he impairs his bodily or mental faculties, he not only brings evil on everyone who depended on him for any part of their happiness, but disqualifies himself for rendering the services he owes to his fellow creatures generally, and perhaps becomes a burden on their affection or their charity; and if such conduct were very frequent, hardly any offence that gets committed would subtract more from the general sum of good. Finally, even if by his vices or follies a person does no direct harm to others, he is nevertheless (it may be said) harmful by his example, and ought to be compelled to control himself for the sake of those whom the sight or the knowledge of his conduct might corrupt or mislead.

And even (it will be added) if the consequences of misconduct could be confined to the vicious or thoughtless individual, ought society to abandon to their own guidance people who are plainly unfit for it? If protection against themselves is admittedly owed to children and people under age, is society not equally bound to give it to people of mature years who are equally incapable of self-government? If gambling, or drunkenness, or sexual incontinence, or idleness, or dirtiness are as damaging to happiness and as great an obstacle to improvement as many or most of the acts the law prohibits, why (it may be asked) should the law not try to repress these too, so far as practicability and social convenience allow? And as a supplement to the unavoidable imperfections of law, ought opinion at least not to organise a powerful police against these vices, and visit those known to practise them with rigorous social penalties? There is no question here (it may be said) of restricting individuality or hindering the trial of new and original experiments in living. The only things it is sought to prevent are things that have been tried and condemned from the beginning of the world until now — things experience has shown to be neither useful nor suited to anybody's individuality. There must be some length of time and amount of experience after which a moral or prudential truth may be regarded as established; and all that is wanted is to stop generation after generation from falling over the same precipice that proved fatal to their predecessors.

I fully admit that the mischief a person does to himself may seriously affect those closely connected with him, both through their sympathies and through their interests, and to a lesser degree society at large. When conduct of this kind leads a person to violate a distinct and assignable obligation to some other person or persons, the case is taken out of the self-regarding class and becomes liable to moral disapproval in the proper sense of the word. If, for example, a man through intemperance or extravagance becomes unable to pay his debts, or, having taken on the moral responsibility of a family, becomes for the same reason unable to support or educate them, he is deservedly condemned and might be justly punished — but for the breach of duty to his family or his creditors, not for the extravagance. If the resources that ought to have gone to them had been diverted from them for the most prudent investment, the moral guilt would have been the same. George Barnwell murdered his uncle to get money for his mistress; but if he had done it to set himself up in business, he would have been hanged just the same. Again, in the frequent case of a man who causes his family grief by addiction to bad habits, he deserves reproach for his unkindness or ingratitude — but so he may for cultivating habits that are not in themselves vicious, if they are painful to those he lives among, or to those who depend on him by personal ties for their comfort. Anyone who fails in the consideration generally owed to the interests and feelings of others, without being compelled by some more imperative duty or justified by allowable self-preference, is a subject of moral disapproval for that failure — but not for its cause, nor for the errors, merely personal to himself, that may have led remotely to it. In the same way, when a person by purely self-regarding conduct disables himself from performing some definite duty he owes the public, he is guilty of a social offence. Nobody ought to be punished simply for being drunk; but a soldier or a policeman should be punished for being drunk on duty. In short, wherever there is a definite damage, or a definite risk of damage, either to an individual or to the public, the case is taken out of the province of liberty and placed in that of morality or law.

But as for the merely contingent, or, as it may be called, constructive injury a person does to society by conduct that violates no specific duty to the public and causes no perceptible harm to any assignable individual but himself, the inconvenience is one society can afford to bear for the sake of the greater good of human freedom. If grown people are to be punished for not taking proper care of themselves, I would rather it were for their own sake than on the pretence of preventing them from impairing their capacity to render society benefits that society does not pretend it has a right to demand. But I cannot agree to argue the point as though society had no way of bringing its weaker members up to its ordinary standard of rational conduct except waiting until they do something irrational and then punishing them for it, legally or morally. Society has had absolute power over them throughout the whole early part of their existence: it has had the whole period of childhood and adolescence to try whether it could make them capable of rational conduct in life. The existing generation is master both of the training and of the entire circumstances of the generation to come. It cannot, of course, make them perfectly wise and good, because it is itself so lamentably deficient in goodness and wisdom, and its best efforts are not always the most successful in individual cases; but it is perfectly well able to make the rising generation, as a whole, as good as itself and a little better. If society lets any considerable number of its members grow up mere children, incapable of being influenced by rational consideration of distant motives, society has itself to blame for the consequences. Armed not only with all the powers of education, but with the ascendancy the authority of a received opinion always has over the minds least fitted to judge for themselves, and helped by the *natural* penalties that cannot be kept from falling on those who incur the distaste or the contempt of the people who know them — let society not pretend that on top of all this it needs the power to issue commands and enforce obedience in the personal concerns of individuals, where on every principle of justice and policy the decision ought to rest with those who have to live with the consequences. Nor is there anything that tends more to discredit and frustrate the better means of influencing conduct than resorting to the worse. If there is among those it is attempted to coerce into prudence or temperance any of the material vigorous and independent characters are made of, they will infallibly rebel against the yoke. No such person will ever feel that others have the same right to control him in his own concerns as they have to prevent him from injuring them in theirs; and it easily comes to be thought a mark of spirit and courage to fly in the face of such usurped authority and do the exact opposite of what it enjoins, and do it ostentatiously — as in the fashion for coarseness that followed, in the time of Charles II, on the fanatical moral intolerance of the Puritans. As for what is said about the necessity of protecting society from the bad example the vicious or the self-indulgent set to others: it is true that a bad example may have a pernicious effect, especially the example of doing wrong to others and getting away with it. But we are speaking now of conduct that does no wrong to others while it is supposed to do great harm to the person himself; and I do not see how those who believe this can think anything but that the example must on the whole be more wholesome than harmful, since if it displays the misconduct it also displays the painful or degrading consequences which, if the conduct is justly censured, must be supposed to accompany it in all or most cases.
