Chapter Four: On the Limits of Society's Authority over the Individual

(Part 2 of 2)

But the strongest of all the arguments against the public interfering with purely personal conduct is that when it does interfere, the odds are that it interferes wrongly and in the wrong place. On questions of social morality, of duty to others, the opinion of the public — that is, of an overruling majority — though often wrong, is likely to be right still oftener, because on such questions they are only required to judge their own interests: how some way of behaving, if it were allowed, would affect them. But the opinion of a similar majority, imposed as a law on the minority in questions of self-regarding conduct, is quite as likely to be wrong as right; for in these cases public opinion means, at best, some people's opinion of what is good or bad for other people, and very often it does not even mean that, the public passing over the pleasure or convenience of those whose conduct they censure with the most perfect indifference, and considering only their own preference. There are many who count any conduct they dislike as an injury to themselves, and resent it as an outrage on their feelings — as a religious bigot, charged with disregarding other people's religious feelings, has been known to retort that they disregard his feelings by persisting in their abominable worship or creed. But there is no parity between a person's feeling for his own opinion and the feeling of somebody who is offended that he holds it, any more than between a thief's desire to take a purse and the rightful owner's desire to keep it. And a person's taste is as much his own particular concern as his opinion or his purse. It is easy for anyone to imagine an ideal public that leaves the freedom and choice of individuals undisturbed in all uncertain matters, and only requires them to abstain from ways of behaving that universal experience has condemned. But where has a public ever been seen that set any such limit to its censorship? Or when does the public trouble itself about universal experience? In its interferences with personal conduct it is seldom thinking of anything but the enormity of acting or feeling differently from itself; and this standard of judgment, thinly disguised, is held up to mankind as the dictate of religion and philosophy by nine tenths of all moralists and speculative writers. They teach that things are right because they are right, because we feel them to be so. They tell us to search our own minds and hearts for laws of conduct binding on ourselves and on everyone else. What can the poor public do but apply these instructions and make their own personal feelings of good and evil, if they are tolerably unanimous in them, binding on all the world?

The evil pointed out here is not one that exists only in theory, and it may perhaps be expected that I should name the instances in which the public of this age and country improperly invests its own preferences with the character of moral laws. I am not writing an essay on the aberrations of existing moral feeling. That is too weighty a subject to be discussed in parentheses and by way of illustration. Yet examples are needed to show that the principle I maintain is of serious and practical importance, and that I am not trying to erect a barrier against imaginary evils. And it is not difficult to show, by abundant instances, that extending the bounds of what may be called moral police until it encroaches on the most unquestionably legitimate liberty of the individual is one of the most universal of all human propensities.

For a first instance, consider the antipathies men cherish on no better grounds than that people whose religious opinions differ from theirs do not keep their religious observances, and especially their religious abstinences. To take a rather trivial example: nothing in the creed or practice of Christians does more to embitter Muslim hatred of them than the fact that they eat pork. There are few acts that Christians and Europeans regard with more unaffected disgust than Muslims regard this particular way of satisfying hunger. It is in the first place an offence against their religion; but that by no means explains either the degree or the kind of their repugnance, for wine is also forbidden by their religion, and every Muslim counts drinking it wrong, but not disgusting. Their aversion to the flesh of the "unclean beast" is, on the contrary, of that peculiar kind, resembling an instinctive antipathy, which the idea of uncleanness always seems to excite once it has thoroughly sunk into the feelings, even in people whose personal habits are anything but scrupulously clean; and of this the sense of religious impurity, so intense in the Hindus, is a remarkable example. Now suppose that among a people of whom the majority were Muslims, that majority insisted on not permitting pork to be eaten anywhere in the country. This would be nothing new in Muslim countries. Would it be a legitimate exercise of the moral authority of public opinion? And if not, why not? The practice really is revolting to such a public. They also sincerely think it is forbidden and abhorred by God. Nor could the prohibition be condemned as religious persecution. It might be religious in origin, but it would not be persecution for religion, since nobody's religion makes it a duty to eat pork. The only tenable ground of condemnation would be that the public has no business interfering with the personal tastes and self-regarding concerns of individuals.

Footnote: The case of the Bombay Parsees is a curious instance in point. When this industrious and enterprising people, the descendants of the Persian fire-worshippers, arrived in western India in flight from their native country before the Caliphs, they were granted toleration by the Hindu sovereigns on condition of not eating beef. When those regions later fell under the rule of Muslim conquerors, the Parsees obtained a continuance of the indulgence from them on condition of abstaining from pork. What was at first obedience to authority became second nature, and the Parsees to this day abstain from both beef and pork. Though their religion does not require it, the double abstinence has had time to grow into a custom of their people; and custom, in the East, is a religion.

To come rather nearer home: most Spaniards consider it a gross impiety, offensive in the highest degree to the Supreme Being, to worship him in any way but the Roman Catholic one, and no other public worship is lawful on Spanish soil. The people of all southern Europe look on a married clergy as not only irreligious but unchaste, indecent, gross and disgusting. What do Protestants think of these perfectly sincere feelings, and of the attempt to enforce them against non-Catholics? Yet if mankind are justified in interfering with each other's liberty in things that do not concern other people's interests, on what principle is it possible to exclude these cases consistently? Or who can blame people for wanting to suppress what they regard as a scandal in the sight of God and man? No stronger case can be made for prohibiting anything regarded as a personal immorality than is made for suppressing these practices in the eyes of those who regard them as impieties; and unless we are willing to adopt the logic of persecutors and say that we may persecute others because we are right, and that they must not persecute us because they are wrong, we must beware of admitting a principle whose application to ourselves we should resent as a gross injustice.

The preceding instances may be objected to, though unreasonably, as drawn from things that could not happen among us: opinion in this country is not likely to enforce abstinence from particular meats, or to interfere with people for worshipping, or for marrying or not marrying, according to their creed or inclination. The next example, however, shall be taken from an interference with liberty that we are by no means past all danger of. Wherever the Puritans have been powerful enough, as in New England and in Great Britain at the time of the Commonwealth, they have tried, with considerable success, to put down all public and nearly all private amusements — especially music, dancing, public games and other gatherings for the purpose of entertainment, and the theatre. There are still in this country large bodies of people by whose notions of morality and religion these recreations are condemned; and since those people belong chiefly to the middle class, which is the ascendant power in the present social and political condition of the kingdom, it is by no means impossible that people of these sentiments may at some time command a majority in Parliament. How will the rest of the community like having the amusements they are permitted regulated by the religious and moral sentiments of the stricter Calvinists and Methodists? Would they not, with considerable sharpness, ask these intrusively pious members of society to mind their own business? That is exactly what ought to be said to every government and every public that claims that nobody shall enjoy any pleasure they think wrong. But if the principle of the claim is admitted, nobody can reasonably object to its being acted on according to the views of the majority, or of whatever other power predominates in the country; and everyone must be ready to conform to the idea of a Christian commonwealth as the early settlers in New England understood it, if a religious profession like theirs should ever succeed in regaining its lost ground, as religions supposed to be in decline have so often been known to do.

Let us imagine another possibility, perhaps more likely to be realised than the last. There is admittedly a strong tendency in the modern world towards a democratic constitution of society, whether or not accompanied by popular political institutions. It is said that in the country where this tendency is most completely realised — where both society and the government are most democratic, the United States — the feeling of the majority, who dislike any appearance of a showier or more expensive style of living than they can hope to rival, works as a tolerably effective sumptuary law, and that in many parts of the Union it is really difficult for a person with a very large income to find any way of spending it that will not incur popular disapproval. Such statements are no doubt much exaggerated as a description of the existing facts, but the state of things they describe is not only conceivable and possible but a probable result of democratic feeling combined with the notion that the public has a right to veto the way individuals spend their incomes. We have only to suppose, further, a considerable spread of socialist opinions, and it may become disgraceful in the eyes of the majority to own more than some very small amount of property, or to have any income not earned by manual labour. Opinions similar in principle to these already prevail widely among the artisan class and weigh oppressively on those who are answerable mainly to the opinion of that class, namely its own members. It is well known that the bad workmen who make up the majority of the workforce in many branches of industry are decidedly of the opinion that bad workmen ought to receive the same wages as good ones, and that nobody should be allowed, through piecework or otherwise, to earn more by superior skill or industry than others can earn without it. And they employ a moral police, which occasionally becomes a physical one, to deter skilful workmen from accepting, and employers from giving, larger pay for more useful service. If the public has any jurisdiction over private concerns, I cannot see that these people are at fault, or that any individual's own particular public can be blamed for asserting the same authority over his individual conduct that the general public asserts over people in general.

But without dwelling on hypothetical cases, there are in our own day gross usurpations of the liberty of private life actually being practised, and greater ones threatened with some prospect of success, and opinions put forward that assert an unlimited right in the public not only to prohibit by law everything it thinks wrong, but, in order to get at what it thinks wrong, to prohibit any number of things it admits to be innocent.

Under the name of preventing intemperance, the people of one English colony and of nearly half the United States have been forbidden by law to make any use whatever of fermented drinks except for medical purposes; for prohibiting their sale is in fact, as it is intended to be, prohibiting their use. And though the impracticability of enforcing the law has caused its repeal in several of the states that adopted it, including the one it takes its name from, an attempt has nevertheless been begun, and is pressed with considerable zeal by many professed philanthropists, to agitate for a similar law in this country. The association, or "Alliance" as it calls itself, formed for this purpose has acquired some notoriety through the publicity given to a correspondence between its Secretary and one of the very few English public men who hold that a politician's opinions ought to be founded on principles. Lord Stanley's share in this correspondence is calculated to strengthen the hopes already built on him by those who know how rare the qualities shown in some of his public appearances unhappily are among those who figure in political life. The spokesman of the Alliance, who would "deeply deplore the recognition of any principle which could be wrested to justify bigotry and persecution", undertakes to point out the "broad and impassable barrier" that divides such principles from those of his association. "All matters relating to thought, opinion, conscience, appear to me," he says, "to be without the sphere of legislation; all pertaining to social act, habit, relation, subject only to a discretionary power vested in the State itself, and not in the individual, to be within it." No mention is made of a third class, different from either of these: acts and habits that are not social but individual — although it is surely to this class that the act of drinking fermented liquors belongs. Selling fermented liquors, however, is trading, and trading is a social act. But the infringement complained of is not on the liberty of the seller but on that of the buyer and consumer, since the state might just as well forbid him to drink wine as deliberately make it impossible for him to get any. The Secretary, however, says: "I claim, as a citizen, a right to legislate whenever my social rights are invaded by the social act of another." And now for the definition of these "social rights". "If anything invades my social rights, certainly the traffic in strong drink does. It destroys my primary right of security, by constantly creating and stimulating social disorder. It invades my right of equality, by deriving a profit from the creation of a misery, I am taxed to support. It impedes my right to free moral and intellectual development, by surrounding my path with dangers, and by weakening and demoralising society, from which I have a right to claim mutual aid and intercourse." Here is a theory of "social rights" the like of which has probably never before found its way into distinct language: nothing less than this, that it is the absolute social right of every individual that every other individual shall act in every respect exactly as he ought; that whoever fails in this in the smallest particular violates my social right, and entitles me to demand that the legislature remove the grievance. So monstrous a principle is far more dangerous than any single interference with liberty; there is no violation of liberty it would not justify. It acknowledges no right to any freedom whatever, except perhaps the freedom to hold opinions in secret and never disclose them; for the moment an opinion I consider harmful passes anybody's lips, it invades all the "social rights" the Alliance ascribes to me. The doctrine gives all mankind a vested interest in each other's moral, intellectual and even physical perfection, to be defined by each claimant according to his own standard.

Another important example of illegitimate interference with the rightful liberty of the individual, not merely threatened but long since carried into triumphant effect, is Sabbatarian legislation. Without doubt, abstaining one day a week from one's usual daily occupation, so far as the necessities of life permit, is a highly beneficial custom, though it is in no way religiously binding on anyone but Jews. And since this custom cannot be observed without a general agreement to that effect among the working population, it may be allowable and right, in so far as some people by working can impose the same necessity on others, that the law should guarantee to each the observance of the custom by others, by suspending the greater operations of industry on a particular day. But this justification, grounded on the direct interest others have in each individual's observance of the practice, does not apply to the occupations a person may choose to fill his own leisure with; nor does it hold good in the smallest degree for legal restrictions on amusements. It is true that the amusement of some is the day's work of others; but the pleasure, not to say the useful recreation, of many is worth the labour of a few, provided the occupation is freely chosen and can be freely given up. The workers are perfectly right in thinking that if everybody worked on Sunday, seven days' work would have to be given for six days' wages; but so long as the great mass of employments are suspended, the small number who must still work for the enjoyment of others get a proportional increase in earnings, and they are not obliged to follow those occupations if they prefer leisure to pay. If a further remedy is wanted, it might be found in establishing by custom a holiday on some other day of the week for those particular classes of people. The only ground, then, on which restrictions on Sunday amusements can be defended must be that they are religiously wrong — a motive for legislation that can never be protested against too earnestly. *Deorum injuriae Diis curae*: wrongs done to the gods are the gods' own business. It remains to be proved that society, or any of its officers, holds a commission from on high to avenge any supposed offence to Omnipotence which is not also a wrong done to our fellow creatures. The notion that it is one man's duty that another should be religious was the foundation of every religious persecution ever perpetrated, and if admitted would fully justify them. Though the feeling that breaks out in the repeated attempts to stop railway travel on Sunday, in the resistance to opening museums and the like, has not the cruelty of the old persecutors, the state of mind it indicates is fundamentally the same. It is a determination not to tolerate others in doing what their religion permits, because the persecutor's religion does not permit it. It is a belief that God not only abominates the act of the misbeliever, but will not hold us guiltless if we leave him alone.

I cannot help adding to these examples of how little account is commonly made of human liberty the language of downright persecution that breaks out from the press of this country whenever it feels called on to notice the remarkable phenomenon of Mormonism. Much might be said about the unexpected and instructive fact that an alleged new revelation, and a religion founded on it, the product of palpable imposture, not even supported by the *prestige* of extraordinary qualities in its founder, is believed by hundreds of thousands and has been made the foundation of a society in the age of newspapers, railways and the electric telegraph. What concerns us here is that this religion, like other and better religions, has its martyrs; that its prophet and founder was put to death by a mob for his teaching; that others of its adherents lost their lives by the same lawless violence; that they were forcibly expelled in a body from the country where they first grew up; while now that they have been chased into a solitary retreat in the middle of a desert, many in this country openly declare that it would be right — only that it is not convenient — to send an expedition against them and compel them by force to conform to other people's opinions. The article of Mormon doctrine that chiefly provokes the antipathy which thus breaks through the ordinary restraints of religious tolerance is its sanction of polygamy, which, though permitted to Muslims, Hindus and Chinese, seems to excite unquenchable animosity when practised by people who speak English and profess to be a kind of Christians. Nobody disapproves of this Mormon institution more deeply than I do, both for other reasons and because, far from being in any way countenanced by the principle of liberty, it is a direct infraction of that principle, being nothing but a riveting of the chains on one half of the community and a release of the other half from any reciprocal obligation towards them. Still, it must be remembered that this relation is as voluntary on the part of the women concerned in it, who may be considered the sufferers by it, as any other form of the marriage institution is; and however surprising the fact may seem, it has its explanation in the common ideas and customs of the world, which, by teaching women that marriage is the one thing needful, make it intelligible that many a woman should prefer being one of several wives to not being a wife at all. Other countries are not asked to recognise such unions, or to release any of their inhabitants from their own laws on the strength of Mormon opinions. But when the dissenters have conceded to the hostile feelings of others far more than could justly be demanded — when they have left the countries where their doctrines were unacceptable and established themselves in a remote corner of the Earth, which they are the first to make habitable for human beings — it is difficult to see on what principle but tyranny they can be prevented from living there under whatever laws they please, provided they commit no aggression against other nations and allow perfect freedom of departure to anyone dissatisfied with their ways. A recent writer, in some respects of considerable merit, proposes (in his own words) not a crusade but a *civilizade* against this polygamous community, to put an end to what seems to him a retrograde step in civilisation. It seems so to me too; but I am not aware that any community has a right to force another to be civilised. So long as those who suffer under the bad law do not call for help from other communities, I cannot admit that people entirely unconnected with them ought to step in and demand that a state of things which everyone directly concerned appears satisfied with should be brought to an end because it is a scandal to people some thousands of miles away who have no part or interest in it. Let them send missionaries, if they like, to preach against it; and let them, by any fair means — of which silencing the teachers is not one — oppose the progress of similar doctrines among their own people. If civilisation has got the better of barbarism when barbarism had the world to itself, it is too much to profess to be afraid that barbarism, having been fairly subdued, will revive and conquer civilisation. A civilisation that can succumb to its own vanquished enemy must first have become so degenerate that neither its appointed priests and teachers nor anybody else has the capacity, or will take the trouble, to stand up for it. If that is so, the sooner such a civilisation gets notice to quit, the better. It can only go on from bad to worse, until it is destroyed and regenerated, like the Western Empire, by energetic barbarians.
