Chapter Five: Applications

(Part 1 of 2)

The principles asserted in these pages will have to be more generally admitted as the basis for discussing details before any consistent application of them to all the various departments of government and morals can be attempted with any prospect of advantage. The few observations I propose to make on questions of detail are meant to illustrate the principles rather than to follow them out to their consequences. I offer not so much applications as specimens of application, which may help to bring out more clearly the meaning and the limits of the two maxims that together make up the whole doctrine of this essay, and to assist the judgment in holding the balance between them in cases where it seems doubtful which of them applies.

The maxims are, first, that the individual is not accountable to society for his actions in so far as they concern the interests of nobody but himself. Advice, instruction, persuasion, and being avoided by other people if they think it necessary for their own good, are the only measures by which society can justifiably express its dislike or disapproval of his conduct. Second, that for actions prejudicial to the interests of others the individual is accountable, and may be subjected to either social or legal punishment if society is of the opinion that one or the other is needed for its protection.

In the first place, it must by no means be supposed that because damage, or the probability of damage, to the interests of others is the only thing that can justify society in interfering, it therefore always does justify such interference. In many cases an individual, in pursuing a legitimate object, necessarily and therefore legitimately causes pain or loss to others, or intercepts some good they had a reasonable hope of getting. Such oppositions of interest between individuals often arise from bad social institutions, but are unavoidable while those institutions last, and some would be unavoidable under any institutions. Whoever succeeds in an overcrowded profession or in a competitive examination, whoever is preferred to another in any contest for something both of them want, reaps a benefit from other people's loss, from their wasted effort and their disappointment. But it is by common admission better for the general interest of mankind that people should pursue their objects undeterred by consequences of this sort. In other words, society admits no right, legal or moral, in the disappointed competitors to be spared this kind of suffering, and feels called on to interfere only when means of success have been used that it is against the general interest to permit — namely fraud, treachery and force.

Again, trade is a social act. Anyone who undertakes to sell goods of any description to the public does something that affects the interests of other people and of society in general, and so his conduct comes in principle within the jurisdiction of society. Accordingly it was once held to be the duty of governments, in every case they thought important, to fix prices and regulate the processes of manufacture. But it is now recognised, though not until after a long struggle, that both the cheapness and the good quality of goods are most effectively secured by leaving producers and sellers perfectly free, with the sole check of an equal freedom in buyers to supply themselves elsewhere. This is the so-called doctrine of Free Trade, which rests on grounds different from, though equally solid as, the principle of individual liberty asserted in this essay. Restrictions on trade, or on production for the purposes of trade, are indeed restraints, and all restraint *quâ* restraint, simply as restraint, is an evil; but the restraints in question affect only that part of conduct which society is competent to restrain, and they are wrong solely because they do not in fact produce the results they are meant to produce. Just as the principle of individual liberty is not involved in the doctrine of Free Trade, so it is not involved in most of the questions that arise about the limits of that doctrine — for example, how much public control is admissible for preventing fraud by adulteration, or how far sanitary precautions, or arrangements to protect workers employed in dangerous occupations, should be enforced on employers. Such questions involve considerations of liberty only in so far as leaving people to themselves is always better, *caeteris paribus*, all else being equal, than controlling them; but that they may legitimately be controlled for these ends is in principle undeniable. On the other hand, there are questions about interference with trade that are essentially questions of liberty: the Maine Law, already touched on; the prohibition of importing opium into China; the restriction on the sale of poisons — in short, all cases where the object of the interference is to make a particular commodity impossible or difficult to get. These interferences are objectionable not as infringements of the liberty of the producer or seller, but of the buyer's.

One of these examples, the sale of poisons, opens a new question: the proper limits of what may be called the functions of the police, and how far liberty may legitimately be invaded to prevent crime or accident. It is one of the undisputed functions of government to take precautions against crime before it is committed, as well as to detect and punish it afterwards. The preventive function of government, however, is far more liable to be abused to the prejudice of liberty than the punitive function, since there is hardly any part of the legitimate freedom of action of a human being that could not be represented, and fairly represented too, as increasing the facilities for some form of wrongdoing. Nevertheless, if a public authority, or even a private person, sees someone evidently preparing to commit a crime, they are not bound to look on inactive until the crime is committed, but may interfere to prevent it. If poisons were never bought or used for any purpose except murder, it would be right to prohibit their manufacture and sale. But they may be wanted not only for innocent but for useful purposes, and restrictions cannot be imposed in the one case without operating in the other. Again, it is a proper office of public authority to guard against accidents. If a public officer, or anyone else, saw a person about to cross a bridge that had been found to be unsafe, and there were no time to warn him of his danger, they might seize him and turn him back without any real infringement of his liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one wants, and he does not want to fall into the river. Nevertheless, where there is not a certainty but only a danger of mischief, nobody but the person himself can judge whether his motive for running the risk is sufficient. In that case, therefore, unless he is a child, or delirious, or in some state of excitement or absorption incompatible with the full use of his reflective faculty, he ought, I think, only to be warned of the danger, not forcibly prevented from exposing himself to it. Similar considerations, applied to a question like the sale of poisons, may enable us to decide which among the possible modes of regulation are and are not contrary to principle. A precaution such as labelling the drug with some word expressing its dangerous character, for instance, may be enforced without any violation of liberty: the buyer cannot want not to know that the thing he has is poisonous. But to require a doctor's certificate in every case would make it sometimes impossible, and always expensive, to obtain the article for legitimate uses. The only way I can see of putting difficulties in the way of crime committed by this means, without any infringement worth counting on the liberty of those who want the poisonous substance for other purposes, is to provide what in Bentham's apt phrase is called "preappointed evidence". This provision is familiar to everybody in the case of contracts. It is usual and right that when a contract is entered into, the law should require, as a condition of enforcing performance, that certain formalities be observed — signatures, the attestation of witnesses and the like — so that in case of later dispute there may be evidence to prove that the contract really was entered into, and that there was nothing in the circumstances to make it legally invalid. The effect is to throw great obstacles in the way of fictitious contracts, or contracts made in circumstances that would destroy their validity if they were known. Precautions of a similar kind might be enforced in the sale of articles suited to be instruments of crime. The seller, for example, might be required to enter in a register the exact time of the transaction, the name and address of the buyer, and the precise quality and quantity sold; to ask what purpose it was wanted for, and record the answer he was given. Where there was no medical prescription, the presence of some third person might be required, so as to bring the fact home to the purchaser if there should afterwards be reason to think the article had been put to criminal use. Such regulations would in general be no material obstacle to obtaining the article, but a very considerable one to making improper use of it undetected.

Society's inherent right to ward off crimes against itself by precautions taken in advance suggests the obvious limits to the maxim that purely self-regarding misconduct cannot properly be meddled with by way of prevention or punishment. Drunkenness, for example, is in ordinary cases not a fit subject for legislative interference; but I should think it perfectly legitimate that a person who had once been convicted of any act of violence to others while under the influence of drink should be placed under a special legal restriction personal to himself — that if he were afterwards found drunk he should be liable to a penalty, and that if in that state he committed another offence, the punishment he would be liable to for that offence should be increased in severity. Making himself drunk, in a person whom drunkenness excites to do harm to others, is a crime against others. So again idleness, except in a person receiving public support, or except where it constitutes a breach of contract, cannot without tyranny be made a subject of legal punishment; but if from idleness or from any other avoidable cause a man fails to perform his legal duties to others — for instance to support his children — it is no tyranny to force him to fulfil that obligation by compulsory labour, if no other means are available.

Again, there are many acts which, being directly injurious only to the people who do them, ought not to be legally forbidden, but which, if done publicly, are a violation of good manners, and coming thus into the category of offences against others may rightfully be prohibited. Offences against decency are of this kind, and there is no need to dwell on them, the more so as they are only indirectly connected with our subject, the objection to publicity being equally strong in the case of many actions that are not in themselves condemnable, or supposed to be.

There is another question that must be answered consistently with the principles laid down here. In cases of personal conduct that is supposed to be blameable but which respect for liberty forbids society to prevent or punish, because the harm that directly results falls wholly on the person himself: what the person is free to do, ought other people to be equally free to advise or urge? This question is not free of difficulty. The case of a person who solicits another to do an act is not strictly a case of self-regarding conduct. To give advice or offer inducements to anybody is a social act, and may therefore, like actions in general that affect others, be supposed liable to social control. But a little reflection corrects that first impression by showing that even if the case does not strictly fall within the definition of individual liberty, the reasons the principle of individual liberty is grounded on do apply to it. If people must be allowed, in whatever concerns only themselves, to act as seems best to them at their own risk, they must equally be free to consult one another about what would be best to do, to exchange opinions, and to give and receive suggestions. Whatever it is permitted to do, it must be permitted to advise doing. The question is doubtful only where the person urging it derives a personal benefit from his advice — where he makes it his occupation, for a living or for money, to promote what society and the state consider an evil. Then indeed a new element of complication comes in: the existence of classes of people whose interest is opposed to what is considered the public good, and whose way of living is founded on working against it. Ought this to be interfered with, or not? Fornication, for example, must be tolerated, and so must gambling; but should a person be free to be a pimp, or to keep a gambling house? The case is one of those that lie exactly on the boundary line between two principles, and it is not immediately obvious which of the two it belongs to. There are arguments on both sides. On the side of toleration it may be said that following something as an occupation, and living or profiting by the practice of it, cannot make criminal what would otherwise be permissible; that the act should either be consistently permitted or consistently prohibited; that if the principles we have defended so far are true, society has no business, *as* society, to decide that anything concerning only the individual is wrong; that it cannot go beyond dissuasion, and that one person should be as free to persuade as another is to dissuade. Against this it may be argued that although the public, or the state, are not warranted in deciding authoritatively, for purposes of repression or punishment, that such and such conduct affecting only the individual's own interests is good or bad, they are fully justified in assuming, if they regard it as bad, that whether it is so or not is at least a disputable question; and that on that supposition they cannot be acting wrongly in trying to exclude the influence of solicitations that are not disinterested, of instigators who cannot possibly be impartial, who have a direct personal interest on one side, the side the state believes to be the wrong one, and who admittedly promote it for personal ends alone. Surely, it may be urged, nothing can be lost, and no good sacrificed, by so ordering things that people shall make their choice, wisely or foolishly, on their own initiative, as free as possible from the arts of people who stimulate their inclinations for interested purposes of their own. Thus, it may be said, though the statutes about unlawful games are utterly indefensible — though everyone should be free to gamble in his own house or in each other's, or in any meeting place established by their own subscriptions and open only to members and their guests — yet public gambling houses should not be permitted. It is true that the prohibition is never effective, and that however much tyrannical power is given to the police, gambling houses can always be kept up under other pretences; but they can be forced to conduct their operations with a certain degree of secrecy and mystery, so that nobody knows anything about them but those who seek them out; and society ought not to aim at more than that. There is considerable force in these arguments. I will not venture to decide whether they are enough to justify the moral anomaly of punishing the accessory when the principal is, and must be, allowed to go free — of fining or imprisoning the procurer but not the fornicator, the keeper of the gambling house but not the gambler. Still less should the common operations of buying and selling be interfered with on analogous grounds. Almost every article that is bought and sold may be used to excess, and the sellers have a financial interest in encouraging that excess; but no argument can be founded on this in favour, for instance, of the Maine Law, because the class of dealers in strong drink, though interested in its abuse, are indispensable for the sake of its legitimate use. The interest these dealers have in promoting intemperance is, however, a real evil, and justifies the state in imposing restrictions and requiring guarantees which but for that justification would be infringements of legitimate liberty.

A further question is whether the state, while permitting such conduct, should nevertheless discourage it indirectly when it thinks it contrary to the best interests of the person concerned — whether, for example, it should take measures to make the means of drunkenness more expensive, or add to the difficulty of getting them by limiting the number of places of sale. On this, as on most other practical questions, many distinctions have to be made. To tax stimulants for the sole purpose of making them harder to get is a measure differing only in degree from prohibiting them entirely, and would be justifiable only if that were justifiable. Every increase in cost is a prohibition to those whose means do not come up to the increased price, and to those whose means do it is a penalty laid on them for gratifying a particular taste. Their choice of pleasures, and the way they spend their income after satisfying their legal and moral obligations to the state and to individuals, are their own concern and must rest with their own judgment. These considerations may seem at first sight to condemn the singling out of stimulants as special subjects of taxation for revenue. But it must be remembered that taxation for fiscal purposes is absolutely inevitable; that in most countries a considerable part of that taxation has to be indirect; and that the state therefore cannot help imposing penalties, which to some people may be prohibitive, on the use of some articles of consumption. It is therefore the duty of the state to consider, when imposing taxes, which commodities the consumers can best do without, and *à fortiori*, all the more, to choose in preference those whose use beyond a very moderate quantity it thinks positively injurious. Taxation of stimulants, then, up to the point that produces the largest amount of revenue — supposing the state needs all the revenue it yields — is not only admissible but to be approved of.

The question of making the sale of these commodities a more or less exclusive privilege must be answered differently according to the purposes the restriction is meant to serve. All places of public resort require the restraint of a police, and places of this kind particularly, because offences against society are especially apt to originate there. It is therefore fitting to confine the power of selling these commodities, at least for consumption on the premises, to people of known or vouched-for respectability of conduct; to make such regulations about opening and closing hours as public surveillance requires; and to withdraw the licence if breaches of the peace repeatedly occur through the connivance or the incapacity of the keeper of the house, or if it becomes a meeting place for planning and preparing offences against the law. Any further restriction I do not think justifiable in principle. Limiting the number of beer houses and spirit houses, for instance, for the express purpose of making them harder to get to and reducing the occasions of temptation, not only exposes everybody to an inconvenience because there are some who would abuse the facility, but is suited only to a state of society in which the labouring classes are avowedly treated as children or savages and placed under an education of restraint, to fit them for future admission to the privileges of freedom. This is not the principle on which the labouring classes are professedly governed in any free country, and nobody who sets a due value on freedom will consent to their being governed that way, unless after every effort has been exhausted to educate them for freedom and govern them as free men, and it has been definitively proved that they can only be governed as children. The bare statement of the alternative shows the absurdity of supposing that such efforts have been made in any case we need consider here. It is only because the institutions of this country are a mass of inconsistencies that things belonging to a system of despotic, or as it is called paternal, government find their way into our practice, while the general freedom of our institutions rules out exercising the amount of control that would make the restraint of any real use as a moral education.

It was pointed out earlier in this essay that the liberty of the individual in things that concern the individual alone implies a corresponding liberty in any number of individuals to regulate by mutual agreement things that concern them jointly and concern nobody else. This question presents no difficulty as long as the will of everyone involved remains unchanged; but since that will may change, it is often necessary, even in things that concern only themselves, that they should enter into engagements with one another — and when they do, it is fitting as a general rule that those engagements should be kept. Yet in the laws of probably every country this general rule has some exceptions. Not only are people not held to engagements that violate the rights of third parties, but it is sometimes considered sufficient reason for releasing them from an engagement that it is injurious to themselves. In this and most other civilised countries, for example, an engagement by which a person sold himself, or allowed himself to be sold, as a slave would be null and void, enforced neither by law nor by opinion. The ground for thus limiting his power to dispose of his own lot in life voluntarily is obvious, and is very clearly seen in this extreme case. The reason for not interfering with a person's voluntary acts, except for the sake of others, is consideration for his liberty. His voluntary choice is evidence that what he chooses is desirable, or at least endurable, to him, and that his good is on the whole best provided for by letting him take his own means of pursuing it. But by selling himself as a slave he abdicates his liberty; he gives up any future use of it beyond that single act. He therefore defeats, in his own case, the very purpose that justifies allowing him to dispose of himself. He is no longer free, and is from then on in a position that no longer has the presumption in its favour which his voluntarily remaining in it would give. The principle of freedom cannot require that he should be free not to be free. It is not freedom to be allowed to give away one's freedom. These reasons, whose force is so conspicuous in this peculiar case, evidently apply far more widely; yet a limit is set to them everywhere by the necessities of life, which continually require, not indeed that we should resign our freedom, but that we should consent to this or that limitation of it. The principle, however, that demands uncontrolled freedom of action in everything that concerns only the people acting requires that those who have become bound to one another in things concerning no third party should be able to release one another from the engagement; and even without such voluntary release there are perhaps no contracts or engagements, except those relating to money or money's worth, of which one can venture to say that there ought to be no liberty of withdrawal whatever. Baron Wilhelm von Humboldt, in the excellent essay I have already quoted, states his conviction that engagements involving personal relations or services should never be legally binding beyond a limited length of time, and that the most important of these engagements, marriage, having the peculiarity that its objects are frustrated unless the feelings of both parties are in harmony with it, should require nothing more than the declared will of either party to dissolve it. This subject is too important and too complicated to be discussed in a parenthesis, and I touch on it only so far as is necessary for purposes of illustration. If the conciseness and generality of Baron Humboldt's essay had not obliged him in this instance to content himself with stating his conclusion without discussing the premises, he would doubtless have recognised that the question cannot be decided on grounds as simple as the ones he confines himself to. When a person, either by an express promise or by his conduct, has encouraged another to rely on his continuing to act in a certain way — to build expectations and calculations, and to stake any part of his plan of life on that supposition — a new series of moral obligations arises on his part towards that person, which may possibly be overruled, but cannot be ignored. And again, if the relation between two contracting parties has been followed by consequences to others; if it has put third parties in any particular position, or, as in the case of marriage, has even called third parties into existence, obligations arise on the part of both contracting parties towards those third persons, and the fulfilment of them, or at any rate the manner of fulfilling them, must be greatly affected by whether the relation between the original parties to the contract continues or is broken off. It does not follow, and I cannot admit, that these obligations extend to requiring the contract to be fulfilled at all costs to the happiness of the reluctant party; but they are a necessary element in the question. And even if, as von Humboldt maintains, they ought to make no difference to the *legal* freedom of the parties to release themselves from the engagement — and I too hold that they ought not to make *much* difference — they necessarily make a great difference to the *moral* freedom. A person is bound to take all these circumstances into account before resolving on a step that may affect such important interests of others; and if he does not give proper weight to those interests, he is morally responsible for the wrong. I have made these obvious remarks the better to illustrate the general principle of liberty, and not because they are at all needed on the particular question, which on the contrary is usually discussed as if the interest of children were everything and that of grown people nothing.
