Chapter Five: Applications

(Part 2 of 2)

I have already observed that because there are no recognised general principles, liberty is often granted where it should be withheld as well as withheld where it should be granted; and one of the cases in which the feeling for liberty is strongest in the modern European world is a case where, in my view, it is altogether misplaced. A person should be free to do as he likes in his own concerns, but he ought not to be free to do as he likes when he is acting for somebody else, under the pretext that the other person's affairs are his own. The state, while it respects the liberty of each in what specially concerns himself, is bound to keep a vigilant control over his exercise of any power it allows him to have over others. This obligation is almost entirely disregarded in the case of family relations — a case which in its direct influence on human happiness is more important than all the others put together. The almost despotic power of husbands over wives need not be dwelt on here, because nothing more is needed to remove the evil completely than that wives should have the same rights and receive the protection of the law in the same way as everyone else; and because on this subject the defenders of established injustice do not resort to the plea of liberty, but stand out openly as the champions of power. It is in the case of children that misapplied notions of liberty are a real obstacle to the state's fulfilling its duties. One would almost think that a man's children were supposed to be literally, and not metaphorically, a part of himself, so jealous is opinion of the smallest interference of the law with his absolute and exclusive control over them — more jealous than of almost any interference with his own freedom of action. So much less do most people value liberty than power.

Consider, for example, the case of education. Is it not almost a self-evident axiom that the state should require and compel the education, up to a certain standard, of every human being born its citizen? Yet who is there who is not afraid to recognise and assert this truth? Hardly anyone will deny that it is one of the most sacred duties of the parents — or, as law and custom now stand, the father — after summoning a human being into the world, to give that being an education fitting him to do his part well in life, towards others and towards himself. But while everyone unanimously declares this to be the father's duty, hardly anybody in this country will bear to hear of obliging him to perform it. Instead of being required to make any effort or sacrifice to secure an education for the child, he is left to choose whether to accept one or not when it is provided free. It is still not recognised that to bring a child into existence without a fair prospect of being able not only to provide food for its body but instruction and training for its mind is a moral crime, both against the unfortunate offspring and against society; and that if the parent does not fulfil this obligation, the state ought to see it fulfilled, at the parent's expense as far as possible.

If the duty of enforcing universal education were once admitted, there would be an end of the difficulties about what the state should teach and how it should teach, which now turn the subject into a mere battlefield for sects and parties, and cause the time and labour that should have gone into educating to be wasted in quarrelling about education. If the government would make up its mind to *require* a good education for every child, it might save itself the trouble of *providing* one. It could leave parents to obtain the education where and how they pleased, and content itself with helping to pay the school fees of the poorer children and paying the whole school expenses of those who have nobody else to pay for them. The objections urged with reason against state education do not apply to the enforcement of education by the state, but to the state's taking on itself to direct that education, which is an entirely different thing. That the whole, or any large part, of the education of the people should be in the hands of the state, I deplore as much as anyone. Everything that has been said about the importance of individuality of character, and of diversity in opinions and modes of conduct, implies that diversity of education is of the same unspeakable importance. A general state education is a mere contrivance for moulding people to be exactly like one another; and since the mould it casts them in is the one that pleases the predominant power in the government — whether that is a monarch, a priesthood, an aristocracy or the majority of the existing generation — in proportion as it is efficient and successful it establishes a despotism over the mind, leading by a natural tendency to one over the body. An education established and controlled by the state should exist, if it exists at all, only as one among many competing experiments, carried on for the sake of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain standard of excellence. Unless, indeed, society in general is in so backward a state that it could not or would not provide itself with any proper institutions of education unless the government undertook the task; then indeed the government may, as the lesser of two great evils, take the business of schools and universities on itself, as it may take on that of joint-stock companies when private enterprise in a form fit for undertaking great works of industry does not exist in the country. But in general, if the country contains enough people qualified to provide education under government auspices, the same people would be able and willing to give an equally good education on the voluntary principle, assured of payment by a law making education compulsory combined with state aid for those unable to meet the expense.

The instrument for enforcing the law could only be public examinations, extending to all children and beginning at an early age. An age might be fixed at which every child must be examined to find out whether he or she can read. If a child proved unable, the father, unless he had some sufficient excuse, might be subjected to a moderate fine, to be worked out by his labour if necessary, and the child might be put to school at his expense. Once every year the examination should be repeated, with a gradually widening range of subjects, so as to make the universal acquisition — and, what is more, retention — of a certain minimum of general knowledge virtually compulsory. Beyond that minimum there should be voluntary examinations on all subjects, at which anyone reaching a certain standard of proficiency could claim a certificate. To prevent the state from using these arrangements to exert an improper influence over opinion, the knowledge required for passing an examination — beyond the merely instrumental parts of knowledge, such as languages and their use — should be confined, even in the higher class of examinations, exclusively to facts and positive science. Examinations on religion, politics, or other disputed topics should not turn on the truth or falsity of opinions, but on the matter of fact that such and such an opinion is held, on such and such grounds, by particular authors, schools or churches. Under this system the rising generation would be no worse off with regard to all disputed truths than they are at present; they would be brought up as churchmen or as dissenters just as they are now, the state merely taking care that they should be instructed churchmen or instructed dissenters. There would be nothing to stop them from being taught religion, if their parents chose, at the same schools where they were taught everything else. All attempts by the state to bias the conclusions of its citizens on disputed subjects are evil; but it may very properly offer to ascertain and certify that a person has the knowledge needed to make his conclusions on any given subject worth attending to. A student of philosophy would be the better for being able to stand an examination in both Locke and Kant, whichever of the two he takes up with, or even if he takes up with neither; and there is no reasonable objection to examining an atheist on the evidences of Christianity, provided he is not required to profess belief in them. The examinations in the higher branches of knowledge, however, should in my view be entirely voluntary. It would give governments too dangerous a power if they were allowed to exclude anyone from a profession, even from the profession of teacher, for an alleged deficiency of qualifications; and I think, with Wilhelm von Humboldt, that degrees and other public certificates of scientific or professional attainment should be given to everyone who presents himself for examination and passes the test, but that such certificates should confer no advantage over competitors beyond whatever weight public opinion chooses to attach to their testimony.

It is not only in the matter of education that misplaced notions of liberty prevent moral obligations on the part of parents from being recognised, and legal obligations from being imposed, where there are the strongest grounds for the moral ones always and in many cases for the legal ones too. The very fact of causing a human being to exist is one of the most responsible actions in the range of human life. To take on this responsibility — to bestow a life which may be either a curse or a blessing — unless the being it is bestowed on will have at least the ordinary chances of a desirable existence, is a crime against that being. And in a country either overpopulated or threatened with being so, to produce children beyond a very small number, with the effect of reducing the reward of labour by their competition, is a serious offence against everyone who lives on the pay for their labour. The laws in many Continental countries that forbid marriage unless the parties can show they have the means of supporting a family do not exceed the legitimate powers of the state; and whether such laws are expedient or not, a question depending mainly on local circumstances and feelings, they are not objectionable as violations of liberty. Such laws are interferences by the state to prohibit a mischievous act — an act injurious to others, which ought to be a subject of condemnation and social stigma even where it is not thought expedient to add legal punishment. Yet the current ideas of liberty, which bend so easily to real infringements of an individual's freedom in things that concern only himself, would repel any attempt to restrain his inclinations when the consequence of indulging them is a life, or lives, of wretchedness and depravity for the offspring, and manifold evils for everyone near enough to be affected in any way by what they do. When we compare mankind's strange respect for liberty with their strange want of respect for it, we might imagine that a man had an indispensable right to do harm to others and no right at all to please himself without giving pain to anyone.

I have reserved for last a large class of questions about the limits of government interference which, though closely connected with the subject of this essay, do not strictly belong to it. These are cases where the reasons against interference do not turn on the principle of liberty at all: the question is not about restraining the actions of individuals but about helping them. It is asked whether the government should do, or have done, something for their benefit, instead of leaving it to be done by themselves, individually or in voluntary combination.

The objections to government interference, when it does not involve any infringement of liberty, may be of three kinds.

The first is where the thing to be done is likely to be done better by individuals than by the government. Generally speaking, nobody is so fit to conduct a business, or to decide how and by whom it shall be conducted, as the people personally interested in it. This principle condemns the interferences, once so common, of the legislature or the officers of government with the ordinary processes of industry. But this part of the subject has been sufficiently dealt with by political economists, and is not particularly related to the principles of this essay.

The second objection is more closely allied to our subject. In many cases, though individuals may not do the particular thing as well on average as government officials would, it is nevertheless desirable that it should be done by them rather than by the government, as a means to their own mental education — a way of strengthening their active faculties, exercising their judgment, and giving them a familiar knowledge of the subjects they are thus left to deal with. This is a principal, though not the sole, recommendation of trial by jury, in non-political cases; of free and popular local and municipal institutions; and of the conduct of industrial and philanthropic enterprises by voluntary associations. These are not questions of liberty, and are connected with that subject only by remote tendencies; but they are questions of development. It belongs to another occasion than this to dwell on these things as parts of national education — as being in truth the peculiar training of a citizen, the practical part of the political education of a free people, taking them out of the narrow circle of personal and family selfishness and accustoming them to understanding joint interests and managing joint concerns, getting them into the habit of acting from public or semi-public motives and guiding their conduct by aims that unite them instead of isolating them from one another. Without these habits and powers, a free constitution can neither be worked nor preserved, as is shown by the too often transitory nature of political freedom in countries where it does not rest on a sufficient basis of local liberties. The management of purely local business by the localities, and of the great enterprises of industry by the union of those who voluntarily supply the money, is further recommended by all the advantages this essay has set out as belonging to individuality of development and diversity of modes of action. Government operations tend to be everywhere alike. With individuals and voluntary associations, by contrast, there are varied experiments and endless diversity of experience. What the state can usefully do is to make itself a central depository, and an active circulator and diffuser, of the experience resulting from many trials. Its business is to enable each experimenter to benefit from other people's experiments, instead of tolerating no experiments but its own.

The third and most cogent reason for restricting the interference of government is the great evil of adding unnecessarily to its power. Every function added to those the government already exercises spreads its influence over people's hopes and fears more widely, and converts more and more of the active and ambitious part of the public into hangers-on of the government, or of some party aiming at becoming the government. If the roads, the railways, the banks, the insurance offices, the great joint-stock companies, the universities and the public charities were all branches of the government; if, in addition, the municipal corporations and local boards, with everything now entrusted to them, became departments of the central administration; if the employees of all these different enterprises were appointed and paid by the government and looked to the government for every step up in life — then not all the freedom of the press and all the popular constitution of the legislature would make this or any other country free except in name. And the evil would be the greater the more efficiently and scientifically the administrative machinery was constructed, and the more skilful the arrangements for obtaining the best qualified hands and heads to work it. In England it has lately been proposed that all members of the civil service should be selected by competitive examination, so as to get the most intelligent and instructed people available for those posts; and much has been said and written for and against the proposal. One of the arguments most insisted on by its opponents is that the occupation of a permanent official servant of the state does not offer prospects of pay and importance great enough to attract the highest talents, which will always be able to find a more inviting career in the professions, or in the service of companies and other public bodies. One would not have been surprised if this argument had been used by the friends of the proposal, as an answer to its chief difficulty. Coming from the opponents it is strange enough. What is urged as an objection is the safety valve of the proposed system. If all the high talent of the country *could* indeed be drawn into the service of the government, a proposal tending to bring that about might well cause uneasiness. If every part of the business of society requiring organised concert, or large and comprehensive views, were in the hands of the government, and if government offices were universally filled by the ablest men, then all the enlarged culture and practised intelligence in the country, except the purely speculative, would be concentrated in a numerous bureaucracy, to whom alone the rest of the community would look for everything: the multitude for direction and dictation in all they had to do, and the able and aspiring for personal advancement. Getting admitted into the ranks of this bureaucracy, and, once admitted, rising in it, would be the only objects of ambition. Under such a regime not only is the outside public ill qualified, for want of practical experience, to criticise or check how the bureaucracy operates; but even if the accidents of a despotism, or the natural working of popular institutions, occasionally raise to the top a ruler or rulers with a leaning towards reform, no reform can be carried through that is contrary to the interest of the bureaucracy. Such is the melancholy condition of the Russian empire, as the accounts of those who have had opportunity enough to observe it show. The Czar himself is powerless against the bureaucratic body: he can send any one of them to Siberia, but he cannot govern without them, or against their will. On every decree of his they have a tacit veto, simply by refraining from carrying it out. In countries of more advanced civilisation and a more insurrectionary spirit, the public, accustomed to expect everything to be done for them by the state, or at least to do nothing for themselves without asking the state not only for leave to do it but even for instructions how, naturally hold the state responsible for every evil that befalls them; and when the evil exceeds the amount of patience they have, they rise against the government and make what is called a revolution. Then somebody else, with or without legitimate authority from the nation, vaults into the seat, issues his orders to the bureaucracy, and everything goes on much as before, the bureaucracy being unchanged and nobody else being capable of taking their place.

A very different spectacle is seen among a people used to transacting their own business. In France, where a large part of the people have served in the army and many have held at least the rank of non-commissioned officer, there are in every popular insurrection several people competent to take the lead and improvise some tolerable plan of action. What the French are in military affairs, the Americans are in every kind of civil business. Leave them without a government, and any body of Americans is able to improvise one and to carry on that or any other public business with a sufficient amount of intelligence, order and decision. This is what every free people ought to be, and a people capable of it is certain to be free. It will never let itself be enslaved by any man or body of men merely because they are able to seize and pull the reins of the central administration. No bureaucracy can hope to make such a people do or put up with anything they do not like. But where everything is done through the bureaucracy, nothing the bureaucracy is really opposed to can be done at all. The constitution of such countries is an organisation of the experience and practical ability of the nation into a disciplined body for the purpose of governing the rest; and the more perfect that organisation is in itself, the more successful it is at drawing to itself and educating for itself the people of greatest capacity from every rank of the community, the more complete is the bondage of everybody — the members of the bureaucracy included. For the governors are as much the slaves of their organisation and discipline as the governed are of the governors. A Chinese mandarin is as much the tool and creature of a despotism as the humblest farmer. An individual Jesuit is the slave of his order to the utmost degree of abasement, though the order itself exists for the collective power and importance of its members.

Nor should it be forgotten that absorbing all the principal ability of the country into the governing body is fatal, sooner or later, to the mental activity and progressiveness of that body itself. Banded together as they are, working a system which, like all systems, must proceed largely by fixed rules, the official body are under the constant temptation of sinking into an indolent routine — or, if they now and then leave that treadmill round, of rushing into some half-examined crudity that has taken the fancy of some leading member of the corps. The only check on these closely allied though apparently opposite tendencies, and the only stimulus that can keep the ability of the body itself up to a high standard, is being liable to the watchful criticism of equal ability outside the body. It is indispensable, therefore, that the means should exist, independently of the government, of forming such ability and giving it the opportunities and experience necessary for correct judgment in great practical affairs. If we want to have permanently a skilful and efficient body of officials — above all, a body able to originate improvements and willing to adopt them; if we do not want our bureaucracy to degenerate into a pedantocracy, this body must not monopolise all the occupations that form and cultivate the faculties needed for governing mankind.

To determine the point at which evils so formidable to human freedom and advancement begin — or rather, at which they begin to outweigh the benefits of applying the collective force of society, under its recognised leaders, to removing the obstacles that stand in the way of its well-being; to secure as much of the advantages of centralised power and intelligence as can be had without turning too great a proportion of the general activity into governmental channels — is one of the most difficult and complicated questions in the art of government. It is largely a question of detail, in which many various considerations have to be kept in view and no absolute rule can be laid down. But I believe the practical principle in which safety lies, the ideal to keep in view, the standard by which to test every arrangement intended to overcome the difficulty, can be put in these words: the greatest dissemination of power consistent with efficiency, but the greatest possible centralisation of information and diffusion of it from the centre. Thus in municipal administration there would be, as in the New England states, a very minute division among separate officers, chosen by the localities, of all business that is not better left to the people directly interested; but besides this there would be, in each department of local affairs, a central superintendence forming a branch of the general government. The organ of this superintendence would concentrate, as in a focus, the variety of information and experience derived from the conduct of that branch of public business in every locality, from everything analogous done in foreign countries, and from the general principles of political science. This central organ should have a right to know everything that is done, and its special duty should be to make the knowledge acquired in one place available to others. Emancipated by its elevated position and comprehensive view from the petty prejudices and narrow outlook of a locality, its advice would naturally carry much authority; but its actual power as a permanent institution should, I think, be limited to compelling the local officers to obey the laws laid down for their guidance. In everything not provided for by general rules, those officers should be left to their own judgment, answerable to their constituents. For violating the rules they should be answerable to the law, and the rules themselves should be laid down by the legislature, the central administrative authority only watching over their execution, and if they were not properly carried out, appealing, according to the nature of the case, either to the courts to enforce the law or to the constituencies to dismiss the officials who had not carried it out in its spirit. Such, in its general conception, is the central superintendence the Poor Law Board is meant to exercise over the administrators of the Poor Rate throughout the country. Whatever powers the Board exercises beyond this limit were right and necessary in that peculiar case, to cure rooted habits of maladministration in matters deeply affecting not merely the localities but the whole community, since no locality has a moral right to make itself by mismanagement a nest of pauperism, which necessarily overflows into other localities and impairs the moral and physical condition of the whole labouring community. The powers of administrative coercion and subordinate legislation the Poor Law Board possesses, though they exercise them very sparingly given the state of opinion on the subject, are perfectly justifiable in a case of first-rate national interest but would be wholly out of place in the superintendence of purely local interests. But a central organ of information and instruction for all the localities would be equally valuable in every department of administration. A government cannot have too much of the kind of activity that does not impede but aids and stimulates individual effort and development. The mischief begins when, instead of calling forth the activity and the powers of individuals and bodies, it substitutes its own activity for theirs; when, instead of informing, advising and on occasion denouncing, it makes them work in fetters, or tells them to stand aside and does their work for them. The worth of a state, in the long run, is the worth of the individuals composing it; and a state which postpones the interests of *their* mental expansion and elevation to a little more administrative skill, or to that semblance of it which practice gives in the details of business; a state which dwarfs its men so that they may be more docile instruments in its hands, even for beneficial purposes, will find that with small men nothing great can really be accomplished, and that the perfection of machinery to which it has sacrificed everything will in the end avail it nothing, for want of the vital power which, so that the machine might run more smoothly, it has preferred to banish.
