Chapter 5: Riches Bring Anxiety, Not Contentment

"But since my arguments are beginning to have a soothing effect on your mind, I think I may turn to somewhat stronger remedies. Come, then: suppose the gifts of Fortune were not fleeting and passing. What is there in them that could ever really become yours, or that does not lose value when it is looked at steadily and weighed fairly?

"Are riches precious, I ask you, because of your nature or because of their own? What are they but gold and heaps of money? And these fine things show their quality better in the spending than in the hoarding; for I take it to be plain that greed always makes men hateful, while generosity brings a good name. But what is transferred to somebody else cannot stay in your own possession; and if that is so, then money is only precious when it is given away, and by being handed to others stops being yours.

"Again, if all the money in the world were heaped up in one man's hands, everybody else would be made poor. A sound fills many ears at once without being broken into parts; your riches cannot pass to many people without being reduced in the process. And when that happens, they necessarily impoverish the people they leave. How poor and cramped a thing riches are, then, when more than one person cannot possess them whole, and when they fall to one man only by impoverishing everyone else.

"Or is it the glitter of gems that catches the eye? However rare and excellent their brilliance may be, remember the flashing light is in the jewels and not in you. I am frankly amazed that men admire them; for what can rightly look beautiful to a creature that has life and reason, if it has neither the movement nor the structure of life? And although such things do in the end take on some beauty from their maker's care and from their own brightness, they still in no way deserve your admiration, since their excellence is set on a lower rung than yours.

"Does the beauty of the countryside delight you? Certainly — it is a beautiful part of a very beautiful whole. And rightly we sometimes enjoy the serene calm of the sea and admire the sky, the stars, the moon, the sun. But is any of these your business? Do you dare to boast of the beauty of any of them? Is it *you* who are decked out with the flowers of spring? Is it *your* fertility that swells in the fruits of autumn? Why are you carried away by these empty raptures? Why do you hug somebody else's excellence as if it were your own? Fortune will never make yours what the nature of things has shut out of your ownership.

"No doubt the fruits of the earth are given to feed living creatures. But if you are content to supply your needs as far as nature requires, there is no need to go to Fortune for a handout. Nature is satisfied with few things, and with very little of them. If you insist on forcing extras on her when she is satisfied, what you add will turn out to be either unpleasant or harmful. But now you think it fine to shine in clothes of many colours; and yet — if there is any pleasure in the sight of such things at all — what I shall admire is the weaving, or the skill of the man who made it.

"Or perhaps it is a long train of servants that makes you happy? Why, if they behave badly they are a ruinous burden on your house and extremely dangerous to their own master; and if they are honest, how can you count somebody else's virtue among your possessions? From all of which it is plainly proved that not one of the things you count among your possessions is really yours. And if there is no beauty in them worth wanting, why should you either grieve at losing them or be glad to keep them? While if they are beautiful in their own nature, what is that to you? They would have been no less pleasing in themselves if they had never been counted among your possessions. They do not become precious by being counted in your riches; you have chosen to count them in your riches because they looked precious to you.

"So what are you after with all this noisy outcry about fortune? To drive poverty away with abundance, I suppose. And yet you find the result is exactly the opposite. This varied array of precious furniture needs more accessories to protect it; and it is a true saying that those want most who have most, and, the other way about, those want very little who measure their abundance by what nature requires and not by the surplus of empty display.

"Have you no good of your own planted inside you, that you look for your good in things outside and separate? Has the nature of things been so reversed that a creature divine by right of reason can only be splendid in his own eyes by owning lifeless goods? Everything else is content with its own; and you, who in your intelligence are like God, look for ornaments for a nature of supreme excellence among the lowest things there are, and cannot see how great a wrong you do your maker. His will was that mankind should excel everything on earth; you push your own worth down below the lowest of things.

"For if the thing in which each thing finds its good is plainly more precious than the thing whose good it is, then by your own reckoning you put yourselves below the most worthless things, when you judge those worthless things to be your good. And this does not happen undeservedly. Man is so made that he excels other things only when he knows himself, and is brought lower than the animals if he loses that self-knowledge. For other creatures to be ignorant of themselves is natural; in a human being it shows as a defect.

"How extravagant, then, is this error of yours, in thinking that anything can be improved by ornaments that are not its own. It cannot be. If such accessories add any brightness, it is the accessories that get the praise, while the thing they veil and cover stays as ugly as it was. And I say again: that is no *good* which harms the man who has it. Is that untrue? No, you say, quite true. And yet riches have often hurt the people who had them, since the worst sort of men, who are all the greedier because they are wicked, think nobody but themselves deserves to own all the gold and gems in the world. So you, who now go in fear of pike and sword, might have sung a carol 'in the robber's face' if you had set out on the road of life with empty pockets. What a marvellous blessing perishable wealth is, when getting it robs you of your safety!"

Song V: The Former Age

	Too fortunate, that earlier age
		whose people lived content in the fields,
	and, still unspoiled by luxury,
		fed sparingly on acorns.
	They had no skill for blending
		the rich grape with the sweetness of honey,
	nor for dyeing the soft shining silks
		of China with bold Tyrian purple.
	Grass was their wholesome bed, the stream
		their drink, the tall pine's shade their roof;
	it was not for them to cut the deep sea
		or hunt the spoils of trade in strange far countries.
	The war trumpet had not been heard,
		and no bloodshed had stained the fields;
	for why should the fierce madness of war
		take up arms, when fighting brought wounds and no profit?
	If only our hearts could go back
		to walking in those ancient ways.
	But the greed of getting burns
		fiercer than the fires of Etna.
	Curse him, whoever he was,
		who first uncovered the hidden store of gold
	and dug out — dangerous treasure —
		the gems that would rather have stayed hidden.
