Chapter 6: High Office Without Virtue

"And what am I to say about rank and power, by which you hope to reach the sky because you do not know what real power and dignity are? Yet when rank and power have fallen to the worst sort of men, has any Etna, belching flame and a flood of fire, ever done such damage? I think you remember how your ancestors tried to abolish the consulship, which had been the foundation of their liberties, because of the overbearing pride of the consuls — and how for that same pride they had already abolished the title of king.

"And if, as happens only rarely, these privileges are given to good men, the only thing that pleases us is the virtue of the men who hold them. So it turns out that honour does not come to virtue from rank, but to rank from virtue.

"Look, too, at the nature of the power you find so attractive and glorious. Do you creatures of earth never consider what you are, and who it is you are exercising your imaginary lordship over? Suppose, among the mice, one were to stand up and claim rights and powers over the rest — would you not laugh yourselves sick? And yet, if you look only at his body, what creature can you find feebler than a man, who is often killed by a fly's bite or by some insect creeping into the inner passages of his body?

"And what rights can one man exercise over another except over the body, and over what is lower than the body — I mean his fortune? Will you bind the free spirit with your orders? Can you force a mind firmly settled by reason out of the calm that belongs to it? A tyrant once thought he could make a freeborn man reveal his fellow conspirators; the prisoner bit off his own tongue and threw it in the furious tyrant's face. So the tortures the tyrant thought were the instruments of his cruelty, the wise man turned into an opportunity for heroism.

"Besides, what is there that one man can do to another that he may not have to undergo in his own turn? We are told that Busiris, who used to kill his guests, was killed by his guest Hercules. Regulus had put in irons many of the Carthaginians he had taken in war; and soon afterwards he was holding out his own hands for the chains of the men he had beaten. So do you think a man has any power at all, when he cannot stop somebody else being able to do to him exactly what he can do to others?

"Besides, if there were any element of natural and proper good in rank and power, they would never come to the utterly bad, since opposites do not usually keep company. Nature will not have contraries joined. So, seeing there is no doubt that wicked wretches are often put in high places, it is also clear that things which will keep company with the worst of men cannot be good in their own nature. Indeed there is some reason to pass this judgement on all the gifts of fortune, which fall so plentifully to the most wicked.

"This ought to be considered as well, I think. Nobody doubts that a man is brave in whom he has seen a brave spirit living. Plainly a man endowed with speed is fast on his feet. In the same way music makes men musical, medicine makes physicians, rhetoric makes public speakers. Each of these has its own proper working by nature; there is no confusion with the effects of contrary things — indeed each of itself rejects what is incompatible with it. And yet wealth cannot put out insatiable greed, and power has never made a man master of himself when vicious appetites kept him tied in chains that would not come undone; and high office given to the wicked not only fails to make them worthy, but on the contrary reveals and puts their unworthiness on display.

"Why does that happen? Because you enjoy giving false names to things whose nature is quite unsuited to them — names the very effects of the things themselves easily prove false. And so it is: these riches, that power, this dignity, are none of them rightly so called. And finally we can draw the same conclusion about the whole realm of Fortune, in which there is plainly nothing truly worth wanting and nothing excellent in itself; for she neither always attaches herself to the good, nor makes good men of those she does attach herself to."

Song VI: Nero's Infamy

	We know what terrible harm he did —
		Rome burned, the senators killed —
	whose hand, still wet with a brother's blood,
		went on to stain itself with a mother's.
	No tear of pity wet his cheek
		as he stood and looked at the corpse;
	that mother's beauty, once so famous,
		was appraised in a critic's voice.
	And yet from east to west, far and wide,
		the nations acknowledged his rule;
	and the scorching south and the frozen north
		obeyed his will alone.
	Did high power, then, put any check
		on the frenzy of Nero's will?
	It is a bad day when the evil heart
		is handed the sword as well.
