Chapter 3: Riches Only Add to What You Want

"You creatures of earth have some glimmer of where you came from, however faint; and though the vision is dim and clouded, you do somehow make out the true end of happiness, and so nature's aim leads you towards it — towards the true good — while error in many forms leads you off. Consider whether men are able to win happiness by the means through which they think they will reach the goal they have set.

"Truly, if wealth or rank or any of the rest brings with it something that seems to lack no good at all, then we too admit that some people are made happy by getting these things. But if they cannot keep their promises, and are moreover short of many good things, is the happiness men look for in them not plainly shown up as a false front?

"So I ask you first, who were living in affluence only a short while ago: in the middle of all that abundance of wealth, was your mind never troubled by some wrong done to you?"

"No," I said, "I cannot remember a time when my mind was so completely at peace that it felt no twinge of uneasiness at all."

"Was that not because something was missing that you did not want missing, or something was there that you wanted out of the way?"

"Yes," I said.

"Then you wanted the presence of the one and the absence of the other?"

"I admit it."

"But a man lacks what he wants?"

"He does."

"And a man who lacks something is not self-sufficient at every point?"

"No, certainly not," I said.

"So you were carrying this insufficiency about with you, in the fullness of your wealth?"

"I must have been."

"Then wealth cannot make its owner independent and free of every want — and that was exactly what it seemed to promise. And I think this too deserves considering: there is nothing in the particular nature of money to stop it being taken away from those who have it against their will."

"I admit it."

"Of course there is not, when every day the stronger wrests it from the weaker without his consent. Where else do lawsuits come from, except from trying to recover money taken away against the owner's will by force or fraud?"

"True," I said.

"Then everybody will need some outside means of protection to keep his money safe."

"Who would dare deny it?"

"And yet he would not need it, unless he had the money that can be lost."

"No, certainly he would not."

"Then we have worked our way round to the opposite conclusion: the wealth that was supposed to make a man independent actually puts him in need of further protection. So how in the world can want be driven off by riches? Cannot the rich feel hunger? Cannot they get thirsty? Are the limbs of the wealthy not sensitive to winter cold? 'But,' you will say, 'the rich have the means to satisfy their hunger, and the means to get rid of thirst and cold.' True enough: want can be soothed by riches that way, but it cannot be removed. For if this ever-gaping, ever-craving want is stuffed full by wealth, then the want that could be stuffed full is necessarily still there. I say nothing of how very little is enough for nature, and how nothing at all is enough for greed. So if wealth cannot get rid of want, and creates new wants of its own, how can you believe it confers independence?"

Song III: The Insatiableness of Avarice

	Though the greedy man grows rich
		and watches his piles of gold go up;
	though he gathers a store of treasure
		that can never satisfy him;
	though his collar blazes with pearls,
		the rarest the ocean yields;
	though a hundred head of oxen
		labour in his broad fields:
	gnawing anxiety will not leave him
		as long as he draws breath,
	and his riches will not go with him
		when his eyes close in death.
