Chapter 10: That Happiness Exists, and That It Is God

"Now that you have seen what the shape of the imperfect good is, and the shape of the perfect one too, I think the next thing is to show how this perfection of happiness is built up. And here I think it right to ask first whether any excellence of the kind you have just defined can exist in the nature of things at all — in case we are being taken in by an empty fiction of thought that nothing real answers to. But it cannot be denied that such a thing does exist, and is, so to speak, the source of everything good. For anything called imperfect is called imperfect because it is deprived of some perfection; so it follows that whenever imperfection is found in any particular respect, there must necessarily be a perfection in that same respect as well. For if there were no such perfection, it is impossible to conceive how the so-called *im*perfection could have come into existence at all. Nature does not make a beginning with things that are mutilated and incomplete; she starts from what is whole and perfect, and falls away afterwards into these feeble, inferior productions. So if there is, as we showed earlier, a happiness of a frail and imperfect kind, there can be no doubt that there is also a happiness that is substantial and perfect."

"Your conclusion is perfectly true, and perfectly certain," I said.

"The next thing is to consider where this happiness lives. It is the common belief of all mankind that God, the supreme of all things, is good. For since nothing better than God can be imagined, how can we doubt that a being is good when there is nothing better than it? Now reason shows God to be good in such a way as to prove that the perfect good is in Him. For if it were not, He would not be supreme of all things: there would be something else more excellent that possessed the perfect good, and that would evidently have the advantage in priority and dignity, since we have clearly seen that all perfect things come before the less complete ones. And so, to avoid falling into an infinite regress, we have to acknowledge that the supreme God is full of the supreme and perfect good. But we have determined that true happiness is the perfect good; therefore true happiness must live in the supreme God."

"I accept your reasoning," I said. "There is no way of disputing it."

"But come, see how strictly and unanswerably you can prove this claim of ours, that the supreme Godhead possesses the highest good in the fullest way."

"How, exactly?" I said.

"Do not carelessly suppose that He who is the Father of all things has received that highest good He is said to possess from some source outside Himself, or has it as a natural endowment in such a way that you could think of the essence of the happiness possessed and of the God who possesses it as two distinct and different things. For if you take it to have been received from outside, you might reckon what gives to be more excellent than what has received. But Him we most rightly acknowledge to be the most supremely excellent of all things. And if the good is in Him by nature, but is logically distinct from Him, the thought is inconceivable — since we are speaking of God, who is supreme of all things. Who was there to join these distinct essences together? Finally, when one thing is different from another, the things conceived as distinct cannot be identical. So whatever is by its own nature distinct from the highest good is not itself the highest good — and that is an impious thing to think of Him, than whom, clearly, nothing can be more excellent. For universally nothing can be better in its nature than the source it came from; so on the truest grounds of reason I would conclude that the source of all things is, in its own essence, the highest good."

"And quite rightly," I said.

"But the highest good has been admitted to be happiness."

"Yes."

"Then," she said, "we have to acknowledge that God is happiness itself."

"Yes," I said. "I cannot go back on what I admitted before, and I see clearly that this follows necessarily from it."

"Consider, too," she said, "whether the same conclusion is not further confirmed by this: that there cannot be two supreme goods distinct from one another. For goods that are different clearly cannot each be what the other is; so neither of the two can be perfect, since each is missing the other. But since it is not perfect, it plainly cannot be the supreme good. So supreme goods cannot possibly be different from one another. And we have concluded that both happiness and God are the supreme good; therefore that which is the highest Divinity must itself also necessarily be the highest happiness."

"No conclusion," I said, "could be truer to the facts, or more soundly reasoned, or more worthy of God."

"Then further," she said, "just as geometers are in the habit of drawing extra inferences from their demonstrations — the things they call corollaries — so I will add a sort of corollary here. Since men become happy by acquiring happiness, and happiness is Godhood itself, it is clear that they become happy by acquiring Godhood. But just as men become just by acquiring justice, and wise by acquiring wisdom, so by the same reasoning they must necessarily become gods by acquiring Godhood. So every man who is happy is a god; and although in nature God is One only, there is nothing to stop a great many being gods by sharing in that nature."

"That is a fine conclusion, and a precious one," I said — "deduction or corollary, whichever you want to call it."

"And yet," she said, "not one bit finer than this, which reason urges us to add."

"What is that?" I said.

"Since happiness has many particular things included under it, should all of them be regarded as forming a single body of happiness, made up of various parts, as it were? Or is there some one of them that constitutes the whole essence of happiness, with all the rest related to that?"

"I wish you would set the whole matter out for me at length."

"We judge happiness to be good, do we not?"

"Yes — the supreme good."

"And that superlative applies to all of them; for this same happiness is judged to be the completest independence, the highest power, reverence, renown and pleasure."

"What then?"

"Are all these goods — independence, power and the rest — to be counted as limbs of happiness, so to speak? Or are they all related to the good as to their summit and crown?"

"I understand the problem, but I want to hear how you would solve it."

"Then listen to how the matter is settled. If all these were limbs composing happiness, they would differ from one another individually. For that is the nature of parts: they compose one body by being different. But all of these have been proved to be the same thing; so they cannot possibly be limbs, or happiness will look as though it were built up out of a single limb, which is impossible."

"There can be no doubt about that," I said, "but I am impatient to hear the rest."

"Why, it is obvious that all the others are related to the good. The very reason independence is sought is that it is judged to be good — and so with power, because it is believed to be good. We may suppose the same of reverence, of renown and of the delight of pleasure. Good, then, is the sum and source of everything worth wanting. Whatever has no good in it, either really or apparently, cannot be wanted at all. And conversely, even things that are not good by nature are wanted as though they were truly good, if they seem so. So it turns out that goodness is rightly believed to be the sum and the hinge and the cause of everything desirable. Now the thing for whose sake anything is wanted seems to be the thing most wished for. For instance, if somebody wants to ride for the sake of his health, it is not so much the exercise of riding that he wants as the benefit to his health. Since, then, all things are sought for the sake of the good, it is not those things so much as the good itself that everyone is seeking. But the thing on account of which everything else is wished for was, we agreed, happiness; so this also shows that it is happiness alone that is sought. From all of which it is transparently clear that the essence of absolute good and the essence of happiness are one and the same."

"I cannot see how anyone could disagree with these conclusions."

"But we have also proved that God and true happiness are one and the same."

"Yes," I said.

"Then we can safely conclude too that God's essence is seated in absolute good, and nowhere else."

Song X: The True Light

		Come here, all you whose minds
	lust binds with rosy chains —
	lust that hauls into hard bondage
	the earthy souls he lives in —
	here your labour shall end;
	here is your harbour of rest.
	Come, press towards your one refuge;
	it stands wide open to every distress.
		Not the glint of yellow gold
	rolled down bright Hermus' stream;
	not the precious sands of Tagus,
	nor, in far-off scorching lands,
	all the shining gems that hide
	under Indus' famous tide —
	green emerald and glittering white —
	can light up our feeble sight;
	rather they leave the mind
	blind in the darkness it was born to.
	For the finest beams they shed
	were fed in earth's lowest depths;
	but the splendour that supplies
	strength and vigour to the skies,
	and governs the universe,
	keeps clear of dark and ruined souls.
	Anyone who has once seen *this* light
	will not call the sunbeam bright.
