Chapter 2: The Good Alone Have Power

Then I said: "Your promises really are wonderfully large; and yet I do not doubt you can make them good. Only, having raised such hopes, do not keep me in suspense."

"Learn first, then," she said, "how power always attends the good, while the bad are left entirely without strength. Each of these truths proves the other. Since good and evil are opposites, if it is made plain that good is power, the feebleness of evil is clearly seen; and conversely, if the frailty of evil is shown, the strength of good is known from it. Still, to win wider credit for my conclusion, I will follow both paths, and get confirmation for what I say first in one direction and then in the other.

"Carrying out any human action depends on two things: will and power. If either is missing, nothing can be done. For if the will is lacking, no attempt at all is made at what is not willed; while if there is no power, the will is entirely useless. So if you see someone wanting to reach an end and completely failing to reach it, you cannot doubt that he lacked the power to get what he wanted."

"Certainly not; there is no denying it."

"Can you doubt, then, that a man you see has accomplished what he wanted also had the power to accomplish it?"

"Of course not."

"Then a man is to be counted strong in respect of what he can do, and weak in respect of what he cannot?"

"Granted," I said.

"Then do you remember that our earlier reasoning concluded that the whole aim of a man's will, however much the means of pursuit vary, is fixed intently on happiness?"

"I do remember that being proved as well."

"Do you also recall that happiness is absolute good, and therefore that when happiness is sought it is good that is the object of desire in every case?"

"I do not so much recall it as keep it fixed in my memory."

"Then all men, good and bad alike, strive to reach the good with one and the same purpose?"

"Yes, that follows."

"But it is certain that men become good by attaining the good?"

"It is."

"Then do the good reach their object?"

"It seems so."

"But if the bad were to reach the good that is *their* object too, they could not be bad?"

"No."

"Then, since both seek the good, but one sort reach it and the other do not, can there be any doubt that the good are endowed with power, while those who are bad are weak?"

"Anyone who doubts it is incapable of reflecting on the nature of things, or on what follows from an argument."

"Again: suppose there are two things given the same function in the course of nature, and one of them successfully performs that function by a natural action, while the other is altogether incapable of that natural action and instead, in a way that does not suit its nature, does not so much fulfil the function as pretend to fulfil it. Which of the two would you say was the stronger?"

"I can guess what you mean, but please let me hear you spell it out."

"Walking is man's natural motion, is it not?"

"Certainly."

"And you do not doubt, I suppose, that it is natural for the feet to perform that function?"

"No, of course I do not."

"Now, if one man who can use his feet walks, and another, who lacks the natural use of his feet, tries to walk on his hands, which of the two would you rightly reckon the stronger?"

"Go on," I said. "Nobody can question that a man who has the natural capacity has more strength than one who has not."

"Now, the supreme good is set up as the end for the bad just as much as for the good; but the good pursue it by the natural action of the virtues, whereas the bad try to reach that same good through every kind of craving, which is not the natural way of reaching good. Or do you think otherwise?"

"No; in fact one further consequence is clear to me. From what I have admitted, it must follow that the good have power and the bad are powerless."

"You run ahead correctly, and that, as doctors reckon, is a sign that nature is at work and throwing off the disease. But since I see you are so quick at understanding, I will heap proof on proof. See how obvious the extremity of vicious men's weakness is: they cannot even reach the goal that the aim of their nature leads and almost forces them towards. What would they be like if they were left without this mighty, this nearly irresistible help of nature's guidance? Consider, too, how momentous the powerlessness is that disables the wicked. The prizes they contend for, and cannot win or hold, are not light or trivial; their failure concerns the sum and crown of things. Poor wretches: they fail to get even the thing they toil after day and night. And here too the strength of the good stands out. Just as you would judge the strongest walker to be the one whose legs could carry him to a point beyond which no further advance was possible, so you must reckon a man strong in power when he so reaches the end of his desires that there is nothing further left to desire. From which follows the obvious conclusion that those who are wicked are seen, likewise, to be wholly without strength. For why do they abandon virtue and follow vice? Is it from ignorance of what is good? Well, what is weaker and feebler than the blindness of ignorance? Or do they know what they ought to follow, but get driven off the road by desire? If so, they are frail from lack of self-control, since they cannot fight against vice. Or do they knowingly and deliberately abandon the good and turn aside to vice? Why, at that rate they not only stop having power, they stop existing at all. For those who abandon the common end of everything that exists, likewise stop existing at all. Now some may find it strange that we should claim that the bad, who make up most of mankind, do not exist. But so it is. I do not deny that those who are bad are bad; what I deny is that they *are*, in an unqualified and absolute sense. Just as we call a corpse a dead man but cannot call it simply a man, so I would allow the vicious to be bad, but I cannot allow that they *are* in an absolute sense. Only that thing *is* which holds its place and keeps its nature; whatever falls away from that abandons the existence that belongs to its nature. 'But,' you will say, 'the bad have an ability.' I do not want to deny that either; only this ability of theirs comes not from strength but from powerlessness. For their ability is an ability to do evil, and that would have had no efficacy at all if they could have gone on doing good. So this ability of theirs proves still more plainly that they have no power. For if, as we concluded just now, evil is nothing, it is clear that the wicked can bring nothing about, since all they are able to do is evil."

"That is evident."

"And so that you may understand the exact force of this power: did we not determine a while ago that nothing has more power than the supreme good?"

"We did," I said.

"But that same highest good cannot do evil?"

"Certainly not."

"Is there anybody, then, who thinks that men are able to do everything?"

"Nobody but a madman."

"Yet they are able to do evil?"

"Yes — I wish they were not!"

"Since, then, the one who can do only good is all-powerful, while those who can do evil as well are not all-powerful, it is clear that those who can do evil have less power. There is this too: we have shown that all power is to be counted among the things worth wanting, and that all such things are referred to the good as to a kind of completion of their nature. But the ability to commit a crime cannot be referred to the good; therefore it is not something to be wanted. And yet all power is worth wanting. So it is clear that the ability to do evil is not power. From all of which the power of the good appears, and the unmistakable weakness of the bad, and it is clear that Plato's verdict was true: the wise alone are able to do what they want, while the wicked follow the lust of their own hearts but can *not* accomplish what they want. For they go on in their wilfulness, imagining they will get what they want by the roads of pleasure; but they are very far from getting it, since shameful acts do not lead to happiness."

Song II: The Bondage of Passion

	When the monarch sits high on his throne, magnificent in the pride of his purple,
	with flashing steel to guard him on every side;
	when deadly terrors lower on his forehead with a threatening frown
	and Passion heaves in his labouring breast — how dreadful his power looks!
	But strip the robes of state off such a man
	and you will see what a load of secret chains this lord of the earth is wearing.
	Lust's poison is festering; rage sweeps across his mind like a rough storm;
	sorrow torments his spirit, and empty hopes lead him on.
	Then you will admit it: one unlucky wretch, oppressed by many masters,
	who never does what he wants, but lives in the helplessness of slavery.
