Chapter 4: The Wicked Are Unhappier When They Succeed

Then I said: "That is very true. I can see that vicious men, though they keep the outward form of a man, are rightly said to be changed into beasts as far as their spiritual nature goes. But since their cruel and polluted minds work off their rage in destroying the good, I wish they were not allowed that licence."

"Nor are they," she said, "as will be shown in its proper place. And yet if that licence you believe they are allowed were taken away from them, the punishment of the wicked would be largely remitted. For, incredible as it may seem to some, it must necessarily be true that the bad are more unfortunate when they have carried out what they wanted than when they cannot get it done. If it is wretched to will an evil, it is more wretched to have been able to accomplish one; for without the power, the wretched will would come to nothing. And so those whom you see willing crime, being able to commit it, and committing it, must necessarily be the victims of a threefold wretchedness, since each of these states has its own measure of wretchedness."

"Yes," I said, "and yet I earnestly wish they could be quickly rid of this misfortune by losing the ability to commit crime."

"They will lose it," she said, "sooner than you perhaps wish, or than they themselves think likely. Within the narrow bounds of our brief life there is truly nothing so slow in coming that anyone should think it a long wait — least of all an immortal spirit. Their great expectations, the towering structure of their crimes, is often brought down by a sudden and unlooked-for ending, and that only sets a limit to their misery. For if wickedness makes men wretched, a man who is wicked for longer is necessarily more wretched; and if death did not at any rate put an end to the evil doings of the wicked, I should count them wretched to the last degree. Indeed, if the conclusions we have reached about the ill fortune of wickedness are true, then a wretchedness doomed to be eternal is plainly infinite."

Then I said: "That is an astonishing inference, and hard to grant; but I can see it agrees entirely with our earlier conclusions."

"You are right," she said. "But if anyone finds the conclusion hard to admit, in fairness he ought either to prove that something in the premises is false, or to show that the propositions taken together do not adequately force the conclusion; otherwise, if the premises are granted, there is nothing whatever to be said against the inference. And here is another statement that looks no less astonishing, but is equally necessary given the premises we have assumed."

"What is that?"

"The wicked are happier when they undergo punishment than they would be if no penalty of justice corrected them. And I do not mean now the thing that would occur to anybody — that a bad character is improved by retribution and brought back onto the right road by the fear of punishment, or that it serves as an example warning others off wrongdoing. I mean that in another way the wicked are more unfortunate when they go unpunished, even leaving improvement out of account and paying no attention to the example."

"Why, what other way is there besides those?" I said.

Then she said: "Have we not agreed that the good are happy and the evil wretched?"

"Yes," I said.

"Now, if some good thing is given to a man in affliction along with his misery, is he not happier than a man whose misery is misery pure and simple, with no good mixed into it?"

"It would seem so."

"But if some further evil is added to a man who is wretched in that way, and destitute of all good, on top of the things that already make him wretched, is he not to be judged far unhappier than the man whose ill fortune is relieved by some share of good?"

"It could hardly be otherwise."

"Then surely, when the wicked are punished, a good thing is added to them — namely the punishment, which by the law of justice is good; and likewise when they escape punishment, a new evil attaches to them in that very freedom from punishment, which you have rightly acknowledged to be an evil in the case of the unrighteous."

"I cannot deny it."

"Then the wicked are far unhappier when they are indulged with an unjust freedom from punishment than when they are punished by a just retribution. Now it is obvious that it is just for the wicked to be punished, and unjust for them to get off unpunished."

"Why, who would dare deny it?"

"And nobody can possibly deny this either: that everything just is good, and conversely everything unjust is bad."

Then I answered: "These inferences certainly do follow from what we concluded a moment ago. But tell me: do you take no account of the punishment of the soul after the death of the body?"

"Indeed I do," she said. "These penalties are great — some of them inflicted, I imagine, in the severity of retribution, others in the mercy of purification. But it is not my present purpose to talk about them. So far my aim has been to make you recognise that the power of the bad, which shocked you so extremely, is no power at all; to make you see that the men whose freedom from punishment you complained of are never without the proper penalties of their unrighteousness; to teach you that the licence you prayed might soon come to an end does not last long; that it would be unhappier if it lasted longer, and unhappiest of all if it lasted for ever; and after that, that the unrighteous are more wretched when they are unjustly let off without punishment than when they are punished by a just retribution — from which it follows that the wicked are afflicted with more severe penalties precisely when they are supposed to be escaping punishment."

Then I said: "While I follow your reasonings, I am deeply struck by their truth. But if I turn to what people commonly believe, I find few who will even listen to such arguments, let alone allow that they are credible."

"True," she said. "They cannot lift eyes accustomed to darkness up to the light of clear truth, and they are like the birds whose sight night brightens and day blinds. For since they look not at the order of the universe but at their own frame of mind, they think the licence to commit crime and the escape from punishment are strokes of luck. But observe the ordinance of eternal law. If you have shaped your soul to the likeness of what is better, you need no judge to award you the prize: by your own act you have raised yourself in the scale of excellence. If you have twisted your affections towards baser things, do not look for punishment from anyone outside you: your own act has degraded you and pushed you down. It is like turning your gaze by turns on the vile earth and on the heavens: though everything outside you stands still, by the mere laws of sight you seem now to be sunk in the mud, now to be soaring among the stars. But the common herd pays no attention to these things. What then? Shall we go over to the people we have shown to be like brute beasts? Why, suppose someone who had entirely lost his sight also forgot that he had ever had the faculty of vision, and imagined that he lacked nothing that belongs to human perfection: should we then judge the people who could see as well as ever to be the blind ones? And they will not agree to this either — that those who do wrong are more wretched than those who suffer it — though the proof of it rests on grounds of reason just as strong."

"Let me hear those reasons," I said.

"Would you deny that every wicked man deserves punishment?"

"Certainly not."

"And that those who are wicked are unhappy is clear in a great many ways?"

"Yes," I replied.

"Then you do not doubt that those who deserve punishment are wretched?"

"Agreed," I said.

"So if you were sitting in judgment, on which of them would you order punishment inflicted — the man who had done the wrong, or the man who had suffered it?"

"Without a doubt I would compensate the sufferer at the wrongdoer's expense."

"Then the man who injures would seem more wretched than the man injured?"

"Yes; that follows. And so for this and other reasons resting on the same ground, since baseness by its own nature makes men wretched, it is plain that a wrong involves the misery of the doer, not of the sufferer."

"And yet," she said, "the practice of the law courts is exactly the opposite. Advocates try to rouse the judges' pity for people who have suffered some grievous and cruel wrong, whereas pity is rather owed to the criminal, who ought to be brought to the judgment seat by his accusers in a spirit not of anger but of compassion and kindness — as a sick man is brought to the doctor, to have the ulcer of his fault cut away by punishment. At which point the advocate's business would either come to a complete standstill, or, if men preferred to make it useful to mankind, would be restricted to the practice of accusation. And the wicked themselves, if they were allowed to see through some chink or cranny the virtue they have abandoned, and to see that by the pains of punishment they would rid themselves of the filth of their vices and win the reward of righteousness in exchange, would no longer think these sufferings were pains at all; they would refuse the help of advocates and hand themselves over entirely to their accusers and their judges. Which is why the wise have no room left in them for hatred. Only the greatest fool would hate the good, and hating the bad is unreasonable. For if a vicious tendency is a disease of the soul, as bodily sickness is of the body, then just as we count the physically sick as by no means deserving hatred but rather pity, so, and far more, should we pity those whose minds are under assault by wickedness, which is more frightening than any sickness."

Song IV: The Unreasonableness of Hatred

		Why all this furious fighting? Why
	provoke with a rash and wilful hand the day death has fixed for you?
		If it is death you are after — look, death is close at hand,
	and those swift horses do not slow down at their master's wish.
		Wild beasts vent their rage on man,
	yet men aim the murdering steel at the lives of their own brothers;
		they wage unjust and cruel wars
	and hurry to meet or deal out death by flying spears.
		They can show neither right nor reason for it;
	it is only that their lands and their laws are not the same.
		If *you* want to give each man his due, then know this:
	the good must have your love, and the bad have a claim on your pity.
