Chapter 2: Whether a Human Being Is Free

"I am following carefully," I said, "and I agree that it is as you say. But in this series of linked causes, is there any freedom left to our will? Or does the chain of fate bind the very movements of our souls as well?"

"There is freedom," she said. "Indeed, no creature can be rational unless it is endowed with free will. For whatever has the natural use of reason has the faculty of judging between things, and distinguishes for itself what is to be avoided and what wanted. Now everyone seeks what he judges desirable and avoids what he thinks should be avoided. So beings endowed with reason also possess the faculty of freely choosing and refusing. But I do not suppose this faculty is equal in all of them. The higher divine beings have a clear-sighted judgment, an uncorrupted will, and an effective power of getting what they want. Human souls are necessarily freer while they remain in the contemplation of the divine mind, less free when they pass into bodily form, and less free again when they are wrapped in earthly limbs. But when they are handed over to vices and fall away from possession of their own proper reason, then their condition is complete slavery. For when they let their gaze drop from the light of the highest truth to the lower world where darkness rules, ignorance soon blinds their sight; they are troubled by ruinous passions, and by giving way and consenting to those passions they help along the slavery they are caught in, and are in a way led captive by their very freedom. Yet He who sees all things from eternity looks on all this with the eyes of His providence, and assigns to each what its merits have destined for it:

"'surveying all things, overhearing all things.'"

Song II: The True Sun

	Homer with his honeyed tongue
	has sung the glorious light of the sun,
		hymning his high praise;
		and yet *his* feeble beams
	cannot brighten the hollows of the ocean
	or light up the gloom at the earth's centre.
	But the might of the One who had the skill
	to build this great universe
		is not confined like that;
		neither the solid crust of earth
	nor the blackest canopy of night
	can baffle His all-seeing eye.
	Everything that is, has been or will be
	He makes out at once,
		all within a single glance,
		and no eyes but His
	survey the whole world — none at all.
	*Him*, then, you may truly call the Sun.
