Chapter 5: Rising from Reason to a Higher Standpoint

"Now in the case of bodies that have sensation, the qualities of external objects do affect the sense organs, and the activity of the mind is preceded by a bodily affection that calls out the mind's action on itself and stimulates the forms lying inactive within it until that moment. Yet even so, if in these bodies with sensation the mind is not merely written on by passive affection, but by its own power sorts out the impressions supplied to the body, how much more must intelligences free of all bodily affections use their own mental activities in their sorting, instead of conforming to external objects? So on these principles various modes of knowing belong to distinct and different kinds of being. To creatures with no power of movement — shellfish and other such creatures that cling to rocks and grow there — belongs Sense alone, with no other way of gaining knowledge. To beasts that can move, in whom some capacity for seeking and avoiding seems to have arisen, belongs Imagination as well. Thought belongs only to the human race, as Intelligence belongs to Divinity alone. From which it follows that the form of knowledge that surpasses the rest is the one that by its own nature knows not only its proper object but the objects of the other forms of knowledge too.

"But what if Sense and Imagination were to contradict Thought and declare that the universal Thought believes it sees is nothing at all? For the object of Sense and Imagination cannot be universal. So either the judgment of Reason is true and there is no sense-object; or else, since they know perfectly well that many objects are presented to Sense and Imagination, the conception of Reason is empty of content, since it looks at what is perceived by Sense and is particular as though it were something 'universal'. Suppose, further, that Reason replies that it does indeed contemplate the object of both Sense and Imagination under the form of universality, while Sense and Imagination cannot aspire to knowledge of the universal, since what they know cannot go beyond bodily shapes; and that in knowing reality we ought rather to trust the stronger and more perfect faculty of judgment. In a dispute of that kind, should not we, in whom the faculty of reasoning is planted as well as the faculties of imagining and perceiving, take Reason's side?

"It is in just this way that human reason thinks the divine Intelligence cannot see the future except in the manner in which reason's own knowledge is obtained. For your contention is that if events do not appear to involve certain and necessary outcomes, they cannot be foreseen as certainly going to happen. So there is no foreknowledge of such events; or if we can ever bring ourselves to believe there is, then there can be nothing that does not happen by necessity. If, however, we could have some share in the judgment of the divine mind, as we have a share in Reason, we should think it perfectly just for human Reason to submit itself to the divine mind, just as we judged that Imagination and Sense ought to give way to Reason. So let us soar, if we can, to the heights of that supreme Intelligence; for there Reason will see what in itself it cannot look upon — namely, how things whose occurrence is not certain may still be seen in a sure and definite foreknowledge, and how that foreknowledge is not guesswork but rather knowledge in its supreme simplicity, free of every limit and restriction."

Song V: The Upward Look

	In what different shapes and fashions the creatures, great and small,
	skim or scud or walk or crawl over the wide teeming face of the earth!
	Some sweep the ground with a long body, and as they move
	must trail a winding groove in the dust with a writhing belly;
	some, soaring up on light wings, swiftly divide the winds
	and glide smoothly in free motion through heaven's ample spaces;
	these press the solid surface of the earth and roam on with firm steps,
	ranging through the green meadows, crouching in the woodland groves.
	Great and marvellous is the difference between them! Yet in all of them the head hangs low,
	dulling the soul and blunting the senses, however different their shapes.
	Man alone stands erect and aspiring, and lifts his forehead to the skies,
	and in his upright posture seems to despise the baseness of the earth.
	If you are not altogether besotted with the earth, listen to this parable,
	you whose gaze is fixed on heaven, who hold your face up high:
	lift your soul up as well, in case it stains its heavenly worth
	and your eyes alone look upward while your mind clings to the ground.
