Chapter Five: Energy

1. Sun Tzu said: Controlling a large force works on the same principle as controlling a few men: it is merely a question of dividing up their numbers.

Commentary: That is, cutting the army up into regiments, companies and so on, with subordinate officers commanding each. Tu Mu reminds us of Han Hsin's famous reply to the first Han Emperor, who once asked him: "How large an army do you think I could lead?" "Not more than 100,000 men, your Majesty." "And you?" asked the Emperor. "Oh," he answered, "the more the better."

2. Fighting with a large army under your command is no different from fighting with a small one: it is merely a question of setting up signs and signals.

3. To make sure that your whole host can take the brunt of the enemy's attack and stay unshaken — this is done by manoeuvres direct and indirect.

Commentary: We now come to one of the most interesting parts of Sun Tzu's treatise, the discussion of *cheng* and *ch'i*. Since it is by no means easy to grasp the full force of these two terms, or to translate them consistently with good English equivalents, it may be as well to set out some of the commentators' remarks before going further. Li Ch'uan: "Facing the enemy is *cheng*; making a lateral diversion is *ch'i*." Chia Lin: "In the enemy's presence your troops should be drawn up in the normal way, but to secure victory abnormal manoeuvres must be used." Mei Yao-ch'en: "*Ch'i* is active, *cheng* is passive; passivity means waiting for an opportunity, activity brings the victory itself." Ho Shih: "We must make the enemy see our straightforward attack as one secretly designed, and the other way about; so *cheng* may also be *ch'i*, and *ch'i* may also be *cheng*." He instances the famous exploit of Han Hsin, who, while marching ostensibly against Lin-chin (now Chao-i in Shensi), suddenly threw a large force across the Yellow River in wooden tubs and utterly disconcerted his opponent. [Ch'ien Han Shu, ch. 3.] Here, we are told, the march on Lin-chin was *cheng* and the surprise manoeuvre was *ch'i*. Chang Yu summarises the opinions on the words: "Military writers do not agree about the meaning of *ch'i* and *cheng*. Wei Liao Tzu (4th century B.C.) says: 'Direct warfare favours frontal attacks, indirect warfare attacks from the rear.' Ts'ao Kung says: 'Going straight out to join battle is a direct operation; appearing in the enemy's rear is an indirect manoeuvre.' Li Wei-kung (6th and 7th centuries A.D.) says: 'In war, marching straight ahead is *cheng*; turning movements are *ch'i*.' These writers simply take *cheng* as *cheng* and *ch'i* as *ch'i*; they do not notice that the two are interchangeable and run into each other like the two sides of a circle (see below, verse 11). A comment of the T'ang Emperor T'ai Tsung goes to the root of the matter: 'A *ch'i* manoeuvre may be *cheng*, if we make the enemy see it as *cheng*; then our real attack will be *ch'i*, and the other way about. The whole secret lies in confusing the enemy, so that he cannot fathom our real intention.'" To put it perhaps a little more clearly: any attack or other operation on which the enemy has had his attention fixed is *cheng*, while what takes him by surprise or comes from an unexpected quarter is *ch'i*. If the enemy notices a movement that was meant to be *ch'i*, it immediately becomes *cheng*.

4. To make the impact of your army like a grindstone dashed against an egg — this is done by the science of weak points and strong.

5. In all fighting, the direct method may be used to join battle, but indirect methods will be needed to secure victory.

Commentary: Chang Yu says: "Steadily develop indirect tactics, either by pounding the enemy's flanks or falling on his rear." A brilliant example of "indirect tactics" that decided the fortunes of a campaign was Lord Roberts's night march round the Peiwar Kotal in the second Afghan war.

Footnote: "Forty-one Years in India," chapter 46.

6. Indirect tactics, efficiently applied, are as inexhaustible as Heaven and Earth, as unending as the flow of rivers and streams; like the sun and moon, they end only to begin again; like the four seasons, they pass away only to return.

Commentary: Tu Yu and Chang Yu understand this of the permutations of *ch'i* and *cheng*. But Sun Tzu is not speaking of *cheng* at all here, unless we suppose with Cheng Yu-hsien that a clause about it has dropped out of the text. Of course, as has been pointed out already, the two are so inextricably interwoven in all military operations that they cannot really be considered apart. What we have here is simply an expression, in figurative language, of a great leader's almost infinite resource.

7. There are no more than five musical notes, yet their combinations give rise to more melodies than can ever be heard.

8. There are no more than five primary colours (blue, yellow, red, white and black), yet in combination they produce more hues than can ever be seen.

9. There are no more than five cardinal tastes (sour, acrid, salt, sweet, bitter), yet their combinations yield more flavours than can ever be tasted.

10. In battle there are no more than two methods of attack, the direct and the indirect; yet the two in combination give rise to an endless series of manoeuvres.

11. The direct and the indirect lead on to each other in turn. It is like moving in a circle: you never come to an end. Who can exhaust the possibilities of their combination?

12. The onset of troops is like the rush of a torrent that will roll even stones along in its course.

13. The quality of decision is like the well-timed swoop of a falcon, which lets it strike and destroy its victim.

Commentary: The Chinese here is tricky, and one key word in this context defies the translator's best efforts. Tu Mu defines it as "the measurement or estimation of distance". But that does not quite fit the illustrative simile in verse 15. Applied to the falcon, it seems to me to denote the instinct of *self-restraint* that keeps the bird from swooping on its quarry until the right moment, together with the power of judging when that moment has come. The corresponding quality in soldiers is the highly important one of being able to hold their fire until the very instant when it will be most effective. When the "Victory" went into action at Trafalgar at hardly more than drifting pace, she was exposed for several minutes to a storm of shot and shell before replying with a single gun. Nelson coolly waited until he was at close range, and then the broadside he brought to bear worked fearful havoc on the enemy's nearest ships.

14. So the good fighter will be terrible in his onset and prompt in his decision.

Commentary: The word "decision" would refer to the measurement of distance mentioned above — letting the enemy get near before striking. But I cannot help thinking that Sun Tzu meant it in a figurative sense, comparable to our own idiom "short and sharp". Compare Wang Hsi's note, which, after describing the falcon's method of attack, goes on: "This is just how the 'psychological moment' should be seized in war."

15. Energy may be compared to the bending of a crossbow; decision, to the releasing of the trigger.

Commentary: None of the commentators seems to grasp the real point of the simile: the force stored up in the bent crossbow until the finger on the trigger releases it.

16. Amid the turmoil and tumult of battle there may be seeming disorder and yet no real disorder at all; amid confusion and chaos your array may be without head or tail, yet it will be proof against defeat.

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en says: "The subdivisions of the army having been fixed beforehand, and the various signals agreed on, the separating and joining, the dispersing and collecting that take place in the course of a battle may give the appearance of disorder when no real disorder is possible. Your formation may be without head or tail, your dispositions all topsy-turvy, and yet a rout of your forces quite out of the question."

17. Simulated disorder presupposes perfect discipline; simulated fear presupposes courage; simulated weakness presupposes strength.

Commentary: To make the translation intelligible it is necessary to tone down the sharply paradoxical form of the original. Ts'ao Kung hints at the meaning in his brief note: "These things all serve to break up formation and conceal one's condition." But Tu Mu is the first to put it plainly: "If you wish to feign confusion in order to lure the enemy on, you must first have perfect discipline; if you wish to display timidity in order to trap him, you must have extreme courage; if you wish to parade your weakness in order to make him overconfident, you must have exceeding strength."

18. Hiding order beneath a cloak of disorder is simply a question of subdivision;

Commentary: See above, verse 1.

concealing courage under a show of timidity presupposes a fund of latent energy;

Commentary: The commentators strongly understand a certain Chinese word here in a different sense from anywhere else in the chapter. So Tu Mu says: "Seeing that we are favourably placed and yet make no move, the enemy will believe we are really afraid."

masking strength with weakness is a matter of tactical dispositions.

Commentary: Chang Yu tells this anecdote of Kao Tsu, the first Han Emperor. Wishing to crush the Hsiung-nu, he sent out spies to report on their condition. But the Hsiung-nu, forewarned, carefully hid all their able-bodied men and well-fed horses, and let nothing be seen but infirm soldiers and emaciated cattle. The result was that the spies recommended, one and all, that the Emperor should attack. Lou Ching alone opposed them: "When two countries go to war, they are naturally inclined to make an ostentatious display of their strength. Yet our spies have seen nothing but old age and infirmity. This is surely some *ruse* on the enemy's part, and it would be unwise for us to attack." The Emperor disregarded the advice, fell into the trap, and found himself surrounded at Po-teng.

19. So the man who is skilful at keeping the enemy on the move keeps up deceitful appearances, and the enemy acts on them.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung's note is: "Make a display of weakness and want." Tu Mu says: "If our force happens to be superior to the enemy's, weakness may be simulated in order to lure him on; but if it is inferior, he must be led to believe we are strong, so that he keeps away. In fact all the enemy's movements should be determined by the signs we choose to give him." Note this anecdote of Sun Pin, a descendant of Sun Wu. In 341 B.C. the Ch'i State, being at war with Wei, sent T'ien Chi and Sun Pin against the general P'ang Chuan, who happened to be Sun Pin's deadly personal enemy. Sun Pin said: "The Ch'i State has a reputation for cowardice, and so our adversary despises us. Let us turn that to account." So when the army had crossed the border into Wei territory, he ordered 100,000 fires to be shown on the first night, 50,000 on the next, and only 20,000 the night after. P'ang Chuan pursued them hotly, saying to himself: "I knew these men of Ch'i were cowards: their numbers have already fallen by more than half." In his retreat Sun Pin came to a narrow defile which he calculated his pursuers would reach after dark. Here he had a tree stripped of its bark and these words written on it: "Under this tree shall P'ang Chuan die." Then, as night fell, he put a strong body of archers in ambush nearby with orders to shoot the moment they saw a light. Later P'ang Chuan arrived at the spot, noticed the tree, and struck a light to read what was written on it. His body was immediately riddled with arrows and his whole army thrown into confusion. (This is Tu Mu's version of the story; the *Shih Chi*, less dramatically but probably with more historical truth, has P'ang Chuan cut his own throat with an exclamation of despair after the rout of his army.)

He sacrifices something, so that the enemy may snatch at it.

20. By holding out baits he keeps him on the march; then, with a body of picked men, he lies in wait for him.

Commentary: With an emendation suggested by Li Ching this reads: "He lies in wait with the main body of his troops."

21. The clever fighter looks to the effect of combined energy, and does not ask too much of individuals.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "He first considers the power of his army in the mass; afterwards he takes individual talent into account and uses each man according to his capabilities. He does not demand perfection from the untalented."

Hence his ability to pick out the right men and make use of combined energy.

22. When he makes use of combined energy, his fighting men become like rolling logs or stones. For it is the nature of a log or a stone to stay motionless on level ground and to move on a slope; if four-cornered, to come to a stop, but if round, to go rolling down.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung calls this "the use of natural or inherent power".

23. So the energy developed by good fighting men is like the momentum of a round stone rolled down a mountain thousands of feet high. So much for the subject of energy.

Commentary: The chief lesson of this chapter, in Tu Mu's opinion, is the paramount importance in war of rapid movement and sudden rushes. "Great results," he adds, "can be achieved this way with small forces."
