Chapter Six: Weak Points and Strong

Commentary: Chang Yu tries to explain the sequence of the chapters: "Chapter Four, on Tactical Dispositions, dealt with the offensive and the defensive; Chapter Five, on Energy, with direct and indirect methods. The good general first acquaints himself with the theory of attack and defence, then turns to direct and indirect methods. He studies the art of varying and combining these two before going on to weak and strong points. For the use of direct or indirect methods arises out of attack and defence, and the perception of weak and strong points depends in turn on those methods. That is why the present chapter comes immediately after the one on Energy."

1. Sun Tzu said: Whoever is first in the field and waits for the enemy to come will be fresh for the fight; whoever is second in the field and has to hurry to battle will arrive exhausted.

2. So the clever combatant imposes his will on the enemy, but does not let the enemy's will be imposed on him.

Commentary: One mark of a great soldier is that he fights on his own terms or does not fight at all.

Footnote: See Colonel Henderson's biography of Stonewall Jackson, 1902 edition, vol. II, p. 490.

3. By holding out advantages he can make the enemy come to him of his own accord; or, by inflicting damage, he can make it impossible for the enemy to come near.

Commentary: In the first case he will entice him with a bait; in the second he will strike at some important point that the enemy will have to defend.

4. If the enemy is taking his ease, he can harass him;

Commentary: This passage may be cited as evidence against Mei Yao-ch'en's reading of Chapter One, verse 23.

if he is well supplied with food, he can starve him out; if he is quietly encamped, he can force him to move.

5. Appear at points the enemy must hurry to defend; march swiftly to places where you are not expected.

6. An army may march great distances without distress if it marches through country where the enemy is not.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung sums it up very well: "Emerge from the void" — that is, like a bolt from the blue — "strike at vulnerable points, shun places that are defended, attack in unexpected quarters."

7. You can be sure of succeeding in your attacks if you attack only places that are undefended.

Commentary: Wang Hsi explains "undefended places" as "weak points — that is, where the general lacks capacity or the soldiers lack spirit; where the walls are not strong enough or the precautions not strict enough; where relief comes too late, or provisions are too scanty, or the defenders are at odds among themselves."

You can ensure the safety of your defence if you hold only positions that cannot be attacked.

Commentary: That is, where there are none of the weak points mentioned above. There is a rather nice point in how to read this second clause. Tu Mu, Ch'en Hao and Mei Yao-ch'en take the meaning to be: "To make your defence quite safe you must defend *even* those places that are not likely to be attacked" — and Tu Mu adds: "How much more, then, those that will be." Taken that way, however, the clause balances less well with the one before it, which is always a consideration in the highly antithetical style natural to Chinese. Chang Yu therefore seems nearer the mark: "He who is skilled in attack flashes out from the topmost heights of heaven (see Chapter Four, verse 7), making it impossible for the enemy to guard against him. That being so, the places I shall attack are precisely those the enemy cannot defend… He who is skilled in defence hides in the most secret recesses of the earth, making it impossible for the enemy to guess where he is. That being so, the places I shall hold are precisely those the enemy cannot attack."

8. So the general is skilful in attack whose opponent does not know what to defend, and skilful in defence whose opponent does not know what to attack.

Commentary: An aphorism that puts the whole art of war in a nutshell.

9. O divine art of subtlety and secrecy! Through you we learn to be invisible, through you inaudible;

Commentary: Literally, "without form or sound" — with reference, of course, to the enemy.

and so we can hold the enemy's fate in our hands.

10. You may advance and be absolutely irresistible, if you make for the enemy's weak points; you may retire and be safe from pursuit, if your movements are quicker than his.

11. If we want to fight, the enemy can be forced into an engagement even though he is sheltered behind a high rampart and a deep ditch. All we need do is attack some other place he will be obliged to relieve.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "If the enemy is the invader, we can cut his lines of communication and occupy the roads he will have to return by; if we are the invaders, we may direct our attack against the sovereign himself." Clearly Sun Tzu, unlike certain generals in the late Boer war, was no believer in frontal attacks.

12. If we do not want to fight, we can stop the enemy from engaging us even though the lines of our camp are merely traced on the ground. All we need do is throw something odd and unaccountable in his way.

Commentary: This extremely concise expression is intelligibly paraphrased by Chia Lin: "even though we have built neither wall nor ditch." Li Ch'uan says: "We puzzle him with strange and unusual dispositions." And Tu Mu clinches the meaning with three anecdotes, one of them about Chu-ko Liang, who, holding Yang-p'ing and about to be attacked by Ssu-ma I, suddenly struck his colours, stopped the drums and flung the city gates open, showing nothing but a few men sweeping and sprinkling the ground. This unexpected behaviour had the intended effect: Ssu-ma I, suspecting an ambush, actually drew off his army and retreated. What Sun Tzu is advocating here, then, is nothing more nor less than the timely use of bluff.

13. By discovering the enemy's dispositions while remaining invisible ourselves, we can keep our forces concentrated while his must be divided.

Commentary: The conclusion is perhaps not very obvious, but Chang Yu, following Mei Yao-ch'en, rightly explains: "If the enemy's dispositions are visible, we can make for him in one body; whereas our own dispositions being kept secret, the enemy will be obliged to divide his forces to guard against attack from every quarter."

14. We can form a single united body while the enemy must split into fractions. So there will be a whole pitted against separate parts of a whole, which means we shall be many to the enemy's few.

15. And if we can attack an inferior force with a superior one, our opponents will be in dire straits.

16. The spot where we intend to fight must not be made known, for then the enemy will have to prepare against a possible attack at several different points;

Commentary: Sheridan once explained General Grant's victories by saying that "while his opponents were kept fully employed wondering what he was going to do, *he* was thinking most about what he was going to do himself".

and his forces being spread in so many directions, the numbers we shall have to face at any one point will be proportionately few.

17. For if the enemy strengthens his front, he will weaken his rear; if he strengthens his rear, he will weaken his front; if he strengthens his left, he will weaken his right; if he strengthens his right, he will weaken his left. If he sends reinforcements everywhere, he will be weak everywhere.

Commentary: In Frederick the Great's *Instructions to his Generals* we read: "A defensive war is apt to betray us into too frequent detachment. Those generals who have had but little experience attempt to protect every point, while those who are better acquainted with their profession, having only the capital object in view, guard against a decisive blow, and acquiesce in small misfortunes to avoid greater."

18. Numerical weakness comes from having to prepare against possible attacks; numerical strength, from forcing our adversary to make those preparations against us.

Commentary: The highest generalship, in Colonel Henderson's words, is "to compel the enemy to disperse his army, and then to concentrate superior force against each fraction in turn".

19. Knowing the place and the time of the coming battle, we can concentrate from the greatest distances in order to fight.

Commentary: What Sun Tzu evidently has in mind is that nice calculation of distances, and that masterly use of strategy, which lets a general divide his army for a long, rapid march and then bring it together again at precisely the right spot and the right hour, to face the enemy in overwhelming strength. Of the many such successful junctions military history records, one of the most dramatic and decisive was Blücher's appearance at the critical moment on the field of Waterloo.

20. But if neither time nor place is known, then the left wing will be unable to help the right and the right unable to help the left; the front will not be able to relieve the rear, nor the rear to support the front. How much more so if the furthest parts of the army are anything under a hundred *li* apart, and even the nearest are separated by several *li*!

Commentary: The Chinese of this last sentence lacks a little in precision, but the picture we are meant to draw is probably of an army advancing towards a given rendezvous in separate columns, each ordered to be there on a fixed date. If the general lets the various detachments proceed at haphazard, with no precise instructions about the time and place of meeting, the enemy will be able to destroy the army piece by piece. Chang Yu's note is worth quoting here: "If we do not know the place where our opponents mean to concentrate, or the day on which they will give battle, our unity will be lost through our preparations for defence, and the positions we hold will be insecure. Coming suddenly upon a powerful enemy, we shall be brought to battle in a flurry, and no mutual support will be possible between wings, vanguard and rear — especially if there is any great distance between the foremost and hindmost divisions of the army."

21. Though by my estimate the soldiers of Yueh outnumber our own, that will do them no good in the matter of victory. I say, then, that victory can be achieved.

Commentary: Alas for these brave words. The long feud between the two states ended in 473 B.C. with the total defeat of Wu by Kou Chien and its absorption into Yueh. That was doubtless long after Sun Tzu's death. Compare this assertion with Chapter Four, verse 4. Chang Yu is the only commentator to point out the apparent discrepancy, and he explains it: "In the chapter on Tactical Dispositions it is said, 'One may *know* how to conquer without being able to *do* it,' whereas here we have the statement that victory can be achieved. The explanation is that in the earlier chapter, where the offensive and the defensive are under discussion, it is said that if the enemy is fully prepared one cannot be certain of beating him. But this passage refers particularly to the soldiers of Yueh who, by Sun Tzu's calculations, will be kept in ignorance of the time and place of the coming struggle. That is why he says here that victory can be achieved."

22. Though the enemy is stronger in numbers, we may prevent him from fighting. Scheme so as to discover his plans and how likely they are to succeed.

Commentary: An alternative reading offered by Chia Lin is: "Know beforehand all plans conducive to our success and to the enemy's failure."

23. Rouse him, and learn the principle of his activity or inactivity.

Commentary: Chang Yu tells us that by noting the joy or anger the enemy shows on being disturbed this way, we can judge whether his policy is to lie low or the reverse. He instances the action of Chu-ko Liang, who sent the scornful present of a woman's headdress to Ssu-ma I in order to goad him out of his delaying tactics.

Force him to reveal himself, so as to find out his vulnerable spots.

24. Compare the opposing army carefully with your own, so that you may know where strength is superabundant and where it is deficient.

Commentary: Compare Chapter Four, verse 6.

25. In making tactical dispositions, the highest pitch you can reach is to conceal them;

Commentary: The piquancy of the paradox evaporates in translation. Concealment here is perhaps not so much actual invisibility (see above, verse 9) as "showing no sign" of what you mean to do, of the plans formed in your head.

conceal your dispositions, and you will be safe from the prying of the subtlest spies and the machinations of the wisest brains.

Commentary: Tu Mu explains: "Though the enemy may have clever and capable officers, they will not be able to lay any plans against us."

26. How victory may be produced for them out of the enemy's own tactics — that is what the multitude cannot understand.

27. All men can see the tactics by which I conquer, but what none can see is the strategy out of which the victory grew.

Commentary: That is, anybody can see superficially how a battle is won; what they cannot see is the long series of plans and combinations that came before it.

28. Do not repeat the tactics that won you one victory; let your methods be governed by the infinite variety of circumstances.

Commentary: As Wang Hsi sagely remarks: "There is only one root principle underlying victory, but the tactics that lead up to it are infinite in number." Compare Colonel Henderson: "The rules of strategy are few and simple. They may be learned in a week. They may be taught by familiar illustrations or a dozen diagrams. But such knowledge will no more teach a man to lead an army like Napoleon than a knowledge of grammar will teach him to write like Gibbon."

29. Military tactics are like water; for water in its natural course runs away from high places and hurries downwards.

30. So in war the way is to avoid what is strong and strike at what is weak.

Commentary: Like water, taking the line of least resistance.

31. Water shapes its course according to the nature of the ground over which it flows; the soldier works out his victory in relation to the enemy he is facing.

32. So, just as water keeps no constant shape, in warfare there are no constant conditions.

33. He who can modify his tactics in relation to his opponent, and so win, may be called a heaven-born captain.

34. The five elements (water, fire, wood, metal, earth) are not always equally predominant;

Commentary: That is, as Wang Hsi says, "they predominate alternately".

the four seasons give way to each other in turn.

Commentary: Literally, "have no invariable seat".

There are short days and long; the moon has its waning and its waxing.

Commentary: Compare Chapter Five, verse 6. The point of the passage is simply to illustrate the lack of fixity in war by the changes constantly taking place in nature. The comparison is not a very happy one, though, because the regularity of the phenomena Sun Tzu mentions has no parallel in war at all.
