Chapter Eight: Variation of Tactics

Commentary: The heading means literally "The Nine Variations". But since Sun Tzu does not appear to enumerate them, and since he has already told us (Chapter Five, verses 6 to 11) that such departures from the ordinary course are practically innumerable, we have little option but to follow Wang Hsi, who says that "nine" stands for an indefinitely large number: "All it means is that in warfare we ought to vary our tactics to the utmost degree… I do not know what Ts'ao Kung makes these Nine Variations out to be, but it has been suggested that they are connected with the Nine Situations" of Chapter Eleven. That is the view Chang Yu adopts. The only other possibility is that something has been lost — a supposition to which the unusual shortness of the chapter lends some weight.

1. Sun Tzu said: In war, the general receives his commands from the sovereign, gathers his army and concentrates his forces.

Commentary: Repeated from Chapter Seven, verse 1, where it is certainly more in place. It may have been interpolated here simply to give the chapter a beginning.

2. In difficult country, do not camp. Where high roads cross, join hands with your allies. Do not linger in dangerously isolated positions.

Commentary: The last of these is not one of the Nine Situations listed at the beginning of Chapter Eleven, but occurs later on (verse 43 of that chapter). Chang Yu defines it as being positioned across the frontier, in hostile territory. Li Ch'uan says it is "country in which there are no springs or wells, flocks or herds, vegetables or firewood"; Chia Lin, "country of gorges, chasms and precipices, with no road to advance by".

In hemmed-in situations you must resort to stratagem. In a desperate position you must fight.

3. There are roads that must not be followed,

Commentary: "Especially those leading through narrow defiles," says Li Ch'uan, "where an ambush is to be feared."

armies that must not be attacked,

Commentary: More correctly, perhaps: "there are times when an army must not be attacked". Ch'en Hao says: "When you see your way to gaining a trifling advantage but are powerless to inflict a real defeat, refrain from attacking, for fear of overtaxing your men's strength."

towns that must not be besieged,

Commentary: Compare Chapter Three, verse 4. Ts'ao Kung gives an interesting illustration from his own experience. Invading the territory of Hsu-chou, he ignored the city of Hua-pi, which lay directly in his path, and pressed on into the heart of the country. This excellent strategy was rewarded by the later capture of no fewer than fourteen important district cities. Chang Yu says: "No town should be attacked which, if taken, cannot be held, or which, if left alone, will cause no trouble." Hsun Ying, urged to attack Pi-yang, replied: "The city is small and well fortified; even if I succeed in taking it, it will be no great feat of arms, whereas if I fail I shall make myself a laughing stock." In the seventeenth century sieges still made up a large part of war. It was Turenne who drew attention to the importance of marches, countermarches and manoeuvres. He said: "It is a great mistake to waste men in taking a town when the same expenditure of soldiers will gain a province."

Footnote: "Marshal Turenne," p. 50.

positions that must not be contested, commands of the sovereign that must not be obeyed.

Commentary: This is a hard saying for the Chinese, with their reverence for authority, and Wei Liao Tzu (quoted by Tu Mu) is moved to exclaim: "Weapons are baleful instruments, strife is the enemy of virtue, a military commander is the negation of civil order!" The unpalatable fact remains, however, that even an Emperor's wishes must give way to military necessity.

4. The general who thoroughly understands the advantages that come with varying his tactics knows how to handle his troops.

5. The general who does not understand them may know the lie of the land perfectly well and still be unable to turn that knowledge to practical account.

Commentary: Literally, "get the advantage of the ground", which means not only securing good positions but making use of natural advantages in every possible way. Chang Yu says: "Every kind of ground has its own natural features, and each also gives scope for a certain variability of plan. How can these natural features be turned to account unless topographical knowledge is supplemented by versatility of mind?"

6. So the student of war who is unpractised in the art of varying his plans will fail to make the best use of his men, even if he knows the Five Advantages.

Commentary: Chia Lin tells us these are five obvious and generally advantageous lines of action: "If a certain road is short, it must be taken; if an army is isolated, it must be attacked; if a town is in a parlous state, it must be besieged; if a position can be stormed, the attempt must be made; and if it is consistent with military operations, the ruler's commands must be obeyed." But circumstances sometimes forbid a general to use these advantages. For instance, "a certain road may be his shortest way, but if he knows it abounds in natural obstacles, or that the enemy has laid an ambush on it, he will not take it. A hostile force may be open to attack, but if he knows it is hard pressed and likely to fight with desperation, he will hold off" — and so on.

7. So in the wise leader's plans, considerations of advantage and of disadvantage are blended together.

Commentary: "Whether you are in an advantageous position or a disadvantageous one," says Ts'ao Kung, "the opposite state should always be present to your mind."

8. If our expectation of advantage is tempered this way, we may succeed in accomplishing the essential part of our plans.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "If we wish to wrest an advantage from the enemy, we must not fix our minds on that alone, but must allow for the possibility of the enemy doing us some harm too, and let that enter our calculations as a factor."

9. If, on the other hand, in the middle of difficulties we are always ready to seize an advantage, we may extricate ourselves from misfortune.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "If I wish to get myself out of a dangerous position, I must consider not only the enemy's ability to injure me but my own ability to gain an advantage over him. If these two considerations are properly blended in my counsels, I shall succeed in freeing myself… For instance, if I am surrounded by the enemy and think only of escaping, the nervelessness of my policy will encourage my adversary to pursue and crush me; it would be far better to urge my men to a bold counter-attack, and use the advantage so gained to free myself from the enemy's toils." See the story of Ts'ao Ts'ao in Chapter Seven, verse 35, note.

10. Reduce the hostile chieftains by inflicting damage on them;

Commentary: Chia Lin lists several ways of inflicting this injury, some of which would occur only to the Oriental mind: "Entice away the enemy's best and wisest men, so that he is left without counsellors. Introduce traitors into his country, so that his government's policy comes to nothing. Foment intrigue and deceit, and so sow dissension between the ruler and his ministers. By every artful contrivance, cause deterioration among his men and waste of his treasure. Corrupt his morals with insidious gifts that lead him into excess. Disturb and unsettle his mind by presenting him with lovely women." Chang Yu, following Wang Hsi, reads Sun Tzu differently here: "Get the enemy into a position where he must suffer injury, and he will submit of his own accord."

and make trouble for them,

Commentary: Tu Mu takes this phrase to mean that trouble should be made for the enemy in his "possessions", or, as we might say, his assets — which he considers to be "a large army, a rich treasury, harmony among the soldiers, punctual carrying out of commands". These give us the whip hand over him.

and keep them constantly occupied;

Commentary: Literally, "make servants of them". Tu Yu says: "Prevent them from having any rest."

hold out specious attractions, and make them rush to any given point.

Commentary: Meng Shih's note contains an excellent example of the idiomatic use of this phrase: "cause them to forget *pien*" — the reasons for acting otherwise than on their first impulse — "and hasten in our direction".

11. The art of war teaches us to rely not on the likelihood of the enemy not coming, but on our own readiness to receive him; not on the chance of his not attacking, but on the fact that we have made our position unassailable.

12. There are five dangerous faults that may affect a general. (1) Recklessness, which leads to destruction;

Commentary: "Bravery without forethought", as Ts'ao Kung analyses it, which makes a man fight blindly and desperately like a mad bull. Such an opponent, says Chang Yu, "must not be met with brute force, but may be lured into an ambush and killed". Compare Wu Tzu, chapter 4, at the beginning: "In estimating a general's character, men are apt to pay exclusive attention to his courage, forgetting that courage is only one of the many qualities a general should have. The merely brave man is prone to fight recklessly; and the man who fights recklessly, with no sense of what is expedient, must be condemned." The Ssu-ma Fa also makes the incisive remark: "Simply going to one's death does not bring victory."

(2) cowardice, which leads to capture;

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung defines the Chinese word translated here as "cowardice" as belonging to the man "whom timidity prevents from advancing to seize an advantage", and Wang Hsi adds, "who is quick to run at the sight of danger". Meng Shih gives the closer paraphrase "he who is bent on returning alive" — that is, the man who will never take a risk. But as Sun Tzu knew, nothing is achieved in war unless you are willing to take risks. T'ai Kung said: "He who lets an advantage slip will afterwards bring real disaster on himself." In A.D. 404 Liu Yu pursued the rebel Huan Hsuan up the Yangtse and fought a naval battle with him at the island of Ch'eng-hung. The loyal troops numbered only a few thousand, while their opponents were in great force. But Huan Hsuan, fearing the fate in store for him if he were beaten, had a light boat made fast to the side of his war junk so that he could escape at a moment's notice. The natural result was that his soldiers' fighting spirit was utterly quenched; and when the loyalists attacked from windward with fireships, every man striving to be first into the fray, Huan Hsuan's forces were routed, had to burn all their baggage, and fled for two days and nights without stopping. Chang Yu tells a similar story of Chao Ying-ch'i, a general of the Chin State, who during a battle with the army of Ch'u in 597 B.C. had a boat kept ready for him on the river, wishing to be the first across in case of defeat.

(3) a hasty temper, which can be provoked by insults;

Commentary: Tu Mu tells us that Yao Hsiang, opposed in A.D. 357 by Huang Mei, Teng Ch'iang and others, shut himself up behind his walls and refused to fight. Teng Ch'iang said: "Our adversary has a choleric temper and is easily provoked; let us make constant sallies and break down his walls, and he will grow angry and come out. Once we can bring his force to battle, it is bound to be our prey." The plan was acted on; Yao Hsiang came out to fight, was lured as far as San-yuan by the enemy's pretended flight, and was finally attacked and killed.

(4) a delicacy of honour that is sensitive to shame;

Commentary: This need not be taken to mean that a sense of honour is really a defect in a general. What Sun Tzu condemns is rather an exaggerated sensitiveness to slanderous reports — the thin-skinned man who is stung by abuse, however undeserved. Mei Yao-ch'en observes truly, if a little paradoxically: "The seeker after glory should be careless of public opinion."

(5) over-solicitude for his men, which exposes him to worry and trouble.

Commentary: Here again Sun Tzu does not mean that the general should be careless of his troops' welfare. All he wants to stress is the danger of sacrificing any important military advantage to his men's immediate comfort. That is a short-sighted policy, because in the long run the troops will suffer more from the defeat, or at best the prolonging of the war, that follows from it. A mistaken feeling of pity will often lead a general to relieve a besieged city, or reinforce a hard-pressed detachment, against his military instincts. It is now generally admitted that our repeated efforts to relieve Ladysmith in the South African War were so many strategic blunders that defeated their own purpose. And in the end relief came through the very man who set out with the firm resolve to stop subordinating the interests of the whole to sentiment in favour of a part. An old soldier of one of our generals who failed most conspicuously in that war once tried, I remember, to defend him to me on the ground that he was always "so good to his men". By that plea, had he only known it, he was condemning him out of Sun Tzu's own mouth.

13. These are the five besetting sins of a general, ruinous to the conduct of war.

14. When an army is overthrown and its leader killed, the cause will surely be found among these five dangerous faults. Let them be a subject for meditation.
