Chapter Nine: The Army on the March

Commentary: The contents of this interesting chapter are better indicated by verse 1 than by the heading.

1. Sun Tzu said: We come now to the question of encamping the army and observing signs of the enemy. Pass quickly over mountains, and keep near valleys.

Commentary: The idea is not to linger among barren uplands but to stay close to supplies of water and grass. Compare Wu Tzu, chapter 3: "Do not stay in natural ovens" — that is, in the mouths of valleys. Chang Yu tells this anecdote. Wu-tu Ch'iang was a robber captain in the time of the Later Han, and Ma Yuan was sent to wipe out his gang. Ch'iang took refuge in the hills, and Ma Yuan made no attempt to force a battle but seized all the favourable positions commanding water and forage. Ch'iang was soon in such desperate straits for provisions that he had to surrender outright. He did not know the advantage of keeping near valleys.

2. Camp in high places,

Commentary: Not on high hills, but on knolls or hillocks raised above the surrounding country.

facing the sun.

Commentary: Tu Mu takes this to mean "facing south" and Ch'en Hao "facing east". Compare below, verses 11 and 13.

Do not climb heights in order to fight. So much for mountain warfare.

3. After crossing a river, you should get well away from it.

Commentary: "In order to tempt the enemy to cross after you," according to Ts'ao Kung, and also, says Chang Yu, "in order not to be hampered in your movements". The *T'ung Tien* reads, "If *the enemy* crosses a river", and so on. But in view of the next sentence this is almost certainly an interpolation.

4. When an invading force crosses a river on its way towards you, do not go to meet it in midstream. It is best to let half the army get across, and then attack.

Commentary: Li Ch'uan alludes to the great victory Han Hsin won over Lung Chu at the Wei River. Turning to the *Ch'ien Han Shu*, chapter 34, folio 6 verso, we find the battle described as follows. The two armies were drawn up on opposite banks. In the night Han Hsin ordered his men to take some ten thousand sacks filled with sand and build a dam higher upstream. Then, leading half his army across, he attacked Lung Chu; but after a while, pretending to have failed, he withdrew hastily to the other bank. Lung Chu, much elated by this unlooked-for success, exclaimed, "I was sure Han Hsin was really a coward!" and pursued him, beginning to cross the river in his turn. Han Hsin now sent a party to cut the sandbags open, releasing a great volume of water that swept down and stopped the greater part of Lung Chu's army from getting across. He then turned on the force that had been cut off and annihilated it, Lung Chu himself among the slain. The rest of the army, on the far bank, scattered and fled in all directions.

5. If you are anxious to fight, you should not go to meet the invader near a river he has to cross.

Commentary: For fear of preventing his crossing.

6. Moor your craft higher upstream than the enemy's, and facing the sun.

Commentary: See above, verse 2. The repetition of these words in connection with water is very awkward. Chang Yu notes: "Said either of troops drawn up on the riverbank, or of boats anchored in the stream itself; in either case it is essential to be higher than the enemy and facing the sun." The other commentators are not at all explicit.

Do not move upstream to meet the enemy.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "As water flows downwards, we must not pitch camp on the lower reaches of a river, for fear the enemy should open the sluices and sweep us away in a flood. Chu-ko Wu-hou remarked that 'in river warfare we must not advance against the stream', which amounts to saying that our fleet must not anchor below the enemy's, or they will be able to use the current and make short work of us." There is also the danger, noted by other commentators, that the enemy may throw poison into the water to be carried down to us.

So much for river warfare.

7. In crossing salt marshes, your only concern should be to get over them quickly, without any delay.

Commentary: Because of the lack of fresh water, the poor quality of the herbage, and, not least, because they are low, flat and exposed to attack.

8. If you are forced to fight in a salt marsh, you should have water and grass near you and get your back to a clump of trees.

Commentary: Li Ch'uan remarks that the ground is less likely to be treacherous where there are trees, while Tu Mu says they will protect the rear.

So much for operations in salt marshes.

9. In dry, level country, take up an easily accessible position with rising ground to your right and behind you,

Commentary: Tu Mu quotes T'ai Kung: "An army should have a stream or a marsh on its left and a hill or mound on its right."

so that the danger is in front and safety behind. So much for campaigning in flat country.

10. These are the four useful branches of military knowledge

Commentary: Those concerned with (1) mountains, (2) rivers, (3) marshes and (4) plains. Compare Napoleon's "Military Maxims," no. 1.

which enabled the Yellow Emperor to defeat four several sovereigns.

Commentary: About the Yellow Emperor: Mei Yao-ch'en asks, with some plausibility, whether there is an error in the text, since nothing is known of Huang Ti having conquered four other Emperors. The *Shih Chi*, chapter 1, at the beginning, speaks only of his victories over Yen Ti and Ch'ih Yu. The *Liu T'ao* mentions that he "fought seventy battles and pacified the Empire". Ts'ao Kung explains that the Yellow Emperor was the first to institute the feudal system of vassal princes, each of whom — four in number — originally bore the title of Emperor. Li Ch'uan tells us that the art of war began under Huang Ti, who received it from his minister Feng Hou.

11. All armies prefer high ground to low,

Commentary: "High ground," says Mei Yao-ch'en, "is not only pleasanter and healthier but more convenient from a military point of view; low ground is not only damp and unhealthy but also bad for fighting."

and sunny places to dark.

12. If you take care of your men,

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung says: "Make for fresh water and pasture, where you can turn the animals out to graze."

and camp on hard ground, the army will be free of every kind of disease,

Commentary: Chang Yu says: "The dryness of the ground will prevent illness breaking out."

and that will mean victory.

13. When you come to a hill or a bank, occupy the sunny side, with the slope on your right rear. So you will at once act for your soldiers' benefit and use the natural advantages of the ground.

14. When heavy rain upcountry has swollen a river you want to ford, and it is flecked with foam, you must wait until it goes down.

15. Country with precipitous cliffs and torrents running between them, deep natural hollows,

Commentary: The last defined as "places enclosed on every side by steep banks, with pools of water at the bottom".

confined places,

Commentary: Defined as "natural pens or prisons", or "places surrounded by precipices on three sides — easy to get into, hard to get out of".

tangled thickets,

Commentary: Defined as "places covered with undergrowth so dense that spears cannot be used".

quagmires

Commentary: Defined as "low-lying places so heavy with mud that they are impassable for chariots and horsemen".

and crevasses,

Commentary: Defined by Mei Yao-ch'en as "a narrow difficult way between overhanging cliffs". Tu Mu's note is "ground covered with trees and rocks, and cut up by numerous ravines and pitfalls". This is very vague, but Chia Lin explains it clearly enough as a defile or narrow pass, and Chang Yu takes much the same view. On the whole the weight of the commentators certainly inclines to "defile". But the ordinary meaning of the Chinese in one place is "a crack or fissure", and that, together with the fact that the sense elsewhere in the sentence points to something like a defile, makes me think Sun Tzu is speaking here of crevasses.

should be left with all possible speed and not approached.

16. While we keep away from such places, we should get the enemy to approach them; while we face them, we should let the enemy have them at his back.

17. If there is any hilly country near your camp, or ponds surrounded by water grass, or hollow basins full of reeds, or woods with thick undergrowth, they must be carefully beaten and searched; for these are the places where men in ambush or insidious spies are likely to be lurking.

Commentary: Chang Yu notes: "We must also be on our guard against traitors lying in close cover, secretly spying out our weaknesses and overhearing our instructions."

18. When the enemy is close at hand and stays quiet, he is relying on the natural strength of his position.

Commentary: Here begin Sun Tzu's remarks on reading signs, much of which is so good that it could almost be included in a modern manual like General Baden-Powell's "Aids to Scouting".

19. When he keeps his distance and tries to provoke a battle, he is anxious for the other side to advance.

Commentary: Probably because we are in a strong position he wants to dislodge us from. "If he came close up to us," says Tu Mu, "and tried to force a battle, he would seem to despise us, and we should be less likely to take up the challenge."

20. If his camp is easy to get at, he is offering a bait.

21. Movement among the trees of a forest shows that the enemy is advancing.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung explains this as "felling trees to clear a passage", and Chang Yu says: "Every commander sends out scouts to climb high places and observe the enemy. If a scout sees that the trees of a forest are moving and shaking, he knows they are being cut down to clear a passage for the enemy's march."

The appearance of a number of screens in the middle of thick grass means the enemy wants to make us suspicious.

Commentary: Tu Yu's explanation, borrowed from Ts'ao Kung's, is this: "The presence of a number of screens or sheds in the middle of thick vegetation is a sure sign that the enemy has fled and, fearing pursuit, has built these hiding places to make us suspect an ambush." It seems these screens were hastily knotted together out of whatever long grass the retreating enemy came across.

22. Birds rising in flight are the sign of an ambush.

Commentary: Chang Yu's explanation is doubtless right: "When birds flying along in a straight line suddenly shoot upwards, it means soldiers are in ambush at the spot beneath."

Startled beasts mean that a sudden attack is coming.

23. Dust rising in a high column is the sign of chariots advancing; when the dust is low but spread over a wide area, it means infantry approaching.

Commentary: "High and sharp", or rising to a peak, is of course somewhat exaggerated as applied to dust. The commentators explain the phenomenon by saying that horses and chariots, being heavier than men, raise more dust, and also follow one another in the same wheel track, whereas foot soldiers march in ranks many abreast. According to Chang Yu, "every army on the march must have scouts some way ahead, who on sighting dust raised by the enemy will gallop back and report it to the commander-in-chief". Compare General Baden-Powell: "As you move along, say, in a hostile country, your eyes should be looking afar for the enemy or any signs of him: figures, dust rising, birds getting up, glitter of arms, and so on."

Footnote: "Aids to Scouting," p. 26.

When the dust branches out in different directions, it shows that parties have been sent to collect firewood. A few clouds of dust moving to and fro mean that the army is making camp.

Commentary: Chang Yu says: "In laying out the defences of a camp, light horse will be sent to survey the position and find the weak and strong points all round its circumference. Hence the small quantity of dust, and its motion."

24. Humble words and increased preparations are signs that the enemy is about to advance.

Commentary: "As though they stood in great fear of us," says Tu Mu. "Their object is to make us contemptuous and careless, and then attack." Chang Yu alludes to the story of T'ien Tan of Chi-mo against the Yen forces under Ch'i Chieh. In chapter 82 of the *Shih Chi* we read: T'ien Tan said openly, "My only fear is that the Yen army may cut off the noses of their Ch'i prisoners and put them in the front rank to fight against us; that would be the undoing of our city." The other side, hearing of this, acted at once on the suggestion; but the people inside the city were enraged at seeing their countrymen mutilated, and, fearing nothing so much as falling into the enemy's hands themselves, were nerved to defend the place more stubbornly than ever. Again T'ien Tan sent back converted spies who reported these words to the enemy: "What I dread most is that the men of Yen may dig up the ancestral tombs outside the town, and by that indignity to our forefathers make us faint-hearted." At once the besiegers dug up all the graves and burned the corpses in them. And the people of Chi-mo, watching the outrage from the walls, wept passionately and were all impatient to go out and fight, their fury increased tenfold. T'ien Tan knew then that his soldiers were ready for anything. But instead of a sword he took a mattock in his own hands, and had others handed out to his best warriors, while the ranks were filled up with their wives and concubines. He then served out all the remaining rations and told his men to eat their fill. The regular soldiers were kept out of sight, and the walls were manned with the old and weak and with women. That done, envoys were sent to the enemy's camp to arrange terms of surrender, and the Yen army began shouting for joy. T'ien Tan also collected 20,000 ounces of silver from the people and got the wealthy citizens of Chi-mo to send it to the Yen general, praying that when the town capitulated he would not let their homes be plundered or their women maltreated. Ch'i Chieh, in high good humour, granted the prayer; but his army now grew steadily slacker and more careless. Meanwhile T'ien Tan got together a thousand oxen, decked them with pieces of red silk, painted their bodies with coloured stripes like dragons, fastened sharp blades to their horns and well-greased rushes to their tails. When night came he lit the ends of the rushes and drove the oxen out through a number of holes he had pierced in the walls, backing them up with a force of 5,000 picked warriors. The animals, maddened with pain, dashed furiously into the enemy's camp and caused the utmost confusion and dismay; their tails acted as torches, showing up the hideous pattern on their bodies, and the weapons on their horns killed or wounded anyone they touched. Meanwhile the band of 5,000 had crept up with gags in their mouths, and now threw themselves on the enemy. At the same moment a frightful din arose in the city itself, everyone left behind making as much noise as possible by banging drums and hammering on bronze vessels, until heaven and earth were convulsed with the uproar. Terror-stricken, the Yen army fled in disorder, hotly pursued by the men of Ch'i, who killed their general Ch'i Chieh… The result of the battle was the eventual recovery of some seventy cities that had belonged to the Ch'i State.

Violent language and driving forward as if to attack are signs that he will retreat.

25. When the light chariots come out first and take up position on the wings, it is a sign that the enemy is forming for battle.

26. Peace proposals unaccompanied by a sworn covenant indicate a plot.

Commentary: The reading here is uncertain. Li Ch'uan takes it as "a treaty confirmed by oaths and hostages". Wang Hsi and Chang Yu, on the other hand, simply say "without reason", "on a frivolous pretext".

27. When there is much running about

Commentary: Every man hurrying to his proper place under his own regimental banner.

and the soldiers fall into rank, it means the critical moment has come.

28. When some are seen advancing and some retreating, it is a lure.

29. When the soldiers stand leaning on their spears, they are faint from want of food.

30. If those sent to draw water begin by drinking themselves, the army is suffering from thirst.

Commentary: As Tu Mu remarks: "One may know the condition of a whole army from the behaviour of a single man."

31. If the enemy sees an advantage to be gained and makes no effort to take it, his soldiers are exhausted.

32. If birds gather on a spot, it is unoccupied.

Commentary: A useful fact to bear in mind when, as Ch'en Hao says, the enemy has secretly abandoned his camp.

Clamour by night means nervousness.

33. If there is disturbance in the camp, the general's authority is weak. If the banners and flags are shifted about, sedition is afoot. If the officers are angry, it means the men are weary.

Commentary: Tu Mu reads the sentence differently: "If all the officers of an army are angry with their general, it means they are broken with fatigue" — from the exertions he has demanded of them.

34. When an army feeds its horses with grain and kills its cattle for food,

Commentary: In the ordinary course of things the men would be fed on grain and the horses chiefly on grass.

and when the men do not hang their cooking pots over the camp fires, showing that they will not be returning to their tents, you may know they are determined to fight to the death.

Commentary: I may quote here the illustrative passage from the *Hou Han Shu*, chapter 71, given in abbreviated form by the *P'ei Wen Yun Fu:* The rebel Wang Kuo of Liang was besieging the town of Ch'en-ts'ang, and Huang-fu Sung, who was in supreme command, and Tung Cho were sent out against him. Tung Cho pressed for hasty measures, but Sung turned a deaf ear. At last the rebels were utterly worn out and began throwing down their weapons of their own accord. Sung was for advancing to the attack, but Cho said: "It is a principle of war not to pursue desperate men and not to press a retreating host." Sung answered: "That does not apply here. What I am about to attack is a jaded army, not a retreating host; with disciplined troops I am falling on a disorganized multitude, not a band of desperate men." So he advanced to the attack unsupported by his colleague, and routed the enemy, Wang Kuo being killed.

35. The sight of men whispering together in small knots, or speaking in low tones, points to disaffection among the rank and file.

36. Too frequent rewards mean the enemy is at the end of his resources;

Commentary: Because when an army is hard pressed, as Tu Mu says, there is always a fear of mutiny, and lavish rewards are given to keep the men in good temper.

too many punishments betray a condition of dire distress.

Commentary: Because in such a case discipline grows slack, and unusual severity is needed to keep the men to their duty.

37. To begin with bluster and afterwards take fright at the enemy's numbers shows a supreme lack of intelligence.

Commentary: I follow Ts'ao Kung's reading, also adopted by Li Ch'uan, Tu Mu and Chang Yu. Another possible meaning, set out by Tu Yu, Chia Lin, Mei Yao-ch'en and Wang Hsi, is: "The general who is first tyrannical towards his men and then in terror lest they should mutiny." That would connect the sentence with what went before about rewards and punishments.

38. When envoys are sent with compliments in their mouths, it is a sign that the enemy wants a truce.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "If the enemy opens friendly relations by sending hostages, it is a sign that they are anxious for an armistice, either because their strength is exhausted or for some other reason." But it hardly takes a Sun Tzu to draw so obvious an inference.

39. If the enemy's troops march up angrily and stand facing ours for a long time without either joining battle or going away again, the situation is one that demands great vigilance and circumspection.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung says a manoeuvre of this sort may be only a ruse to gain time for an unexpected flank attack or the laying of an ambush.

40. If our troops are no more numerous than the enemy's, that is quite enough; it only means that no direct attack can be made.

Commentary: Literally, "no martial advance". That is to say, *cheng* tactics and frontal attacks must be avoided, and stratagem used instead.

What we can do is simply concentrate all our available strength, keep a close watch on the enemy, and get reinforcements.

Commentary: This is an obscure sentence, and none of the commentators manages to squeeze very good sense out of it. I follow Li Ch'uan, who seems to offer the simplest explanation: "Only the side that gets more men will win." Fortunately Chang Yu expounds it in language that is lucidity itself: "When the numbers are even and no favourable opening presents itself, we may not be strong enough to deliver a sustained attack, but we can find extra recruits among our suppliers and camp followers, and then, concentrating our forces and keeping a close watch on the enemy, contrive to snatch the victory. But we must avoid borrowing foreign soldiers to help us." He then quotes Wei Liao Tzu, chapter 3: "The nominal strength of mercenary troops may be 100,000, but their real value will be no more than half that."

41. He who exercises no forethought and makes light of his opponents is sure to be captured by them.

Commentary: Ch'en Hao, quoting the *Tso Chuan*, says: "If bees and scorpions carry poison, how much more a hostile state!" Even a puny opponent, then, should not be treated with contempt.

42. If soldiers are punished before they have grown attached to you, they will not be submissive; and if they are not submissive, they will be practically useless. If, once they have grown attached to you, punishments are not enforced, they will still be useless.

43. So soldiers must be treated in the first place with humanity, but kept under control by iron discipline.

Commentary: Yen Tzu (493 B.C.) said of Ssu-ma Jang-chu: "His civil virtues endeared him to the people; his martial prowess kept his enemies in awe." Compare Wu Tzu, chapter 4, at the beginning: "The ideal commander unites culture with a warlike temper; the profession of arms requires a combination of hardness and tenderness."

This is a certain road to victory.

44. If commands are habitually enforced in training the soldiers, the army will be well disciplined; if not, its discipline will be bad.

45. If a general shows confidence in his men but always insists on his orders being obeyed,

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "In time of peace a general ought to show kindly confidence in his men and also make his authority respected, so that when they come to face the enemy his orders are carried out and discipline is maintained, because they all trust and look up to him." What Sun Tzu says in verse 44, however, would lead one rather to expect something like: "If a general is always confident that his orders will be carried out," and so on.

the gain will be mutual.

Commentary: Chang Yu says: "The general has confidence in the men under his command, and the men are docile, having confidence in him. So the gain is mutual." He quotes a pregnant sentence from Wei Liao Tzu, chapter 4: "The art of giving orders is not to try to rectify minor blunders and not to be swayed by petty doubts." Vacillation and fussiness are the surest way of sapping an army's confidence.
