Chapter Ten: Terrain

Commentary: Only about a third of the chapter, verses 1 to 13, deals with terrain; the subject is treated more fully in Chapter Eleven. The "six calamities" are discussed in verses 14 to 20, and the rest of the chapter is again a string of desultory remarks — though perhaps no less interesting for that.

1. Sun Tzu said: We may distinguish six kinds of terrain, namely: (1) accessible ground;

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en says: "plentifully provided with roads and means of communication."

(2) entangling ground;

Commentary: The same commentator says: "Net-like country, which you become entangled in if you venture into it."

(3) temporising ground;

Commentary: Ground that allows you to stave things off, or delay.

(4) narrow passes; (5) precipitous heights; (6) positions at a great distance from the enemy.

Commentary: It is hardly necessary to point out how faulty this classification is. A strange lack of logical perception shows in the way Chinese writers accept, without question, glaring cross-divisions like this one.

2. Ground that both sides can cross freely is called *accessible*.

3. On ground of this kind, be ahead of the enemy in occupying the raised and sunny spots, and guard your line of supply carefully.

Commentary: The general sense of that last phrase is doubtless, as Tu Yu says, "not to allow the enemy to cut your communications". In view of Napoleon's dictum that "the secret of war lies in the communications", we could wish Sun Tzu had done more than skirt the edge of this important subject, here and in Chapter One verse 10 and Chapter Seven verse 11. Colonel Henderson says: "The line of supply may be said to be as vital to the existence of an army as the heart to the life of a human being. Just as the duellist who finds his adversary's point menacing him with certain death, and his own guard astray, is compelled to conform to his adversary's movements and content himself with warding off the thrusts, so the commander whose communications are suddenly threatened finds himself in a false position, and he will be fortunate if he does not have to change all his plans, split his force into more or less isolated detachments, and fight with inferior numbers on ground he has had no time to prepare, where defeat will not be an ordinary failure but will entail the ruin or surrender of his whole army."

Footnote: See "Pensees de Napoleon 1er," no. 47.

Footnote: "The Science of War," chapter 2.

Then you will be able to fight with advantage.

4. Ground that can be abandoned but is hard to reoccupy is called *entangling*.

5. From a position of this sort, if the enemy is unprepared, you may sally out and beat him. But if he is ready for your coming and you fail to beat him, then, since return is impossible, disaster will follow.

6. When the position is such that neither side will gain by moving first, it is called *temporising* ground.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "Each side finds it inconvenient to move, and the situation stays deadlocked."

7. In a position of this sort, even if the enemy offers an attractive bait,

Commentary: Tu Yu says, "turning their backs on us and pretending to flee". But that is only one of the lures that might tempt us to leave our position.

it will be as well not to stir, but rather to retreat, and so entice the enemy out in his turn; then, when part of his army has come out, we may attack to advantage.

8. As for *narrow passes*, if you can occupy them first, garrison them strongly and wait for the enemy to come.

Commentary: Because then, as Tu Yu observes, "the initiative will lie with us, and by making sudden and unexpected attacks we shall have the enemy at our mercy".

9. If the enemy occupies a pass before you, do not go after him if it is fully garrisoned — only if it is weakly garrisoned.

10. As for *precipitous heights*, if you get there before your adversary, occupy the raised and sunny spots and wait for him there.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung says: "The particular advantage of securing heights and defiles is that your actions cannot then be dictated by the enemy." (For the grand principle alluded to, see Chapter Six, verse 2.) Chang Yu tells this anecdote of P'ei Hsing-chien (A.D. 619–682), who was sent on a punitive expedition against the Turkic tribes. At night he pitched camp as usual, and it had already been completely fortified with wall and ditch, when he suddenly ordered the army to shift quarters to a nearby hill. His officers were highly displeased and protested loudly at the extra fatigue this would cost the men. P'ei Hsing-chien paid no heed to their complaints and had the camp moved as quickly as possible. That same night a terrific storm came on, flooding their former camping ground to a depth of more than twelve feet. The recalcitrant officers were amazed at the sight and admitted they had been wrong. "How did you know what was going to happen?" they asked. P'ei Hsing-chien replied: "From this time on, be content to obey orders without asking unnecessary questions." "From this," Chang Yu goes on, "it may be seen that high and sunny places are advantageous not only for fighting but because they are safe from disastrous floods."

11. If the enemy has occupied them before you, do not follow him; retreat and try to entice him away.

Commentary: The turning point of Li Shih-min's campaign of A.D. 621 against the two rebels Tou Chien-te, King of Hsia, and Wang Shih-ch'ung, Prince of Cheng, was his seizure of the heights of Wu-lao. In spite of it Tou Chien-te persisted in trying to relieve his ally in Lo-yang, and was defeated and taken prisoner. See the *Chiu T'ang Shu*, chapter 2, folio 5 verso, and also chapter 54.

12. If you are a great distance from the enemy and the two armies are equal in strength, it is not easy to provoke a battle,

Commentary: The point is that we must not think of undertaking a long and wearisome march, at the end of which, as Tu Yu says, "we should be exhausted and our adversary fresh and keen".

and fighting will be to your disadvantage.

13. These six are the principles connected with Earth.

Commentary: Or perhaps "the principles relating to ground". See, however, Chapter One, verse 8.

The general who has reached a responsible post must study them carefully.

14. Now an army is exposed to six several calamities that arise not from natural causes but from faults the general is responsible for. They are: (1) flight; (2) insubordination; (3) collapse; (4) ruin; (5) disorganisation; (6) rout.

15. Other conditions being equal, if one force is hurled against another ten times its size, the result will be the *flight* of the first.

16. When the common soldiers are too strong and their officers too weak, the result is *insubordination*.

Commentary: Tu Mu cites the unhappy case of T'ien Pu (*Hsin T'ang Shu*, chapter 148), who was sent to Wei in A.D. 821 with orders to lead an army against Wang T'ing-ts'ou. The whole time he was in command his soldiers treated him with the utmost contempt and openly flouted his authority by riding about the camp on donkeys, several thousand at a time. T'ien Pu was powerless to stop it; and when, after some months, he tried to engage the enemy, his troops turned tail and scattered in every direction. After that the unfortunate man cut his own throat.

When the officers are too strong and the common soldiers too weak, the result is *collapse*.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung says: "The officers are energetic and want to press on, the common soldiers are feeble and suddenly collapse."

17. When the higher officers are angry and insubordinate, and on meeting the enemy give battle on their own account out of resentment, before the commander-in-chief can tell whether or not he is in a position to fight, the result is *ruin*.

Commentary: Wang Hsi's note is: "This means the general is angry without cause and at the same time does not appreciate the ability of his subordinate officers; so he stirs up fierce resentment and brings an avalanche of ruin on his own head."

18. When the general is weak and without authority; when his orders are not clear and distinct;

Commentary: Wei Liao Tzu, chapter 4, says: "If the commander gives his orders with decision, the soldiers will not wait to hear them twice; if his moves are made without vacillation, the soldiers will not be in two minds about doing their duty." General Baden-Powell says, italicizing the words: "The secret of getting successful work out of your trained men lies in one nutshell — in the clearness of the instructions they receive." Compare also Wu Tzu, chapter 3: "The most fatal defect in a military leader is indecision; the worst calamities that befall an army arise from hesitation."

Footnote: "Aids to Scouting," p. xii.

when officers and men have no fixed duties assigned to them,

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "Neither officers nor men have any regular routine."

and the ranks are formed in a slovenly, haphazard way, the result is utter *disorganisation*.

19. When a general, unable to estimate the enemy's strength, lets an inferior force engage a larger one, or hurls a weak detachment against a powerful one, and fails to put picked soldiers in the front rank, the result must be a *rout*.

Commentary: Chang Yu paraphrases the second half of the sentence and goes on: "Whenever there is fighting to be done, the keenest spirits should be appointed to serve in the front ranks, both to strengthen the resolution of our own men and to demoralize the enemy." Compare the primi ordines of Caesar ("De Bello Gallico," V. 28, 44, and elsewhere).

20. These are six ways of courting defeat, and must be carefully noted by the general who has reached a responsible post.

Commentary: See above, verse 13.

21. The natural formation of the country is the soldier's best ally;

Commentary: Ch'en Hao says: "The advantages of weather and season are not equal to those of ground."

but the power of estimating an adversary, of controlling the forces of victory, and of shrewdly calculating difficulties, dangers and distances, is the test of a great general.

22. He who knows these things and puts his knowledge into practice in his fighting will win his battles. He who does not know them, and does not practise them, will surely be defeated.

23. If fighting is sure to result in victory, then you must fight, even though the ruler forbids it; if fighting will not result in victory, then you must not fight, even at the ruler's bidding.

Commentary: Compare the end of Chapter Eight, verse 3. Huang Shih-kung of the Ch'in dynasty, who is said to have been Chang Liang's patron and to have written the *San Lueh*, has these words attributed to him: "The responsibility for setting an army in motion must rest on the general alone; if advance and retreat are controlled from the Palace, brilliant results will hardly be achieved. So the god-like ruler and the enlightened monarch are content to play a humble part in furthering their country's cause" — literally, to kneel down and push the chariot wheel. This means that in matters outside the women's quarters the military commander's decision must be absolute. Chang Yu also quotes the saying: "Decrees from the Son of Heaven do not penetrate the walls of a camp."

24. The general who advances without coveting fame and retreats without fearing disgrace,

Commentary: It was Wellington, I think, who said that the hardest thing of all for a soldier is to retreat.

whose only thought is to protect his country and serve his sovereign well, is the jewel of the kingdom.

Commentary: A noble presentation, in a few words, of the Chinese "happy warrior". Such a man, says Ho Shih, "even if he had to suffer punishment, would not regret his conduct".

25. Regard your soldiers as your children, and they will follow you into the deepest valleys; look on them as your own beloved sons, and they will stand by you even to death.

Commentary: Compare Chapter One, verse 6. Here Tu Mu draws an engaging picture of the famous general Wu Ch'i, from whose treatise on war I have often had occasion to quote: "He wore the same clothes and ate the same food as the meanest of his soldiers, refused to have either a horse to ride or a mat to sleep on, carried his own surplus rations wrapped in a parcel, and shared every hardship with his men. One of his soldiers had an abscess, and Wu Ch'i himself sucked out the poison. The soldier's mother, hearing of it, began wailing and lamenting. Somebody asked her: 'Why do you cry? Your son is only a common soldier, and the commander-in-chief himself has sucked the poison from his sore.' The woman replied: 'Many years ago Lord Wu did the same service for my husband, who never left him afterwards, and finally met his death at the enemy's hands. And now that he has done the same for my son, my son too will fall fighting, I know not where.'" Li Ch'uan mentions the Viscount of Ch'u, who invaded the small state of Hsiao in winter. The Duke of Shen said to him: "Many of the soldiers are suffering severely from the cold." So he made a round of the whole army, comforting and encouraging the men; and at once they felt as though they were dressed in garments lined with floss silk.

26. If, however, you are indulgent but cannot make your authority felt; kind-hearted but unable to enforce your commands; and incapable, besides, of quelling disorder — then your soldiers must be compared to spoilt children. They are useless for any practical purpose.

Commentary: Li Ching once said that if you could make your soldiers afraid of you, they would not be afraid of the enemy. Tu Mu recalls an instance of stern military discipline from A.D. 219, when Lu Meng was occupying the town of Chiang-ling. He had given his army stringent orders not to molest the inhabitants or take anything from them by force. Nevertheless a certain officer under his command, who happened to be a fellow townsman, took a bamboo hat belonging to one of the people in order to wear it over his regulation helmet against the rain. Lu Meng held that being a fellow native of Ju-nan could not excuse a clear breach of discipline, and ordered his summary execution — the tears rolling down his own face as he did it. This act of severity filled the army with wholesome awe, and from that time on even articles dropped in the highway were not picked up.

27. If we know that our own men are in a condition to attack, but do not know that the enemy is not open to attack, we have gone only halfway to victory.

Commentary: That is, as Ts'ao Kung says, "the issue in this case is uncertain".

28. If we know that the enemy is open to attack, but do not know that our own men are not in a condition to attack, we have gone only halfway to victory.

Commentary: Compare Chapter Three, verse 13 (1).

29. If we know that the enemy is open to attack and that our men are in a condition to attack, but do not know that the nature of the ground makes fighting impracticable, we have still gone only halfway to victory.

30. So the experienced soldier, once in motion, is never bewildered; once he has broken camp, he is never at a loss.

Commentary: The reason being, according to Tu Mu, that he has taken his measures so thoroughly as to make victory certain beforehand. "He does not move recklessly," says Chang Yu, "so when he does move he makes no mistakes."

31. Hence the saying: If you know the enemy and know yourself, your victory will not be in doubt; if you know Heaven and know Earth, you may make your victory complete.

Commentary: Li Ch'uan sums up: "Given a knowledge of three things — the affairs of men, the seasons of heaven and the natural advantages of earth — victory will always crown your battles."
