Chapter Eleven: The Nine Situations

(Part 1 of 2)

1. Sun Tzu said: The art of war recognises nine varieties of ground: (1) dispersive ground; (2) facile ground; (3) contentious ground; (4) open ground; (5) ground of intersecting highways; (6) serious ground; (7) difficult ground; (8) hemmed-in ground; (9) desperate ground.

2. When a chieftain fights in his own territory, it is dispersive ground.

Commentary: So called because the soldiers, being near their homes and anxious to see their wives and children, are likely to seize the chance a battle gives them and scatter in every direction. "In advancing," observes Tu Mu, "they will lack the valour of desperation, and in retreating they will find places of refuge."

3. When he has penetrated hostile territory, but not far, it is facile ground.

Commentary: Li Ch'uan and Ho Shih say "because of the ease of retreating", and the other commentators explain it similarly. Tu Mu remarks: "When your army has crossed the border you should burn your boats and bridges, to make it clear to everyone that you have no hankering after home."

4. Ground that gives a great advantage to whichever side holds it is contentious ground.

Commentary: Tu Mu defines it as ground "to be contended for". Ts'ao Kung says: "ground on which the few and the weak can defeat the many and the strong" — such as "the neck of a pass", which is Li Ch'uan's instance. Thermopylae was of this kind, because holding it even for a few days meant checking an entire invading army and so gaining invaluable time. Compare Wu Tzu, chapter 5, at the beginning: "For those who have to fight at odds of one to ten, there is nothing better than a narrow pass." When Lu Kuang was returning from his triumphant expedition to Turkestan in A.D. 385, and had got as far as I-ho laden with spoils, Liang Hsi, administrator of Liang-chou, took advantage of the death of Fu Chien, King of Ch'in, to plot against him and bar his way into the province. Yang Han, governor of Kao-ch'ang, advised him: "Lu Kuang is fresh from his victories in the west, and his soldiers are vigorous and mettlesome. If we oppose him in the shifting sands of the desert we shall be no match for him, so we must try another plan. Let us hurry to occupy the defile at the mouth of the Kao-wu pass, cutting him off from water; then, when his troops are prostrate with thirst, we can dictate our own terms without moving. Or, if you think that pass too far off, we could make a stand against him at the I-wu pass, which is nearer. The cunning and resource of Tzu-fang himself would be spent in vain against the enormous strength of these two positions." Liang Hsi refused to act on the advice, and was overwhelmed and swept away by the invader.

5. Ground on which each side has freedom of movement is open ground.

Commentary: There are various readings of the Chinese adjective for this kind of ground. Ts'ao Kung says it means "ground covered with a network of roads", like a chessboard. Ho Shih suggested "ground on which communication is easy".

6. Ground that forms the key to three neighbouring states,

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung defines this as "our country adjoining the enemy's, and a third country bordering on both". Meng Shih instances the small principality of Cheng, bounded on the north-east by Ch'i, on the west by Chin and on the south by Ch'u.

so that whoever occupies it first has most of the Empire at his command,

Commentary: The belligerent who holds this dominating position can force most of them to become his allies.

is ground of intersecting highways.

7. When an army has penetrated into the heart of a hostile country, leaving a number of fortified cities behind it, it is serious ground.

Commentary: Wang Hsi explains the name by saying that "when an army has reached such a point, its situation is serious".

8. Mountain forests,

Commentary: Or simply "forests".

rugged steeps, marshes and fens — all country that is hard to cross: this is difficult ground.

9. Ground reached through narrow gorges, from which we can only retire by winding paths, so that a small number of the enemy would be enough to crush a large body of our men: this is hemmed-in ground.

10. Ground on which we can be saved from destruction only by fighting without delay is desperate ground.

Commentary: The situation as Ts'ao Kung pictures it is very like hemmed-in ground, except that here escape is no longer possible: "A lofty mountain in front, a large river behind, advance impossible, retreat blocked." Ch'en Hao says: "To be on desperate ground is like sitting in a leaking boat or crouching in a burning house." Tu Mu quotes Li Ching's vivid description of the plight of an army so trapped: "Suppose an army invading hostile territory without the help of local guides: it falls into a fatal snare and is at the enemy's mercy. A ravine on the left, a mountain on the right, a path so perilous that the horses have to be roped together and the chariots carried in slings, no passage open in front, retreat cut off behind, no choice but to go in single file. Then, before there is time to draw our soldiers up in order of battle, the enemy appears on the scene in overwhelming strength. Advancing, we can nowhere take a breathing space; retreating, we have no haven of refuge. We seek a pitched battle in vain; yet standing on the defensive, none of us has a moment's respite. If we simply hold our ground, whole days and months will crawl by; the moment we move, we have to sustain the enemy's attacks front and rear. The country is wild, without water or plants; the army lacks the necessities of life, the horses are jaded and the men worn out, all our resources of strength and skill useless, the pass so narrow that a single man defending it can check the onset of ten thousand; every means of attack in the enemy's hands, every point of vantage already forfeited by us. In this terrible plight, even if we had the most valiant soldiers and the keenest weapons, how could they be used to the slightest effect?" Students of Greek history may be reminded of the awful close of the Sicilian expedition and the agony of the Athenians under Nicias and Demosthenes (see Thucydides, VII. 78 and following).

11. On dispersive ground, therefore, do not fight. On facile ground, do not halt. On contentious ground, do not attack.

Commentary: Rather, let all your energy go into occupying the advantageous position first. So Ts'ao Kung. Li Ch'uan and others, however, suppose the meaning to be that the enemy has already forestalled us, so that it would be sheer madness to attack. In the *Sun Tzu Hsu Lu*, when the King of Wu asks what should be done in this case, Sun Tzu replies: "The rule about contentious ground is that those in possession have the advantage. If a position of that kind has been secured first by the enemy, beware of attacking him. Lure him away by pretending to flee; show your banners and sound your drums; make a dash for other places he cannot afford to lose; trail brushwood and raise a dust; confound his ears and eyes; detach a body of your best troops and put it secretly in ambush. Then your opponent will sally out to the rescue."

12. On open ground, do not try to block the enemy's way.

Commentary: Because the attempt would be futile and would expose the blocking force itself to serious risk. There are two readings available here. I follow Chang Yu's. The other is indicated in Ts'ao Kung's brief note: "Draw closer together" — that is, see that no part of your own army is cut off.

On ground of intersecting highways, join hands with your allies.

Commentary: Or perhaps, "form alliances with neighbouring states".

13. On serious ground, gather in plunder.

Commentary: Li Ch'uan has this delicious note: "When an army penetrates far into the enemy's country, care must be taken not to alienate the people by unjust treatment. Follow the example of the Han Emperor Kao Tsu, whose march into Ch'in territory was marked by no violation of women and no looting of valuables." (Note well: this was in 207 B.C., and may well make us blush for the Christian armies that entered Peking in A.D. 1900.) "So he won all hearts. In this passage, then, I think the true reading must be not 'plunder' but 'do not plunder'." Alas, I fear that here the worthy commentator's feelings outran his judgment. Tu Mu at least has no such illusions. He says: "When encamped on serious ground, with no inducement as yet to advance further and no possibility of retreat, one ought to prepare for a long resistance by bringing in provisions from all sides, and keep a close watch on the enemy."

On difficult ground, keep steadily on the march.

Commentary: Or, in the words of Chapter Eight, verse 2, "do not encamp".

14. On hemmed-in ground, resort to stratagem.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung says: "Try the effect of some unusual artifice." Tu Yu amplifies this: "In such a position some scheme must be devised to suit the circumstances, and if we can succeed in deluding the enemy, the danger may be escaped." This is exactly what happened on the famous occasion when Hannibal was hemmed in among the mountains on the road to Casilinum and to all appearances trapped by the dictator Fabius. The stratagem Hannibal devised to baffle his enemies was remarkably like the one T'ien Tan had used with success exactly 62 years earlier (see Chapter Nine, verse 24, note). When night came on, bundles of twigs were fastened to the horns of some 2000 oxen and set alight, and the terrified animals were driven quickly along the mountainside towards the passes the enemy was holding. The strange spectacle of these rapidly moving lights so alarmed and disconcerted the Romans that they withdrew from their position, and Hannibal's army passed safely through the defile. (See Polybius, III. 93, 94; Livy, XXII. 16, 17.)

On desperate ground, fight.

Commentary: For, as Chia Lin remarks: "If you fight with all your might there is a chance of life, whereas death is certain if you cling to your corner."

15. Those who were called skilful leaders of old knew how to drive a wedge between the enemy's front and rear;

Commentary: More literally, "cause the front and rear to lose touch with each other".

to prevent cooperation between his large and small divisions; to stop the good troops rescuing the bad and the officers rallying their men.

16. When the enemy's men were scattered, they prevented them from concentrating; even when their forces were united, they contrived to keep them in disorder.

17. When it was to their advantage, they moved forward; when it was not, they stayed still.

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en connects this with what goes before: "Having dislocated the enemy in this way, they would push forward to secure any advantage to be had; if there was none, they stayed where they were."

18. If I am asked how to deal with a great host of the enemy in orderly array and on the point of marching to attack, I should say: "Begin by seizing something your opponent holds dear; then he will be amenable to your will."

Commentary: Opinions differ about what Sun Tzu had in mind. Ts'ao Kung thinks it is "some strategic advantage the enemy is depending on". Tu Mu says: "The three things an enemy is anxious to do, and on which his success depends, are (1) to capture our favourable positions, (2) to ravage our cultivated land, and (3) to guard his own communications." Our object, then, must be to thwart his plans in these three directions and so leave him helpless. (Compare Chapter Three, verse 3.) By boldly seizing the initiative this way, you at once throw the other side on the defensive.

19. Rapidity is the essence of war:

Commentary: According to Tu Mu, "this is a summary of the leading principles in warfare", and he adds: "These are the profoundest truths of military science and the chief business of the general." The following anecdotes, told by Ho Shih, show the importance two of China's greatest generals attached to speed. In A.D. 227 Meng Ta, governor of Hsin-ch'eng under the Wei Emperor Wen Ti, was contemplating defection to the House of Shu and had entered into correspondence with Chu-ko Liang, that State's prime minister. The Wei general Ssu-ma I was then military governor of Wan, and, getting wind of Meng Ta's treachery, he set off at once with an army to forestall the revolt, having first lulled him with a specious message of friendship. Ssu-ma's officers came to him and said: "If Meng Ta has allied himself with Wu and Shu, the matter should be thoroughly investigated before we move." Ssu-ma I replied: "Meng Ta is an unprincipled man, and we ought to go and punish him at once, while he is still wavering and before he has thrown off the mask." Then, by a series of forced marches, he brought his army under the walls of Hsin-ch'eng within eight days. Now Meng Ta had said in an earlier letter to Chu-ko Liang: "Wan is 1200 *li* from here. When news of my revolt reaches Ssu-ma I, he will at once inform his imperial master, but a whole month will pass before any steps can be taken, and by then my city will be well fortified. Besides, Ssu-ma I is sure not to come himself, and the generals who will be sent against us are not worth troubling about." His next letter was full of consternation: "Though only eight days have passed since I threw off my allegiance, an army is already at the city gates. What miraculous rapidity is this!" A fortnight later Hsin-ch'eng had fallen and Meng Ta had lost his head. (See the *Chin Shu*, chapter 1, folio 3.) In A.D. 621 Li Ching was sent from K'uei-chou in Ssu-ch'uan to put down the successful rebel Hsiao Hsien, who had set himself up as Emperor at what is now Ching-chou Fu in Hupeh. It was autumn, and the Yangtse being in flood, Hsiao Hsien never dreamed his adversary would venture down through the gorges, and so made no preparations. But Li Ching embarked his army without losing any time, and was just about to start when the other generals begged him to postpone his departure until the river was less dangerous. Li Ching replied: "To the soldier, overwhelming speed is of paramount importance, and he must never miss an opportunity. Now is the time to strike, before Hsiao Hsien even knows we have got an army together. If we seize this moment while the river is in flood, we shall appear before his capital with startling suddenness, like the thunder that is heard before you have time to stop your ears against it (see Chapter Seven, verse 19, note). This is the great principle in war. Even if he learns of our approach, he will have to levy his soldiers in such a hurry that they will be unfit to oppose us. So the full fruits of victory will be ours." Everything came about as he predicted, and Hsiao Hsien had to surrender, nobly stipulating that his people should be spared and he alone suffer death.

take advantage of the enemy's unreadiness, make your way by unexpected routes, and attack unguarded spots.

20. These are the principles an invading force should observe. The further you penetrate into a country, the greater the solidarity of your own troops, and so the defenders will not prevail against you.

21. Make raids in fertile country in order to supply your army with food.

Commentary: Compare above, verse 13. Li Ch'uan does not venture a note here.

22. Study the well-being of your men carefully,

Commentary: By "well-being" Wang Hsi means: "Pet them, humour them, give them plenty of food and drink, and look after them generally."

and do not overtax them. Concentrate your energy and hoard your strength.

Commentary: Ch'en Hao recalls the course adopted in 224 B.C. by the famous general Wang Chien, whose military genius contributed so much to the success of the First Emperor. He had invaded the Ch'u State, where a universal levy was raised against him. But, doubtful of his troops' temper, he refused every invitation to fight and stayed strictly on the defensive. In vain did the Ch'u general try to force a battle: day after day Wang Chien kept inside his walls and would not come out, but gave his whole time and energy to winning his men's affection and confidence. He saw that they were well fed, shared his own meals with them, provided facilities for bathing, and used every method of judicious indulgence to weld them into a loyal and homogeneous body. After some time had passed, he sent certain people to find out how the men were amusing themselves. The answer was that they were competing with one another at putting the weight and long jumping. When Wang Chien heard they were at these athletic pursuits, he knew their spirits had been strung up to the right pitch and that they were ready to fight. By this time the Ch'u army, having repeated its challenge again and again, had marched away eastwards in disgust. The Ch'in general immediately broke camp and followed them, and in the battle that followed they were routed with great slaughter. Shortly afterwards the whole of Ch'u was conquered by Ch'in, and its king Fu-ch'u led into captivity.

Keep your army continually on the move,

Commentary: So that the enemy never knows exactly where you are. It has struck me, however, that the true reading might be "link your army together".

and devise unfathomable plans.

23. Throw your soldiers into positions from which there is no escape, and they will prefer death to flight. Once they will face death, there is nothing they may not achieve.

Commentary: Chang Yu quotes his favourite Wei Liao Tzu, chapter 3: "If one man were to run amok with a sword in the marketplace and everybody else tried to get out of his way, I should not allow that this one man had courage and all the rest were contemptible cowards. The truth is that a desperado and a man who sets some value on his life do not meet on even terms."

Officers and men alike will put out their utmost strength.

Commentary: Chang Yu says: "If they are in an awkward place together, they will surely exert their united strength to get out of it."

24. Soldiers in desperate straits lose their sense of fear. If there is no place of refuge, they will stand firm. If they are in the heart of a hostile country, they will show a stubborn front. If there is no help for it, they will fight hard.

25. So, without waiting to be marshalled, the soldiers will be constantly on the *qui vive*; without waiting to be asked, they will do your will;

Commentary: Literally, "without asking, you will get".

without restrictions, they will be faithful; without being given orders, they can be trusted.

26. Prohibit the taking of omens, and do away with superstitious doubts. Then, until death itself comes, no calamity need be feared.

Commentary: The superstitious, "bound in to saucy doubts and fears", degenerate into cowards and "die many times before their deaths". Tu Mu quotes Huang Shih-kung: "Spells and incantations should be strictly forbidden, and no officer allowed to inquire by divination into an army's fortunes, for fear the soldiers' minds should be seriously disturbed." "The meaning," he goes on, "is that if all doubts and scruples are discarded, your men will never falter in their resolution until they die."

27. If our soldiers are not overburdened with money, it is not that they dislike riches; if their lives are not unduly long, it is not that they are disinclined to live.

Commentary: Chang Yu has the best note on this passage: "Wealth and long life are things all men naturally incline to. So if they burn or throw away valuables and sacrifice their own lives, it is not that they dislike them, but simply that they have no choice." Sun Tzu is slyly hinting that, since soldiers are only human, it is for the general to see that no temptation to shirk fighting and grow rich is put in their way.

28. On the day they are ordered out to battle, your soldiers may weep,

Commentary: The word in the Chinese is "snivel", which is taken to indicate more genuine grief than tears alone.

those sitting up wetting their clothes and those lying down letting the tears run down their cheeks.

Commentary: Not because they are afraid but because, as Ts'ao Kung says, "all have embraced the firm resolution to do or die". We may remember that the heroes of the Iliad were just as childlike in showing their emotion. Chang Yu alludes to the mournful parting at the I River between Ching K'o and his friends, when Ching K'o was sent to attempt the life of the King of Ch'in (afterwards the First Emperor) in 227 B.C. The tears of all flowed down like rain as he said goodbye and spoke these lines: "The shrill blast is blowing, / Chilly the burn; / Your champion is going — / Not to return."

Footnote: Giles's Biographical Dictionary, no. 399.

But let them once be brought to bay, and they will show the courage of a Chu or a Kuei.

Commentary: Chu was the personal name of Chuan Chu, a native of the Wu State and a contemporary of Sun Tzu himself, who was employed by Kung-tzu Kuang, better known as Ho Lu Wang, to assassinate his sovereign Wang Liao with a dagger hidden in the belly of a fish served up at a banquet. He succeeded, and was immediately hacked to pieces by the king's bodyguard. That was in 515 B.C. The other hero, Ts'ao Kuei (or Ts'ao Mo), performed the exploit that made his name famous 166 years earlier, in 681 B.C. Lu had been defeated three times by Ch'i and was about to conclude a treaty surrendering a large slice of territory, when Ts'ao Kuei suddenly seized Huan Kung, the Duke of Ch'i, as he stood on the altar steps, and held a dagger to his chest. None of the duke's retainers dared move a muscle, and Ts'ao Kuei went on to demand full restitution, declaring that Lu was being unjustly treated because she was a smaller and weaker state. Huan Kung, in peril of his life, had to consent, and Ts'ao Kuei flung the dagger away and quietly resumed his place among the terrified assembly without so much as changing colour. As might be expected, the Duke afterwards wanted to repudiate the bargain; but his wise old counsellor Kuan Chung pointed out how impolitic it would be to break his word, and the upshot was that this bold stroke regained for Lu the whole of what she had lost in three pitched battles.

29. The skilful tactician may be compared to the *shuai-jan*. Now the *shuai-jan* is a snake found in the Ch'ang mountains.

Commentary: *Shuai-jan* means "suddenly" or "rapidly", and the snake was doubtless so called because of the speed of its movements. Through this passage the term has now come to be used in Chinese for "military manoeuvres".

Strike at its head and you will be attacked by its tail; strike at its tail and you will be attacked by its head; strike at its middle and you will be attacked by head and tail together.

30. Asked whether an army can be made to imitate the *shuai-jan*,

Commentary: That is, as Mei Yao-ch'en says: "Is it possible to make the front and rear of an army each respond swiftly to an attack on the other, just as though they were parts of a single living body?"

I should answer, yes. For the men of Wu and the men of Yueh are enemies;

Commentary: Compare Chapter Six, verse 21.

yet if they are crossing a river in the same boat and are caught by a storm, they will come to each other's help just as the left hand helps the right.

Commentary: The meaning is: if two enemies will help each other in a moment of common peril, how much more should two parts of the same army, bound together as they are by every tie of interest and fellow feeling. And yet it is notorious that many a campaign has been ruined by the lack of cooperation, especially where armies are allied.

31. So it is not enough to put your trust in tethering the horses and burying the chariot wheels in the ground.

Commentary: These quaint devices for stopping an army running away recall the Athenian hero Sophanes, who carried an anchor with him at the battle of Plataea and used it to fasten himself firmly to one spot (see Herodotus, IX. 74). It is not enough, says Sun Tzu, to make flight impossible by such mechanical means. You will not succeed unless your men have tenacity and unity of purpose and, above all, a spirit of sympathetic cooperation. That is the lesson to be learned from the *shuai-jan*.

32. The principle for managing an army is to set up one standard of courage that all must reach.

Commentary: Literally, "level the courage of all as though it were that of one". If the ideal army is to form a single organic whole, then the resolution and spirit of its parts must be of the same quality, or at least must not fall below a certain standard. Wellington's seemingly ungrateful description of his army at Waterloo as "the worst he had ever commanded" meant no more than that it was deficient in this important particular — unity of spirit and courage. Had he not foreseen the Belgian defections and carefully kept those troops in the background, he would almost certainly have lost the day.

33. How to make the best of both the strong and the weak — that is a question of the proper use of ground.

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en's paraphrase is: "The way to eliminate the differences between strong and weak, and make both serviceable, is to use the accidental features of the ground." Less reliable troops, posted in strong positions, will hold out as long as better troops on more exposed ground. The advantage of position cancels out the inferiority in stamina and courage. Colonel Henderson says: "With all respect to the textbooks, and to the ordinary tactical teaching, I am inclined to think that the study of ground is often overlooked, and that by no means sufficient importance is attached to the selection of positions… and to the immense advantages to be derived, whether you are defending or attacking, from the proper use of natural features."

Footnote: "The Science of War," p. 333.

34. So the skilful general leads his army just as though he were leading a single man by the hand, willing or not.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "The simile refers to the ease with which he does it."

35. It is the business of a general to be quiet, and so ensure secrecy; upright and just, and so maintain order.

36. He must be able to mystify his officers and men with false reports and appearances,

Commentary: Literally, "to deceive their eyes and ears".

and so keep them in total ignorance.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung gives us one of his excellent maxims: "The troops must not be allowed to share your schemes at the beginning; they may only rejoice with you over the happy outcome." To mystify, mislead and surprise the enemy is one of the first principles of war, as has often been pointed out. But what of the other process — mystifying one's own men? Anyone who thinks Sun Tzu over-emphatic on this point would do well to read Colonel Henderson's remarks on Stonewall Jackson's Valley campaign: "The infinite pains," he says, "with which Jackson sought to conceal, even from his most trusted staff officers, his movements, his intentions and his thoughts, a commander less thorough would have pronounced useless" — and so on. In A.D. 88, as we read in chapter 47 of the *Hou Han Shu*, Pan Ch'ao took the field with 25,000 men from Khotan and other Central Asian states, meaning to crush Yarkand. The King of Kutcha answered by sending his chief commander to relieve the place with an army drawn from the kingdoms of Wen-su, Ku-mo and Wei-t'ou, 50,000 men in all. Pan Ch'ao summoned his officers, and the King of Khotan too, to a council of war, and said: "Our forces are now outnumbered and unable to make head against the enemy. The best plan is for us to separate and disperse, each in a different direction. The King of Khotan will march away by the easterly route, and I will return westward. Let us wait until the evening drum has sounded, and then start." Pan Ch'ao now secretly released the prisoners he had taken alive, and so the King of Kutcha learned his plans. Much elated by the news, the King set off at once at the head of 10,000 horsemen to bar Pan Ch'ao's retreat in the west, while the King of Wen-su rode east with 8000 horse to intercept the King of Khotan. As soon as Pan Ch'ao knew the two chieftains had gone, he called his divisions together, got them well in hand, and at cockcrow hurled them against the army of Yarkand as it lay encamped. Panic-stricken, it fled in confusion, closely pursued by Pan Ch'ao. Over 5000 heads were brought back as trophies, besides immense spoils in horses and cattle and valuables of every kind. Yarkand then capitulated, and Kutcha and the other kingdoms drew off their forces. From that time on Pan Ch'ao's prestige completely overawed the countries of the west. Here, as we see, the Chinese general not only kept his own officers in ignorance of his real plans but actually took the bold step of dividing his army in order to deceive the enemy.

Footnote: "Stonewall Jackson," vol. I, p. 421.
