Chapter Eleven: The Nine Situations

(Part 2 of 2)

37. By altering his arrangements and changing his plans,

Commentary: Wang Hsi thinks this means not using the same stratagem twice.

he keeps the enemy without definite knowledge.

Commentary: Chang Yu, quoting another work, says: "The axiom that war is based on deception does not apply only to deceiving the enemy. You must deceive your own soldiers too. Make them follow you, but without letting them know why."

By shifting his camp and taking roundabout routes, he prevents the enemy from anticipating his purpose.

38. At the critical moment, the leader of an army acts like a man who has climbed up to a height and then kicks the ladder away behind him. He carries his men deep into hostile territory before he shows his hand.

Commentary: Literally, "releases the spring" (see Chapter Five, verse 15) — that is, he takes some decisive step that makes it impossible for the army to return, like Hsiang Yu, who sank his ships after crossing a river. Ch'en Hao, followed by Chia Lin, understands the words less well as "puts forth every artifice at his command".

39. He burns his boats and breaks his cooking pots; like a shepherd driving a flock of sheep, he drives his men this way and that, and none of them knows where he is going.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "The army knows only the orders to advance or retreat; it is ignorant of the ultimate ends of attacking and conquering."

40. To muster his host and bring it into danger — this may be called the business of the general.

Commentary: Sun Tzu means that after mobilisation there should be no delay in aiming a blow at the enemy's heart. Note how he returns to this point again and again. Among the warring states of ancient China, desertion was no doubt a much more present fear and a more serious evil than it is in the armies of today.

41. The different measures suited to the nine varieties of ground;

Commentary: Chang Yu says: "One must not be hidebound in interpreting the rules for the nine varieties of ground."

the expediency of aggressive or defensive tactics; and the fundamental laws of human nature: these are things that must most certainly be studied.

42. When invading hostile territory, the general principle is that penetrating deeply brings cohesion, while penetrating only a short way means dispersion.

Commentary: Compare above, verse 20.

43. When you leave your own country behind and take your army across neighbouring territory, you find yourself on critical ground.

Commentary: This "ground" is curiously mentioned in Chapter Eight, verse 2, but it does not figure among the Nine Situations, nor among the Six Calamities in Chapter Ten. One's first impulse would be to translate it "distant ground", but that, if we can trust the commentators, is precisely what is not meant here. Mei Yao-ch'en says it is "a position not far enough advanced to be called 'facile', and not near enough to home to be 'dispersive', but something between the two". Wang Hsi says: "It is ground separated from home by an intervening state, whose territory we have had to cross in order to reach it. Hence it is incumbent on us to settle our business there quickly." He adds that this position occurs rarely, which is why it is not included among the Nine Situations.

When there are means of communication on all four sides, the ground is one of intersecting highways.

44. When you penetrate deeply into a country, it is serious ground. When you penetrate only a little way, it is facile ground.

45. When you have the enemy's strongholds on your rear and narrow passes in front, it is hemmed-in ground. When there is no place of refuge at all, it is desperate ground.

46. Therefore, on dispersive ground, I would inspire my men with unity of purpose.

Commentary: This end, according to Tu Mu, is best attained by remaining on the defensive and avoiding battle. Compare above, verse 11.

On facile ground, I would see that there is close connection between all parts of my army.

Commentary: As Tu Mu says, the object is to guard against two possible contingencies: "(1) the desertion of our own troops; (2) a sudden attack on the part of the enemy." Compare Chapter Seven, verse 17. Mei Yao-ch'en says: "On the march, the regiments should be in close touch; in an encampment, there should be continuity between the fortifications."

47. On contentious ground, I would hurry up my rear.

Commentary: This is Ts'ao Kung's interpretation. Chang Yu adopts it, saying: "We must quickly bring up our rear, so that head and tail may both reach the goal" — that is, they must not be allowed to straggle up a long way apart. Mei Yao-ch'en offers another equally plausible explanation: "Supposing the enemy has not yet reached the coveted position, and we are behind him, we should advance with all speed in order to dispute its possession." Ch'en Hao, on the other hand, assuming that the enemy has had time to select his own ground, quotes Chapter Six, verse 1, where Sun Tzu warns us against coming exhausted to the attack. His own idea of the situation is rather vaguely expressed: "If there is a favourable position lying in front of you, detach a picked body of troops to occupy it; then, if the enemy relies on his numbers and comes up to make a fight for it, you may fall quickly on his rear with your main body, and victory will be assured." It was in this way, he adds, that Chao She beat the army of Ch'in. (See Chapter Seven, verse 4, note.)

48. On open ground, I would keep a vigilant eye on my defences. On ground of intersecting highways, I would consolidate my alliances.

49. On serious ground, I would try to ensure a continuous stream of supplies.

Commentary: The commentators take this as referring to forage and plunder, not, as one might expect, to an unbroken line of communication with a home base.

On difficult ground, I would keep pushing on along the road.

50. On hemmed-in ground, I would block any way of retreat.

Commentary: Meng Shih says: "To make it seem that I meant to defend the position, whereas my real intention is to burst suddenly through the enemy's lines." Mei Yao-ch'en says: "in order to make my soldiers fight with desperation". Wang Hsi says: "fearing that my men may be tempted to run away". Tu Mu points out that this is the converse of Chapter Seven, verse 36, where it is the enemy who is surrounded. In A.D. 532 Kao Huan, afterwards Emperor and canonised as Shen-wu, was surrounded by a great army under Erh-chu Chao and others. His own force was comparatively small, consisting only of 2000 horse and something under 30,000 foot. The lines of investment had not been drawn very closely together, gaps being left at certain points. But Kao Huan, instead of trying to escape, actually contrived to block all the remaining outlets himself, by driving into them a number of oxen and donkeys roped together. As soon as his officers and men saw that there was nothing for it but to conquer or die, their spirits rose to an extraordinary pitch of exaltation, and they charged with such desperate ferocity that the opposing ranks broke and crumbled under their onslaught.

On desperate ground, I would proclaim to my soldiers the hopelessness of saving their lives.

Commentary: Tu Yu says: "Burn your baggage and impedimenta, throw away your stores and provisions, choke up the wells, destroy your cooking-stoves, and make it plain to your men that they cannot survive, but must fight to the death." Mei Yao-ch'en says: "The only chance of life lies in giving up all hope of it." This concludes what Sun Tzu has to say about "grounds" and the "variations" corresponding to them. Reviewing the passages that bear on this important subject, we cannot fail to be struck by the desultory and unmethodical way in which it is treated. Sun Tzu begins abruptly in Chapter Eight, verse 2, to enumerate "variations" before touching on "grounds" at all, but mentions only five, namely nos. 7, 5, 8 and 9 of the later list, and one that is not included in it. A few varieties of ground are dealt with in the earlier part of Chapter Nine, and then Chapter Ten sets out six new grounds, with six variations of plan to match. None of these is mentioned again, though the first is hardly to be distinguished from ground no. 4 in the next chapter. At last, in Chapter Eleven, we come to the Nine Grounds proper, immediately followed by the variations. This takes us down to verse 14. In verses 43 to 45, fresh definitions are provided for nos. 5, 6, 2, 8 and 9 (in that order), as well as for the tenth ground noticed in Chapter Eight; and finally the nine variations are enumerated once more from beginning to end, all of them, except 5, 6 and 7, different from those given before. Though it is impossible to account for the present state of Sun Tzu's text, a few suggestive facts may be brought into prominence: (1) Chapter Eight, according to its title, should deal with nine variations, whereas only five appear. (2) It is an abnormally short chapter. (3) Chapter Eleven is entitled The Nine Grounds. Several of these are defined twice over, and besides that there are two distinct lists of the corresponding variations. (4) The length of the chapter is disproportionate, being double that of any other except Nine. I do not propose to draw any inferences from these facts, beyond the general conclusion that Sun Tzu's work cannot have come down to us in the shape in which it left his hands: Chapter Eight is obviously defective and probably out of place, while Eleven seems to contain matter that has either been added by a later hand or ought to appear elsewhere.

51. For it is the soldier's disposition to offer an obstinate resistance when surrounded, to fight hard when he cannot help himself, and to obey promptly when he has fallen into danger.

Commentary: Chang Yu alludes to the conduct of Pan Ch'ao's devoted followers in A.D. 73. The story runs like this in the *Hou Han Shu*, chapter 47: "When Pan Ch'ao arrived at Shan-shan, Kuang, the King of the country, received him at first with great politeness and respect; but shortly afterwards his behaviour underwent a sudden change, and he became remiss and negligent. Pan Ch'ao spoke about this to the officers of his suite. 'Have you noticed,' he said, 'that Kuang's polite intentions are on the wane? This must mean that envoys have come from the Northern barbarians, and that he is consequently in a state of indecision, not knowing which side to throw in his lot with. That is surely the reason. The truly wise man, we are told, can perceive things before they have come to pass; how much more, then, those that are already plain!' Then he called in one of the natives who had been assigned to his service, and set a trap for him, saying: 'Where are those envoys from the Hsiung-nu who arrived some days ago?' The man was so taken aback that between surprise and fear he blurted out the whole truth on the spot. Pan Ch'ao, keeping his informant carefully under lock and key, then summoned a general gathering of his officers, thirty-six in all, and began drinking with them. When the wine had gone a little to their heads, he tried to rouse their spirit still further by addressing them like this: 'Gentlemen, here we are in the heart of an isolated region, anxious to win riches and honour by some great exploit. Now it happens that an ambassador from the Hsiung-nu arrived in this kingdom only a few days ago, and the result is that the respectful courtesy our royal host extended to us has disappeared. If this envoy should prevail on him to seize our party and hand us over to the Hsiung-nu, our bones will become food for the wolves of the desert. What are we to do?' With one accord the officers replied: 'Standing as we do in peril of our lives, we will follow our commander through life and death.'" For the sequel of this adventure, see Chapter Twelve, verse 1, note.

52. We cannot enter into alliance with neighbouring princes until we are acquainted with their designs. We are not fit to lead an army on the march unless we are familiar with the face of the country — its mountains and forests, its pitfalls and precipices, its marshes and swamps. We shall be unable to turn natural advantages to account unless we make use of local guides.

Commentary: These three sentences are repeated from Chapter Seven, verses 12 to 14 — in order to emphasise their importance, the commentators seem to think. I prefer to regard them as interpolated here in order to form an antecedent to the words that follow. With regard to local guides, Sun Tzu might have added that there is always the risk of going wrong, either through their treachery or through some misunderstanding such as Livy records (XXII. 13): Hannibal, we are told, ordered a guide to lead him into the neighbourhood of Casinum, where there was an important pass to be occupied; but his Carthaginian accent, unsuited to the pronunciation of Latin names, made the guide understand Casilinum instead of Casinum, and turning off his proper route he took the army in that direction, the mistake not being discovered until they had almost arrived.

53. To be ignorant of any one of the following four or five principles does not befit a warlike prince.

54. When a warlike prince attacks a powerful state, his generalship shows itself in preventing the concentration of the enemy's forces. He overawes his opponents, and their allies are prevented from joining against him.

Commentary: Mei Tao-ch'en constructs one of those chains of reasoning the Chinese are so fond of: "In attacking a powerful state, if you can divide her forces you will have a superiority in strength; if you have a superiority in strength you will overawe the enemy; if you overawe the enemy, the neighbouring states will be frightened; and if the neighbouring states are frightened, the enemy's allies will be prevented from joining her." The following gives a stronger meaning: "If the great state has once been defeated (before she has had time to summon her allies), then the lesser states will hold aloof and refrain from massing their forces." Ch'en Hao and Chang Yu take the sentence in quite another way. The former says: "Powerful though a prince may be, if he attacks a large state he will be unable to raise enough troops, and must rely to some extent on outside aid; if he dispenses with this, and with overweening confidence in his own strength simply tries to intimidate the enemy, he will surely be defeated." Chang Yu puts his view like this: "If we recklessly attack a large state, our own people will be discontented and hang back. But if (as will then be the case) our display of military force is inferior by half to the enemy's, the other chieftains will take fright and refuse to join us."

55. Hence he does not strive to ally himself with all and sundry, nor does he foster the power of other states. He carries out his own secret designs, keeping his antagonists in awe.

Commentary: The train of thought, as Li Ch'uan puts it, appears to be this: secure against a combination of his enemies, "he can afford to reject entangling alliances and simply pursue his own secret designs, his prestige enabling him to dispense with outside friendships".

So he is able to capture their cities and overthrow their kingdoms.

Commentary: This paragraph, though written many years before the Ch'in State became a serious menace, is not a bad summary of the policy by which the famous Six Chancellors gradually paved the way for her final triumph under Shih Huang Ti. Chang Yu, following up his earlier note, thinks that Sun Tzu is condemning this attitude of cold-blooded selfishness and haughty isolation.

56. Bestow rewards without regard to rule,

Commentary: Wu Tzu (chapter 3) says, less wisely: "Let advance be richly rewarded and retreat be heavily punished."

issue orders

Commentary: Literally, "hang" or "post up".

without regard to previous arrangements;

Commentary: "In order to prevent treachery," says Wang Hsi. The general meaning is made clear by Ts'ao Kung's quotation from the *Ssu-ma Fa*: "Give instructions only on sighting the enemy; give rewards when you see deserving deeds." Ts'ao Kung's own paraphrase: "The final instructions you give your army should not correspond with those that have been posted up beforehand." Chang Yu simplifies this into "your arrangements should not be divulged beforehand", and Chia Lin says: "there should be no fixity in your rules and arrangements". Not only is there danger in letting your plans be known, but war often makes it necessary to reverse them entirely at the last moment.

and you will be able to handle a whole army as though you had to do with only a single man.

Commentary: Compare above, verse 34.

57. Confront your soldiers with the deed itself; never let them know your design.

Commentary: Literally, "do not tell them words" — that is, do not give your reasons for any order. Lord Mansfield once told a junior colleague to "give no reasons" for his decisions, and the maxim applies even more to a general than to a judge.

When the outlook is bright, bring it before their eyes; but tell them nothing when the situation is gloomy.

58. Place your army in deadly peril and it will survive; plunge it into desperate straits and it will come off in safety.

Commentary: These words of Sun Tzu were once quoted by Han Hsin to explain the tactics he used in one of his most brilliant battles. In 204 B.C. he was sent against the army of Chao, and halted ten miles from the mouth of the Ching-hsing pass, where the enemy had mustered in full force. There, at midnight, he detached a body of 2000 light cavalry, every man of them furnished with a red flag. Their instructions were to make their way through the narrow defiles and keep a secret watch on the enemy. "When the men of Chao see me in full flight," Han Hsin said, "they will abandon their fortifications and give chase. That must be the signal for you to rush in, pull down the Chao standards and set up the red banners of Han in their place." Turning then to his other officers, he remarked: "Our adversary holds a strong position and is not likely to come out and attack us until he sees the standard and drums of the commander-in-chief, for fear I should turn back and escape through the mountains." So saying, he first of all sent out a division of 10,000 men and ordered them to form in line of battle with their backs to the River Ti. Seeing this manoeuvre, the whole army of Chao broke into loud laughter. By this time it was broad daylight, and Han Hsin, displaying the generalissimo's flag, marched out of the pass with drums beating and was immediately engaged by the enemy. A great battle followed, lasting some time, until at length Han Hsin and his colleague Chang Ni left drums and banner on the field and fled to the division on the river bank, where another fierce battle was raging. The enemy rushed out to pursue them and to secure the trophies, stripping their ramparts of men; but the two generals succeeded in joining the other army, which was fighting with the utmost desperation. The time had now come for the 2000 horsemen to play their part. As soon as they saw the men of Chao following up their advantage, they galloped behind the deserted walls, tore up the enemy's flags and replaced them with those of Han. When the Chao army looked back from the pursuit, the sight of these red flags struck them with terror. Convinced that the Hans had got in and overpowered their king, they broke up in wild disorder, every effort of their leader to stay the panic being in vain. Then the Han army fell on them from both sides and completed the rout, killing a number and capturing the rest, among whom was King Ya himself… After the battle, some of Han Hsin's officers came to him and said: "In the *Art of War* we are told to have a hill or a mound on the right rear, and a river or marsh on the left front. [This appears to be a blend of Sun Tzu and T'ai Kung. See Chapter Nine, verse 9, and note.] You, on the contrary, ordered us to draw up our troops with the river at our backs. Under these conditions, how did you manage to gain the victory?" The general replied: "I fear you gentlemen have not studied the Art of War with sufficient care. Is it not written there: 'Plunge your army into desperate straits and it will come off in safety; place it in deadly peril and it will survive'? Had I taken the usual course, I should never have been able to bring my colleague round. What does the Military Classic say? 'Swoop down on the marketplace and drive the men off to fight.' [This passage does not occur in the present text of Sun Tzu.] If I had not placed my troops in a position where they were obliged to fight for their lives, but had allowed each man to follow his own discretion, there would have been a general stampede, and it would have been impossible to do anything with them." The officers admitted the force of his argument, and said: "These are higher tactics than we should have been capable of." (See the *Ch'ien Han Shu*, chapter 34, folios 4, 5.)

59. For it is precisely when a force has fallen into harm's way that it is capable of striking a blow for victory.

Commentary: Danger has a bracing effect.

60. Success in warfare is gained by carefully accommodating ourselves to the enemy's purpose.

Commentary: Ts'ao Kung says: "Feign stupidity" — by an appearance of yielding and falling in with the enemy's wishes. Chang Yu's note makes the meaning clear: "If the enemy shows an inclination to advance, lure him on to do so; if he is anxious to retreat, delay on purpose so that he may carry out his intention." The object is to make him careless and contemptuous before we deliver our attack.

61. By persistently hanging on the enemy's flank,

Commentary: I understand the first four words to mean "accompanying the enemy in one direction". Ts'ao Kung says: "unite the soldiers and make for the enemy". But such a violent displacement of characters is quite indefensible.

we shall succeed in the long run

Commentary: Literally, "after a thousand *li*".

in killing the commander-in-chief.

Commentary: Always a great point with the Chinese.

62. This is called the ability to accomplish a thing by sheer cunning.

63. On the day you take up your command, block the frontier passes, destroy the official tallies,

Commentary: These were tablets of bamboo or wood, one half of which was issued as a permit or passport by the official in charge of a gate. Compare the "border warden" of the *Lun Yu*, III. 24, who may have had similar duties. When this half was returned to him within a fixed period, he was authorised to open the gate and let the traveller through.

and stop the passage of all emissaries.

Commentary: Either to or from the enemy's country.

64. Be stern in the council chamber,

Commentary: Show no weakness, and insist on your plans being ratified by the sovereign.

so that you may control the situation.

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en understands the whole sentence to mean: take the strictest precautions to ensure secrecy in your deliberations.

65. If the enemy leaves a door open, you must rush in.

66. Forestall your opponent by seizing what he holds dear,

Commentary: Compare above, verse 18.

and subtly contrive to time his arrival on the ground.

Commentary: Ch'en Hao's explanation: "If I manage to seize a favourable position but the enemy does not appear on the scene, the advantage I have gained cannot be turned to any practical account. Anyone who intends to occupy a position of importance to the enemy must therefore begin by making an artful appointment, so to speak, with his antagonist, and coax him into going there as well." Mei Yao-ch'en explains that this "artful appointment" is to be made through the enemy's own spies, who will carry back just the amount of information we choose to give them. Then, having cunningly disclosed our intentions, "we must manage, though starting after the enemy, to arrive before him (Chapter Seven, verse 4). We must start after him in order to make sure he marches there; we must arrive before him in order to capture the place without trouble." Taken this way, the present passage lends some support to Mei Yao-ch'en's interpretation of verse 47.

67. Walk in the path defined by rule,

Commentary: Chia Lin says: "Victory is the only thing that matters, and this cannot be achieved by adhering to conventional canons." It is unfortunate that this variant rests on very slight authority, for the sense it yields is certainly much more satisfactory. Napoleon, as we know, won his battles — according to the veterans of the old school whom he defeated — by violating every accepted canon of warfare.

and accommodate yourself to the enemy until you can fight a decisive battle.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "Conform to the enemy's tactics until a favourable opportunity offers; then come forth and engage in a battle that shall prove decisive."

68. At first, then, exhibit the coyness of a maiden, until the enemy gives you an opening; afterwards emulate the rapidity of a running hare, and it will be too late for the enemy to oppose you.

Commentary: As the hare is noted for its extreme timidity, the comparison hardly seems a happy one. But of course Sun Tzu was thinking only of its speed. The words have been taken to mean: you must flee from the enemy as quickly as an escaping hare; but Tu Mu rightly rejects this.
