Chapter Thirteen: The Use of Spies

1. Sun Tzu said: Raising a host of a hundred thousand men and marching them great distances entails heavy loss on the people and a drain on the resources of the State. The daily expenditure will amount to a thousand ounces of silver.

Commentary: Compare Chapter Two, verses 1, 13 and 14.

There will be commotion at home and abroad, and men will drop down exhausted on the highways.

Commentary: Compare the *Tao Te Ching*, chapter 30: "Where troops have been quartered, brambles and thorns spring up." Chang Yu has this note: "We may be reminded of the saying 'On serious ground, gather in plunder.' Why then should carriage and transport cause exhaustion on the highways? The answer is that not victuals alone but all sorts of munitions of war have to be conveyed to the army. Besides, the instruction to 'forage on the enemy' only means that when an army is deeply engaged in hostile territory, scarcity of food must be guarded against. So, without being solely dependent on the enemy for corn, we must forage in order that there may be an uninterrupted flow of supplies. Then again, there are places like salt deserts where provisions cannot be got at all, and supplies from home cannot be done without."

As many as seven hundred thousand families will be hindered in their labour.

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en says: "Men will be lacking at the plough-tail." The allusion is to the system of dividing land into nine parts, each of about 15 acres, the plot in the centre being cultivated on behalf of the State by the tenants of the other eight. It was here too, so Tu Mu tells us, that their cottages were built and a well sunk, to be used by all in common. (See Chapter Two, verse 12, note.) In time of war one of the families had to serve in the army, while the other seven contributed to its support. So a levy of 100,000 men — reckoning one able-bodied soldier to each family — would affect the husbandry of 700,000 families.

2. Hostile armies may face each other for years, striving for the victory that is decided in a single day. This being so, to remain in ignorance of the enemy's condition simply because one grudges the outlay of a hundred ounces of silver in honours and salaries,

Commentary: "For spies" is of course the meaning, though it would spoil the effect of this curiously elaborate build-up if spies were actually mentioned at this point.

is the height of inhumanity.

Commentary: Sun Tzu's argument is certainly ingenious. He begins by calling attention to the frightful misery and the vast expenditure of blood and treasure that war always brings in its train. Now, unless you are kept informed of the enemy's condition and are ready to strike at the right moment, a war may drag on for years. The only way to get this information is to employ spies, and it is impossible to obtain trustworthy spies unless they are properly paid for their services. But it is surely false economy to grudge a comparatively trifling amount for this purpose, when every day the war lasts eats up an incalculably greater sum. This grievous burden falls on the shoulders of the poor, and so Sun Tzu concludes that to neglect the use of spies is nothing less than a crime against humanity.

3. One who acts like this is no leader of men, no present help to his sovereign, no master of victory.

Commentary: This idea, that the true object of war is peace, has its root in the national temperament of the Chinese. As far back as 597 B.C. these memorable words were uttered by Prince Chuang of the Ch'u State: "The Chinese character for 'prowess' is made up of the characters for 'to stay' and 'a spear' — that is, the cessation of hostilities. Military prowess is seen in the repression of cruelty, the calling in of weapons, the preservation of the appointment of Heaven, the firm establishment of merit, the bestowal of happiness on the people, the making of harmony between the princes, the spreading of wealth."

4. Thus, what enables the wise sovereign and the good general to strike and conquer, and to achieve things beyond the reach of ordinary men, is *foreknowledge*.

Commentary: That is, knowledge of the enemy's dispositions and of what he means to do.

5. Now this foreknowledge cannot be got out of spirits; it cannot be obtained inductively from experience,

Commentary: Tu Mu's note is: "Knowledge of the enemy cannot be gained by reasoning from other cases like it."

nor by any deductive calculation.

Commentary: Li Ch'uan says: "Quantities like length, breadth, distance and magnitude can be determined exactly by mathematics; human actions cannot be calculated in that way."

6. Knowledge of the enemy's dispositions can only be obtained from other men.

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en has rather an interesting note: "Knowledge of the spirit world is to be obtained by divination; information in natural science may be sought by inductive reasoning; the laws of the universe can be verified by mathematical calculation: but the dispositions of an enemy can be found out through spies, and through spies alone."

7. Hence the use of spies, of whom there are five classes: (1) local spies; (2) inward spies; (3) converted spies; (4) doomed spies; (5) surviving spies.

8. When these five kinds of spy are all at work, none can discover the secret system. This is called "divine manipulation of the threads". It is the sovereign's most precious faculty.

Commentary: Cromwell, one of the greatest and most practical of all cavalry leaders, had officers styled "scout masters", whose business it was to collect all possible information about the enemy through scouts and spies and the like; and much of his success in war was traceable to the knowledge of the enemy's moves he gained beforehand in this way.

Footnote: "Aids to Scouting," p. 2.

9. Having *local spies* means employing the services of the inhabitants of a district.

Commentary: Tu Mu says: "In the enemy's country, win people over by kind treatment, and use them as spies."

10. Having *inward spies* means making use of officials of the enemy.

Commentary: Tu Mu lists the following classes as likely to do good service in this respect: "Worthy men who have been degraded from office; criminals who have undergone punishment; also favourite concubines who are greedy for gold, men who are aggrieved at being in subordinate positions or who have been passed over in the distribution of posts, others who are anxious that their own side should be defeated so that they may have a chance of displaying their ability and talents, and fickle turncoats who always want to have a foot in each boat. Officials of these several kinds," he goes on, "should be secretly approached and bound to your interests by means of rich presents. In this way you will be able to find out the state of affairs in the enemy's country, learn the plans that are being formed against you, and moreover disturb the harmony and create a breach between the sovereign and his ministers." The need for extreme caution in dealing with "inward spies", however, appears from a historical incident related by Ho Shih: "Lo Shang, Governor of I-Chou, sent his general Wei Po to attack the rebel Li Hsiung of Shu in his stronghold at P'i. After each side had had a number of victories and defeats, Li Hsiung had recourse to the services of a certain P'o-t'ai, a native of Wu-tu. He began by having him whipped until the blood came, and then sent him off to Lo Shang, whom he was to delude by offering to cooperate with him from inside the city and to give a fire signal at the right moment for a general assault. Lo Shang, trusting in these promises, marched out all his best troops and placed Wei Po and others at their head, with orders to attack at P'o-t'ai's bidding. Meanwhile Li Hsiung's general, Li Hsiang, had prepared an ambush on their line of march; and P'o-t'ai, having reared long scaling-ladders against the city walls, now lit the beacon fire. Wei Po's men raced up on seeing the signal and began climbing the ladders as fast as they could, while others were drawn up by ropes lowered from above. More than a hundred of Lo Shang's soldiers entered the city this way, and every one of them was beheaded on the spot. Li Hsiung then charged with all his forces, both inside and outside the city, and routed the enemy completely." (This happened in A.D. 303. I do not know where Ho Shih got the story from. It is not given in the biography of Li Hsiung, nor in that of his father Li T'e, *Chin Shu*, chapters 120 and 121.)

11. Having *converted spies* means getting hold of the enemy's spies and using them for our own purposes.

Commentary: That is, detaching them from the enemy's service by means of heavy bribes and liberal promises, and inducing them to carry back false information as well as to spy in turn on their own countrymen. On the other hand, Hsiao Shih-hsien says that we pretend not to have detected the spy, but contrive to let him carry away a false impression of what is going on. Several of the commentators accept this as an alternative definition; but that it is not what Sun Tzu meant is conclusively proved by his later remarks about treating the converted spy generously (verse 21 and following). Ho Shih notes three occasions on which converted spies were used with conspicuous success: (1) by T'ien Tan in his defence of Chi-mo (see above, Chapter Nine, verse 24, note); (2) by Chao She on his march to O-yu (see Chapter Seven, verse 4, note); and (3) by the wily Fan Chu in 260 B.C., when Lien P'o was conducting a defensive campaign against Ch'in. The King of Chao strongly disapproved of Lien P'o's cautious and dilatory methods, which had failed to avert a series of minor disasters, and therefore lent a ready ear to the reports of his spies, who had secretly gone over to the enemy and were already in Fan Chu's pay. They said: "The only thing that causes Ch'in any anxiety is the fear that Chao Kua may be made general. Lien P'o they consider an easy opponent, who is sure to be beaten in the long run." Now this Chao Kua was a son of the famous Chao She. From boyhood he had been wholly engrossed in the study of war and military matters, until at last he came to believe that there was no commander in the whole Empire who could stand against him. His father was much disturbed by this overweening conceit, and by the flippancy with which he spoke of so serious a thing as war, and solemnly declared that if Kua were ever appointed general he would bring ruin on the armies of Chao. This was the man who, in spite of earnest protests from his own mother and from the veteran statesman Lin Hsiang-ju, was now sent to succeed Lien P'o. Needless to say, he proved no match for the redoubtable Po Ch'i and the great military power of Ch'in. He fell into a trap by which his army was divided in two and his communications cut; and after a desperate resistance lasting 46 days, during which the famished soldiers devoured one another, he was himself killed by an arrow, and his whole force, amounting, it is said, to 400,000 men, was ruthlessly put to the sword.

12. Having *doomed spies* means doing certain things openly for purposes of deception, and allowing our own spies to know of them and report them to the enemy.

Commentary: Tu Yu gives the best exposition of the meaning: "We ostentatiously do things calculated to deceive our own spies, who must be led to believe that they have found them out unnoticed. Then, when these spies are captured in the enemy's lines, they will make an entirely false report, and the enemy will take his measures accordingly, only to find that we do something quite different. The spies will thereupon be put to death." As an example of doomed spies, Ho Shih mentions the prisoners released by Pan Ch'ao in his campaign against Yarkand. (See Chapter Eleven, verse 36, note.) He also refers to T'ang Chien, who in A.D. 630 was sent by T'ai Tsung to lull the Turkish Khan Chieh-li into a false sense of security, until Li Ching was able to deliver a crushing blow against him. Chang Yu says that the Turks took their revenge by killing T'ang Chien, but this is a mistake, for we read in both the Old and the New T'ang History (chapter 58, folio 2, and chapter 89, folio 8, respectively) that he escaped and lived on until 656. Li I-chi played a somewhat similar part in 203 B.C., when he was sent by the King of Han to open peace negotiations with Ch'i. He has certainly more claim to be described as a "doomed spy", for the King of Ch'i, being attacked without warning soon afterwards by Han Hsin, and infuriated by what he took to be Li I-chi's treachery, ordered the unfortunate envoy to be boiled alive.

13. *Surviving spies*, finally, are those who bring back news from the enemy's camp.

Commentary: This is the ordinary class of spies, properly so called, forming a regular part of the army. Tu Mu says: "Your surviving spy must be a man of keen intellect, though in outward appearance a fool; of shabby exterior, but with a will of iron. He must be active, robust, endowed with physical strength and courage, thoroughly used to all sorts of dirty work, able to endure hunger and cold, and to put up with shame and humiliation." Ho Shih tells the following story of Ta-hsi Wu of the Sui dynasty: "When he was governor of Eastern Ch'in, Shen-wu of Ch'i made a hostile movement on Sha-yuan. The Emperor T'ai Tsu sent Ta-hsi Wu to spy on the enemy. He was accompanied by two other men. All three were on horseback and wore the enemy's uniform. When it was dark they dismounted a few hundred feet from the enemy's camp and stealthily crept up to listen, until they managed to catch the passwords used in the army. Then they got on their horses again and boldly rode through the camp in the guise of night-watchmen; and more than once, happening to come across a soldier who was committing some breach of discipline, they actually stopped to give the culprit a sound cudgelling. In this way they managed to return with the fullest possible information about the enemy's dispositions, and received warm commendation from the Emperor, who as a result of their report was able to inflict a severe defeat on his adversary."

14. Hence it is that with none in the whole army are more intimate relations to be maintained than with spies.

Commentary: Tu Mu and Mei Yao-ch'en point out that the spy is privileged to enter even the general's private sleeping tent.

None should be more liberally rewarded. In no other business should greater secrecy be preserved.

Commentary: Tu Mu gives a graphic touch: all communication with spies should be carried on "mouth to ear". The following remarks on spies may be quoted from Turenne, who made perhaps larger use of them than any commander before him: "Spies are attached to those who give them most; he who pays them ill is never served. They should never be known to anybody, nor should they know one another. When they propose anything very material, secure their persons, or have in your possession their wives and children as hostages for their fidelity. Never communicate anything to them but what is absolutely necessary that they should know."

Footnote: "Marshal Turenne," p. 311.

15. Spies cannot be usefully employed without a certain intuitive sagacity.

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en says: "In order to use them, one must know fact from falsehood, and be able to tell honesty from double-dealing." Wang Hsi, taking it differently, thinks rather along the lines of "intuitive perception" and "practical intelligence". Tu Mu strangely refers these qualities to the spies themselves: "Before using spies we must assure ourselves of their integrity of character and of the extent of their experience and skill." But then he goes on: "A brazen face and a crafty disposition are more dangerous than mountains or rivers; it takes a man of genius to see through such a one." So we are left in some doubt as to his real opinion on the passage.

16. They cannot be properly managed without benevolence and straightforwardness.

Commentary: Chang Yu says: "When you have attracted them by substantial offers, you must treat them with absolute sincerity; then they will work for you with all their might."

17. Without subtle ingenuity of mind, one cannot make certain of the truth of their reports.

Commentary: Mei Yao-ch'en says: "Be on your guard against the possibility of spies going over to the enemy's service."

18. Be subtle! Be subtle! And use your spies for every kind of business.

Commentary: Compare Chapter Six, verse 9.

19. If a secret piece of news is divulged by a spy before the time is ripe, he must be put to death together with the man to whom the secret was told.

Commentary: Word for word, the translation here is: "If spy matters are heard before our plans are carried out," and so on. Sun Tzu's main point in this passage is that whereas you kill the spy himself as a punishment for letting the secret out, the object of killing the other man is only, as Ch'en Hao puts it, "to stop his mouth" and prevent the news leaking any further. If it had already been repeated to others, that object would not be gained. Either way, Sun Tzu lays himself open to the charge of inhumanity, though Tu Mu tries to defend him by saying that the man deserves to be put to death, since the spy would certainly not have told the secret unless the other had been at pains to worm it out of him.

20. Whether the object is to crush an army, to storm a city, or to assassinate an individual, it is always necessary to begin by finding out the names of the attendants, the aides-de-camp,

Commentary: The word is literally "visitors", which is equivalent, as Tu Yu says, to "those whose duty it is to keep the general supplied with information" — which naturally requires frequent interviews with him.

the doorkeepers and sentries of the general in command. Our spies must be commissioned to find these out.

Commentary: As the first step, no doubt, towards finding out whether any of these important functionaries can be won over by bribery.

21. The enemy's spies who have come to spy on us must be sought out, tempted with bribes, led away and comfortably housed. So they will become converted spies and available for our service.

22. It is through the information brought by the converted spy that we are able to acquire and employ local and inward spies.

Commentary: Tu Yu says: "Through conversion of the enemy's spies we learn the enemy's condition." And Chang Yu says: "We must tempt the converted spy into our service, because it is he who knows which of the local inhabitants are greedy for gain and which of the officials are open to corruption."

23. It is owing to his information, again, that we can get the doomed spy to carry false tidings to the enemy.

Commentary: Chang Yu says: "because the converted spy knows how the enemy can best be deceived".

24. Lastly, it is by his information that the surviving spy can be used on appointed occasions.

25. The end and aim of spying in all its five varieties is knowledge of the enemy; and this knowledge can only be derived, in the first instance, from the converted spy.

Commentary: As explained in verses 22 to 24. He not only brings information himself, but makes it possible to use the other kinds of spy to advantage.

Hence it is essential that the converted spy be treated with the utmost liberality.

26. Of old, the rise of the Yin dynasty

Commentary: Sun Tzu means the Shang dynasty, founded in 1766 B.C. Its name was changed to Yin by P'an Keng in 1401.

was due to I Chih

Commentary: Better known as I Yin, the famous general and statesman who took part in Ch'eng T'ang's campaign against Chieh Kuei.

who had served under the Hsia. Likewise, the rise of the Chou dynasty was due to Lü Ya

Commentary: Lu Shang rose to high office under the tyrant Chou Hsin, whom he afterwards helped to overthrow. Popularly known as T'ai Kung, a title bestowed on him by Wen Wang, he is said to have composed a treatise on war, wrongly identified with the *Liu T'ao*.

who had served under the Yin.

Commentary: There is less precision in the Chinese than I have thought it well to introduce into my translation, and the commentaries on the passage are by no means explicit. But, having regard to the context, we can hardly doubt that Sun Tzu is holding up I Chih and Lu Ya as illustrious examples of the converted spy, or of something closely like it. His suggestion is that the Hsia and Yin dynasties were overthrown because of the intimate knowledge of their weaknesses and shortcomings that these former ministers were able to pass on to the other side. Mei Yao-ch'en appears to resent any such aspersion on these historic names: "I Yin and Lu Ya," he says, "were not rebels against the Government. Hsia could not employ the former, so Yin employed him. Yin could not employ the latter, so Hou employed him. Their great achievements were all for the good of the people." Ho Shih is indignant too: "How should two divinely inspired men such as I and Lu have acted as common spies? Sun Tzu's mention of them simply means that the proper use of the five classes of spies is a matter requiring men of the highest mental calibre, like I and Lu, whose wisdom and capacity qualified them for the task. The words above only emphasise this point." Ho Shih believes, then, that the two heroes are mentioned on account of their supposed skill in the use of spies. But this is very weak.

27. Hence it is only the enlightened ruler and the wise general who will use the highest intelligence of the army for purposes of spying, and thereby they achieve great results.

Commentary: Tu Mu closes with a note of warning: "Just as water, which carries a boat from bank to bank, may also be the means of sinking it, so reliance on spies, while productive of great results, is often the cause of utter destruction."

Spies are a most important element in war, because on them depends an army's ability to move.

Commentary: Chia Lin says that an army without spies is like a man without ears or eyes.
