Lecture I: Early Forms of Liability
(Part 1 of 2)

The object of this book is to present a general view of the Common Law. To do that, we need other tools besides logic. It is something to show that the consistency of a system requires a particular result, but it is not everything. The life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience. The felt necessities of the time, the moral and political theories that prevail, intuitions of public policy, whether openly stated or unconscious, even the prejudices that judges share with their fellow men, have had a good deal more to do than the syllogism with deciding the rules by which men should be governed. The law embodies the story of a nation's development through many centuries, and it cannot be treated as if it contained only the axioms and corollaries of a book of mathematics. In order to know what it is, we must know what it has been, and what it tends to become. We must consult, by turns, history and the existing theories of legislation. But the hardest work will be to understand how the two combine into new products at every stage. The substance of the law at any given time corresponds pretty closely, so far as it goes, with what is then thought convenient. But its form and machinery, and how well it is able to produce the results we want from it, depend very much upon its past.

In Massachusetts today there are, on the one hand, a great many rules that are fully accounted for by their obvious good sense. On the other hand, there are some that can only be understood by going back to the infancy of legal procedure among the German tribes, or to the social condition of Rome under the Decemvirs, the board of ten men who first wrote down Roman law in the fifth century before Christ.

I shall use the history of our law as far as it is needed to explain an idea or to interpret a rule, and no further. In doing so there are two errors, equally to be avoided by writer and reader alike. One is to suppose that because an idea seems very familiar and natural to us, it has always been so. Many things we take for granted had to be painfully fought out or thought out in past times. The other mistake is the opposite one of asking too much of history. We start with man full grown. It may be assumed that the earliest barbarian whose practices we shall look at had a good many of the same feelings and passions as ourselves.

The first subject to be discussed is the general theory of liability, civil and criminal. The Common Law has changed a good deal since our series of law reports began, and the search for a theory that can now be said to prevail is very much a study of tendencies. I believe it will be instructive to go back to the early forms of liability and to start from them.

It is commonly known that the early forms of legal procedure were grounded in vengeance. Modern writers have thought that Roman law started from the blood feud, the private war of revenge between one family and another, and all the authorities agree that German law began that way. The feud led to the composition, a payment by which the feud was bought off, at first optional and then compulsory. The composition's gradual advance can be traced in the Anglo-Saxon laws, and by the time of William the Conqueror the feud was pretty well broken up, though not extinguished. The killings and house-burnings of an earlier day became the appeals of mayhem and arson. (An appeal, in old English law, was a private accusation of crime brought by the injured person himself.) The appeal "of the peace and of wounds" (de pace et plagis) and the appeal of mayhem became, or rather were in substance, the action of trespass, which is still familiar to lawyers: the action for a direct and forcible wrong to a man's person or property. But since the compensation recovered in the appeal was the alternative to vengeance, we might expect its scope to be limited to the scope of vengeance. Vengeance implies a feeling of blame, and an opinion, however distorted by passion, that a wrong has been done. It can hardly go very far beyond the case of a harm inflicted on purpose: even a dog distinguishes between being stumbled over and being kicked.

Whether for this reason or another, the early English appeals for personal violence seem to have been confined to intentional wrongs. Glanvill, the first great writer on English law, mentions brawls, blows, and wounds, all forms of intentional violence. In the fuller description of these appeals given by Bracton, the great lawyer of the thirteenth century, it is made quite clear that they were based on intentional assaults. The appeal de pace et plagis alleged an intentional assault, described the weapons used, and gave the length and depth of the wound. The accuser also had to show that he had immediately raised the hue and cry, the public outcry that called the neighborhood out in pursuit. So when Bracton speaks of the lesser offenses, which were not sued by way of appeal, he gives as examples only intentional wrongs, such as blows with the fist, flogging, wounding, insults, and so forth. The cause of action in the trespass cases reported in the earlier Year Books (the medieval reports of cases argued in the English courts) and in the Abbreviatio Placitorum, a digest of still older court records, is always an intentional wrong. It was only later, and after argument, that trespass was extended to cover harms that the defendant foresaw but did not intend as the consequence of his act. From there it was extended again to injuries nobody foresaw.

This order of development, you will notice, does not quite fit an opinion that some have held: that it was characteristic of early law not to look beyond the visible external fact, the damnum corpore corpori datum, "harm done by a body to a body." It has been thought that to inquire into the inner condition of the defendant, into his guilt or innocence, implies a refinement of legal thinking equally foreign to Rome before the Lex Aquilia (the Roman statute on wrongful damage to property) and to England when trespass took its shape. I do not know of any very satisfactory evidence that a man was generally held liable, either in Rome or in England, for the accidental consequences even of his own act. But whatever the earliest law may have been, the account just given shows the starting point of the system we have to deal with. Our system of private liability for the consequences of a man's own acts, that is, for his trespasses, started from the notion of actual intent and actual personal blame.

The original principles of liability for harm done by another person or by a thing have been less carefully studied so far than those governing trespass, and so I shall give the rest of this Lecture to them. I shall try to show that this liability, too, had its root in the passion of revenge, and to point out the changes by which it reached its present form. But I shall not confine myself strictly to what that purpose requires. It is not only most interesting to trace the transformation through its whole extent; the story will also give an instructive example of the way the law has grown, without a break, from barbarism to civilization. Furthermore, it will throw much light on some important and peculiar doctrines that there will be no chance to come back to later.

A very common phenomenon, and one very familiar to the student of history, is this. The customs, beliefs, or needs of a primitive time establish a rule or a formula. In the course of centuries the custom, belief, or necessity disappears, but the rule remains. The reason that gave rise to the rule has been forgotten, and ingenious minds set themselves to work out how it is to be accounted for. Some ground of policy is thought of that seems to explain it and to reconcile it with the present state of things. Then the rule adapts itself to the new reasons that have been found for it, and starts on a new career. The old form receives a new content, and in time even the form changes to fit the meaning it has received. The subject before us illustrates this course of events very clearly.

I will begin with a medley of examples, each embodying a distinct rule, and each with its own plausible and apparently sufficient ground of policy to explain it.

A man keeps an animal known to be vicious, which escapes and does his neighbor damage. He can prove that the animal got out through no negligence of his, but he is held liable all the same. Why? Because, says the analytical jurist, although he was not negligent at the moment it escaped, he was guilty of a more remote heedlessness, or negligence, or fault, in keeping such a creature at all. And one whose fault causes damage ought to pay for it.

A baker's man, driving his master's cart to deliver hot rolls one morning, runs another man down. The master has to pay for it. And when the master has asked why he should pay for the wrongful act of an independent and responsible human being, he has been answered, from the time of Ulpian down to that of Austin, that it is because he was to blame for employing an unfit person. If he replies that he took the greatest possible care in choosing his driver, he is told that this is no excuse. Then perhaps the reason shifts, and he is told that there ought to be a remedy against someone who can pay the damages, or that the wrongful acts that ordinary human experience shows are likely to happen in the course of the job are chargeable to the job.

Next, take a case where a limit has been set to a liability that used to be unlimited. In 1851 Congress passed a law, still in force, under which the owners of ships, in all the more common cases of loss at sea, can hand over the vessel and the freight then due on her to those who suffered the loss; and it provides that when they have done so, all further proceedings against the owners shall stop. The legislators to whom we owe this act argued that if a merchant puts part of his property into a risky venture, it is reasonable that his stake should be confined to what he puts at risk. That is a principle similar to the one on which corporations have been created in such numbers in America during the last fifty years.

It was a rule of criminal pleading in England down into the present century that an indictment for homicide must state the value of the instrument that caused the death. The purpose was to let the king, or whoever held the right from him, claim the forfeiture of the deodand, "as an accursed thing," in Blackstone's words. (The deodand was the object that had caused a man's death, forfeited to the Crown.)

I could go on multiplying examples, but these are enough to show how far apart the points are that have to be brought together. As a first step toward a generalization, we must consider what is to be found in ancient and independent systems of law.

There is a well-known passage in Exodus that we shall need to remember later: "If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit." When we turn from the Jews to the Greeks, we find the principle of that passage built up into a system. Plutarch, in his life of Solon, tells us that a dog that had bitten a man was to be handed over tied to a log four cubits long. Plato, in his Laws, made elaborate provision for many cases of this kind. If a slave killed a man, he was to be given up to the dead man's relatives. If he wounded a man, he was to be given up to the injured party to do with as he pleased. The same held if he did damage to which the injured party had not himself contributed. In either case, if the owner failed to surrender the slave, he was bound to make good the loss. If a beast killed a man, it was to be killed and thrown out beyond the borders. If a lifeless thing caused a death, it was to be thrown beyond the borders in the same way, and expiation was to be made. Nor was all this an ideal creation of merely imagined law. In one of the speeches of Aeschines it is said that "we banish beyond our borders stocks and stones and steel, voiceless and mindless things, if they chance to kill a man; and if a man commits suicide, bury the hand that struck the blow afar from its body." This is mentioned as an everyday matter, obviously without any thought that it was extraordinary, and only to set up a contrast with the honors heaped on Demosthenes. As late as the second century after Christ, the traveler Pausanias noted with some surprise that the Athenians still sat in judgment on lifeless things in the Prytaneum, their ancient town hall. Plutarch credits Draco with founding the practice.

In Roman law we find similar principles of noxae deditio, noxal surrender (the handing over of the offending creature or thing to the injured party), gradually leading to further results. The Twelve Tables, Rome's first written code (451 B.C.), provided that if an animal had done damage, either the animal was to be surrendered or the damage paid for. We learn from Gaius that the same rule applied to wrongs done by children or slaves, and there is some trace of it for lifeless things as well.

The Roman lawyers, not looking beyond their own system or their own time, used their wits to find an explanation that would show the law as they found it to be reasonable. Gaius said it was unjust that the fault of children or slaves should cost their parents or owners more than the bodies of the wrongdoers themselves. Ulpian reasoned that this was true all the more, a fortiori, of things without life, which are incapable of fault. This way of approaching the question treats the right of surrender as if it were a limit on a liability incurred by the parent or owner, a liability that would naturally, and to begin with, be unlimited. But if that is what was meant, it puts the cart before the horse. The right of surrender was not introduced as a limit on liability. On the contrary, in Rome and Greece alike, payment was introduced as the alternative to a failure to surrender.

The action was not based, as it would be nowadays, on the fault of the parent or owner. If it had been, it would always have been brought against the person who had control of the slave or animal at the time it did the harm, the person who, if anyone, was to blame for not preventing it. Far from this being the practice, the person to be sued was whoever owned the slave or animal at the time of the suit. The action followed the guilty thing into whoever's hands it came. And in a curious contrast with the principle as later turned around to suit still more modern views of public policy, if the animal was of a wild nature—that is, in the very case of the most dangerous animals—the owner stopped being liable the moment it escaped, because at that moment he stopped being its owner. There seems to have been no other or wider liability under the old law, even where a slave did the wrong with his master's knowledge, unless perhaps the slave was a mere tool in his master's hands. Gaius and Ulpian showed an inclination to cut noxal surrender down to a privilege of the owner in cases of misdeeds committed without his knowledge. But Ulpian is obliged to admit that by the ancient law, according to Celsus, the action was noxal where a slave did wrong even with his master's knowledge and consent.

Footnote: The maxim was Noxa caput sequitur: the liability follows the offender himself.

All this shows very clearly that the owner's liability was merely a way of getting at the slave or animal that was the immediate cause of offense. In other words, the object of the Greek and early Roman process was vengeance on the immediate offender, not compensation from the master or owner. The owner's liability was simply a liability of the offending thing. In the primitive customs of Greece it was enforced by a legal proceeding directed expressly against the object, alive or lifeless. The Roman Twelve Tables made the owner the defendant instead of the thing itself, but did not in any way change the ground of liability or its limit. The change was simply a device to let the owner protect his interest.

Footnote: Gaius says that a noxal action may turn into a direct one, and a direct action into a noxal one. If the head of a family commits a wrong and is then adopted, or becomes a slave, a noxal action now lies against his new master in place of the direct action against himself as the wrongdoer.

But it may be asked how lifeless objects came to be pursued in this way, if the object of the procedure was to satisfy the passion of revenge. Learned men have been ready to find the reason in the habit, common to savages and children, of treating lifeless nature as if it were a person, and there is much to confirm this view. Without some such personification, anger toward lifeless things would have been brief at most. It is worth noticing that the commonest example in the most primitive customs and laws is a tree that falls on a man, or from which he falls and is killed. We can imagine fairly easily how a tree might be put on the same footing as an animal. It certainly was treated like one, and was handed over to the relatives, or chopped to pieces to satisfy a passion, real or put on.

In the Athenian process there is also, no doubt, a different thought to be traced. Expiation—the religious purging of guilt—is one of the ends Plato insists on most, and it appears to have been the purpose of the procedure Aeschines mentions. Some passages in the Roman historians, which will come up again, seem to point the same way.

Another peculiarity to notice is that the liability seems to have been thought of as attached to the body that did the damage, in an almost physical sense. An untrained mind carries out only imperfectly the analysis by which jurists trace responsibility back to the beginning of a chain of causes. The hatred of anything that gives us pain, which takes itself out on the obvious cause, and which leads even civilized man to kick a door when it pinches his finger, is embodied in noxal surrender and other related doctrines of early Roman law. There is a damaged passage in Gaius that seems to say that liability could sometimes be escaped by giving up even the dead body of the offender. So Livy relates that when Brutulus Papius had caused a breach of truce with the Romans, the Samnites decided to surrender him; and when he escaped disgrace and punishment by killing himself, they sent his lifeless body. It is worth noticing that the surrender seems to be regarded as the natural expiation for the breach of treaty, and that sending the body when the wrongdoer has died is treated as equally a matter of course.

Footnote: I follow Huschke's reading of that passage: it is lawful, if the offender has died a natural death, to give up the dead man; for although we have said that defendants are not permitted to surrender dead men, still, if someone gives up one who has died by his own fate, he is equally discharged. Ulpian's statement that the action is gone if the animal dies before the suit is joined is aimed only at the point that the liability is founded on possession of the thing.

Footnote: Livy adds that it was decided to hand over his property along with his body. Elsewhere he tells of a demand that the Fabii be surrendered for having violated the law of nations.

The most curious examples of this sort occur in the region of what we would now call contract. Livy again supplies one, if indeed the last case is not one already. The Roman consul Postumius concluded the disgraceful peace of the Caudine Forks—by a sponsio, a personal pledge, as Livy says, rejecting the usual story that it was by a formal treaty—and he was sent to Rome to get the people's approval. When he got there, however, he proposed that the persons who had made the contract, himself included, should be handed over in satisfaction of it. For, he said, since the Roman people had not approved the agreement, who is so ignorant of the jus fetialium, the sacred law of treaties and war kept by the priests called fetials, as not to know that the people are released from obligation by surrendering us? The formula of surrender seems to bring the case within noxal surrender. Cicero tells of a similar surrender of Mancinus to the Numantines by the pater patratus, the fetial priest who spoke for Rome in such matters; the Numantines, however, like the Samnites in the earlier case, refused to accept him.

Footnote: The formula of surrender ran: "Whereas these men, without the command of the Roman people, pledged that a treaty would be made, and have thereby done harm; therefore, so that the Roman people may be freed from impious guilt, I surrender these men to you." The words for doing harm, noxam nocuerunt, are the very words of the noxal action.

Footnote: Florus, in his account, says that Rome expiated the matter by the surrender of Mancinus. It has already been observed that the cases Livy mentions suggest that the object of the surrender was expiation as much as they suggest that it was satisfaction of a contract. Compare the provision attributed to the laws of Numa, that if a man killed another unintentionally, he should offer a ram in public to the dead man's kindred in place of the head of the slain.

It might be asked what likeness could be found between a breach of contract and the kinds of wrong that stir the desire for vengeance. But it must be remembered that the distinction between tort (a civil wrong other than a breach of contract) and breach of contract, and especially between the remedies for the two, is not found ready-made. It is conceivable that a procedure designed to redress violence was extended to other cases as they came up. Slaves were surrendered for theft as well as for assault; and it is said that a debtor who did not pay his debts, or a seller who failed to deliver goods he had been paid for, was dealt with on the same footing as a thief. This line of thought, together with the half-physical idea, already noticed, of legal obligations as binding the offending body, may explain the well-known law of the Twelve Tables on insolvent debtors. Under that law, if a man owed money to several creditors and could not pay, then after certain formalities they might cut up his body and divide it among them. If there was a single creditor, he might put his debtor to death or sell him as a slave.

If no other right had been given than that of reducing a debtor to slavery, the law might be taken to aim only at compensation, and to be modeled on the natural working of self-help. That seems to be the explanation of the principle of our own law that seizing a man's body on execution of a judgment satisfies the debt, even if he is not held for an hour. But the right to put him to death looks like vengeance, and the division of the body shows that the debt was thought of, quite literally, as lodged in the body or binding it with a vinculum juris, a "chain of law."

Footnote: Compare Varro's definition: a free man who gives his labor in servitude for money he owes, until he pays it, is called nexus, that is, "bound."

Whatever the true explanation of surrender in connection with contracts may be, for our present purpose we need not go further than the ordinary case of noxal surrender for wrongs. Nor is the apparent clinging of liability to the very body that did the harm of the first importance. Roman law dealt mainly with living creatures, with animals and slaves. If a man was run over, it did not surrender the wagon that crushed him, but the ox that drew the wagon. At this stage the idea is easy to understand. The desire for vengeance may be felt as strongly against a slave as against a free man, and even nowadays it is not unknown for a similar passion to be felt against an animal. The surrender of the slave or beast gave the injured party the power to do as he would with them. Payment by the owner was merely a privilege, in case he wanted to buy the vengeance off.

It is easy to imagine that such a system as I have described could not last once civilization had advanced to any considerable height. What had been a privilege of buying off vengeance by agreement—of paying for the damage instead of surrendering the body of the offender—no doubt became a general custom. The Aquilian law, passed a couple of centuries or so after the Twelve Tables, enlarged the range of compensation for bodily injuries. Interpretation enlarged the Aquilian law. Masters became personally liable for certain wrongs their slaves committed with their knowledge, where before they had only been bound to surrender the slave. If a pack mule threw its load onto a passer-by because it had been improperly overloaded, or a dog that could have been restrained got away from its master and bit someone, the old noxal action, as it was called, gave way to an action under the new law enforcing a general personal liability. Still later, shipowners and innkeepers were made liable, as if they themselves were wrongdoers, for wrongs committed by the people they employed on board ship or in the tavern, even though, of course, the wrongs were committed without their knowledge. The true reason for this exceptional responsibility was the exceptional trust that people were forced to place in carriers and innkeepers. But some of the jurists, who regarded the surrender of children and slaves as a privilege meant to limit liability, explained the new liability on the ground that the innkeeper or shipowner was to some degree guilty of negligence in having employed bad men. This was the first instance of a master being made liable without conditions for the wrongs of his servant. The reason given for it was of general application, and the principle expanded to fill the reach of the reason.

The law on shipowners and innkeepers introduced another and more startling innovation. It made them responsible when the people they employed were free, as well as when they were slaves. For the first time one man was made answerable for the wrongs of another who was answerable himself, and who had standing before the law. This was a great change from the bare permission to ransom one's slave as a privilege. But here we have the history of the whole modern doctrine of master and servant, and of principal and agent: the doctrine that makes an employer answer for what his employee does on the job. All servants are now as free as their masters, and as open to being sued. Yet the principle introduced on special grounds in a special case, when servants were slaves, is now the general law of this country and of England. Under it men every day have to pay large sums for other people's acts, in which they had no part and for which they are in no sense to blame. And to this day the reason the Roman jurists offered for an exceptional rule is made to justify this universal and unlimited responsibility.

So much for one of the parents of our common law. Now let us turn for a moment to the Germanic side. The Salic Law, the code of the Salian Franks, embodies customs that in all probability are too early to have been influenced either by Rome or by the Old Testament. The thirty-sixth chapter of the ancient text provides that if a man is killed by a domestic animal, the owner of the animal shall pay half the composition (the sum he would have had to pay to buy off the blood feud if he had killed the man himself), and for the other half shall give the beast up to the complainant. So, by chapter thirty-five, if a slave killed a free man, the slave was to be surrendered to the dead man's relatives for one half of the composition, and the master was to pay the other half. But according to the gloss, the explanatory commentary on the text, if the slave or his master had been mistreated by the slain man or his relatives, the master had only to surrender the slave. It is interesting to notice that the Northern sources that Wilda takes to represent a more primitive stage of German law limit liability for animals to surrender alone. There is also a trace that at a later date the master could, in some cases, clear himself by showing that the slave was no longer in his possession. There are later provisions making a master liable for wrongs his slave committed at his command. And in the laws the Thuringians adapted from the earlier sources, it is provided in so many words that the master is to pay for all damage done by his slaves.

Footnote: The Saxon law says that if a slave runs away after committing the deed, so that his master can no longer find him, the master pays nothing. The Ripuarian law forbids a man to turn his slave loose because of damage the slave has done to someone; the master must answer for him according to the damage, or offer him up for composition or punishment. But if the slave runs away after the wrong, so that the master cannot find him at all, the master may clear himself by oath that the deed was done neither by his will nor with his knowledge.

In short, so far as I can trace the order of development in the customs of the German tribes, it seems to have been entirely similar to the one we have already followed in the growth of Roman law. The earlier liability for slaves and animals was mainly confined to surrender; the later became personal, as at Rome.

The reader may begin to ask for proof that all this has any bearing on our law of today. As far as the influence of Roman law on our own is concerned, especially the Roman law of master and servant, the evidence is to be found in every book written on the subject for the last five hundred years. It has already been said that we still repeat the reasoning of the Roman lawyers, empty as it is, to the present day. We shall see shortly whether the German folk-laws can also be followed into England.

In the Kentish laws of Hlothhere and Eadric (A.D. 680) it is said: "If any one's slave slay a freeman, whoever it be, let the owner pay with a hundred shillings, give up the slayer," and so on. There are several other provisions like it. In the laws of Ine, from nearly the same time, surrender and payment are simple alternatives: "If a Wessex slave slay an Englishman, then shall he who owns him deliver him up to the lord and the kindred, or give sixty shillings for his life." Alfred's laws (A.D. 871–901) have a similar provision about cattle: "If a neat wound a man, let the neat be delivered up or compounded for"—a neat being an ox or cow, and to compound, to pay a composition. And Alfred, although he came two hundred years after the first English lawgivers quoted here, seems to have gone back to more primitive ideas than we find before his time. For he extends the same principle to the case of a tree that kills a man: "If, at their common work, one man slay another unwilfully, let the tree be given to the kindred, and let them have it off the land within thirty nights. Or let him take possession of it who owns the wood."

It is not out of place to compare what Mr. Tylor has reported about the Kukis, a hill people of Southern Asia. "If a tiger killed a Kuki, his family were in disgrace till they had retaliated by killing and eating this tiger, or another; but further, if a man was killed by a fall from a tree, his relatives would take their revenge by cutting the tree down, and scattering it in chips."
