Lecture I: Early Forms of Liability
(Part 2 of 2)

To return to the English: the later laws, from about a hundred years after Alfred down to the collection known as the laws of Henry I, compiled long after the Norman Conquest, increase the lord's liability for his household and make him a surety for the good conduct of his men. If they incur a fine to the king and run away, the lord has to pay it, unless he can clear himself of any part in the offense. But I cannot say that I find the unlimited liability of master for servant, which was worked out on the Continent both by the German tribes and at Rome, until a later period. Whether the principle, once established, was a native growth, or whether the last step was taken under the influence of the Roman law, of which Bracton made great use, I cannot say. It is enough that the soil was ready for it, and that it took root at an early day. This is all that need be said here about the liability of a master for the misdeeds of his servants.

Footnote: A record from the reign of Edward III holds that "it seemed to the court that every master of a ship is bound to answer for any trespass done by his servants in his ship," and the court relied there on the Laws of Oléron, the old sea code. Later on, the influence of the Roman law is clear.

The next thing to show is what became of the principle as applied to animals. Nowadays a man is bound at his peril to keep his cattle from trespassing, and he is liable for damage done by his dog or by any fierce animal if he has notice that the brute tends to do the kind of harm complained of. The question is whether any connection can be established between these very sensible and intelligible rules of modern law and the surrender ordered by King Alfred.

Let us turn to one of the old books of Scottish law, where the old principle still appears in full force and is stated together with its reasons as they were then understood. The passage says, in the Scots of its day, that if a wild or headstrong horse carries a man against his will over a cliff or into the water and the man drowns, the horse is forfeit to the king; but a tame, broken horse that a man foolishly spurs into the water is not forfeit, because the fault was the man's and not the horse's, and the man has already had his punishment by dying:

"Gif ane wylde or head-strang horse, carries ane man against his will over an craig, or heuch, or to the water, and the man happin to drowne, the horse sall perteine to the king as escheit.

"Bot it is otherwise of ane tame and dantoned horse; gif any man fulishlie rides, and be sharp spurres compelles his horse to take the water, and the man drownes, the horse sould not be escheit, for that comes be the mans fault or trespasse, and not of the horse, and the man has receaved his punishment, in sa farre as he is perished and dead; and the horse quha did na fault, sould not be escheit.

"The like reason is of all other beastes, quhilk slayes anie man, [it is added in a later work, "of the quhilk slaughter they haue gilt,"] for all these beasts sould be escheit."

"Escheit" (escheat) means forfeited to the Crown, and the later addition limits the rule to beasts that are guilty of the killing. "The Forme and Maner of Baron Courts" then goes on to ask whether a mill is forfeit when a man falls into the mill-dam, is carried down by the water to the wheel, and is killed by it. The answer is no, because a mill is a dead thing, and a dead thing can commit no felony:

"It is to witt, that this question is asked in the law, Gif ane lord hes ane milne, and any man fall in the damne, and be borne down with the water quhill he comes to the quheill, and there be slaine to death with the quheill; quhither aught the milne to be escheit or not? The law sayes thereto nay, and be this reason, For it is ane dead thing, and ane dead thing may do na fellony, nor be made escheit throw their gilt. Swa the milne in this case is not culpable, and in the law it is lawfull to the lord of the land to haue ane mylne on his awin water quhere best likes him."

The reader will see in this passage, as I remarked earlier of the Roman law, that a distinction is drawn between things capable of guilt and things that are not—between living things and dead ones. But he will also see that no one had any difficulty in treating animals as guilty.

Take next an early passage of English law, a report of what one of the English judges laid down. In 1333 it was stated as law that "if my dog kills your sheep, and I, freshly after the fact, tender you the dog, you are without recovery against me." In other words, if I promptly hand over the dog, you can get nothing more from me. More than three centuries later, in 1676, Justice Twisden said that "if one hath kept a tame fox, which gets loose and grows wild, he that hath kept him before shall not answer for the damage the fox doth after he hath lost him, and he hath resumed his wild nature." It is at least doubtful whether that sentence would ever have been written but for the lingering influence of the idea that the ground of the owner's liability was his ownership of the offending thing and his failure to surrender it. When the fox escaped, ownership was at an end by another principle of law. In fact, that very consideration was seriously pressed in England as late as 1846, in the case of a monkey that escaped and bit the plaintiff. So it seems a reasonable guess that the same way of thinking led Lord Holt, near the beginning of the eighteenth century, to suggest that one reason a man is bound at his peril to keep his cattle from trespassing is that he has a valuable property in such animals, whereas he has none in dogs, for which his responsibility is less. To this day, in fact, cautious judges state the law about cattle this way: "if I am the owner of an animal in which by law the right of property can exist, I am bound to take care that it does not stray into the land of my neighbor."

I do not mean that our modern law on this subject is only a survival, and that the only change from primitive notions was to put the owner in place of the offending animal. It is probable that the early law was one of the causes that led to the modern doctrine. But there has been too much good sense at every stage of our law for it to adopt the sweeping consequences that would follow from such a wholesale transfer of liability. An owner is not bound at his peril to keep his cattle from harming his neighbor's person. And in some of the earliest cases of personal liability, even for trespass on a neighbor's land, the ground seems to have been the owner's negligence.

Footnote: In the laws of Ine, personal liability seems to be imposed where a man fails to fence. But if an animal breaks through hedges, the only remedy mentioned is to kill it, the owner keeping the skin and flesh and forfeiting the rest. In a case of 1353 or 1354 the defendant was held liable "because it was found that this was for default of guarding them . . . for default of good guard." It is much later that the reason is stated in the absolute form, "because I am bound by law to keep my beasts without doing wrong to any one." The old Scottish book called Regiam Majestatem draws further distinctions about a horse that kills a man.

It is the nature of the animals the common law recognizes as things that can be owned to stray, and, when they stray, to do damage by trampling and eating crops. At the same time it is usual and easy to restrain them. A dog, on the other hand, is not treated as property, and does no harm simply by crossing land that is not its owner's. To this extent, then, the new law might have followed the old. The right of property in the offending animal, which was the ancient ground of responsibility, could safely enough have been adopted as the test of a liability based on the owner's fault. But responsibility for damage of a kind not to be expected from such animals is settled on grounds of policy, comparatively little disturbed by tradition. I have already explained how personal liability for fierce wild animals developed at Rome. Our law seems to have followed the Roman.

We will now follow the history of the branch of the primitive notion that was least likely to survive—the liability of inanimate things.

It will be remembered that King Alfred ordered the surrender of a tree, but that the later Scottish law refused to forfeit a mill because a dead thing could not have guilt. It will be remembered, too, that the animals the Scottish law forfeited went to the king. The same has remained true in England until well into the nineteenth century, even of inanimate objects. As long ago as Bracton, when a man was killed, the coroner was to value the object that caused the death, and it was to be forfeited as a deodand "for the king." It was to be given to God—that is, to the Church—on the king's behalf, to be spent for the good of his soul. A man's death had ceased to be the private affair of his friends, as it had been in the time of the barbarian folk-laws. The king, who provided the court, now sued for the penalty. He took the family's place in the claim on the guilty thing, and the Church took his.

In Edward I's time some of the cases remind us of the barbarian laws at their crudest stage. If a man fell from a tree, the tree was deodand. If he drowned in a well, the well was to be filled up. It did not matter that the forfeited instrument belonged to an innocent person. "Where a man killeth another with the sword of John at Stile, the sword shall be forfeit as deodand, and yet no default is in the owner." That is from a book written in the reign of Henry VIII, about 1530. And it has been repeated from Queen Elizabeth's time until within the last hundred years that if my horse strikes a man, and I afterward sell the horse, and after that the man dies, the horse shall be forfeited. This is why, in every indictment for homicide until very lately, it has been necessary to state the instrument that caused the death and its value—that the blow was given by a certain penknife, value sixpence, for instance—so as to secure the forfeiture. It is said that a steam engine has been forfeited in this way.

I now come to what I regard as the most remarkable transformation of this principle, and one that is a most important factor in our law as it is today. For the moment I must leave the common law and take up the doctrines of the Admiralty, the courts that deal with ships and the sea. In the early books just referred to, and long afterward, the fact of motion is treated as very important. A maxim of Henry Spigurnel, a judge in the time of Edward I, is reported: "where a man is killed by a cart, or by the fall of a house, or in other like manner, and the thing in motion is the cause of the death, it shall be deodand." So it was said in the next reign, in Latin, that everything which moves along with the thing that kills a man shall be deodand to the lord king, or to the fee of a clergyman. The reader sees how motion gives life to the object forfeited.

The most striking example of this kind is a ship. And so the old books say that if a man falls from a ship and drowns, the motion of the ship must be taken to have caused the death, and the ship is forfeited—provided, however, that this happens in fresh water. If the death took place on the high seas, it was outside the ordinary jurisdiction. This proviso has been supposed to mean that ships at sea were not forfeited. But a long series of petitions to the king in Parliament, asking that such forfeitures be done away with, tells a different story. The truth seems to be that the forfeiture did take place, but in a different court. A manuscript of the reign of Henry VI, only recently printed, reveals that if a man was killed or drowned at sea by the motion of the ship, the vessel was forfeited to the admiral in a proceeding in the admiral's court, subject to release by favor of the admiral or the king.

A ship is the most living of inanimate things. Servants sometimes say "she" of a clock, but everyone gives a gender to vessels. We need not be surprised, therefore, to find a way of dealing with things that has shown such extraordinary vitality in the criminal law applied even more thoroughly in the Admiralty. Only by supposing that the ship was treated as if it had a personality can the arbitrary-seeming peculiarities of maritime law be made intelligible; and on that supposition they at once become consistent and logical.

To see what those peculiarities are, take first a collision at sea. A collision takes place between two vessels, the Ticonderoga and the Melampus, through the fault of the Ticonderoga alone. That ship is under lease at the time; the lessee has put his own master in charge, and the owner of the vessel has no control over it whatever. The owner, therefore, is not to blame, and he cannot even be charged on the ground that the damage was done by his servants. On elementary principles he is free from personal liability. Yet it is perfectly settled that there is a lien on his vessel for the amount of the damage done—a legal claim against the ship itself. This means that the vessel may be arrested and sold to pay the loss by any admiralty court whose process can reach her. If a livery-stable keeper rents out a horse and wagon to a customer, and the customer runs a man down by careless driving, no one would think of claiming a right to seize the horse and wagon. Everyone would see that the only property that could be sold to pay for a wrong was the property of the wrongdoer.

But now suppose that the vessel, instead of being under lease, is in the charge of a pilot whom the laws of the port she is entering require her to employ. The Supreme Court of the United States holds the ship liable in this case too. The English courts would probably have decided otherwise, and in England the matter is settled by legislation. But there the court of appeal, the Privy Council, has been made up largely of common-law lawyers, and it has shown a marked tendency to bring admiralty into line with common-law doctrine. At common law, a person who could not make the owner personally liable could not bind a particular chattel—a particular piece of movable property—to answer for a wrong it had been the instrument of. But our Supreme Court has long recognized that a person may bind a ship when he could not bind the owners personally, because he was not their agent.

It may be admitted that if this doctrine were not supported by an appearance of good sense, it would not have survived. The ship is the only security available in dealing with foreigners. Rather than send one's own citizens abroad to look for a remedy in strange courts, it is easy to seize the vessel and satisfy the claim at home, leaving the foreign owners to get their indemnity as best they can. I dare say some such thought has helped keep the practice alive. But I believe its true historical foundation is elsewhere. The ship, no doubt, like a sword, would have been forfeited for causing death, in whosever hands it might have been. So, too, if the master and crew of a ship carrying letters of reprisal—a royal license to seize enemy shipping—committed piracy against a friend of the king, the owner lost his ship under admiralty law, although the crime was committed without his knowledge or consent. It seems most likely that the principle by which the ship was forfeited to the king for causing death, or for piracy, was the same as the one by which it was bound to private sufferers for other damage, in whosever hands it might have been when it did the harm.

If we said to an uneducated man today, "She did it and she ought to pay for it," it may be doubted whether he would see the fallacy. He might not be ready to explain that the ship was only property, and that "The ship has to pay for it" was simply a dramatic way of saying that somebody's property was to be sold and the proceeds used to pay for a wrong committed by somebody else.

It would seem that a similar form of words has been enough to satisfy the minds of great lawyers. Here is a passage from a judgment of Chief Justice Marshall, which Justice Story quoted with approval in giving the opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States: "This is not a proceeding against the owner; it is a proceeding against the vessel for an offence committed by the vessel; which is not the less an offence, and does not the less subject her to forfeiture, because it was committed without the authority and against the will of the owner. It is true that inanimate matter can commit no offence. But this body is animated and put in action by the crew, who are guided by the master. The vessel acts and speaks by the master. She reports herself by the master. It is, therefore, not unreasonable that the vessel should be affected by this report." And again Justice Story quotes from another case: "The thing is here primarily considered as the offender, or rather the offence is primarily attached to the thing."

In other words, those great judges, though of course aware that a ship is no more alive than a mill wheel, thought not only that the law did in fact deal with it as if it were alive, but that it was reasonable for the law to do so. The reader will notice that they do not simply say it is reasonable, on grounds of policy, to sacrifice justice to the owner for the sake of security for somebody else. They say it is reasonable to deal with the vessel as an offending thing. Whatever the hidden ground of policy may be, their thought still dresses itself in the language of personification.

Let us now follow the peculiarities of maritime law in other directions, for the cases stated so far are only parts of a larger whole.

By the maritime law of the Middle Ages the ship was not only the source of liability but its limit. The rule already prevailed—since borrowed by the English statutes and by our own act of Congress of 1851—that the owner is discharged from responsibility for the wrongful acts of a master he himself appointed if he surrenders his interest in the vessel and the freight she has earned. Freight here means the money paid for carrying cargo. By the doctrines of agency he would be personally liable for the whole damage. If the origin of this system of limited liability, which is believed to be so essential to modern commerce, is to be found in the considerations of public policy on which it would be defended today, then the system has nothing to do with the law of collision. But if the limit of liability here stands on the same ground as noxal surrender, it confirms the explanation already given of the ship's liability for wrongs it did while out of the owner's hands; and, conversely, the existence of that liability confirms the argument here.

Now take another rule for which, as usual, there is a plausible explanation of policy. Freight, it is said, is the mother of wages: the sailors are paid only if the ship earns its freight. For, we are told, "if the ship perished, if the mariners were to have their wages in such cases, they would not use their endeavors, nor hazard their lives, for the safety of the ship." The best commentary on this reasoning is that the law has recently been changed by statute. But even under the old law there was an exception inconsistent with the supposed reason. In a shipwreck, which was the usual way of failing to earn freight, the mariners' lien remained as long as any part of the ship was saved. I suppose it would have been said that this was because it was sound policy to encourage them to save all they could. But if we consider that the sailors were regarded as employed by the ship, we shall understand both the rule and the exception very readily. "The ship is the debtor," as was said in arguing a case decided in the time of William III. If the debtor perished, that was the end of the matter. If a part of it came ashore, that part might be proceeded against.

Even the rule in its modern form, that freight is the mother of wages, turns out, by the explanation commonly given of it, to be about whether the ship is lost or arrives safe. In the most ancient surviving source of maritime law that says anything on the matter, so far as I have been able to discover, the statement is that the mariners lose their wages when the ship is lost. In the same way, in what its English editor, Sir Travers Twiss, calls the oldest part of the Consulate of the Sea, the medieval Mediterranean sea code, we read that "whoever the freighter may be who runs away or dies, the ship is bound to pay the mariners." I think we may assume that the vessel was bound by its contract with the sailors much as it was by the wrongs it had to answer for—just as, under the ancient law of Rome, the debtor's body answered for his debts as well as for his crimes.

Footnote: The old French of the Judgments of the Sea says it in so many words: "they shall lose their wages when the ship is lost." According to its editor, that collection is the most ancient surviving source of modern maritime law, except the decisions of Trani. Molloy says the same: "If the ship perishes at sea they lose their wages."

Footnote: It should be added, however, that the same book lays down that if the vessel is detained in port by the local authorities, the master is not bound to pay the mariners wages, "for he has earned no freight."

The same is true of other maritime dealings with the vessel, whether by way of contract or otherwise. If salvage service is rendered to a vessel—if someone rescues her or her cargo from peril at sea—the admiralty court will hold the vessel liable for it, although it has been doubted whether an action of contract would lie if the owners were sued at law. So, too, the ship is bound by the master's contract to carry cargo, just as in the case of collision, even though she was under lease at the time. In such cases also, according to our Supreme Court, the master may bind the vessel when he cannot bind the general owners. "By custom the ship is bound to the merchandise, and the merchandise to the ship." "By the maritime law every contract of the master implies an hypothecation"—that is, a pledge of the ship as security. It might no doubt be urged, with force, that in the usual maritime contracts the dealing must in many cases be done on the security of the ship or the merchandise, and that it is therefore good policy to give this security in all cases; that the risk it puts on shipowners can be calculated, and that they must take it into account when they lease their vessels. Again, in many cases where a party claims a maritime lien by way of contract, he has improved the condition of the thing on which he claims it, and some systems have recognized this as a ground for such a lien. But this is not true universally, nor in the most important cases. I must leave it to the reader to decide whether I have not shown ground for believing that the same metaphysical confusion that naturally arose about the ship's wrongful acts affected the way of thinking about her contracts. The whole manner of dealing with vessels plainly took the form that prevailed in the cases first mentioned. Pardessus, a high authority, says that the lien for freight holds even against the owner of stolen goods, "as the master deals less with the person than the thing." So it was said in the argument of a famous English case that "the ship is instead of the owner, and therefore is answerable." In many cases of contract, as well as of tort, the vessel was not only the security for the debt but the limit of the owner's liability.

The principles of the Admiralty are built into its procedure. A suit may be brought there against a vessel by name. Anyone with an interest in the vessel is free to come in and defend, but the suit, if it succeeds, ends in a sale of the vessel and payment of the plaintiff's claim out of the proceeds. As long ago as the time of James I it was said that "the libel ought to be only against the ship and goods, and not against the party"—the libel being the plaintiff's written complaint in admiralty. And authority for the statement was cited from the reign of Henry VI, the same reign in which, as we have seen, the admiral claimed the forfeiture of ships for causing death. I am bound to say, however, that I cannot find any such authority of that date.

We have now followed the development of the chief forms of liability in modern law for anything other than the immediate and obvious consequences of a man's own acts. We have seen the parallel course of events in the two parents—the Roman law and the German customs—and in the offspring of those two on English soil, with regard to servants, animals, and inanimate things. We have seen a single germ multiply and branch into products as different from one another as the flower from the root. It hardly remains to ask what that germ was. We have seen that it was the desire for retaliation against the offending thing itself. It might be argued, no doubt, that many of the rules described came from seizing the offending thing as security for reparation—at first, perhaps, outside the law altogether. That explanation, like the one offered here, would show that modern views of responsibility had not yet been reached, since the owner of the thing might very well not have been the person at fault. But that has not been the view of those most competent to judge. A look at the earliest instances will show, as might be expected, that vengeance, not compensation—and vengeance on the offending thing—was the original object. The ox in Exodus was to be stoned. The axe in the Athenian law was to be banished. The tree, in Mr. Tylor's instance, was to be chopped to pieces. The slave, under every one of the systems, was to be surrendered to the relatives of the slain man, so that they might do with him what they liked. The deodand was an accursed thing. The original limitation of liability to surrender, when the owner himself was before the court, could not be accounted for if it was his liability, and not that of his property, that was in question. Even where, as in some of the cases, expiation seems to be intended rather than vengeance, the object is just as remote from a seizure for security outside the courts.

This history, apart from the purposes for which I have given it, is a good illustration of the paradox of form and substance in the development of law. In form its growth is logical. The official theory is that each new decision follows by syllogism from existing precedents. But just as the clavicle in the cat only tells of some earlier creature to which a collarbone was useful, precedents survive in the law long after the use they once served is at an end and the reason for them has been forgotten. The result of following them must often be failure and confusion from the merely logical point of view.

On the other hand, in substance the growth of the law is legislative. And it is legislative in a deeper sense than that what the courts declare to have always been the law is in fact new. It is legislative in its grounds. The very considerations that judges most rarely mention, and always with an apology, are the secret root from which the law draws all the juices of life. I mean, of course, considerations of what is expedient for the community concerned. Every important principle developed by litigation is in fact, and at bottom, the result of more or less clearly understood views of public policy. Most often, to be sure, under our practice and traditions, it is the unconscious result of instinctive preferences and inarticulate convictions, but it is traceable to views of public policy all the same in the last analysis. And because the law is administered by able and experienced men, who know too much to sacrifice good sense to a syllogism, it will be found that when ancient rules keep themselves alive in the way that has been shown, and will be shown in this book, new reasons better suited to the time have been found for them. Gradually they take on a new content, and at last a new form, from the grounds to which they have been transplanted.

But up to now this process has been largely unconscious. For that reason it is important to call to mind what the actual course of events has been. If it did no more than press for a more conscious recognition of the legislative function of the courts, as just explained, it would be useful, as we shall see more clearly later on.

What has been said will explain the failure of all theories that consider the law only from its formal side—whether they try to deduce the whole body of it from principles assumed in advance, or fall into the humbler error of supposing that the science of law lies in its elegance, the logical cohesion of part with part. The truth is, that the law is always approaching, and never reaching, consistency. It is forever adopting new principles from life at one end, and it always keeps old ones from history at the other, which have not yet been absorbed or sloughed off. It will become entirely consistent only when it stops growing.

The study we have been engaged in is necessary both for knowing the law and for revising it. However much we may codify the law into a series of seemingly self-sufficient propositions, those propositions will be only a phase in a continuous growth. To understand their scope fully, and to know how judges trained in the past that the law embodies will deal with them, we must ourselves know something of that past. The history of what the law has been is necessary to the knowledge of what the law is.

Again, the process I have described has involved the attempt to follow precedents and also to give a good reason for them. When we find that in large and important branches of the law the various grounds of policy used to justify the various rules are later inventions, made up to account for what are in fact survivals from more primitive times, we have a right to reconsider the popular reasons, take a broader view of the field, and decide anew whether those reasons are satisfactory. They may be, in spite of the way they came about. If truth were not often suggested by error, if old tools could not be adapted to new uses, human progress would be slow. But scrutiny and revision are justified.

None of these considerations, however, nor the aim of showing what materials for anthropology the history of the law contains, is the immediate object here. My aim and purpose have been to show that the various forms of liability known to modern law spring from the common ground of revenge. In the sphere of contract this fact will hardly matter outside the cases stated in this Lecture. But in the criminal law and the law of torts it is of the first importance. It shows that they started from a moral basis, from the thought that someone was to blame.

It remains to be proved that, while the vocabulary of morals is still kept, and while the law does still and always, in a certain sense, measure legal liability by moral standards, it is nevertheless, by the very necessity of its nature, continually transforming those moral standards into external or objective ones, from which the actual guilt of the party concerned is wholly eliminated.
