Lecture II: The Criminal Law
(Part 2 of 2)

Still, the law is intelligible as it stands. The general test of murder is the degree of danger attending the acts under the known state of facts. If certain acts are regarded as peculiarly dangerous under certain circumstances, a legislator may make them punishable when done under those circumstances, even though the danger was not generally known. The law often takes this step, although nowadays it seldom inflicts death in such cases. Sometimes it goes further still. It requires a man to find out present facts at his peril, as well as to foresee future harm at his peril, even when those facts are not such as would necessarily be inferred from what he knew.

Thus it is a statutory offence in England to abduct a girl under sixteen from the possession of the person who has lawful charge of her. If a man does things that lead a girl under sixteen to leave her parents, he cannot be charged if he had no reason to know that she was in the lawful charge of her parents; and presumably he could not be charged if he had reasonable cause to believe that she was a boy. But if he knowingly takes a girl away from her parents, he must find out her age at his peril. It is no defence that he had every reason to think her over sixteen. In the same way, under a law prohibiting the sale of liquor, it has been held that a man who sells "Plantation Bitters" has no defence in not knowing that they are intoxicating. And there are other examples of the same kind.

Now suppose experience shows, or the lawmaker believes it shows, that somehow or other deaths which the evidence makes out to be accidental happen disproportionately often in connection with other felonies, or with resistance to officers. Or suppose that on some other ground of policy it is thought desirable to make special efforts to prevent such deaths. Then the lawmaker may consistently treat acts which, under the known circumstances, are felonious, or amount to resisting an officer, as having a dangerous enough tendency to be put under a special ban. The law may therefore throw on the actor the risk not only of the consequences he foresaw, but also of consequences which common experience would not predict, but which the legislator fears. I do not mean to argue, however, that the rules under discussion actually arose from this reasoning, any more than I mean to argue that they are right, or that they would generally be applied in this country.

Returning to the main line of thought, it will be instructive to consider how manslaughter is related to murder. One great difference between the two will be found to lie in the degree of danger attaching to the act in the given state of facts. If a man strikes another with a small stick which is not likely to kill, and which he has no reason to suppose will do more than slight bodily harm, but the blow does kill, he commits manslaughter, not murder. But if the blow is struck as hard as possible with an iron bar an inch thick, it is murder. So, too, if at the time he strikes with a switch the man knows some further fact that lets him foresee that even a slight blow will cause death—for instance, that the other has heart disease—the offence is equally murder. To explode a barrel of gunpowder in a crowded street and kill people is murder, although the actor hopes no such harm will be done. But to kill a man by careless riding in the same street would commonly be manslaughter. Perhaps, however, a case could be put where the riding was so plainly dangerous that it would be murder.

To come back to an example already used for another purpose, here is Blackstone: "When a workman flings down a stone or piece of timber into the street, and kills a man; this may be either misadventure, manslaughter, or murder, according to the circumstances under which the original act was done: if it were in a country village, where few passengers are, and he calls out to all people to have a care, it is misadventure only; but if it were in London, or other populous town, where people are continually passing, it is manslaughter, though he gives loud warning; and murder, if he knows of their passing, and gives no warning at all." Misadventure is simply accident, for which there is no guilt.

The law of manslaughter contains one more doctrine which must be mentioned to complete our understanding of the general principles of the criminal law. It is that provocation may reduce to manslaughter an offence which would otherwise have been murder. According to current morality, a man is less to blame for an act done in the grip of great excitement, caused by a wrong done to himself, than for the same act done calmly. The law is made to govern men through their motives, and it must therefore take their mental constitution into account.

It might be urged on the other side that, if the object of punishment is prevention, the heaviest punishment ought to be threatened exactly where the strongest motive is needed to hold a man back; and early legislation seems sometimes to have gone on that principle. But if any threat will restrain a man in a passion, a threat of something less than death will be enough, and so the extreme penalty has been thought excessive.

Yet even here the objective nature of legal standards shows itself. The mitigation does not come from the fact that the defendant was beside himself with rage. It is not even enough that he had grounds which would have had the same effect on every man of his standing and education. The most insulting words are not provocation, although to this day, and still more when the rule was established, many people would rather die than suffer them without action. There must be provocation sufficient to justify the passion, and the law decides on general considerations which provocations are sufficient.

It is said that even what the law admits to be "provocation does not extenuate the guilt of homicide, unless the person provoked is at the time when he does the deed deprived of the power of self-control by the provocation which he has received." There are obvious reasons for taking the defendant's actual state of mind into account to this extent. The only ground for departing from the general rule is that the defendant was in such a state that he could not be expected to remember the fear of punishment, or be influenced by it. If he could be, the ground for the exception disappears. Yet even here, rightly or wrongly, the law has gone far toward adopting external tests. The courts seem to have decided between murder and manslaughter on such grounds as the kind of weapon used, or the length of time between the provocation and the act. In other cases, though, the question whether the prisoner was deprived of self-control by passion has been left to the jury.

The object of this Lecture is not to give an outline of the criminal law but to explain its general theory. So I shall consider only those offences which throw some special light on the subject, and I shall take them up in whatever order seems best for that purpose. It will now be useful to turn to malicious mischief—the crime of deliberately damaging another's property—and to compare the malice required for that offence with the malice aforethought of murder.

It has been shown that the charge of malice aforethought in an indictment for murder does not mean a state of the defendant's mind, as is often thought, except in the sense that he knew circumstances which did in fact make his conduct dangerous. It is really an allegation like the allegation of negligence. It asserts that the accused did not come up to the legal standard of action in the circumstances in which he found himself, and also that no exceptional fact or excuse was present to take the case out of the general rule. It is a statement of a legal conclusion, which is allowed to stand as a shorthand for the facts, positive and negative, on which it rests.

When a statute punishes "wilfully and maliciously" injuring another's property, it is arguable, if not clear, that something more is meant. We presume that the second word was not added without some meaning, and that presumption is backed by how unreasonable it would be to make every wilful trespass a crime. If this reasoning prevails, "maliciously" is used here in its popular sense. It means that the defendant's motive was a wish to harm the owner of the property—or the thing itself, if it was a living creature—as an end in itself, for the sake of the harm. Malice in this sense has nothing in common with the malice of murder.

A statute need not claim to be consistent with itself, or with the theory adopted by judicial decisions. So strictly speaking there is no need to reconcile such a statute with the principles which have been explained. But in fact there is no inconsistency. Punishment must be confined to compelling outward conformity to a rule of conduct, in the sense that it can always be avoided by avoiding certain acts, or doing them as required, whatever the intent or motive. Still, the prohibited conduct may be harmless unless it is accompanied by a particular state of feeling.

Ordinary disputes about property are satisfactorily settled by compensation. But everyone knows that sometimes secret harm is done by neighbor to neighbor out of pure malice and spite. The damage can be paid for, but the malignity calls for revenge. And since such wrongs are always done in secret, their authors are hard to detect, and that difficulty is a ground for punishment, even if revenge is thought an insufficient one.

How far the law will go in this direction is hard to say. Arson is defined as the malicious and wilful burning of another man's house, and it is generally discussed in close connection with malicious mischief. It has been thought that the burning was not malicious where a prisoner set fire to his prison, not out of any desire to destroy the building, but solely to make his escape. But the better opinion seems to be that this is arson, in which case any intentional burning is malicious within the meaning of the rule. When we remember that arson was the subject of one of the old appeals, which take us far back into the early law, we can readily understand that only intentional burnings were redressed in that way. The appeal of arson was brother to the appeal "of peace and wounds," the appeal for a breach of the peace with wounding. As that one was founded on a warlike assault, so the appeal of arson supposed a house-burning for robbery or revenge, like the one in which Njal perished in the Icelandic saga. But this crime seems to have had the same history as the others. As soon as intent is admitted to be enough, the law is on the high road to an external standard.

A man who intentionally sets fire to his own house, standing so near other houses that the fire will manifestly endanger them, is guilty of arson if one of the other houses burns as a result. Here an act which would not have been arson, if only its immediate consequences were counted, becomes arson because of more remote consequences which were manifestly likely to follow, whether they were actually intended or not. If that can be the effect of setting fire to things which a man has a right to burn, so far as they alone are concerned, why on principle should it not be the effect of any other act which is equally likely, in the surrounding circumstances, to cause the same harm? Cases are easily imagined in which firing a gun, or making a chemical mixture, or piling up oiled rags, or twenty other things, might be manifestly dangerous in the highest degree, and actually lead to a fire. If in such cases the crime is held to have been committed, an external standard has been reached, and the analysis already made of murder applies here too.

There is another class of cases in which intent plays an important part, for reasons quite different from those offered to account for the law of malicious mischief. The most obvious examples are criminal attempts. Attempt and intent, of course, are two distinct things. Intent to commit a crime is not itself criminal. There is no law against a man's intending to commit a murder the day after tomorrow. The law only deals with conduct. An attempt is an overt act—an act actually done in the world. It differs from the crime attempted in this: the act has failed to bring about the result that would have made it the principal crime. If an attempt to murder results in death within a year and a day, it is murder. If an attempt to steal results in carrying off the owner's goods, it is larceny.

Suppose an act is done whose natural and probable effect, in the circumstances, is to accomplish a substantive crime—a crime complete in itself, as opposed to an attempt at one. If the act does not have that effect in the particular case, the criminal law may properly enough lighten the punishment; but on any theory it can hardly refuse to punish it altogether. It has been argued that in such instances only an actual intent can give the act a criminal character. But if the views I have put forward about murder and manslaughter are sound, the same principles ought logically to decide whether acts in general are criminal. Acts should be judged by their tendency under the known circumstances, not by the actual intent that goes with them.

It may be true that in the field of attempts, as elsewhere, the law began with cases of actual intent, since those are the most obvious. But it cannot stop there, unless it cares more about the dictionary meaning of the word "attempt" than about the general principles of punishment. Accordingly there is at least some show of authority for the proposition that an act is punishable as an attempt if, supposing it had produced its natural and probable effect, it would have amounted to a substantive crime.

Footnote: The statement that a man is presumed to intend the natural consequences of his acts is a mere fiction disguising the true theory. I shall come back to it in Lecture IV.

But such acts are not the only punishable attempts. There is another class in which actual intent is clearly necessary, and the existence of this class, as well as the name "attempt," no doubt tends to color the whole doctrine. Some acts may be attempts or misdemeanors—lesser crimes, below the grade of felony—even though they could not have brought about the crime unless the wrongdoer had followed them with other acts of his own. For instance, lighting a match with intent to set fire to a haystack has been held to be a criminal attempt to burn it, although the defendant blew the match out when he saw he was being watched. So the purchase of dies for making counterfeit coin is a misdemeanor, although of course no coin would be counterfeited unless the dies were used.

In such cases the law goes on a new principle, different from the one governing most substantive crimes. The reason for punishing any act must generally be to prevent some harm which is foreseen as likely to follow that act in the circumstances in which it is done. In most substantive crimes the likelihood rests on the ordinary working of natural causes, as experience shows it. But when the law punishes an act whose natural effect, in the circumstances, is not harmful, that ground alone will not do. The probability of harm exists only if there are grounds for expecting the act to be followed by other acts, in combination with which its effect will be harmful, though it would not be harmful otherwise. But since no such acts have in fact followed, it cannot in general be assumed, from the mere doing of what has been done, that they would have followed if the actor had not been interrupted. They would not have followed unless the actor had chosen to do them; and the only means generally available for showing that he would have chosen to do them is to show that he intended to do them when he did what he did. In that case the accompanying intent makes the otherwise innocent act harmful, because it raises a probability that the act will be followed by other acts and events which will together result in harm. The importance of the intent is not to show that the act was wicked, but to show that it was likely to be followed by hurtful consequences.

It will readily be seen that there are limits to this kind of liability. The law does not punish every act done with the intent of bringing about a crime. If a man starts from Boston to Cambridge meaning to commit a murder when he gets there, but is stopped by the drawbridge and goes home, he is no more punishable than if he had sat in his chair and resolved to shoot somebody, and then on second thoughts given up the idea. On the other hand, a slave who ran after a white woman, but stopped before he caught her, has been convicted of an attempt to commit rape. We have seen what amounts to an attempt to burn a haystack; but it was said in the same case that if the defendant had gone no further than to buy a box of matches for the purpose, he would not have been liable.

Eminent judges have been puzzled where to draw the line between these two sets of cases, or even how to state the principle on which it should be drawn. But the principle is believed to be much like the one on which the law draws all its other lines. Public policy—that is to say, considerations of legislation—lies at the bottom of the matter; and the considerations in this case are the nearness of the danger, the greatness of the harm, and the degree of apprehension felt. When a man buys matches to fire a haystack, or sets off on a journey meaning to murder at the end of it, there is still a considerable chance that he will change his mind before he comes to the point. But when he has struck the match, or cocked and aimed the pistol, there is very little chance that he will not go through with it, and the danger becomes so great that the law steps in. With an object which could not be used innocently, the point where the law intervenes might be set further back, as in the case of buying a die for coining.

The degree of apprehension may affect the decision as well as the degree of probability that the crime will be carried out. No doubt the fears peculiar to a slaveowning community had their share in the conviction just mentioned.

There is one doubtful point which should not be passed over. It has been thought that to shoot at a block of wood, thinking it is a man, is not an attempt to murder, and that to put a hand into an empty pocket, intending to pick it, is not an attempt to commit larceny—although on the second question opinions differ. The reason given is that an act which could not have accomplished the crime, even if the actor had been allowed to follow it through to every result it could in the nature of things have led to, cannot be an attempt to commit that crime when it is interrupted. At some point or other, of course, the law must adopt this conclusion, unless it proceeds on the theory of retribution for guilt rather than prevention of harm.

But even to prevent harm effectively, it will not do to be too exact. I do not suppose that firing a pistol at a man with intent to kill him is any less an attempt to murder because the bullet misses. Yet there the act has produced the whole effect it could possibly produce in the course of nature. It is just as impossible for that bullet, in those circumstances, to hit that man as it is to pick an empty pocket. But there is no difficulty in saying that such an act, in such circumstances, is so dangerous, so far as human foresight can tell, that it ought to be punished. No one can know for certain, though many would be pretty sure, exactly where the bullet will strike; and if the harm is done, it is a very great harm. If a man fires at a block, no harm can possibly follow, and no theft can be committed on an empty pocket—besides which, the harm of a successful theft is less than that of murder. Yet it might be said that even such things as these should be punished, in order to make the discouragement broad enough and easy to understand.

There remain certain substantive crimes which differ in very important ways from murder and the like, and which the foregoing analysis of intent in criminal attempts and similar misdemeanors will help to explain.

The type of these is larceny, the common-law crime of theft. Under this name the law punishes acts which would not by themselves be enough to accomplish the evil it seeks to prevent, and which are treated as equally criminal whether that evil has come about or not. Murder, manslaughter, and arson, on the other hand, are not committed unless the evil is accomplished; and they all consist of acts whose tendency, in the surrounding circumstances, is to hurt or destroy person or property by the mere working of natural laws.

In larceny the consequences flowing directly from the act are generally used up with little or no harm to the owner. Goods are removed from his possession by trespass, and that is all there is when the crime is complete. But they must be kept from him permanently before the harm the law seeks to prevent is done. A momentary loss of possession is not what such severe penalties guard against. What the law means to prevent is the loss of it wholly and for ever, as is shown by the fact that it is not larceny to take a thing for temporary use without intending to deprive the owner of his property. If, then, the law punishes the mere act of taking, it punishes an act which will not of itself produce the evil it seeks to prevent, and punishes it before that evil has in any way come to pass.

The reason is plain enough. The law cannot wait until the property has been used up or destroyed in other hands than the owner's, or until the owner has died, in order to make sure that the harm it seeks to prevent has been done. And for the same reason it cannot confine itself to acts likely to do that harm. For the harm of permanent loss will not follow from the act of taking, but only from the series of acts which make up removing and keeping the property after it has been taken. With these preliminaries out of the way, the bearing of intent on the crime is easily seen.

According to Mr. Bishop, larceny is "the taking and removing, by trespass, of personal property which the trespasser knows to belong either generally or specially to another, with the intent to deprive such owner of his ownership therein; and perhaps it should be added, for the sake of some advantage to the trespasser, a proposition on which the decisions are not harmonious."

There must be an intent to deprive the owner of his ownership, it is said. But why? Is it because the law is more anxious not to put a man in prison for stealing unless he is actually wicked than it is not to hang him for killing another? That can hardly be. The true answer is that the intent is an index to the external event which probably would have happened, and that if the law is to punish at all, it must in this case go on probabilities, not on accomplished facts. The analogy with the way attempts are handled is plain. Theft may be called an attempt to deprive a man of his property permanently, which is punished with the same severity whether it succeeds or not. If theft can rightly be seen this way, intent must play the same part as in other attempts. An act which does not fully accomplish the forbidden result may be made wrongful by evidence that, but for some interference, it would have been followed by other acts working with it to produce that result. And this can only be shown by showing intent. In theft, the intent to deprive the owner of his property establishes that the thief would have kept the stolen goods, or at least would not have taken steps to return them. Nor would it matter if the thief afterwards changed his mind and returned the goods. From the point of view of attempt, the crime was already complete when the property was carried off.

It may be objected to this view that if intent is only a makeshift, standing in out of practical necessity for actual deprivation, it ought not to be required where the actual deprivation is wholly accomplished, so long as one and the same criminal act produces the whole effect. Suppose, for instance, that with a single motion a man seizes another's horse and backs it over a precipice. The whole evil the law seeks to prevent is the natural and manifestly certain consequence of the act under the known circumstances. In such a case, if the law of larceny is consistent with the theories maintained here, the act should be judged by its tendency, and the wrongdoer's actual intent should not be considered at all. Yet it is possible, to say the least, that even in such a case the intent would make all the difference. I assume that the act was wrongful and without excuse, and that it would have been larceny if done for the purpose of depriving the owner of his horse. Nevertheless, if it was done for the sake of an experiment, without actual foresight of the destruction and without any evil design against the owner, the trespasser might not be held a thief.

The inconsistency, if there is one, seems to be explained by the way the law has grown. The distinctions the common law draws about theft are not those of a broad theory of legislation. They are highly technical, and to a very large extent only history can explain them.

The type of theft is taking to one's own use. It used to be thought, and sometimes still is, that the taking must be lucri causa—for the sake of some advantage to the thief. In such cases the owner loses his property by the thief's keeping it, not by its destruction, and whether the loss will be permanent can only be judged beforehand by the intent to keep. The intent is therefore always necessary, and it is naturally stated as a self-regarding intent, an intent to benefit oneself. It was an advance on the old precedents when it was decided that the intent to deprive the owner of his property was enough. As late as 1815 the English judges stood only six to five in favor of holding that it was larceny to take a horse intending to kill it, for no other purpose than to destroy evidence against a friend. Even that case, however, did not end the universality of intent as a test. For there the destruction came after the taking, and it is an ancient rule that the criminality of the act must be judged by the state of things at the time of the taking, and not afterwards. Whether the law of larceny would follow what seems to be the general principle of the criminal law, or would be held back by tradition, could only be decided by a case like the one supposed above, where the same act accomplishes both the taking and the destruction. As I have already suggested, tradition might very possibly prevail.

Another crime in which the peculiarities noticed in larceny are still more clearly marked, and at the same time more easily explained, is burglary. It is defined as breaking and entering any dwelling-house by night with intent to commit a felony in it. The object of punishing such a breaking and entering is not to prevent trespasses, even at night, but only those trespasses which are the first step toward wrongs of greater magnitude, like robbery or murder. Here the function of intent, when it is proved, appears more clearly than in theft, but it is exactly the same. It is an index to the probability of certain future acts which the law seeks to prevent. And here the law itself gives evidence that this is the true explanation. For if the feared act did follow, it is no longer necessary to allege that the breaking and entering was done with that intent. An indictment for burglary charging that the defendant broke into a dwelling-house and stole certain property is just as good as one alleging that he broke in with intent to steal.

Footnote: This doctrine goes further than my argument requires. For if burglary were dealt with only on the footing of an attempt, the whole crime would have to be complete at the moment of breaking into the house.

I believe enough has now been said to explain the general theory of criminal liability as it stands at common law. The result may be summed up as follows. All acts are indifferent per se—in themselves, neither innocent nor criminal.

In the characteristic type of substantive crime, acts are made criminal because they are done under circumstances in which they will probably cause some harm which the law seeks to prevent.

The test of criminality in such cases is the degree of danger shown by experience to attend that act under those circumstances.

In such cases the mens rea, or actual wickedness of the party, is wholly unnecessary, and every reference to the state of his consciousness is misleading if it means anything more than this: that the circumstances by which the tendency of his act is judged are the circumstances known to him. Even the requirement of knowledge is subject to certain limits. A man must find out at his peril things which a reasonable and prudent man would have inferred from the things he actually knew. In some cases, especially of statutory crimes, he must go even further: when he knows certain facts, he must find out at his peril whether the other facts are present which would make the act criminal. A man who abducts a girl from her parents in England must find out at his peril whether she is under sixteen.

In some cases it may be that the consequence of the act, in the circumstances, must be actually foreseen, if it is a consequence which a prudent man would not have foreseen. The reference to the prudent man as a standard is the only form in which blameworthiness as such is an element of crime. And what would be blameworthy in such a man is an element for two reasons: first, as a survival of true moral standards; second, because to punish what would not be blameworthy in an average member of the community would be to enforce a standard which was indefensible in theory, and in practice too high for that community.

In some cases, actual malice or intent, in the common meaning of those words, is an element in crime. But it will be found that when it is, it is either because the act, when done maliciously, is followed by harm which would not have followed the act alone, or because the intent raises a strong probability that an act innocent in itself will be followed by other acts or events, in connection with which it will accomplish the result the law seeks to prevent.
