Lecture III: Torts—Trespass and Negligence
(Part 1 of 3)

The object of the next two Lectures is to discover whether there is any common ground at the bottom of all liability in tort, and if so, what that ground is. If the attempt succeeds, it will reveal the general principle of civil liability at common law. The liabilities a man takes on by contract are more or less expressly fixed by the agreement of the parties. Those that arise from a tort are independent of any earlier consent by the wrongdoer to bear the loss his act causes. If A makes a binding promise to pay a certain sum on a certain day, or to deliver a lecture on a certain night, and fails to do it, the damages he has to pay are recovered in accordance with his own consent that some or all of the harms his failure might cause should fall upon him. But when A assaults or slanders his neighbor, or converts his neighbor's property—that is, deals with it as if it were his own—he does a harm that he has never consented to bear. If the law makes him pay for it, the reason must be found in some general view of the conduct that everyone may fairly expect and demand from everyone else, whether that other person has agreed to it or not.

Such a general view is very hard to find. The law did not begin with a theory. It has never worked one out. The point from which it started and the point at which I shall try to show it has arrived are on different planes. In the progress from one to the other, we should expect its course not to be straight and its direction not always to be visible. All that can be done is to point out a tendency, and to justify it. The tendency, which is our main concern, is a matter of fact to be gathered from the cases. But it is much harder to show because, until lately, the substance of the law has been approached only through the categories of the forms of action—the fixed set of writs, each with its own procedure, into one of which every lawsuit had to fit. Discussions of the principles a lawmaker ought to follow have been darkened by arguments over the boundary between trespass and case, or over the scope of a general issue. In place of a theory of tort, we have a theory of trespass. And even within that narrower limit, precedents from the time of the assize and the jurata, the early forms of sworn inquest that came before the modern jury, have been applied without a thought of their connection with a long-forgotten procedure.

Now that the ancient forms of action have disappeared, a broader treatment of the subject ought to be possible. Ignorance is the best of law reformers. People are glad to discuss a question on general principles once they have forgotten the special knowledge needed for technical reasoning. But the present willingness to generalize rests on more than merely negative grounds. The philosophical habit of the day, the frequency of legislation, and the ease with which the law may be changed to meet the opinions and wishes of the public all make it natural and unavoidable that judges, as well as others, should openly discuss the legislative principles on which their decisions must always rest in the end. It is natural, too, that they should base their judgments on broad considerations of policy, which the traditions of the bench would hardly have allowed them to mention fifty years ago.

The business of the law of torts is to fix the dividing lines between the cases in which a man is liable for harm he has done and those in which he is not. But it cannot let him predict with certainty whether a given act under given circumstances will make him liable. An act will rarely have that effect unless damage follows, and for the most part, if not always, the consequences of an act are not known but only guessed at as more or less probable. All the rules the law can lay down beforehand are rules for deciding what conduct will be followed by liability if it is followed by harm—that is, the conduct a man pursues at his peril. The only guide for the future that can be drawn from a decision against a defendant in an action of tort is this: similar acts, done in circumstances that cannot be told apart from the defendant's except by the result, are done at the peril of the actor. If he escapes liability, it is simply because, by good fortune, no harm comes of his conduct on that particular occasion.

If, therefore, there is any common ground for all liability in tort, we shall best find it by setting aside the event as it actually turns out, and considering only the principles on which the peril of his conduct is thrown upon the actor. We are to ask what the elements are, on the defendant's side, that must all be present before liability is possible, and whose presence will commonly make him liable if damage follows.

The law of torts abounds in moral phraseology. It has much to say of wrongs, of malice, fraud, intent, and negligence. So it might naturally be supposed that the risk of a man's conduct is thrown upon him as the result of some moral shortcoming. But while this notion has had its supporters, the extreme opposite will be found to have been a far more popular opinion: I mean the notion that a man is answerable for all the consequences of his acts—in other words, that he acts at his peril always, and wholly regardless of the state of his mind on the matter.

To test the first opinion, it would be natural to take up one by one the words, such as negligence and intent, that in the language of morals name various well-understood states of mind, and to show what they mean in the law. To test the second, it would perhaps be more convenient to consider it form of action by form of action. So many of our authorities are decisions under one or another of these forms that it would not be safe to neglect them, at least at first. A compromise between the two approaches may be reached by beginning with the action of trespass and the notion of negligence together, and leaving the wrongs that are defined as intentional for the next Lecture.

Trespass lies for unintentional as well as intended wrongs. Any wrongful and direct application of force is redressed by that action. It therefore offers a fair field for discussing the general principles of liability for unintentional wrongs at common law. For it can hardly be supposed that a man's responsibility for the consequences of his acts varies according to whether the remedy happens to fall on one side or the other of the penumbra that separates trespass from the action on the case—the action, developed later, for harm done indirectly rather than by direct force. And the greater part of the law of torts will be found under one or the other of those two heads.

It might be hastily assumed that the action on the case is founded on the defendant's negligence. But if that is so, the same doctrine must prevail in trespass. It might be assumed that trespass is founded on the defendant's having caused damage by his act, without regard to negligence. But if that is true, the law must apply the same test to other wrongs that differ from trespass only in some technical point—for instance, that the property damaged was in the defendant's possession. Neither assumption, however, can be allowed to pass so quickly. It might very well be argued that the action on the case adopts the severe rule just suggested for trespass, except when the action is founded on a contract. Negligence, it might be said, had nothing to do with the common-law liability for a nuisance. And it might be added that, where negligence was a ground of liability, a special duty had to be found either in the defendant's super se assumpsit—his having "taken it upon himself," that is, undertaken the task—or in his public calling, such as that of an innkeeper or a carrier. On the other hand, we shall see what can be said for the proposition that even in trespass there must at least be negligence. But whichever argument prevails for the one form of action must prevail for the other. The technical side of the discussion can therefore be shortened by confining it to trespass, as far as that can be done without shutting out the light to be had from other parts of the law.

Footnote: I return to the undertaking and the public calling in Lecture VII.

As has just been hinted, there are two theories of the common-law liability for unintentional harm. Both seem to have the tacit approval of the popular textbooks, and neither lacks plausibility or the appearance of authority.

The first is that of Austin, the English writer on jurisprudence, and it is essentially the theory of a criminal lawyer. According to him, the defining feature of law, properly so called, is a sanction—a detriment threatened and imposed by the sovereign for disobedience to the sovereign's commands. Since the greater part of the law only makes a man answerable in a civil action for breaking it, Austin is compelled to regard liability to an action as a sanction, or, in other words, as a penalty for disobedience. It follows from this, on the prevailing views of penal law, that such liability ought to be based only on personal fault. Austin accepts that conclusion, with its corollaries, one of which is that negligence means a state of the party's mind. These doctrines will be taken up later, so far as necessary.

The other theory is directly opposed to this one. It seems to be adopted by some of the greatest common-law authorities, and it needs serious discussion before it can be set aside in favor of any third opinion. According to this view, broadly stated, under the common law a man acts at his peril. It may be held, as a sort of offset, that he is never liable for omissions except as a result of some duty he has voluntarily undertaken. But outside that class, the whole and sufficient ground for such liabilities as he does incur is supposed to be that he acted voluntarily and that damage followed. If the act was voluntary, it makes no difference at all that the harm that followed was neither intended nor due to the actor's negligence.

To do justice to this way of looking at the subject, we must remember that abolishing the common-law forms of pleading has not changed the rules of substantive law. So although pleaders now generally allege intent or negligence, anything that would formerly have been enough to hold a defendant liable in trespass is still enough, even though the ancient form of action and of declaration—the plaintiff's formal written statement of his claim—has disappeared.

In the first place, it is said, consider in general the protection the law gives to property, both within and outside the limits of the action of trespass. If a man crosses his neighbor's boundary by however innocent a mistake, or if his cattle escape into his neighbor's field, he is said to be liable in trespass quare clausum fregit—the action of trespass "for breaking the close," that is, for entering another man's land. If an auctioneer, in perfect good faith and in the regular course of his business, sells goods sent to his rooms to be sold, he may be made to pay their full value if a third person turns out to be the owner, even though he has paid over the proceeds and has no way of getting reimbursed.

Now suppose that, instead of dealing with the plaintiff's property, the defendant has applied force directly from his own body to the plaintiff's body. It is urged that, since the law cannot be less careful of its subjects' persons than of their property, the only defenses possible are like those that would be open against a charge of trespass on land. You may show that there was no trespass by showing that the defendant did no act—as where he was thrown from his horse onto the plaintiff, or where a third person took his hand and struck the plaintiff with it. In such cases the defendant's body is the passive instrument of an outside force, and the bodily motion the plaintiff relies on is not his act at all. So, too, you may show a justification or excuse in the conduct of the plaintiff himself. But if no such excuse is shown, and the defendant acted voluntarily, he must answer for the consequences, however little intended and however unforeseen. If, for instance, the defendant was attacked by a third person, lifted his stick, and accidentally hit the plaintiff, who was standing behind him, then on this view he is liable, whether or not he was negligent toward the person he hurt.

The arguments for this doctrine are drawn for the most part from precedent, but it is sometimes thought to be defensible as sound in theory. Every man, it is said, has an absolute right to his person, and so forth, free from harm at the hands of his neighbors. In the cases put, the plaintiff has done nothing; the defendant, on the other hand, has chosen to act. As between the two, the party whose voluntary conduct has caused the damage should suffer, rather than one who had no share in producing it.

We have harder material to deal with when we turn to the pleadings and precedents in trespass. The declaration says nothing of negligence, and it is clear that the damage need not have been intended. The words vi et armis, "with force and arms," and contra pacem, "against the peace," which might seem to imply intent, are supposed to have been put in merely to give the king's court jurisdiction. Glanvill says that it belongs to the sheriff, when the lords who held their own local courts neglected the matter, to take charge of brawls, blows, and even wounds, unless the accuser adds a charge of breach of the king's peace (nisi accusator adjiciat de pace Domini Regis infracta). Reeves, the historian of English law, observes: "In this distinction between the sheriff's jurisdiction and that of the king, we see the reason of the allegation in modern indictments and writs, vi et armis, of 'the king's crown and dignity,' 'the king's peace,' and 'the peace,'—this last expression being sufficient, after the peace of the sheriff had ceased to be distinguished as a separate jurisdiction."

Footnote: Fitzherbert says that in the writ of trespass brought before the sheriff, which does not come into the king's court, the words "with force and arms" are not to be used.

Again, it might be said that if the defendant's intent or neglect were essential to his liability, the absence of both would take away his act's character as a trespass, and so ought to be provable under the general issue—the plea of "Not guilty," which denies the plaintiff's charge as a whole. But it is perfectly well settled at common law that "Not guilty" only denies the act.

Next comes the argument from authority. I will begin with an early and important case, from the year 1466. It was trespass quare clausum. The defendant pleaded that he owned the neighboring land, on which there was a thorn hedge; that he cut the thorns, and that they, against his will (ipso invito), fell onto the plaintiff's land; and that he went quickly onto that land and took them away, which was the trespass complained of. On demurrer—that is, on the plaintiff's answer that, even if all this were true, it was no defense—judgment was given for the plaintiff. The plaintiff's counsel put cases that have often been repeated since. One of them, Fairfax, said: "There is a diversity between an act resulting in a felony, and one resulting in a trespass.... If one is cutting trees, and the boughs fall on a man and wound him, in this case he shall have an action of trespass, etc., and also, sir, if one is shooting at butts, and his bow shakes in his hands, and kills a man, ipso invito, it is no felony, as has been said, etc.; but if he wounds one by shooting, he shall have a good action of trespass against him, and yet the shooting was lawful, etc., and the wrong which the other receives was against his will, etc.; and so here, etc." (Shooting at butts means target practice with a bow.) Brian, another counsel, states the whole doctrine, and uses equally familiar illustrations. "When one does a thing, he is bound to do it in such a way that by his act no prejudice or damage shall be done to etc. As if I am building a house, and when the timber is being put up a piece of timber falls on my neighbor's house and breaks his house, he shall have a good action, etc.; and yet the raising of the house was lawful, and the timber fell, me invito, etc. And so if one assaults me and I cannot escape, and I in self-defence lift my stick to strike him, and in lifting it hit a man who is behind me, in this case he shall have an action against me, yet my raising my stick was lawful in self-defence, and I hit him, me invito, etc.; and so here, etc."

Footnote: For the translation of this case I have for the most part followed the one given by Ames.

The judges spoke to the same effect. "Littleton, J. to the same intent, and if a man is damaged he ought to be recompensed.... If your cattle come on my land and eat my grass, notwithstanding you come freshly and drive them out, you ought to make amends for what your cattle have done, be it more or less.... And, sir, if this should be law that he might enter and take the thorns, for the same reason, if he cut a large tree, he might come with his wagons and horses to carry the trees off, which is not reason, for perhaps he has corn or other crops growing, etc., and no more here, for the law is all one in great things and small.... Choke, C. J. to the same intent, for when the principal thing was not lawful, that which depends upon it was not lawful; for when he cut the thorns and they fell on my land, this falling was not lawful, and therefore his coming to take them out was not lawful. As to what was said about their falling in ipso invito, that is no plea, but he ought to show that he could not do it in any other way, or that he did all that was in his power to keep them out."

Forty years later, the Year Books report Justice Rede as adopting Fairfax's argument in that case. In trespass, he says, "the intent cannot be construed; but in felony it shall be. As when a man shoots at butts and kills a man, it is not felony"—and it shall be as if he had no intent to kill him—"and so of a tiler on a house who with a stone kills a man unwittingly, it is not felony. But when a man shoots at the butts and wounds a man, though it is against his will, he shall be called a trespasser against his intent."

There is a series of later shooting cases—Weaver v. Ward, Dickenson v. Watson, and Underwood v. Hewson, running from 1616 to 1723, and followed by the Court of Appeals of New York in Castle v. Duryee in 1865—in which defenses to the effect that the damage was done accidentally and by misfortune, and against the defendant's will, were held not to be enough.

In the reign of Queen Elizabeth it was held that where a man with a gun at the door of his house shot at a bird, and thereby set fire to his own house and to his neighbor's, he was liable in an action on the case in general terms, the declaration not being based on the custom of the realm, "viz. for negligently keeping his fire." "For the injury is the same, although this mischance was not by a common negligence, but by misadventure."

These instances of the stick and of shooting at butts became standard illustrations. They are repeated by Sir Thomas Raymond in Bessey v. Olliot, by Sir William Blackstone in the famous squib case (a squib is a small firework), and by other judges, and they have become familiar through the textbooks. Sir Thomas Raymond, in that case, also repeats the thought and almost the words of Justice Littleton quoted above, and goes on: "In all civil acts the law doth not so much regard the intent of the actor, as the loss and damage of the party suffering." Blackstone also adopts a phrase from Dickenson v. Watson, just cited: "Nothing but inevitable necessity" is a justification. So Lord Ellenborough, in Leame v. Bray: "If the injury were received from the personal act of another, it was deemed sufficient to make it trespass"; or, in the more often quoted words of Justice Grose in the same case: "Looking into all the cases from the Year Book in the 21 H. VII. down to the latest decision on the subject, I find the principle to be, that if the injury be done by the act of the party himself at the time, or he be the immediate cause of it, though it happen accidentally or by misfortune, yet he is answerable in trespass." Further citations are unnecessary.

In spite of all the arguments that may be urged for the rule that a man acts at his peril, however, it has been rejected by very eminent courts, even under the old forms of action. Given this, and given too that since the old forms were abolished the allegation of negligence has spread from the action on the case to all the ordinary declarations in tort that do not allege intent, many lawyers would probably be surprised that anyone should think the present discussion worth the trouble. That is the natural impression to be drawn from daily practice. But even if the doctrine we are considering had no followers left, which is not the case, it would be well to have something more than daily practice to support our views on so fundamental a question. It seems to me, at least, that the true principle is far from being clearly grasped by all who are interested in it, and that it can be reached only after a careful analysis of what has been thought so far. It might be thought enough to cite the decisions against the rule of absolute responsibility, and to show that such a rule is inconsistent with accepted doctrines and with sound policy. But we may go further with profit, and ask whether there are not strong grounds for thinking that the common law has never known such a rule, except in that period of dry precedent so often found midway between a creative age and a period when philosophy begins to dissolve and remake it. To those who, unlike most modern practitioners, still hold to the strict doctrine, I would say once more that there are weighty decisions against it; and that if those decisions were an innovation, the fact that it was made by judges like Chief Justice Shaw of Massachusetts goes far to prove that the change was wise. Having said that, I think I may assert that a little reflection will show the change was required not only by policy but by consistency. I will begin with consistency.

The same reasoning that would make a man answerable in trespass for all damage to another by force resulting directly from his own act, regardless of negligence or intent, would make him answerable in case for the same kind of damage resulting in the same way from the act of his servant in the course of the servant's employment. The discussions of the company's negligence in many railway cases would then be wholly out of place. There is, to be sure, a contract that would make the company liable for negligence, but that contract cannot be taken to reduce any liability that would otherwise exist for a trespass by its employees.

More than this, the same reasoning would make a defendant responsible for all damage, however remote, of which his act could be called the cause. At least so long as only physical forces, or agents not responsible for themselves, co-operated with the act complained of to produce the result, however unforeseen they were, the argument that would decide against the defendant who accidentally struck the plaintiff while lifting a stick in necessary self-defense would require a decision against him in every case where his act was a factor in the harm. The distinction between a direct application of force and causing damage indirectly, as a more remote consequence of one's act, may decide whether the form of action should be trespass or case. But it does not touch the theory of responsibility, if that theory is that a man acts at his peril.

As was said at the outset, if the strict liability is to be kept at all, it must be kept throughout. No principle can be stated that would keep the strict liability in trespass while abandoning it in case. It cannot be said that trespass is for acts alone, and case for the consequences of those acts. All actions of trespass are for the consequences of acts, not for the acts themselves. And some actions of trespass are for consequences more remote from the defendant's act than in other instances where the remedy would be case.

An act is always a voluntary muscular contraction, and nothing else. The chain of physical events that it sets going, or steers toward the plaintiff's harm, is no part of it, and very often a long train of such events comes in between. An example or two will make this extremely clear.

When a man commits an assault and battery with a pistol, his only act is to contract the muscles of his arm and forefinger in a certain way; but elementary writers delight in pointing out what a vast series of physical changes must take place before the harm is done. Suppose that, instead of firing a pistol, he picks up a hose that is spraying water on the sidewalk and turns it on the plaintiff. He does not even set in motion the physical causes that must work together with his act to make a battery. And not only natural causes but a living being may come between the act and its effect. Gibbons v. Pepper decided that there was no battery when a man's horse was frightened, by accident or by a third person, and ran away with him and ran over the plaintiff; and it drew the distinction that if the rider, by spurring, caused the accident, then he is guilty. In Scott v. Shepherd, the squib case already mentioned, trespass was upheld against a man who had thrown a lit squib into a crowd, where it was tossed from hand to hand in self-defense until it burst and injured the plaintiff. Here even human agents were part of the chain between the defendant's act and the result, although the court treated them as more or less automatic in order to reach its decision.

Now I repeat that if principle requires us to hold a man liable in trespass when his act has brought force to bear on another through a fairly short train of intervening causes, even though he used all possible care, it requires the same liability however numerous and unexpected the events between the act and the result. If running a man down is a trespass when the accident can be traced to the rider's act of spurring, why is it not a tort in every case, as was argued in Vincent v. Stinehour, since it can always be traced, more remotely, to his act of mounting the horse and taking it out?

Why is a man not responsible for the consequences of an act that is innocent in its direct and obvious effects, when those consequences would not have followed but for a series of extraordinary, though natural, events coming in between? The reason is that if the intervening events are of such a kind that no foresight could have been expected to look out for them, the defendant is not to blame for having failed to do so. The English judges seem to admit this even on the question whether leaving dry trimmings by the side of a railroad in hot weather, and then sending an engine over the track, are negligent acts—that is, a ground of liability: the consequences that might reasonably have been anticipated are material. Yet these are acts that, in the circumstances, can hardly be called innocent in their natural and obvious effects. The same doctrine has been applied to acts in violation of a statute that could not reasonably have been expected to lead to the result complained of.

Footnote: Many American cases could be cited that carry the doctrine further. But I wish to lay down no proposition that admits of controversy, and it is enough for present purposes that, in the words of an old case, if a man does a lawful act that afterwards becomes unlawful, it is damnum sine injuria—damage without legal wrong. I purposely leave aside any discussion of the true rule of damages once it is settled that a wrong has been done. The text is concerned only with the tests by which it is decided whether a wrong has been done.

But there is no difference in principle between the case where a natural cause or physical factor comes in after the act, in some way that could not be foreseen, and turns what seemed innocent into harm, and the case where such a cause or factor is already present, unknown, at the time of the act—as, for that matter, it was in the English cases cited. If a man is excused in the one case because he is not to blame, he must be excused in the other. The distinction drawn in Gibbons v. Pepper is not between results that are and results that are not the consequences of the defendant's acts. It is between consequences he was bound, as a reasonable man, to contemplate, and those he was not. Hard spurring is so much more likely to lead to harm than merely riding a horse in the street that the court thought the defendant would be bound to look out for the consequences of the one, while it would not hold him liable for those that came merely from the other; for the chance of being run away with when riding quietly, though familiar, is comparatively slight. If, however, the horse had been unruly, and had been taken into a crowded place to be broken in, the owner might have been liable, because "it was his fault to bring a wild horse into a place where mischief might probably be done."

To return to the example of the accidental blow with a stick lifted in self-defense: there is no difference between hitting a person standing behind you and hitting one who was pushed by a horse within range of the stick just as it was lifted, provided that it was not possible, in the circumstances, in the one case to have known, and in the other to have anticipated, that the person was so close. In either case there is missing the only element that distinguishes voluntary acts from spasmodic muscular contractions as a ground of liability. In neither, that is to say, has there been an opportunity of choice with reference to the consequence complained of—a chance to guard against the result that has come to pass. A choice which entails a concealed consequence is as to that consequence no choice.
