Lecture III: Torts—Trespass and Negligence
(Part 3 of 3)

Some examples of this process of specification will be useful. The laws of Alfred provide for the case of a man who runs himself onto a spear that another man is carrying, and we read: "Let this (liability) be if the point be three fingers higher than the hindmost part of the shaft; if they be both on a level,... be that without danger." In other words, the lawgiver did not ask the vague question whether the spear-carrier was careless. He named the exact position of the point.

The rule of the road, and the sailing rules that Congress adopted from England, are modern examples of statutes of the same kind. The rule of the road has narrowed the question from the vague one, Was the party negligent? to the precise one, Was he on the right or the left of the road?

To avoid a possible misunderstanding, I should add that this question does not, of course, decide the question of liability in every case and under all circumstances. A plaintiff may have been on the wrong side of the road, just as he may have been negligent, and yet the defendant's conduct may still have been unjustifiable and a ground of liability. And no doubt a defendant could, under some circumstances, justify or excuse being on the wrong side. The difference between alleging that a defendant was on the wrong side of the road and alleging that he was negligent is this. The first is an allegation of facts, which will be a ground of liability unless the other side excuses them by alleging further facts. The second is an allegation that involves a conclusion of law, and denies in advance that any excuse exists. Whether the first allegation ought to be enough, and whether proving the fact ought to shift the burden of proof to the other side, are questions that belong to the theory of pleading and evidence, and they could be answered either way consistently with analogy. I should have no difficulty in saying that an allegation of facts which are ordinarily a ground of liability, and which would be so unless excused, ought to be sufficient. But the forms of the law, and especially the forms of pleading, do not change with every change of its substance, and a prudent lawyer would use the broader and safer phrase.

The same course of specification that has been illustrated from the statute book ought also to be taking place as judicial decisions grow. That this should happen agrees with the past history of the law. I have already suggested that in the days of the assize and the jurata, the court decided, in all ordinary cases, whether the facts amounted to a ground of liability. A question of negligence might, no doubt, have gone to the jury. Common sense and common knowledge are as often enough to decide whether proper care has been taken of an animal as they are to say whether A or B owns it. The cases that arose first were not of a kind to invite analysis, and for a long time negligence was used as a roughly simple element before anyone felt the need, or saw the possibility, of analyzing it. Still, when an issue of this sort turns up, the dispute is more about what the defendant did or failed to do than about the standard of conduct. The division of work between court and jury does not come into question until the parties disagree about the standard of conduct.

Negligence, like ownership, is a complex idea. Ownership implies that certain facts exist, and also implies the consequence the law attaches to those facts—protection against all the world. In the same way, negligence implies that certain facts exist (conduct), and also the consequence the law attaches to those facts (liability). In most cases the question is about the facts, and only occasionally does one arise about the consequence.

Footnote: In one of the Year Book cases the plea was that the defendant had performed the cure as well as he knew how, and denied that the horse died for want of his care. The opening of that plea, at least, seems to treat negligence as meaning the actual state of the party's mind.

The reader will have noticed how the judges pass on the defendant's acts, on grounds of fault and public policy, in the case of the thorns, and that in Weaver v. Ward it is said that the facts making up an excuse, and showing that the defendant was free from negligence, should have been set out on the record so that the court might judge them. A similar requirement was laid down for the defense of probable cause—reasonable grounds for bringing a charge—in an action for malicious prosecution, the action against a man who has set the criminal law going against another without such grounds. To this day the question of probable cause is always decided by the court. Further evidence will be found in what follows.

There is, however, an important consideration that I have not yet mentioned. It is certainly possible that those who make the law may think it wise, in some cases, to set the mark higher than the point, fixed by common practice, at which blameworthiness begins. For instance, in Morris v. Platt the court declared in the strongest terms that negligence is, in general, the foundation of liability for accidental trespasses. Yet it hinted that, if it had to decide the point, it might hold a defendant to a stricter rule where the damage was done by a pistol, in view of the danger to the public from the growing habit of carrying deadly weapons.

Again, it might well seem that entering a man's house to bring him a present, or to ask after his health when he was ill, was a harmless and rather praiseworthy act, even though crossing the owner's boundary was intentional. No one supposes that an action would lie today for such a thing, unless the visitor had been forbidden the house. Yet in the time of Henry VIII it was said to be actionable if done without permission, "for then under that color my enemy might be in my house and kill me." There is a clear case where public policy sets a standard of outward acts without regard to fault in any sense. In the same way, policy established exceptions to the general rule against entering another's land: as in the instances put by Chief Justice Choke in the Year Book, of a tree blown over onto it, or of a highway become impassable, or of entering to keep the peace.

Another example may perhaps be found in the shape that modern times have given to the liability for animals, and in the principle derived from it in Rylands v. Fletcher: that when a person brings onto his land, and collects and keeps there, anything likely to do mischief if it escapes, he must keep it in at his peril; and if he does not, he is prima facie—on the face of it, unless he can show otherwise—answerable for all the damage that is the natural consequence of its escape. Cases of this sort do not rest on the notion that it is wrong to keep cattle, or to have a reservoir of water, as might have been argued with more plausibility when only fierce and useless animals were in question. It may even be very much for the public good that the dangerous accumulation should be made. (That consideration might affect the decision in some instances, and differently in different jurisdictions.) But since there is a limit to how finely a trial can inquire into things, it may be thought that the safest way to secure care is to throw the risk on the person who decides what precautions shall be taken. The liability for trespasses of cattle seems to lie on the boundary line between rules based on policy without regard to fault, and requirements meant to put into words the conduct of a prudent man.

I showed in the first Lecture how this liability for cattle arose in the early law, and how far the influence of early notions might be traced in the law of today. Subject to what was said there, it is evident that the early discussions turn on the general question whether the owner is or is not to blame. But they do not stop there. They go on to draw practical distinctions based on common experience. Thus, a defendant chased sheep off his land with a dog, and as soon as the sheep were off he called in his dog; but the dog chased them on into the neighboring land. The chasing of the sheep beyond the defendant's line was held no trespass, because "the nature of a dog is such that he cannot be ruled suddenly."

Footnote: In one report of this case, after the court's opinion is given as in the text, it is said that judgment was nevertheless entered for the plaintiff. That contradicts the earlier statement in the same book, and the other reports; but the principle was at all events admitted. For its limit, see Read v. Edwards.

It was lawful, in ploughing, to turn the horses on a neighbor's land; and if, while turning, the beasts took a mouthful of grass, or the plough tore up the soil, against the driver's will, he had a good justification, because the law recognizes that a man cannot at every instant govern his animals as he wishes. So it was said that if a man is driving cattle through a town, and one of them goes into another man's house, and he follows it in, trespass does not lie for this. So, too, Justice Doderidge said in the same case that if deer come onto my land out of the forest and I chase them with dogs, it is excuse enough for me to wind my horn to call back the dogs, because by this the warden of the forest is given notice that a deer is being chased.

Footnote: This is a further illustration of the very practical grounds on which the law of trespass was settled.

The very case of Mason v. Keeling, which I referred to in the first Lecture for its echo of primitive notions, shows that the working rules of the law had long been founded on good sense. As to animals not then treated as property, which were mainly the wilder animals, the law was settled that "if they are of a tame nature, there must be notice of the ill quality; and the law takes notice, that a dog is not of a fierce nature, but rather the contrary." If the animals "are such as are naturally mischievous in their kind, he shall answer for hurt done by them, without any notice." This second principle has been applied to the case of a bear. It also amply accounts for the liability of the owner of animals like horses and oxen for their trespasses on land, although, as we have seen, that liability was at one time thought to rest on his ownership. It is said to be the universal nature of cattle to stray, and, when they stray into cultivated land, to do damage by trampling down and eating the crops, whereas a dog does no harm. It is also said to be usual and easy to restrain them. If, as I have suggested, the rule had a different historical origin, that does not matter.

Following the same line of thought, the owner of cattle is not held absolutely answerable for all the damage they may do to a person. According to Lord Holt in the opinion just quoted, these animals, "which are not so familiar to mankind" as dogs, "the owner ought to confine, and take all reasonable caution that they do no mischief.... But... if the owner puts a horse or an ox to grass in his field, which is adjoining to the highway, and the horse or the ox breaks the hedge and runs into the highway, and kicks or gores some passenger, an action will not lie against the owner; otherwise, if he had notice that they had done such a thing before."

Perhaps the most striking authority for the view that the judge's duties are not at an end when the question of negligence is reached is found in the discussions of the law of bailment—the law of goods held by one person for another. Consider the judgment in Coggs v. Bernard, the treatises of Sir William Jones and of Story, and Kent's chapter on the subject. They are so many attempts to state the bailee's duty specifically, according to the nature of the bailment and of the thing bailed. Those attempts, to be sure, did not succeed. That was partly because they tried to graft onto the native stock a branch of the Roman law too large to survive the operation, but more especially because the distinctions they drew were purely qualitative, and therefore useless when dealing with a jury. To instruct a jury that they must find the defendant guilty of gross negligence before he can be held liable is open to the reproach that, for such a body, the word "gross" is only a term of abuse. But it would not be so with a judge sitting in admiralty, the court for maritime cases, without a jury. The Roman law and the Supreme Court of the United States agree that the word means something. Successful or not, it is enough for the present argument that the attempt has been made.

The principles of substantive law that the courts have established have, I believe, been somewhat obscured by appearing most often in the form of rulings on the sufficiency of evidence. When a judge rules that there is no evidence of negligence, he does something more than he does in an ordinary ruling that there is no evidence of a fact. He rules that the acts or omissions proved, or in question, do not make a ground of legal liability; and in this way the law is gradually enriching itself from daily life, as it should.

Thus, in Crafton v. Metropolitan Railway Co., the plaintiff slipped on the defendant's stairs and was badly hurt. He slipped because the brass edging on the stairs had been worn smooth by the people walking over it, and a builder testified that in his opinion the staircase was unsafe for that reason and because there was no hand-rail. Nothing contradicted this except that great numbers of people had used the stairs and no accident had happened there, and the plaintiff won a verdict. The court set the verdict aside and ordered a nonsuit—a judgment putting the plaintiff out of court because he has not made a case. In form, the ruling was that there was no evidence of negligence to go to the jury. But this was plainly the same as saying, and did in fact mean, that the railroad company had done all it was bound to do in keeping up such a staircase as the plaintiff had proved. A hundred other equally concrete instances will be found in the textbooks.

On the other hand, if the court should rule that certain acts or omissions, coupled with damage, were conclusive evidence of negligence unless explained, it would in substance and in truth be ruling that those acts or omissions were a ground of liability, or barred a recovery, as the case might be. Thus it is said to be actionable negligence to let a house as a dwelling knowing that it is so infected with smallpox as to be dangerous to health, and to conceal that knowledge. To "explain" the acts or omissions in such a case would mean proving different conduct from the conduct ruled on, or showing that they were not, legally speaking, the cause of the damage complained of. The ruling assumes, for the purposes of the ruling, that the facts in evidence are all the facts.

The cases that have raised difficulties needing explanation are those in which the court has ruled that there was prima facie evidence of negligence, or some evidence of negligence to go to the jury.

Many have noticed the confusion of thought in speaking of such cases as presenting mixed questions of law and fact. No doubt, as I said above, the allegation that the defendant has been guilty of negligence is a complex one. It says, first, that he did or failed to do certain things; and second, that his conduct so alleged does not come up to the legal standard. So long as the dispute is only about the first half, the whole complex allegation is plain matter for the jury without special instructions, just as a question of ownership would be where the only dispute was about the fact on which the legal conclusion rested. But when a dispute arises about the second half, the question whether court or jury ought to judge the defendant's conduct is wholly unaffected by the accident of whether there is or is not also a dispute about what that conduct was. If there is such a dispute, it is entirely possible to give a series of hypothetical instructions fitted to every state of facts the jury may find. If there is no such dispute, the court may still take the jury's opinion on the standard. The problem is to explain the relative work of court and jury with regard to the standard.

When a case arises in which the standard of conduct, pure and simple, is put to the jury, the explanation is plain. The court has no clear views of public policy that apply to the matter, and so it draws the rule to be applied from daily experience, just as, we have agreed, the great body of the law of tort has been drawn. But the court further feels that it does not itself have enough practical experience to lay down the rule intelligently. It believes that twelve men taken from the practical part of the community can help its judgment. Therefore it aids its conscience by taking the opinion of the jury.

But suppose a state of facts that is often repeated in practice. Are we to imagine that the court will go on leaving the standard to the jury forever? Is it not plain, on the contrary, that if the jury is on the whole as fair a tribunal as it is said to be, the lesson to be had from that source will be learned? Either the court will find that the fair teaching of experience is that the conduct complained of usually is, or is not, blameworthy, and therefore, unless explained, is or is not a ground of liability; or it will find the jury swinging back and forth, and will see that it must make up its own mind. There is no reason why any other such question should not be settled, as well as the question of liability for stairs with smooth strips of brass on their edges. The exceptions would be found mainly where the standard was changing rapidly, as, for instance, in some questions of medical treatment.

Footnote: In the smallpox case, while the court ruled on the defendant's conduct as I have described, it held that whether the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence—a want of care on his own part that helped bring on the harm—in not having his children vaccinated was "a question of fact, and was properly left to the jury."

If this is the right conclusion in plain cases, further consequences follow. Facts do not often repeat themselves exactly in practice, but cases differing from one another only a little do. A judge who has long sat at nisi prius—presiding over jury trials—ought gradually to gain a fund of experience that lets him represent the common sense of the community in ordinary cases far better than an average jury. He should be able to lead them and to instruct them in detail, even where he thinks it best, on the whole, to take their opinion. Furthermore, the range of cases in which he can rule without taking their opinion at all should be continually growing.

It has often been said that negligence is purely a matter of fact, or that, once the court has declared the evidence to be such that negligence may be inferred from it, the jury are always to decide whether the inference shall be drawn. But I believe that the courts, when they lay down this broad proposition, are thinking of cases where the conduct to be judged is not proved directly, and the main or only question is what that conduct was—not what standard shall be applied to it once it is established.

Most cases that go to the jury on a ruling that there is evidence from which they may find negligence go to them mainly because of a doubt about the conduct, not about the standard. Take the case where the fact proved is an event such as a brick dropping from a railway bridge onto the plaintiff on the highway below. Before there can be any question about the standard of conduct, it must be inferred that the brick fell not because of a sudden action of the weather, but because of a gradual falling into disrepair that the defendant could physically have prevented.

So, in the case of a barrel falling from a warehouse window, it must be found that the defendant or his servants were in charge of it before any question of standard can arise. It will be seen that in each of these well-known cases the court assumed a rule that would make the defendant liable if his conduct was what the evidence tended to prove. When there is no question about the conduct established by the evidence, as in a collision between two trains belonging to the same company, the jury have, sometimes at least, been told in effect that if they believed the evidence, the defendant was liable.

The main argument urged for the view that a wider function belongs to the jury as a matter of right is the need to keep our standards always in line with experience. No doubt the general foundation of legal liability in blameworthiness, as measured by the existing average standards of the community, should always be kept in mind, so that whatever concrete rules are laid down from time to time are kept in line with daily life. No doubt this agreement with daily life is the practical justification for requiring a man to know the civil law, just as the fact that crimes are generally also sins is one of the practical justifications for requiring him to know the criminal law. But these considerations lead only to the conclusion that precedents should be overruled when they become inconsistent with present conditions; and this has generally happened, except in the interpretation of deeds and wills. On the other hand, it is very desirable to know as nearly as we can the standard by which we shall be judged at a given moment; and, moreover, the standards for a very large part of human conduct do not vary from century to century.

The considerations urged in this Lecture are of special importance in this country, or at least in States where the law stands as it does in Massachusetts. In England, the judges at nisi prius freely express their opinions on the value and weight of the evidence, and the judges in banc—the full court, sitting to hear questions of law—constantly draw inferences of fact with the consent of the parties. So fine distinctions about the province of court and jury are not of the first necessity there. But when judges are forbidden by statute to charge the jury on matters of fact, and when the full court will never hear a case that calls for inferences of fact, it becomes vitally important to understand this: when standards of conduct are left to the jury, that is a temporary surrender of a judicial function, which the court may take back at any moment, in any case, when it feels competent to do so. If this were not so, then the almost universal acceptance of the first proposition in this Lecture—that the general foundation of liability for unintentional wrongs is conduct different from that of a prudent man under the circumstances—would leave all our rights and duties, throughout a great part of the law, to the necessarily more or less accidental feelings of a jury.

It is perfectly consistent with the views held in this Lecture that the courts have been very slow to take questions of negligence away from the jury, without distinguishing carefully whether the doubt concerned the facts or the standard to be applied. Legal divisions, like natural ones, however clear in their general outline, will be found on close scrutiny to end in a penumbra, a debatable land. This is the region of the jury, and only cases falling on this doubtful border are likely to be fought far through the courts. Still, the tendency of the law must always be to narrow the field of uncertainty. That is what analogy, as well as the decisions on this very subject, would lead us to expect.

The growth of the law is very apt to take place in this way. Two widely different cases suggest a general distinction, which is a clear one when stated broadly. But as new cases cluster around the opposite poles and begin to approach each other, the distinction becomes harder to trace. The decisions are made one way or the other on a very slight preponderance of feeling, rather than of articulate reason. And at last a mathematical line is arrived at by the contact of contrary decisions—a line so far arbitrary that it might equally well have been drawn a little farther to one side or the other, but which must have been drawn somewhere in the neighborhood of where it falls.

In this way exact distinctions have been worked out on questions where the elements to be considered are few: for instance, what is a reasonable time for presenting negotiable paper (checks, notes and bills of exchange) for payment; or what is a difference in kind and what only a difference in quality; or the rule against perpetuities, which limits how far into the future a gift of property may tie it up.

An example of decisions approaching each other from opposite poles, with the jury at work in the middle, is found in the Massachusetts rulings. If a child of two years and four months is needlessly sent alone across and down a street in a large city, he cannot recover for an injury negligently done to him. To allow a boy of eight to be out alone is not necessarily negligent. And the effect of allowing a boy of ten to be out after dark is for the jury. To these one may add a statement, which may be ventured without authority, that such permission given to a young man of twenty of ordinary intelligence has no effect whatever.

Take again the English law of ancient lights—the right of a house that has long enjoyed the light through its windows not to have that light blocked by a neighbor's building. To be actionable, an obstruction must be substantial. Under ordinary circumstances, putting up a structure a hundred yards away and one foot above the ground would not be actionable. One within a foot of the window and covering it would be, without any finding by a jury beyond those facts. In doubtful cases in between, the question whether the interference was substantial has been left to the jury. But because the elements are few and permanent, the courts have shown an inclination to lay down a definite rule: that in ordinary cases the building complained of must not be higher than the distance of its base from the windows entitled to the light. And although this attempt to work out an exact line calls for much caution, it is entirely philosophical in spirit.

The same principle applies to negligence. If the whole evidence in a case was that a man in full command of his senses and his wits stood on a railway track, watching an approaching engine until it ran him down, no judge would leave it to the jury to say whether his conduct was prudent. If the whole evidence was that he tried to cross a level track, visible for half a mile each way, on which no engine was in sight, no court would allow a jury to find negligence. Between these extremes are cases that would go to the jury. But it is obvious that the limit of safety in such cases, supposing no other elements were present, could be fixed almost to a foot by mathematical calculation.

The trouble with many cases of negligence is that they are of a kind that does not recur often enough for any one judge to profit by long experience with juries and lay down rules, and that their elements are so complex that the courts are glad to leave the whole matter in a lump for the jury to decide.

I reserve the relation between negligent and other torts for the next Lecture.
