Lecture IV: Fraud, Malice, and Intent—The Theory of Torts
(Part 2 of 2)

Accordingly, it would be possible to state all cases of negligence in terms of imputed or presumed foresight. One could even push the presumption further, applying the very inaccurate maxim that every man is presumed to intend the natural consequences of his own acts; and this way of speaking will in fact be found to have been used now and then, especially in the criminal law, where the notion of intent has a stronger foothold. The second fiction is more remote and less philosophical than the first; but, after all, both are equally fictions. Negligence is not foresight, but precisely the want of it. And if foresight were presumed, the ground of the presumption, and therefore the essential element, would be the knowledge of facts which made foresight possible.

Taking knowledge, then, as the true starting point, the next question is how to determine what circumstances a man must have known, in any given case, in order to be liable for the consequences of his act. They must be such as would have led a prudent man to perceive danger, although not necessarily to foresee the specific harm. But this is a vague test. How is it decided what those circumstances are? The answer must be: by experience.

But there is one point which has been left ambiguous, both in the preceding Lecture and here, and it must be touched upon. It has been assumed that conduct which the man of ordinary intelligence would perceive to be dangerous under the circumstances would be blameworthy if he pursued it. That might not be so, however. Suppose that a man, acting under the threats of twelve armed men which put him in fear of his life, enters another man's close—his enclosed land—and takes a horse. In such a case he actually contemplates and chooses harm to another as the consequence of his act. Yet the act is neither blameworthy nor punishable. It might, however, be actionable, and Chief Justice Rolle ruled that it was, in Gilbert v. Stone, in 1648. If that is law, it goes the full length of deciding that it is enough if the defendant had a chance to avoid inflicting the harm complained of. And it may well be argued that, although he does wisely to ransom his life as best he can, there is no reason why he should be allowed to transfer his misfortunes, intentionally and permanently, to the shoulders of his neighbors.

It cannot be inferred, from the mere fact that certain conduct is made actionable, that the law therefore regards it as wrong or seeks to prevent it. Under our mill acts—the statutes that let a man dam a stream to run a mill, even though the water backs up over his neighbor's land—a man has to pay for flooding his neighbor's lands, just as in trover he has to pay for converting his neighbor's goods. Yet the law approves and encourages the flooding of lands for the building of mills.

Moral predilections must not be allowed to influence our minds in settling legal distinctions. If we look only at the liability, how are we to distinguish between trover and the mill acts? Or between conduct which is prohibited and conduct which is merely taxed? The only distinction I can see lies in the different collateral consequences attached to the two classes of conduct. In the first class, the maxim in pari delicto potior est conditio defendentis—where both parties are equally in the wrong, the defendant is in the stronger position—together with the invalidity of contracts that contemplate such conduct, shows that the conduct is outside the protection of the law. In the second class, it is otherwise. This opinion is confirmed by the fact that almost the only cases in which the distinction between prohibition and taxation comes up at all concern the application of these maxims.

But if this is true, liability to an action does not necessarily imply wrongdoing. And this may be admitted without in the least weakening the argument of the foregoing Lecture, which only requires that people should not be made to pay for accidents which they could not have avoided.

It is doubtful, however, whether Chief Justice Rolle's ruling would be followed now. The squib case, Scott v. Shepherd—where a lighted firework thrown into a crowded market was tossed on from stall to stall until it exploded in a man's face—and the language of some textbooks are more or less opposed to it. If this latter view is the law, then in general an act must be not only dangerous, but one which would be blameworthy on the part of the average man, in order to make the actor liable. But apart from such exceptional cases as Gilbert v. Stone, the two tests agree, and the difference need not be considered in what follows.

Footnote: The broad language of one of these textbooks rests on an old case in the Year Books which hardly sustains it.

I therefore repeat that experience is the test by which it is decided whether the degree of danger attending given conduct, under certain known circumstances, is great enough to throw the risk upon the party who pursues it.

For instance, experience shows that a good many guns supposed to be unloaded go off and hurt people. The ordinarily intelligent and prudent member of the community would foresee the possibility of danger from pointing a gun which he had not inspected into a crowd and pulling the trigger, even though he had been told it was unloaded. Hence it may very properly be held that a man who does such a thing does it at his peril, and that if damage follows he is answerable for it. The co-ordinated acts needed to point a gun and pull a trigger, and the intent and knowledge shown by the co-ordination of those acts, are all consistent with entire blamelessness. Without further facts they threaten harm to no one. But the one additional circumstance of a man standing in the line of fire and within range makes the conduct manifestly dangerous to anyone who knows that fact. There is no longer any need to refer to the prudent man, or to general experience. The facts have taught their lesson, and have generated a concrete and external rule of liability. He who snaps the cap of a gun pointed toward another person, whom he knows to be there, is answerable for the consequences.

The question what a prudent man would do under given circumstances is, then, the same as the question what experience teaches about the dangerous character of this or that conduct under these or those circumstances. And since the teachings of experience are matters of fact, it is easy to see why the jury should be consulted about them. They are, however, facts of a special and peculiar function. Their only bearing is on the question what ought to have been done or left undone in the circumstances of the case, not on what was done. Their function is to suggest a rule of conduct.

Sometimes courts are led to lay down rules by facts of a more specific kind: that the legislature passed a certain statute, and that the case before the court is within the fair meaning of its words; or that the practice of a specially interested class, or of the public at large, has produced a rule of conduct outside the law which it is desirable for the courts to recognize and enforce. These are matters of fact, and have sometimes been pleaded as such. But their only importance is that, if believed, they will lead the judges to lay down a rule of conduct—in other words, a rule of law—which they suggest. So their tendency in most instances is to disappear as fast as the rules they suggest become settled. While the facts are uncertain, they are still only motives for deciding the law—grounds for legislation, so to speak—and the judges may ascertain them in any way which satisfies their conscience. Thus courts take judicial notice of the statutes of their own jurisdiction, that is, they recognize them without proof, although the laws of other jurisdictions, with doubtful wisdom, are left to the jury. They may take judicial notice of a custom of merchants. In former days, at least, they might inquire into such a custom out of court, in pais, after a demurrer. They may act on the statement of a special jury—a jury of merchants or other men with knowledge of the trade—as in the time of Lord Mansfield and his successors, or on the finding of a common jury based on the testimony of witnesses, as is the practice in this country today. But many instances will be found in the textbooks which show that, once the facts are ascertained, they soon cease to be referred to, and give place to a rule of law.

The same transition can be seen in the teachings of experience. There are many cases, no doubt, in which the court would lean on a jury for help; but there are also many in which the teaching has been formulated in specific rules. These rules will be found to vary a good deal in the number of accompanying circumstances needed to throw the peril of conduct, otherwise indifferent, on the actor. As the circumstances become more numerous and complex, the tendency to cut the knot by handing it to the jury grows greater. It will be useful, by way of illustration, to follow a line of cases up from the simple to the more complicated. Along the way, particular notice will be taken of how hard it is to distinguish rules based on other grounds of policy from those which have been worked out in the field of negligence.

In all these cases it will be found that there has been a voluntary act on the part of the person to be charged. The reason for this requirement was shown in the foregoing Lecture. Although it is unnecessary for the defendant to have intended or foreseen the evil he has caused, it is necessary that he should have chosen the conduct which led to it. But it has also been shown that a voluntary act is not enough, and that even a co-ordinated series of acts, or conduct, is often not enough by itself. Still, the co-ordination of a series of acts shows a further intent than any single act necessarily shows, and sometimes proves, with almost equal certainty, knowledge of one or more accompanying circumstances. And there are cases where conduct carrying only the intent and knowledge thus necessarily implied is enough to throw its risk on the actor.

For instance, when a man performs the series of acts called walking, it is assumed for all purposes of responsibility that he knows the earth is under his feet. The conduct in itself is indifferent, to be sure. A man may go through the motions of walking without legal peril if he chooses to practise on a private treadmill; but if he goes through the same motions on the surface of the earth, it cannot be doubted that he knows the earth is there. With that knowledge he acts at his peril in certain respects. If he crosses his neighbor's boundary, he is a trespasser. The reasons for this strict rule were partly discussed in the last Lecture. Possibly there is more of history, or of past or present notions of policy, in its explanation than was suggested there, and at any rate I do not care to justify the rule. But it is intelligible. A man who walks knows that he is moving over the surface of the earth; he knows that he is surrounded by private estates which he has no right to enter; and he knows that his motion, unless properly guided, will carry him into those estates. He is thus warned, and the burden of his conduct is thrown upon himself.

But the act of walking does not throw the peril of all its possible consequences upon him. He may run a man down in the street, but he is not liable for that unless he does it negligently. Confused as the law is by the cross-lights of tradition, and hard as we may find it to arrive at a perfectly satisfactory general theory, it does distinguish, in a pretty sensible way, according to the nature and degree of the different perils that belong to a given situation.

From the simple case of walking we may go on to the more complex cases of dealing with tangible things that are someone's property. Generally speaking, it may be said that a man meddles with such things at his own risk. It does not matter how honestly he believes that they belong to him, or are free to the public, or that he has the owner's permission, or that the case is one in which the law has limited the rights of ownership. He takes his chance on how the facts turn out, and if they are otherwise than he supposes, he must answer for his conduct. As has already been suggested, he knows that he is exercising more or less control over property, or that he is injuring it; he must make good his right if it is challenged.

Whether this strict rule rests on the common grounds of liability or on some special consideration of past or present policy, policy has set some limits to it, as was mentioned in the foregoing Lecture.

Another kind of conduct which is at the party's risk, without any further knowledge than the conduct itself implies, is keeping a tiger or a bear, or any other animal of a species commonly known to be ferocious. If such an animal escapes and does damage, the owner is liable simply on proof that he kept it. Notice in particular, in this instance, how far back along the chain of causes the moment of choice lies from the harm complained of. Ordinary cases of liability arise out of a choice which was the proximate cause of the harm on which the action is founded. But here there is usually no question of negligence in guarding the beast. In most cases, if not in all, it is enough that the owner chose to keep it. Experience has shown that tigers and bears are alert to find ways of escape, and that if they escape they are very likely to do serious harm. The possibility of a great danger has the same effect as the probability of a lesser one, and the law throws the risk of the venture on the person who brings the peril into the community.

This remoteness of the opportunity to choose goes far to show that the risk is thrown on the owner for some reason other than the ordinary one of imprudent conduct. It has been suggested that the liability rests on remote inadvertence—on a carelessness far back in the chain. But the law does not forbid a man to keep a menagerie, or regard it as in any way blameworthy. And it has applied nearly as strict a rule to activities which are even more clearly useful to the community than a show of wild beasts.

This seems to be one of those cases where the ground of liability is to be sought in policy coupled with tradition, rather than in any form of blameworthiness, or in the existence of such a chance to avoid doing the harm as a man is usually allowed. But the very fact that remote inadvertence has been offered as an explanation illustrates what has been said about the difficulty of deciding, once a special rule has been laid down, whether it is founded on special grounds or has been worked out within the sphere of negligence.

It should further be noticed that no question is raised about the defendant's knowledge of the nature of tigers, although without that knowledge he cannot be said to have intelligently chosen to expose the community to danger. Here again, even in the domain of knowledge, the law applies its principle of averages. That tigers and bears are dangerous is so generally known that a man who keeps them is presumed to know their peculiarities. In other words, he does actually know that he has an animal with certain teeth, claws, and so forth, and he must find out the rest of what an average member of the community would know, at his peril.

What is true of damage in general done by ferocious wild beasts is true of one particular class of damage done by domestic cattle, namely, trespasses on another's land. This has been dealt with in earlier Lectures, so it is needless to do more than recall it here and point out the distinction, based on experience and policy, between damage which is of a kind to be expected and damage which is not. Cattle generally stray, and damage cultivated land when they get onto it. Only exceptionally do they hurt human beings.

I need not return to the possible historical connection of either of these last two forms of liability with noxal surrender. Whether that origin is proved or not, the policy of the rule has been accepted as sound, and within the last few years it has been carried further in England, by the doctrine of Rylands v. Fletcher: that a man who brings onto his land and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it escapes must keep it in at his peril. How strict this principle is will vary from one jurisdiction to another, as the balance varies between the advantages to the public and the dangers to individuals from the conduct in question. Danger of harm to others is not the only thing to be considered, as has already been said. The law allows some harms to be inflicted intentionally, and all the more, a fortiori, some risks to be run intentionally. In some Western States a man is not required to keep his cattle fenced in. Some courts have refused to follow Rylands v. Fletcher. On the other hand, the principle has been applied to artificial reservoirs of water, to cesspools, to accumulations of snow and ice on a building caused by the shape of its roof, and to party walls—the shared walls between neighboring buildings.

In these cases, as in that of ferocious animals, it is no excuse that the defendant did not know, and could not have found out, the weak point through which the dangerous thing escaped. The moment of choice lay further back; and although he was not to blame, he was bound at his peril to know that the thing was a continual threat to his neighbors, and that is enough to throw the risk of the business on him.

I now pass to cases one degree more complex than those considered so far. In these, the party must have known one more accompanying circumstance, in addition to those whose knowledge is necessarily or practically proved by his conduct. The cases which naturally come to mind again concern animals. Experience, as interpreted by the English law, has shown that dogs, rams, and bulls are in general tame and mild by nature, and that if one of them does happen to show a tendency to bite, butt, or gore, it is an exceptional thing. Hence it is not the law that a man keeps dogs, rams, bulls, and other such tame animals at his peril as to the personal injuries they may inflict—unless he knows, or has notice, that the particular animal he keeps has the abnormal tendency which they do sometimes show. The law has, however, been brought a little nearer to actual experience by statute in many jurisdictions.

Now let us go one step further still. A man keeps an unbroken and unruly horse, knowing it to be so. That is not enough to throw the risk of its behavior on him. The known wildness is not dangerous in general, but only in particular circumstances. Add to the keeping an attempt to break the horse; still no danger to the public is shown. But if the place where the owner tries to break it is a crowded thoroughfare, the owner knows an additional circumstance which, by common experience, makes this conduct dangerous, and he must therefore take the risk of whatever harm is done. On the other hand, if a man who was a good rider bought a horse with no sign of vice and mounted it to ride home, there would be no such apparent danger as to make him answerable if the horse became unruly and did damage. Experience has measured the probabilities, and it draws the line between the two cases.

Whatever the true explanation of the rule applied to keeping tigers, or of the principle of Rylands v. Fletcher, in these last cases we have entered the sphere of negligence. And if we take a case lying somewhere between the two just stated, and add a little to the complexity of the circumstances, we shall find that both the conduct and the standard would probably be left to the jury without much sorting, on the broad issue whether the defendant had acted as a prudent man would have done under the circumstances.

As for the wrongs called malicious or intentional, it is not necessary to list the different classes a second time and find each a place in this series. As has been seen, they vary in the number of circumstances which must be known. Slander is conduct very generally at the speaker's risk. Charges of the kind it deals with are manifestly harmful, so the questions which actually arise mostly concern the defenses of truth or privilege. Deceit requires more, but still simple facts. Statements do not threaten the harm in question unless they are made under such circumstances as would naturally lead someone to act on them, and are made on insufficient grounds.

It is not without significance, however, that certain wrongs are described in language implying intent. In such cases the harm is most often done intentionally; and if intent to cause a certain harm is shown, there is no need to prove knowledge of facts which made it likely that harm would follow. Moreover, it is often much easier to prove intent directly than to prove the knowledge which would make it unnecessary.

The cases in which a man is treated as the responsible cause of a given harm extend, on the one hand, beyond those in which his conduct was chosen in actual contemplation of that result, and in which, therefore, he may be said to have chosen to cause that harm. On the other hand, they do not extend to every instance in which the damage would not have happened but for some remote choice on his part. Generally speaking, the choice will be found to have gone further than a simple act, and to have joined co-ordinated acts into conduct. Very commonly it will have gone further still, to some external consequence. But generally, too, it will be found to have stopped short of the consequence complained of.

The question in each case is whether the actual choice—in other words, the result actually contemplated—was near enough to the remoter result complained of to throw the peril of it on the actor.

Many of the cases put so far are cases in which the defendant intended to produce the proximate cause of the loss. But it will be seen that the same result may be caused by a choice made at different points. Suppose, for instance, a man is sued for having caused his neighbor's house to burn down. The simplest case is that he actually intended to burn it down. If so, the length of the chain of physical causes in between is of no importance, and has no bearing on the case.

But the choice may have stopped one step further back. The defendant may have intended to light a fire on his own land, and not intended to burn the house. Then the nature of the physical causes that intervened and accompanied the act becomes of the highest importance. The question will be the degree of danger attending the contemplated (and therefore chosen) effect of the defendant's conduct, under the circumstances known to him. If the danger was very plain and very great—if, for instance, his conduct consisted in lighting stubble near a haystack close to the house, and the evident circumstances were that the house was of wood, the stubble very dry, and the wind in a dangerous quarter—the court would probably rule that he was liable. If the defendant lit an ordinary fire in a fireplace in the house next door, knowing nothing of the fireplace's being unsafely built, the court would probably rule that he was not liable. In the middle, complicated and doubtful cases would go to the jury.

But the defendant may not even have intended to set a fire. His conduct and intent may have been simply to fire a gun, or, more remote still, to walk across a room, in doing which he involuntarily upset a bottle of acid. So cases may go to the jury because the choice lies far back in the series of events, as well as because of the complexity of the circumstances attending the act or conduct. The difference is perhaps more dramatic than substantial.

But the philosophical analysis of every wrong begins by determining what the defendant has actually chosen—that is, what his voluntary act or conduct has been, and what consequences he has actually contemplated as flowing from it—and then goes on to determine what dangers attended either the conduct under the known circumstances, or its contemplated consequence under the contemplated circumstances.

Take a case like the glancing of Sir Walter Tyrrel's arrow, which, as the story goes, glanced off a tree in the New Forest and killed King William Rufus. If an expert marksman contemplated that the arrow would hit a certain person, cadit quaestio—the question is settled. If he contemplated that it would glance in the direction of another person, but contemplated no more than that, then in order to judge his liability we must go to the end of his foresight, assume the foreseen event to happen, and consider what the manifest danger was at that point. But if no such event was foreseen, the marksman must be judged by the circumstances known to him at the time he shot.

The theory of torts may be summed up very simply. At the two extremes of the law are rules determined by policy without any reference to morality. Certain harms a man may inflict even wickedly; for certain others he must answer, although his conduct has been prudent and beneficial to the community.

But in the main, the law started from those intentional wrongs which are the simplest and most pronounced cases, as well as the nearest to the feeling of revenge which leads men to take the law into their own hands. It thus naturally adopted the vocabulary, and to some degree the tests, of morals. But as the law has grown, even where its standards have continued to model themselves on those of morality, they have necessarily become external. For they have considered, not the actual condition of the particular defendant, but whether his conduct would have been wrong in the fair average member of the community, whom he is expected to equal at his peril.

In general, this question will be settled by considering the degree of danger attending the act or conduct under the known circumstances. If there is danger that harm to another will follow, the act is generally wrong in the sense of the law.

But in some cases the defendant's conduct may not have been morally wrong, and yet he may have chosen to inflict the harm, as where he acted in fear of his life. In such cases he will be liable or not according to whether the law makes moral blameworthiness, within the limits explained above, the ground of liability, or thinks it enough that the defendant had reasonable warning of danger before acting. This distinction, however, is generally unimportant, and the known tendency of the act, under the known circumstances, to do harm may be accepted as the general test of conduct.

The tendency of a given act to cause harm under given circumstances must be determined by experience. And experience, either at first hand or through the voice of the jury, is continually working out concrete rules which in form are still more external, and still further removed from any reference to the moral condition of the defendant, than even the test of the prudent man, which marks the first stage in the division between law and morals. It does this in the domain of wrongs described as intentional as systematically as in those called unintentional or negligent.

But while the law is thus continually adding to its specific rules, it does not adopt the coarse and impolitic principle that a man always acts at his peril. On the contrary, its concrete rules, as well as the general questions put to the jury, show that the defendant must have had at least a fair chance of avoiding the infliction of harm before he becomes answerable for such a consequence of his conduct. And it is certainly arguable that even a fair chance to avoid bringing harm to pass is not enough to throw upon a person the peril of his conduct, unless, judged by average standards, he is also to blame for what he does.
