Lecture V: The Bailee at Common Law
(Part 1 of 3)

So far the discussion has been confined to the general principles of liability, and to the way we find the point at which a man begins to act at his own peril. But it does not matter to a man whether he acts at his own peril or not unless harm comes of it, and there must always be someone within reach of the consequences of the act before any harm can be done. Furthermore, and more to the point, there are certain forms of harm which are not likely to be suffered, and which can never be complained of, by anyone except a person who stands in a particular relation to the actor or to some other person or thing. Thus it is neither a harm nor a wrong to take fish from a pond unless the pond is possessed or owned by someone, and then it is a wrong only to the possessor or owner. It is neither a harm nor a wrong to fail to deliver a bale of wool at a certain time and place, unless a binding promise has been made to deliver it, and then it is a wrong only to the person who was promised.

The next thing to be done is to analyze those special relations out of which special rights and duties arise. The chief of them—and by "relations" I mean simply relations of fact—are possession and contract, and I shall take up those subjects one after the other.

The test of the theory of possession that prevails in any system of law is how it deals with people who have a thing within their power but who do not own it, or claim the position of an owner for themselves with regard to it—bailees, in a word. It is necessary, therefore, as a first step toward understanding the common-law theory of possession, to study what the common law says about bailees.

The state of things on the border between England and Scotland until fairly recent times, which is brought back to life in the ballad of the Fray of Suport, is very like the state of things that, in an earlier century, left its skeleton in the folk-laws of Germany and England. Cattle were the chief property people knew, and cattle-stealing was the chief way of wrongfully taking property. There was very little law, and what there was depended almost wholly on the injured party himself to enforce it. The Salic Law of the fifth century and the Anglo-Saxon laws of Alfred give very full directions about following the trail. If the pursuer came up with the cattle before three days had passed, he had the right to take them and keep them, subject only to swearing that he had lost them against his will. If more than three days went by before the cattle were found, the defendant might swear, if he could, to facts that would disprove the claimant's loss.

This procedure was truly a legal procedure; but it depended on the party making the claim both to start it and to carry it out. Being "executive" in nature—a matter of doing rather than of pleading—it could hardly have been started by anyone other than the person on the spot, in whose keeping the cattle had been. The oath was to the effect that the party had lost possession against his will. But if all a man had to swear was that he had lost possession against his will, it is a natural conclusion that the right to take the oath and use the procedure depended on possession, not on ownership. Possession was not merely enough; it was essential. Only the man who had possession could say that he had lost the property against his will, just as only the man who was on the spot could follow the cattle.

Footnote: Laband and Heusler correct the earlier opinion of Bruns on this point, which Sohm adopted. Compare the discussion of the word "his" (sua) in writs of trespass in the English law, at the end of Lecture VI. Our knowledge of the primitive form of action is somewhat meager and depends on inference. The edict of Liutprand, dealing with housebreaking followed by theft of property the householder had been left in charge of, lays down that the owner shall look to the bailee alone, and the bailee shall hold the thief responsible both for the housebreaking and for the stolen goods—because, as it says, we cannot raise two claims out of one cause. This is somewhat as our own law was unable to split the severing of a thing from the land, and the conversion of it, into two different wrongs.

This, so far as we know, was the one means the early law of our race provided for getting back property lost against one's will. So, in a word, this procedure, modeled on the self-help that came naturally in the situation that gave rise to it, was the only remedy. It was confined to the man in possession, and it was not open to the owner unless he was that man.

To this primitive condition of society has been traced a rule that survived into later times and a more civilized procedure: if the owner entrusted chattels to another person, it was the bailee, and not the bailor, who was the proper party to sue when a third person wrongfully took them. It followed that if the bailee—the person so entrusted—sold or gave the goods in his charge to someone else, the owner could look only to the bailee and could not sue the stranger. This was not from any principle in favor of trade, meant to protect those who bought in good faith from people in possession, but because there was no form of action open to him. But since all the remedies were in the bailee's hands, it also followed that he was bound to hold his bailor harmless. If the goods were lost, it was no excuse that they had been stolen without his fault. He alone could recover the lost property, and therefore he was bound to do so.

In the course of time this reason ceased to exist. An owner out of possession could sue the wrongful taker of his property, just as a possessor could. But the strict liability of the bailee remained, as such rules do remain in the law, long after the causes that gave rise to it had disappeared, and at length we find cause and effect turned upside down. We read in Beaumanoir, the French jurist, writing in 1283, that if a hired thing is stolen, the right to sue belongs to the bailee, because he is answerable to the person from whom he hired it. At first the bailee was answerable to the owner because he was the only person who could sue. Now it was said that he could sue because he was answerable to the owner.

All the peculiarities just described reappear in the Anglo-Norman law, and from that day to this every kind of bailee has been treated as having possession in the legal sense, as I shall presently show.

It is worth proving that our law of bailment is of native origin, so that, when we come to theory, modern German opinion may not be valued at more than it is worth. The only existing theories on the subject come from Germany. The German philosophers who have written on law have known no system but the Roman, and the German lawyers who have philosophized have been professors of Roman law. Some rules that we think clear go against what the German civilians—scholars of the Roman, or civil, law—would regard as first principles. To test the value of those principles, or at least to prevent the hasty assumption that they are universal (and English writers show a slight tendency to make it), it is well to realize that we are dealing with a new system, which philosophy has not yet taken into account.

In the first place, we find an action to recover stolen property which, like the Salic procedure, was based on possession, not on title. Bracton says that a man may sue for his chattel as stolen, on the testimony of good men, and that it does not matter whether the thing so taken was his own property or another's, provided it was in his custody.

The point of special importance, it will be remembered, was the oath. From the wording of Bracton, the oath of the good men (probi homines) seems to have been that the thing was lost (adirata), and a report of the year 1294 tells us expressly that this was so. It says, in effect, that the loser may state his claim this way: "Note that where a man's chattel is lost (ou la chosse de un home est endire), he may count that he [the finder] tortiously detains it, etc., and tortiously for this that whereas he lost the said thing on such a day, etc., he [the loser] came on such a day, etc. (la vynt yl e en jour), and found it in the house of such an one, and told him, etc., and prayed him to restore the thing, but that he would not restore it, etc., to his damage, etc.; and if he, etc. In this case, the demandant must prove (his own hand the twelfth) that he lost the thing." To "count" was to state one's claim in court, and to prove a thing "his own hand the twelfth" was to swear to it backed by eleven others who swore with him.

Footnote: This is not trover. The claim to the return of a thing on the ground that the plaintiff had lost it and the defendant had found it was called, in the fifteenth century, "a newfound holiday."

Assuming, then, that as a first step we find a procedure kindred to that of the early German folk-laws, the more important question is whether we find any principles like those just explained. One of them, it will be remembered, concerned a wrongful transfer by the bailee. We find it laid down in the Year Books that if I deliver goods to a bailee to keep for me, and he sells or gives them to a stranger, the property passes to the stranger by the gift, and I cannot bring trespass against him; but I have a good remedy against the bailee by the writ of detinue—the action to get back a specific thing wrongfully kept from its owner—for his failure to return the goods. These cases have been understood, and on the whole it seems rightly, to deny the bailor not merely trespass but any action whatever. Modern writers have added, however, the characteristically modern qualification that the purchase must be bona fide and without notice—that is, made in good faith by a buyer who did not know of the owner's claim. The answer is that the rule extends to gifts as well as to sales by the bailee, that there is no such condition in the old books, and that it goes against the spirit of the strict doctrines of the common law to read one in. No lawyer needs to be told that, even so qualified, this is no longer the law. The doctrine of the Year Books must be regarded as a survival from the primitive times when we have seen the same rule in force—unless we are prepared to believe that in the fifteenth century they had a finer feeling for the rights of good-faith purchasers than we have now.

The next point in logical order would be how far the bailee was held responsible to the bailor who entrusted him. But for convenience I will first take up the explanation given for the bailee's right of action against third persons who wrongfully took the goods from his possession. The reader will remember Beaumanoir's inverted explanation: that the bailee could sue because he was answerable over to the owner, instead of the original rule, that he was answerable over so strictly because only he could sue. We find the same reasoning repeated often in the Year Books, and indeed from that day to this it has been one of the commonplaces of the law. Thus Hankford, then a judge of the Common Bench, says, around 1410: "If a stranger takes beasts in my custody, I shall have a writ of trespass against him, and shall recover the value of the beasts, because I am chargeable for the beasts to my bailor, who has the property." There are cases in which this reasoning was pushed to the conclusion that if, by the terms of the trust, the bailee was not answerable for the goods if they were stolen, he would have no action against the thief. The same explanation is repeated to this day. Thus we read in a well-known textbook, "For the bailee being responsible to the bailor, if the goods be lost or damaged by negligence, or if he do not deliver them up on lawful demand, it is therefore reasonable that he should have a right of action," etc. But in general, nowadays, a borrower or hirer of property is not answerable if it is taken from him against his will. If the reason offered were the true one, it would follow that, since he was not answerable over, he could not sue the wrongdoer. The wrongdoer would only have to commit a wrong so gross that it freed the bailee from responsibility, and the bailee would lose his right of action. The truth is that any person in possession, whether entrusted and answerable over or not—a finder of property as well as a bailee—can sue anyone except the true owner for interfering with his possession, as will be shown more fully at the end of the next Lecture.

Footnote: Because the bailee recovered the whole value of the goods, the old reason, that he was answerable over, has in some cases turned into a new rule, seemingly based on a misunderstanding: that the bailee holds in trust for the bailor whatever he recovers beyond his own damage. From there the new rule has been extended to insurance money recovered by a bailee. In this form it ceases to be a reason for allowing the action at all.

The bailor also got a right of action against the wrongdoer at a fairly early date. In the forty-eighth year of Edward III, in an action of trespass brought by an agister of cattle—a man paid to pasture other people's cattle—counsel laid it down that "in this case, he who has the property may have a writ of trespass, and he who has the custody another writ of trespass. Persay: Sir, it is true. But he who recovers first shall oust the other of the action, and it shall be in many cases, as if tenant by elegit is ousted, each shall have the assize, and, if the one recover first, the writ of the other is abated, and so here." The comparison is to land held by a creditor under a writ of elegit until his debt is paid: if he is put out, both he and the owner may bring the assize, and whichever wins first cuts off the other's writ.

Other books suggest that this was said of bailments generally, and was not limited to those the bailor could end whenever he pleased. Thus in the twenty-second year of Edward IV, counsel say, "If I bail to you my goods, and another takes them out of your possession, I shall have good action of trespass quare vi et armis." And this seems to have been Rolle's understanding in the passage modern courts usually rely on.

It was to be expected that the bailor would be given some action as soon as the law had machinery that could be worked without the fresh pursuit and the armed hands of the possessor and his friends. Before the action on the case was heard of, allowing the bailor to sue and giving him trespass came to pretty nearly the same thing. Many early writs will be found which show that trespass did not always have the sharp outline it developed later. The point the Year Books seem to insist on is, as Brooke sums it up in the margin of his Abridgment, that two people shall have an action for a single act—not that both shall have trespass rather than case. It should be added that the Year Books quoted go no further than a wrongful taking out of the bailee's custody, which is the old case of the folk-laws. Even so, the right to bring trespass is now denied to the bailor where the bailee has the exclusive right to the goods by a lease or a lien; although the doctrine has been repeated for bailments the bailor can end at pleasure. But the modified rule does not concern the present discussion any more than the earlier form did, because it still leaves the possessory remedies—the actions that protect possession as such—open to all bailees without exception. This appears from the relation of the modified rule to the ancient law; from the fact that Baron Parke, in Manders v. Williams, hints that he would have been prepared to apply the old rule to its full extent but for Gordon v. Harper; and, still more plainly, from the fact that the bailee's right to trespass and trover is asserted in the same breath as the bailor's, and is proved as well by express decisions, which will be cited.

Footnote: In one instance, where the bailor was allowed, against Brian's opinion, to sue a stranger for damage to the chattel, the action seems to have been case.

It is true that in Lotan v. Cross Lord Ellenborough ruled at nisi prius that a lender could bring trespass for damage done to a chattel in the hands of a borrower, and that the case is often cited as authority without comment. Indeed, reputable textbooks sometimes lay it down generally that a gratuitous bailment—one made without payment—does not change the possession but leaves it in the bailor; that a gratuitous bailee is a sort of servant of the bailor, so that the possession of one is the possession of the other; and that this is why, although the bailee may sue on his possession, the bailor has the same actions. Part of this confusion has already been explained, and the rest will be when I come to speak of servants, between whom and all bailees there is a broad and well-known distinction. But whatever ground Lotan v. Cross may stand on, if it stands on any, it cannot for a moment be admitted that borrowers in general do not have trespass and trover. A gratuitous deposit, made for the sole benefit of the person depositing the goods, is a much stronger case for denying these remedies to the depositary, the person who keeps them. Yet we have a decision of the full court, in which Lord Ellenborough also took part, that a depositary has case; and the reasoning implies that a borrower, all the more (a fortiori), would have trespass. And this has always been the law. We have seen that a similar doctrine followed necessarily from the nature of the early German procedure; and the cases show that in this, as in other respects, the English followed the traditions of their race.

The meaning of the rule that all bailees have the possessory remedies is this: in the theory of the common law every bailee has a true possession, and a bailee recovers on the strength of his possession, just as a finder does, and just as even a wrongful possessor may get full damages, or the return of the specific thing, from a stranger to the title. On the other hand, so far as the possessory actions are still allowed to bailors, it is not on the ground that they too have possession. It is probably by a survival, which has been explained, and which in its modern form is an anomaly. The reason usually given is that a right to immediate possession is enough—a reason which itself shuts out the notion that the bailor actually has possession.

The point essential to understanding the common-law theory of possession is now established: from time immemorial the English law has regarded all bailees as possessors, entitled to the possessory remedies. It is not strictly necessary to go on and complete the proof that our law of bailment is of pure German descent. But, curiosity aside, the doctrine that remains to be discussed has had so important an influence on the law of the present day that I shall follow it out with some care. That doctrine was the absolute responsibility of the bailee to the bailor if the goods were wrongfully taken from him.

The early textbook writers are not as instructive as one might hope, because of the influence of the Roman law. Glanvill, however, says in so many words that if a borrowed thing is destroyed or lost in any way while in the borrower's custody, he is absolutely bound to pay a reasonable price for it. So does Bracton, who partly repeats, but modifies, what Justinian says about commodatum, depositum, and pignus—the Roman loan for use, deposit for safekeeping, and pledge—and about the duty of the hirer to use the care of a diligentissimus paterfamilias, the most careful head of a household.

Footnote: Bracton's passage says that one who has received a thing on loan is bound to return it, or its price, even if it has been destroyed or lost by fire, the fall of a building, shipwreck, or the attack of robbers or enemies. This has been thought a corrupt text, but it agrees with Glanvill and with Fleta.

The language and decisions of the courts are perfectly clear, and there we find the German tradition kept alive for several centuries. I begin with the time of Edward II, about 1315. In an action of detinue, the defendant's plea was that the plaintiff had delivered to him a chest locked with the plaintiff's own key, that the goods were in the chest, and that they had been taken from the defendant by robbery together with his own goods. The replication—the plaintiff's answer to the plea—was that the goods had been delivered to the defendant outside any enclosure, and Fitzherbert says the defendant was driven to take issue on that point. This implies that if the goods were not in the chest but simply in the defendant's custody, he was liable. Lord Holt, in Coggs v. Bernard, denies that the chest would make any difference; but the old books agree that there is no delivery if the goods are under lock and key, and this is the origin of the distinction about carriers "breaking bulk"—opening the package entrusted to them—in modern criminal law. In the reign of Edward III the case of a pledge came up; a pledge seems always to have been regarded as a special bailment, to be kept as the holder kept his own goods. The defense was that the goods had been stolen along with the defendant's own. The plaintiff was driven to reply that he had made a tender of the debt before the theft, which would have ended the pledge and left the defendant an ordinary bailee. Issue was joined on that point, which confirms the other cases, since it implies that in that event the defendant would be liable.

Next I take a case from the time of Henry VI, in 1455. It was an action of debt against the Marshal of the Marshalsea, the jailer of the King's Bench prison, for the escape of a prisoner. Jailers in charge of prisoners were governed by the same law as bailees in charge of cattle. The prisoner's body was delivered to the jailer to keep under the same liabilities that cows or goods would have carried. He pleaded in defense that enemies of the king broke into the prison and carried off the prisoner against the defendant's will. The question was whether this was a good defense. The court said that if alien enemies of the king—the French, for instance—released the prisoner, or perhaps if the burning of the prison gave him a chance to escape, the excuse would be good, "because then [the defendant] has remedy against no one." But if the king's own subjects broke the prison, the defendant would be liable, for they are not enemies but traitors; and then, it is implied, the defendant would have a right of action against them, and therefore would himself be answerable. In this case the court came very near the original ground of liability, and drew its distinction accordingly. The person entrusted was liable in those cases where he had a remedy over against the wrongdoer (and in which, originally, he was the only person who had such a remedy); and, on the other hand, his liability, being founded on that circumstance, ended where the remedy ended. The jailer could not sue the soldiers of an invading army of Frenchmen; but in theory he could sue any British subject who carried off the prisoner, however unlikely it was that he would get much satisfaction that way.

Footnote: This case is cited and heavily relied on in all the leading cases on bailment, among them Woodlife's Case, Southcote v. Bennett, Pickering v. Barkley, and Morse v. Slue.
