Lecture VI: Possession
(Part 3 of 3)

Even if space allowed, it would hardly be worth while to search the books on this subject, because of the great confusion of language to be found in them. It has been said, for instance, in this connection, that a carrier is a servant; yet nothing can be clearer than that goods in his custody are in his possession. Again, where goods remain in the custody of the seller, the courts have confused the setting apart of the goods for the contract, and the buyer's acceptance of them, with delivery. Our law has adopted the Roman doctrine that there may be a delivery—that is, a change of possession—merely by a change in the character in which the seller holds. But it has not always imitated the caution of the civilians as to what amounts to such a change. Bailees are constantly spoken of as if they were agents to possess for someone else—a confusion made easier by the fact that they generally are agents for other purposes. Finally, there are the cases that attribute possession to a buyer of goods in the hands of a middleman, without asking whether the middleman holds in his own name or in the buyer's. They generally reach the right result, no doubt, but they have added to the confusion of thought upon the subject.

Footnote: The Digest puts the Roman rule in so many words: what I possess in my own name I can come to possess in another's name; I do not thereby change the ground of my possession, but I cease to possess, and by my service I make another the possessor. For to possess is not the same as to possess in another's name: he possesses in whose name the thing is possessed, and the agent merely lends his service to another's possession. This shows that the seller changed possession by holding in the name of the buyer, as the buyer's agent to possess.

Footnote: It should be kept in mind also that the Roman law denied possession to bailees.

German writers are a little apt to value a theory of possession in proportion to how broad a line it draws between juridical possession, the kind the law protects, and mere actual detention. But from the point of view taken here, it will be seen that the grounds for denying possession and the possessory remedies to servants, and to agents holding as such—if, indeed, agents lack those remedies—are merely historical. The general theory can only take account of that denial as an anomaly. It will also be seen that servants and depositaries have often been likened to each other on the ground that both hold for the benefit of another and not for themselves. That ground has had no influence whatever on our law, which has always treated depositaries as having possession. Nor is it the true explanation of the Roman doctrine, which did not decide either case upon that ground, and which decided each for reasons different from those on which it decided the other.

It will now be easy to deal with the question of power as to third persons. This is naturally a power coextensive with the intent. But we must bear in mind that the law deals only or mainly with manifested facts; and hence, when we speak of a power to exclude others, we mean no more than a power which appears so in its manifestation. A ruffian may be within equal reach and sight when a child picks up a pocket-book; but if he does nothing, the child has manifested the needful power as well as if it had been backed by a hundred policemen. Narrowed in this way, it might be suggested that the manifestation of power matters only as a manifestation of intent. But the two things are distinct, and the power becomes decisive when there are two conflicting intents at the same time. Thus, two parties, neither of whom had title, each claimed a crop of corn against the other, and they cultivated it by turns. The plaintiff gathered the corn and threw it in small piles in the same field, where it lay for a week; then each party at the same moment began to carry it away. It was held that the plaintiff had not gained possession. But if the defendant's first interference had come after the gathering into piles, the plaintiff would probably have recovered. So, again, trustees in possession of a schoolroom put in a schoolmaster. He was afterwards dismissed, but the next day, June 30, he re-entered by force. On the fourth of July he was required by notice to leave, and he was not thrown out until the eleventh. It was considered that the schoolmaster never got possession as against the trustees.

We are led, in this connection, to the subject of how long the rights acquired by gaining possession continue. To gain possession, as we have seen, there must be certain physical relations, as explained, and a certain intent. It remains to ask how far these facts must go on being true of a person at each moment in order that he may keep the rights which follow from their presence. The prevailing view is Savigny's. He thinks there must always be the same animus as at the moment of acquisition, and a constant power to reproduce at will the original physical relations to the object. Everyone agrees that it is not necessary to have a present power over the thing at every moment; otherwise one could possess only what was under his hand. But it is a question whether we cannot dispense with even more. The facts which constitute possession are by their nature capable of remaining true for a lifetime. Hence there has arisen an ambiguity of language which has led to much confusion of thought. We use the word "possession" indifferently for two things: the presence of all the facts needed to gain it, and the condition of a man who, although some of those facts no longer exist, is still protected as if they did. Consequently it has been only too easy to treat the end of the facts as the loss of the right, as some German writers very nearly do.

But it does not follow, from the single circumstance that certain facts must come together to create the rights incident to possession, that they must continue in order to keep those rights alive. It follows no more than it does from the need for a consideration and a promise to create a right in contract that the consideration and promise must go on passing between the parties until the moment of performance. When certain facts that confer a right have once been made manifest, there is no general ground on which the law need hold the right at an end, except the manifestation of some fact inconsistent with its continuance—although the reasons for conferring the particular right may weigh heavily in deciding which facts shall count as inconsistent. The end of the original physical relations to the object might be treated as such a fact; but it never has been, unless in times of more ungoverned violence than the present. On the same principle, it is only a question of tradition or policy whether losing the power to reproduce the original physical relations shall affect the continuance of the rights. That loss does not stand on the same ground as a new possession taken adversely by another. We have adopted the Roman law as to animals ferae naturae—wild by nature—but the general tendency of our law is to favor appropriation. It abhors the absence of proprietary or possessory rights as a kind of vacuum. Accordingly, where a man found logs afloat and moored them, and they broke loose again and floated away and were found by another, it has been expressly decided that the first finder kept the rights that sprang from his having taken possession, and that he could maintain trover against the second finder, who refused to give them up.

Footnote: Bruns comes to the same conclusion on practical grounds of convenience, although on theory he utterly repudiates it. I must refer to what I said above about these conflicts between theory and convenience.

Suppose that the finder of a purse of gold has left it in his country house, which is lonely and lightly barred, and that he is a hundred miles away, in prison. The only person within twenty miles is a thoroughly equipped burglar at his front door, who has seen the purse through a window and intends to go in and take it at once. The finder's power to reproduce his former physical relation to the gold is rather limited. Yet I believe no one would say that his possession was at an end until the burglar, by an overt act, had manifested his power and intent to exclude others from the purse. The reason is the same one already given about the power to exclude at the moment of gaining possession. The law deals, for the most part, with overt acts and facts which can be known by the senses. So long as the burglar has not taken the purse, he has not manifested his intent; and until he breaks through the barrier which measures the present possessor's power of excluding him, he has not manifested his power. It may be observed, further, that by the tests adopted in this Lecture the owner of the house has a present possession in the strictest sense. He lacks the power which Savigny says is necessary, but he has the present intent and power to exclude others.

It is conceivable that the common law should go so far as to treat possession the same way as a title, and should hold that once possession has been acquired, the rights acquired with it continue to prevail against all the world but one, until something has happened that would be enough to divest ownership.

The possession of rights, as it is called, has been a battleground on the Continent for centuries. It is not uncommon for German writers to go so far as to maintain that there may be a true possession of obligations. This seems to fit a general view that possession and right are, in theory, terms of equal reach: the mastery of the will over an external object in general—whether that object is a thing or another will—is called right when it accords with the general will and is therefore lawful, and is called possession when it exists merely in fact. Bearing in mind what was said on the question whether possession was a fact or a right, it will be seen that such an opposition between possession and right cannot be admitted as a legal distinction. The facts constituting possession generate rights as truly as do the facts which constitute ownership, although the rights of a mere possessor are less extensive than those of an owner.

Footnote: A learned writer of an older day asks why a doctor has no possessory action if you stop employing him, and answers: "I feel that the action does not lie; but I only feel it, and I could not tell you why if you threatened me with death. You, reader, if you are wise, supply the reasons for the decision."

Conversely, rights spring from certain facts supposed to be true of the person entitled to them. Where these facts are such that they can be made true of different persons one after another, as in the case of the occupation of land, the corresponding rights may be enjoyed one after another. But when the facts are past and gone—such as the giving of a consideration and the receiving of a promise—no one can set up a claim to the resulting rights except the party of whom the facts were originally true: in the case supposed, the original contractee, the one to whom the promise was made. For no one but the original contractee can fill the situation from which those rights spring.

English readers will probably grant that one of the essential facts consists in a certain relation to a material object. But this object may be a slave as well as a horse; and conceptions that began in this way may be extended, by a survival, to free services. It is worth noticing that even Bruns, in applying his theory, does not seem to go beyond cases of status and cases where, in common language, land is bound for the services in question, as it is for rent. Free services are treated so far like a slave's, even by our law, that the master has a right of property in them against all the world; so it is only a question of degree where the line shall be drawn. It would be possible to hold that, as one might be in possession of a slave without title, so one might have all the rights of an owner in free services rendered without a contract. Perhaps something of that sort is to be seen when a parent recovers for the seduction of a daughter over twenty-one, although there is no actual contract of service. So, too, throughout the whole course of the canon law and in the early law of England, rents were regarded as so far a part of the land as to be capable of possession and of disseisin, and they could be recovered like land by assize.

But the most important case of the so-called possession of rights in our law, as in the Roman, concerns easements—rights to make some limited use of another's land, such as a right of way. An easement is capable of possession in a certain sense. A man may use land in a certain way, with the intent to exclude all others from using it in any way inconsistent with his own use, but no further. If this is true possession, however, it is a limited possession of land, not of a right, as others have shown. Where an easement has actually been created, whether by deed or by prescription, it is undoubtedly true that anyone in possession of the dominant estate—the land the easement serves—would be protected in its enjoyment. But he has not been protected in the past on the ground that the easement was in itself an object of possession; the protection comes from a survival of precedents explained in Lecture XI. So to test whether there is a mere possession of this sort which the law will protect, we will take a way used in fact for four years, over which no easement has yet been acquired, and ask whether the possessor of the would-be dominant land would be protected in his use as against third persons. It is conceivable that he should be, but I believe that he would not.

Footnote: If the law should protect a possessor of land in the enjoyment of water flowing to it, it would do so because the use of the water was regarded as part of the enjoyment of that land; this would by no means imply that it would do the same in the case just put, of a way over another's land.

The chief objection to the doctrine seems to be that there is almost a contradiction between two assertions: that one man has a general power and intent to exclude the world from dealing with the land, and that another has the power to use it in a particular way and to exclude the world from interfering with that. Reconciling the two takes somewhat artificial reasoning. However, it should be borne in mind that the question in every case is not what the actual power of the parties was, but what their manifested power was. If their manifested powers stood balanced in this way, the law might recognize a kind of split possession. But if the law does not recognize it until a right has been acquired, then the protection of a disseisor in the use of an easement must still be explained by the facts set out in Lecture XI.

The consequences attached to possession are substantially those attached to ownership, subject to the question of how long possessory rights continue, which I have touched on above. Even a wrongful possessor of a chattel may recover full damages for its conversion by a stranger to the title, or get back the specific thing.

It has been supposed, to be sure, that a "special property" was necessary in order to maintain replevin—the action to recover goods wrongfully taken—or trover. But modern cases establish that possession is enough, and an examination of the sources of our law proves that special property never meant anything more. It has been shown that the procedure Bracton describes for recovering chattels lost against one's will, like its predecessor on the Continent, was based on possession. Yet Bracton, in the very passage in which he says so expressly, uses a phrase which, but for that explanation, would seem to mean ownership: "Poterit rem suam petere"—he may claim his thing. The writs of later days used the same language. When it was objected, as it often was, that a bailee's suit for the taking of bona et catalla sua—"his goods and chattels"—should instead have been for bona in custodia sua existentia—"goods being in his custody"—the answer was always that the clerks of the Chancery would not frame a writ in that form.

The substance of the matter was that goods in a man's possession were his (sua) within the meaning of the writ. But it was very natural to try to reconcile, on paper, that formal word with the fact, by saying that although the plaintiff did not have the general property in the chattels, he had a property as against strangers, or a special property. This is what happened, and, curiously enough, two of the earliest cases in which I have found the phrase used are cases of a depositary and of a borrower. Brooke says that a wrongful taker "has title against all but the true owner." In this sense the special property would have been better described as a "possessory property"—as indeed it was, when it was decided that in an indictment for larceny the property could be laid in the bailee from whom the goods were taken.

I have explained the inversion by which a bailee's right of action against third persons was supposed to rest on his responsibility over to the owner, although in truth that right was the foundation of the responsibility, and arose simply from his possession. The step was short from saying that bailees could sue because they were answerable over, to saying that they had the property as against strangers, or a special property, because they were answerable over; and next to saying that they could sue because they had a special property and were answerable over. And that is how the notion that special property meant something more than possession, and was required in order to bring an action, got into the law.

The error was made easier by a different use of the phrase in a different connection. A bailee was in general answerable for goods stolen from his custody, whether he had a lien or not. But the law was otherwise for a pledgee, if he had kept the pledge with his own goods and the two were stolen together. This distinction was accounted for, at least in Lord Coke's time, by saying that the pledge was in a sense the pledgee's own: that he had a special property in it, so that the ordinary relation of bailment did not exist, or that his undertaking was only to keep it as he kept his own goods. The same expression was used in discussing the pledgee's right to assign the pledge. In this sense the term applied only to pledges. But its meaning in that particular connection was easily carried over into the others in which the phrase was used, with the result that the special property required to maintain the possessory actions was supposed to mean a qualified interest in the goods.

As to the legal consequences of possession, it only remains to mention that the rules laid down for chattels also hold for land. It is true that the plaintiff in ejectment—the action to recover land—must recover on the strength of his own title as against a defendant in possession. But it is now settled that prior possession is enough if the defendant stands on his possession alone. Possession is of course enough for trespass. And although the early remedy by assize was restricted to those who had a technical seisin, this was for reasons which do not affect the general theory.

Before closing I must say a word about ownership and the ideas akin to it. Following the order of analysis used for possession, the first question must be: what are the facts to which the rights called ownership are attached as a legal consequence? The most familiar way of gaining ownership is by conveyance from a previous owner. But that presupposes an ownership already existing, and the problem is to discover what calls it into being.

One fact which has this effect is first possession. The captor of wild animals, or the man who takes fish from the ocean, has not merely possession but a title good against all the world. But the most common way of getting an original and independent title is by certain proceedings, in court or out of it, adverse to all the world. At one extreme is the admiralty's proceeding in rem—against the thing itself—which conclusively disposes of the property in its power. When the court sells or condemns the property, it does not deal with this man's title or that one's; it gives a new title paramount to all previous interests, whatever they may be. The other and more familiar case is prescription, where an open, adverse holding continued for a certain time has a similar effect. A title by prescription is not a presumed conveyance from this or that owner alone; it extinguishes all previous and inconsistent claims. The two meet in the ancient fine with proclamations—a collusive lawsuit publicly proclaimed—where the combined effect of the judgment and the lapse of a year and a day was to bar all claims.

So, too, the legislature may give rights like those of ownership to persons of whom some other set of facts is true. A patentee is an example: one to whom the government has issued a certain instrument, and who has in fact made a patentable invention.

But what are the rights of ownership? They are substantially the same as those incident to possession. Within the limits set by policy, the owner is allowed to exercise his natural powers over the thing without interference, and is more or less protected in excluding other people from interfering. The owner is allowed to exclude all, and is accountable to no one. The possessor is allowed to exclude all but one, and is accountable to no one but him. The great body of questions which have made the subject of property so large and important are questions of conveyancing, not necessarily or generally dependent on ownership as distinguished from possession. They are questions about the effect of having no independent and original title, but coming in under a title already in existence, or about the ways in which an original title can be cut up among those who come in under it. These questions will be dealt with and explained where they belong, in the Lectures on Successions, Lectures X and XI.
