Lecture VII: Contract—I. History
(Part 2 of 3)

It is plain that a witness oath, which settles a case by the bare fact that it is sworn, is not a satisfactory mode of proof. A written admission of debt, produced in court and sufficiently identified as coming from the defendant, is obviously much better. The only weak point about a writing is the means of identifying it as the defendant's, and that difficulty disappeared as soon as the use of seals became common. This had more or less happened by Glanvill's time. After that, all a party had to do was to produce the writing and satisfy the court, by looking at it, that the impression in the wax fitted his opponent's seal. The oath of the secta, the plaintiff's band of witnesses, could always be met successfully by wager of law—that is, by a counter-oath from the defendant, backed by the same number of fellow-swearers the plaintiff had brought, or double that number. But a writing proved to be the defendant's could not be contradicted. For if a man said he was bound, he was bound. There was no question of consideration, because there was as yet no such doctrine. He was equally bound if he acknowledged the obligation in any place that kept a record, such as the superior courts, by which his acknowledgment could be proved. Indeed, to this day some securities are taken simply by an oral admission made before the clerk of a court and noted by him in his papers. The advantage of the writing was not only that it furnished better proof in the old cases. It also made it possible to enforce obligations for which there would otherwise have been no proof at all.

Footnote: The favorite proof by duel was also allowed, but it disappeared. When the inquest became general, the question whether the deed had really been executed was tried by that means, like any other fact.

What has been said sufficiently explains why proof by writing was preferred to proof by the old-fashioned witness oath. But there were other reasons, equally good, why the witness oath should not be extended beyond its ancient limits. The transaction witnesses were losing their statutory and official character. Already in Glanvill's time the usual ways of proving a debt were by the duel or by writing. A hundred years later Bracton shows that the secta had sunk to the retainers and household of the party, and he says that their oath raises only a slight presumption.

Moreover, a new mode of trial was growing up. It was not used in these cases for a good while, but by contrast it must have tended to lower the value set on the witness oath. This was the beginning of our trial by jury. At first it was an inquest of the neighbors most likely to know about a disputed matter of fact. They spoke from their own knowledge, but they were chosen by an officer of the court instead of by the interested party, and they were meant to be impartial. Soon witnesses were summoned before them—not, as of old, to settle the case by their oath, but to help the inquest reach a verdict by their testimony. With the arrival of this enlightened procedure, the secta soon ceased to decide the case, and it may well be asked why it did not disappear altogether and leave no trace.

Take into account the conservatism of the English law, and the fact that, before deeds came in, the only debts for which there had been a remedy were debts proved by the transaction witnesses. It would not have been surprising to find the tender of suit—the offering of the secta—persisting in those cases. But there was another reason, more compelling still. Where there was no deed, the defence in debt was by wager of law. A section of Magna Carta was interpreted to forbid putting a man to his law on the plaintiff's own statement without good witness. So the statute required witness—that is, the secta—in every case of debt where the plaintiff did not rely on a writing. Thus it happened that suit went on being tendered in the cases where it had been tendered of old. And since the defendant in such cases, if he did not admit the debt, always waged his law, it was a long time before the inquest got much foothold.

To establish a debt that arose merely by way of promise or acknowledgment, and for which no mode of trial had formerly been provided, you had to have a writing—the new form of proof that had brought such debts into the law in the first place. The rule was laid down, "by parol the party is not obliged"; that is, a man is not bound by a mere spoken word. But the old debts were not thought of as raised by a promise. They were a "duty" springing from the plaintiff's receipt of property—a fact which could be seen and sworn to. In these cases the old law held its ground, and even extended itself a little, by strict analogy.

But the undertaking of a surety, whatever form it was clothed in, did not really arise out of any such fact. It had become of the same nature as other promises, and doubts soon arose whether it ought not to be proved by the same evidence. By the reign of Edward III it was settled that a deed was necessary, except where the customs of particular cities had kept the old law in force.

This reign may be taken as marking the time when the divisions and rules of procedure were fixed that have lasted to the present day. It is therefore worth while to repeat and sum up the condition of the law at that time.

It was still necessary to tender the secta in every action of debt in which no writing was produced. For this reason, as well as for the others already mentioned, the range of such actions was not materially enlarged beyond the cases that had formerly been established by the witness oath. As suretyship was no longer one of these, they became strictly limited to cases in which the debt arose from the receipt of a quid pro quo. Moreover, there was no other action of contract that could be maintained without a writing. New kinds of contract were now enforced by an action of covenant, but there a deed was always necessary. At the same time the secta had shrunk to a form, although it was still argued that its function was more important in contract than elsewhere. It could no longer be examined before the court. It was a mere survival, and the transaction witness had ceased to be an institution. Hence the necessity of tendering the witness oath no longer fixed the limits of debt upon simple contract except by tradition. And it is not surprising to find that the action was slightly extended by analogy beyond its scope in Glanvill's time.

But debt stayed substantially at the point I have indicated, and no new action available for simple contracts was introduced for a century. In the meantime the inversion I have explained took place, and what had been an accident of procedure became a doctrine of substantive law. The change was easy, when the debts that could be enforced without a deed all sprang from a benefit to the debtor.

The influence of the Roman law no doubt helped to bring this result about. It will be remembered that in the reign of Henry II most simple contracts and debts for which there was no evidence of deed or witness were left to the ecclesiastical courts to enforce, so far as their jurisdiction reached. Perhaps it was this circumstance that led Glanvill and his successors to apply the terminology of the civilians to common-law debts. But whether he borrowed it from the church courts or went straight to the fountainhead, it is certain that Glanvill uses the classification and technical language of the Corpus Juris, the great body of Justinian's Roman law, throughout his tenth book.

The Roman system had certain special contracts called real contracts. These bound the contractor either to return a particular thing put into his hands by the other party, as in a lease or a loan, or to deliver other articles of the same kind, as when grain, oil, or money was lent. This class corresponded with the common-law debts only in the most superficial way. But Glanvill adopted the names, and later writers began to draw conclusions from them. The author of Fleta, a writer by no means always intelligent in following and adopting his predecessors' use of the Roman law, says that to raise a debt there must be not only a certain thing promised, but a certain thing promised in return.

If Fleta had confined his statement to debts by simple contract, it might well have been suggested by the existing state of the law. But since he also required a writing and a seal, on top of the thing given or promised in return, the doctrine he laid down can hardly have prevailed at any time. It was probably nothing more than a slight vagary of reasoning, built on the Roman elements he borrowed from Bracton.

It only remains to trace the gradual appearance of consideration in the decisions. A case of the reign of Edward III seems to distinguish between a parol obligation—one not under seal—founded on payments the obligee made of his own accord, and one founded on a payment made at the obligor's request. It also speaks of the debt, or "duty," in that case as arising by cause of the payments. Somewhat similar language is used in the next reign. So, in the twelfth year of Henry IV, there is an approach to the idea: "If money is promised to a man for making a release, and he makes the release, he will have a good action of debt in the matter." In the next reign it was decided that in such a case the plaintiff could not recover without having executed the release. The editor explains this on the ground that ex nudo pacto non oritur actio—from a bare promise no action arises. But the most important fact is that from Edward I to Henry VI we find no case in which a debt was recovered unless a consideration had in fact been received.

Another fact to notice is that from Edward III on, debts arising from a transaction without writing are said to arise from contract, as distinguished from debts arising from an obligation—a sealed bond. Hence, when consideration came to be required as such, it was required in all contracts not under seal, whether they were debts or not. Under Henry VI quid pro quo became a necessity in all such contracts. In the third year of that reign it was objected to an action of assumpsit for not building a mill that the plaintiff had not shown what the defendant was to have for building it. In the thirty-sixth year of the same reign (A.D. 1459) the doctrine appears full grown, and is assumed to be familiar.

That case turned on a question that was debated for centuries before it was settled: whether debt would lie for a sum of money the defendant had promised the plaintiff if he would marry the defendant's daughter. Formerly the debate had been whether the promise was so closely bound up with the marriage that it belonged exclusively to the spiritual courts. Now it turned on the purely worldly doubt whether the defendant had had quid pro quo.

It will be remembered that the fact formerly sworn to by the transaction witnesses was a benefit to the defendant—namely, the delivery to him of the things sold or the money lent. Such cases also offer the most obvious form of consideration. The natural question is, what was the promisor to get for his promise? Only by analysis does one see that the supposed policy of the law is equally satisfied by a detriment incurred by the promisee. So it happened, not unnaturally, that when the judges first laid down the law that there must be quid pro quo, they were slow to recognize a detriment to the promisee as meeting the requirement. In the case I have mentioned, some of the judges were inclined to hold that getting rid of his daughter was a benefit to the defendant sufficient to make him a debtor for the money he had promised. There was even some hint of the opinion that marrying the lady was a consideration because it was a detriment to the promisee. But the other opinion prevailed, at least for a time, because the defendant had had nothing from the plaintiff to raise a debt.

So it was held that a service rendered to a third person, at the defendant's request and on his promise of a reward, would not be enough—though not without strong opinions to the contrary—and for a time the precedents were settled. It became established law that an action of debt would lie only upon a consideration actually received by the debtor and enuring to his benefit.

It was, however, no peculiarity of either the action or the contract of debt that led to this view. It was the imperfectly developed theory of consideration that prevailed between the reigns of Henry VI and Elizabeth. The theory was the same in assumpsit and in equity. Wherever consideration was mentioned, it was always as quid pro quo—as what the contractor was to have for his contract.

Moreover, before consideration was ever heard of, debt was the time-honored remedy on every obligation to pay money that the law enforced, except the liability to pay damages for a wrong. It has been shown already that until the time of Edward III a surety could be sued in debt without a writing. Yet a surety receives no benefit from the dealing with his principal. For instance, if a man sells corn to A, and B says, "I will pay if A does not," the sale does B no good, so far as the terms of the bargain show. For that reason debt cannot now be maintained against a surety in such a case.

It was not always so. It is not so to this day if there is an obligation under seal. In that case it does not matter how the obligation arose, or whether there was any consideration for it or not. But in Glanvill's time a writing was a more general way of establishing a debt than witness, and it is absurd to fix the scope of the action by looking at only one class of the debts it enforced. Moreover, for a long time a writing was only another mode of proof, though a more conclusive one. The foundation of the action was the same however it was proved. It was a duty, or "duity," to the plaintiff—in other words, that money was due him, no matter how—as anyone may see by reading the earlier Year Books. That is why debt lay equally upon a judgment, which established such a duty by matter of record, or upon the defendant's admission recorded in the same way.

To sum up, the action of debt has passed through three stages. At first it was the only remedy to recover money due, except where the liability was simply to pay damages for a wrongful act. It was closely akin to—indeed it was only a branch of—the action for any form of personal property which the defendant was bound, by contract or otherwise, to hand over to the plaintiff. If there was a contract to pay money, the only question was how you could prove it. Any such contract that could be proved by any of the means known to early law constituted a debt. There was no theory of consideration, and therefore, of course, no limit on either the action or the contract based on the nature of the consideration received.

The second stage came when the doctrine of consideration was introduced in its earlier form, as a benefit to the promisor. While that form prevailed it applied to all contracts not under seal. But it was established at a time when debt was the only action for money payable under such contracts, and so the precedents are, for the most part, precedents in debt.

The third stage was reached when a larger view was taken of consideration, and it was expressed in terms of detriment to the promisee. This change was a change in substantive law, and logically it should have been applied throughout. But it arose in another and later form of action, under circumstances peculiarly connected with that action, as will be explained below. The result was that the new doctrine prevailed in the new action and the old in the old. What was really the anomaly of two inconsistent theories carried out side by side disguised itself as a limitation on the action of debt. That action did not remain, as before, the remedy for all binding contracts to pay money. So far as parol contracts were concerned, it could be used only where the consideration was a benefit actually received by the promisor. With regard to obligations arising in any other way, it has remained unchanged.

I must now say a few words about the effect on our law of the other mode of proof I have mentioned. I mean charters. A charter was simply a writing. Since few people could write, most had to authenticate a document in some other way—for instance, by making their mark. This was in fact the universal practice in England until Norman customs were introduced. Seals came in with them. But as late as Henry II the Chief Justice of England said that seals belonged properly only to kings and to very great men. I know of no ground for thinking that an authentic charter had any less effect at that time when it was not under seal than when it was sealed. It was only evidence either way, and it is called evidence in many of the early cases. It could be waived, and suit tendered in its place. Its conclusive effect came from the satisfactory nature of the evidence, not from the seal.

But when seals came into use, they obviously made the evidence of the charter better, in so far as a seal was harder to forge than a stroke of the pen. Seals acquired such importance that for a time a man was bound by his seal even though it had been affixed without his consent. At last a seal came to be required if a charter was to have its ancient effect.

A covenant, or contract under seal, was no longer a promise well proved. It was a promise of a distinct nature, for which a distinct form of action came to be provided. I have shown how the requirement of consideration became a rule of substantive law, and also why it never had any foothold in the domain of covenants. The exemption of covenants from the requirement became a rule of substantive law as well. The man who had set his hand to a charter had been bound because he had consented to be bound and because there was a writing to prove it. Now he was held by force of the seal, and by the deed alone as distinguished from all other writings. And to keep an inadequate theory intact, a seal was said to import a consideration.

Nowadays it is sometimes thought more philosophical to say that a covenant is a formal contract, which survives alongside the ordinary contract made by mere agreement, just as happened in the Roman law. But this is not a very instructive way of putting it either. In one sense, everything is form that the law requires, over and above the mere expression of the promisor's will, in order to make a promise binding. Consideration is a form as much as a seal. The only difference is that one form is of modern introduction and has a foundation in good sense, or at least in our common habits of thought, so that we do not notice it; the other is a survival from an older condition of the law, and is less plainly sensible, or less familiar. I may add that under the influence of this last consideration the law of covenants is breaking down. In many States it is held that a mere scroll or flourish of the pen is a sufficient seal. From there it is a short step to abolish the distinction between sealed and unsealed instruments altogether, and this has been done in some of the Western States.

While covenants survive in a somewhat feeble old age, and debt has disappeared, leaving a vaguely disturbing influence behind it, the whole modern law of contract has grown up through the medium of the action of assumpsit, which must now be explained.

After the Norman Conquest all ordinary actions were begun by a writ issued in the king's name, ordering the defendant to be summoned before the court to answer the plaintiff. These writs issued as a matter of course in the various well-known actions that took their names from them. There were writs of debt and of covenant; there were writs of trespass for forcible injuries to the plaintiff's person, or to property in his possession; and so on. But writs were issued only for the actions the law knew, and without a writ the court had no authority to try a case. In the time of Edward I there were only a few such actions. The cases in which you could recover money from another fell into a small number of groups, and each group had its own particular form of suing and stating your claim.

These forms had ceased to be adequate. There were many cases, for instance, that did not quite fall within the definition of a trespass, but for which a remedy ought to be furnished. To furnish a remedy, the first thing to be done was to furnish a writ. Accordingly, the famous statute of 13 Edward I, chapter 24, authorized the office from which the old writs issued to frame new ones in cases that were like those covered by existing writs in principle and called for a like remedy, but did not fall exactly within the scope of the writs already in use.

So writs of trespass on the case began to appear—that is, writs stating a ground of complaint analogous to a trespass, but not quite amounting to a trespass as it had been sued for in the older precedents. Take an instance that is substantially one of the earliest cases. Suppose a man left a horse with a blacksmith to be shod, and the smith negligently drove a nail into the horse's foot. The owner of the horse might not be able to have one of the old writs, because the horse was not in his possession when the damage was done. A strict trespass to property could be committed only against the person in possession of it, and it could not be committed by one who was in possession himself. But laming the horse was equally a wrong whether the owner held the horse by the bridle or left it with the smith; and the wrong was closely analogous to a trespass, though it was not one. So the law gave the owner a writ of trespass on the case.
