Lecture IX: Contract—III. Void and Voidable
(Part 2 of 2)

Fraudulent representations made outside a contract can never, it would seem, go to anything except the motives for making it. Being outside the contract, they can seldom affect how it is interpreted. A promise in certain words has a definite meaning, which the promisor is presumed to understand. If A says to B, "I promise you to buy this barrel and its contents," his words point to a person and a thing identified by the senses, and they signify nothing more. There is no repugnancy. If that person is ready to deliver that thing, the purchaser cannot say that any term of the contract itself has not been complied with. He may have been fraudulently led to believe that B was another B, and that the barrel held mackerel. But however much his belief on those points may have affected his willingness to make the promise, it would be somewhat extravagant to give his words a different meaning on that account. "You" means the person standing before the speaker, whatever his name, and "contents" applies to salt as well as to mackerel.

It is no doubt only because a condition is construed into the contract—read into it by the law—that fraud is a ground for rescission at all. The parties could agree, if they chose, that a contract should bind them regardless of the truth or falsehood of anything said outside it on either side.

But, as has been said before in these Lectures, although the law starts from the distinctions and uses the language of morality, it necessarily ends in external standards not dependent on the actual consciousness of the individual. So it has happened with fraud. If a man makes a representation while knowing facts which, by the average standard of the community, are enough to warn him that it is probably untrue, and it is untrue, he is guilty of fraud in the eye of the law whether he believes his statement or not. The courts of Massachusetts, at least, go much further. They seem to hold that any material statement a man makes as of his own knowledge, or in such a way that it may fairly be understood as made of his own knowledge, is fraudulent if it is untrue—whatever reasons he may have had for believing it, and for believing that he knew it. It is clear, therefore, that a representation may be morally innocent and yet fraudulent in the eye of the law. Indeed, the Massachusetts rule seems to stop little short of the principle laid down by the English courts of equity, which I criticized in Lecture IV. For most positive statements of fact would at least entitle a jury to find that they were reasonably understood as made of the speaker's own knowledge, and so might justify rescission if they turned out to be untrue. The moral vocabulary has ceased to fit, and an external standard of responsibility has been reached. But the starting point is fraud all the same, and except on the ground of fraud, as the law defines it, I do not think that misrepresentations made before the contract affect its validity, even though they lead directly to its making. And neither the contract nor the implied condition calls for the existence of the facts about which the false representations were made. They call only for the absence of certain false representations. The condition is not that the promisee shall be a certain other B, or that the barrel shall contain mackerel, but that the promisee has not lied to the promisor about material facts.

Then the question arises: how do you decide which facts are material? Since the facts are not required by the contract, the only way they can be material is that a belief in their truth is likely to have led to the making of the contract.

It is not true, then, as is sometimes said, that the law does not concern itself with the motives for making contracts. On the contrary, the whole business of fraud outside the contract is the creation of false motives and the removal of true ones. And this gives us a reasonable test of the cases in which fraud will justify rescission. It is said that a fraudulent representation must be material to have that effect. But how are we to decide whether it is material or not? If the argument above is correct, it must be by appealing to ordinary experience, and asking whether a belief that the fact was as represented would naturally have led to the making of the contract, or a contrary belief would naturally have prevented it.

If the belief would not naturally have had that effect, either in general or under the known circumstances of the particular case, the fraud is immaterial. Suppose a man is induced to contract with another by the other's lie that he is a great-grandson of Thomas Jefferson. I do not suppose the contract would be voidable, unless the contractee knew that, for special reasons, his lie would tend to bring the contract about.

The conditions, or grounds for avoiding a contract, that I have dealt with so far concern the conduct of the parties outside the contract itself. I still confine myself to conditions that arise by construction of law—that is, conditions not attached to a promise directly and in so many words by the literal meaning of the language in which it is expressed. I now come to those which concern facts to which the contract does in some way refer.

Such conditions may be found in contracts where the promise is on one side only. It has been said that where the contract is unilateral—a promise by one party only—and all its language is therefore the promisor's, clauses in his favor will be construed as conditions more readily than the same words would be in a bilateral contract. Indeed, it has been said that they must be so construed. For if they do not create a condition they do him no good, since by hypothesis they are not promises by the other party. How far this ingenious suggestion has actually affected doctrine may perhaps be doubted.

But for the purposes of this general survey it will be enough to deal with bilateral contracts, where there are undertakings on both sides, and where the condition implied in favor of one party is that the other shall make good what he, on his part, has undertaken.

The undertakings of a contract may be for the existence of a fact in the present or in the future. Only in the second case can they be promises; but in the first they may be just as essential terms of the bargain.

Here again we come upon the law of representations, but in a new phase. When representations are part of the contract, it is always possible that their truth should be a condition of the contract, entirely apart from any question of fraud. And it often is so in fact. It is not, however, every representation contained in the words used on one side that will make a condition in favor of the other party. Suppose A agrees to sell, and B agrees to buy, "A's seven-year-old sorrel horse Eclipse, now in the possession of B on trial," and in fact the horse is chestnut, not sorrel. I do not suppose that B could refuse to pay for the horse on that ground. If the law were so foolish as to aim at merely formal consistency, it might indeed be said that there was as absolute a repugnancy between the different terms of this contract as in an agreement to sell certain barrels of mackerel where the barrels turned out to contain salt. If that view were adopted, there would not be a contract subject to a condition; there would be no contract at all. But in truth there is a contract, and there is not even a condition. As has been said already, not every repugnancy makes a contract void, and not every failure in the terms of the other side's undertaking makes it voidable. Here it plainly appears that the buyer knows exactly what he is going to get, and therefore the mistake about the color has no bearing on the bargain.

If, on the other hand, a contract contained a representation that was fraudulent, and that misled the party to whom it was made, the contract would be voidable on the same principles as if the representation had been made beforehand. But words of description in a contract are very often held to amount to what is sometimes called a warranty—an undertaking that a fact is as stated—quite apart from fraud. Whether they do or not is a question for the court to decide on grounds of common sense, looking to the meaning of the words, the importance in the transaction of the facts the words convey, and so on. But when words of description are held to be a warranty, the decision means not merely that the party using them binds himself to answer for their truth, but that their truth is a condition of the contract.

For instance, in a leading case, Behn v. Burness, the agreement was that the plaintiff's ship, "now in the port of Amsterdam," should with all possible dispatch proceed direct to Newport, England, and there load a cargo of coal for Hong Kong. The agreement was a charter-party—the contract by which a ship is hired. At the date of the charter-party the vessel was not in Amsterdam, though she arrived there four days later. The plaintiff had notice that the defendant considered time important. It was held that the vessel's presence in the port of Amsterdam at the date of the contract was a condition, and that its breach entitled the defendant to refuse to load and to rescind the contract. Suppose we adopted the view that a condition must be a future event, and that a promise which purports to be conditional on a past or present event is either absolute or no promise at all. It would follow that in this case the defendant had never made a promise; he had only promised if circumstances existed which did not exist. I have already stated my objections to this way of looking at such cases, in Lecture VIII, and will only add that the courts, so far as I am aware, do not sanction it, and certainly did not in this instance.

There is another ground for holding the charter-party void and no contract at all, rather than merely voidable. It is equally against authority, and yet I have never been able to answer it wholly to my satisfaction. In the case just put, the owner's representation concerned the vessel itself, and therefore entered into the description of the thing the charterer agreed to take. I do not quite see why there is not as fatal a repugnancy between the different terms of this contract as was found in the one for the sale of the barrels of salt described as containing mackerel. Why is the repugnancy between those two terms fatal to the existence of a contract—first, that the thing sold is the contents of these barrels, and second, that it is mackerel? It is because each of those terms goes to the very root and essence of the contract. To compel the buyer to take something that answers to one requirement but not the other would be to hold him to do a substantially different thing from what he promised; and so a promise to take one and the same thing answering to both requirements is contradictory in a substantial matter. We have seen that the law does not proceed on any merely logical ground, and does not hold that every slight repugnancy will make a contract even voidable. But on the other hand, when the repugnancy is between terms that are both essential, it is fatal to the very existence of the contract.

How, then, do we decide whether a given term is essential? Surely the best way to find out is to see how the parties have dealt with it. If they have said nothing, we may refer to the speech and dealings of everyday life, and say that if the term's absence would make the subject matter a different thing, its presence is essential to the existence of the agreement. But the parties may agree that anything, however trifling, shall be essential, just as they may agree that anything, however important, shall not be. And if that essential term is part of the contract's description of a specific thing which is also identified by reference to the senses, how can there be a contract in its absence, any more than if the thing were, in popular speech, different in kind from its description? The qualities that make sameness or difference of kind for the purposes of a contract are not determined by Agassiz or Darwin, or by the public at large, but by the will of the parties, which decides that for their purposes the characteristics insisted on are such and such. Now, if this is true, what better evidence can there be that a requirement is essential—that without it the subject matter will be different in kind from the description—than that one party has demanded, and the other has given, a warranty of its presence? Yet the contract's description of the specific vessel as now in the port of Amsterdam, though held to be an implied warranty, does not seem to have been regarded as making the contract repugnant and void, but only as giving the defendant the option of avoiding it. Even an express warranty of quality in a sale does not have that effect; in England, indeed, it does not allow the purchaser to rescind at all in case of breach. On this last point the law of Massachusetts is different.

One explanation offered for the English doctrine about sales is this: once the title has passed, the purchaser has already had some benefit from the contract, and so he cannot wholly restore the seller in statu quo—to the position he was in before—as must be done when a contract is rescinded. This reasoning seems doubtful even as proof that the contract is not voidable, and it has no bearing at all on the argument that it is void. For if the contract is void, the title does not pass.

It might be said that there is no repugnancy in the charterer's promise, because he promises only to load a certain ship, and the words "now in the port of Amsterdam" are mere history by the time for loading comes, and no part of the description of the vessel he promised to load. But the moment those words are held to be essential, they become part of the description. The promise is then to load a certain vessel which is named the Martaban and which was in the port of Amsterdam at the date of the contract. So interpreted, it is repugnant.

Probably the true solution is to be found in practical considerations. At any rate, the fact is that the law has established three degrees in the effect of repugnancy. If one of the repugnant terms is wholly insignificant, it is simply disregarded, or at most will ground a claim for damages. The law would be reluctant to hold a contract void for repugnancy in terms describing the present, when, if the same terms had only been promised, a failure of one of them would not justify a refusal to perform on the other side. If, on the other hand, both terms are of the utmost importance—so that enforcing the rest of the promise or bargain without one of them would not merely deprive one party of a stipulated incident but would force a substantially different bargain on him—the promise will be void. There is an intermediate class of cases in which it is left to the disappointed party to decide. But since the lines between the three are this vague, it is not surprising that different jurisdictions have drawn them differently.

The examples I have given of undertakings for a present state of facts have been confined to those touching the present condition of the subject matter of the contract. Of course there is no such limit to their use. A contract may warrant the existence of other facts as well. Examples of this kind could probably be found or imagined in which it would be clear that the only effect of the warranty was to attach a condition to the contract in favor of the other side, and in which the question would not arise whether there was something more than a condition—a repugnancy that prevented any contract from being formed at all. But the illustrations already given are enough for the present purpose.

We may now pass from undertakings that certain facts are true at the time the contract is made to undertakings that certain facts shall be true at some later time—that is, to promises properly so called. The question is when performance of the promise on one side is a condition of the obligation of the contract on the other. In practice this question tends to be treated as the same as another which, as has been shown earlier, is a distinct point: namely, when performance on one side is a condition of the right to call for performance on the other. It is of course conceivable that a promise should be limited to the case where the things promised on the other side are performed, and yet that a failure of the other side should not justify rescinding the contract. Wherever one party has already received a substantial benefit under a contract, of a kind that cannot be given back, it is too late to rescind, however serious a breach the other side may commit later. Yet he may be excused from going any further. Suppose a contract is made for a month's labor: ten dollars to be paid down, not to be recovered except if the contract is rescinded for the laborer's fault, and thirty dollars at the end of the month. If the laborer wrongfully stops work at the end of two weeks, I do not suppose that the contract could be rescinded and the ten dollars recovered as money had and received—the action for money that in fairness belongs to the plaintiff. But on the other hand, the employer would not be bound to pay the thirty dollars, and of course he could sue for damages on the contract.

For the most part, however, a breach of promise that releases the promisee from further performance on his side will also justify rescission, so that no great harm is done by the popular confusion of the two questions. Where the promise to perform on one side is limited to the case of performance on the other, the contract is generally conditioned on that performance too. In what follows I shall take up the cases I wish to notice without stopping to consider whether the contract was, in the strict sense, conditioned on performance of the promise on one side, or whether the true construction was merely that the promise on the other side was limited to that event.

Now, how do we settle whether such a condition exists? It is easy to go wrong by seeking too eagerly for simplicity, and by trying too hard to reduce all cases to artificial presumptions, which are less obvious than the decisions they are supposed to explain. The foundation of the whole matter is, after all, good sense, as the courts have often said. The law means to carry out the intention of the parties. So far as they have not provided for the event that has happened, the law has to say what they would naturally have intended if their minds had been turned to the point. It will be found that decisions based on the direct implications of the language used, and decisions based on a remoter inference of what the parties must have meant, or would have said if they had spoken, shade into each other by imperceptible degrees.

Mr. Langdell has called attention to a very important principle, and one which no doubt throws light on many decisions. It is this: in a bilateral contract, although the consideration for each promise is the counter-promise, yet on the face of it the payment for the performance of one is the performance of the other. The other party's performance is what each means to have in return for his own. If A promises B a barrel of flour, and B promises A ten dollars for it, A means to have the ten dollars for his flour, and B means to have the flour for his ten dollars. If no time is set for either act, neither can call on the other to perform without being ready to perform at the same time himself.

But this principle of equivalence is not the only one to be drawn even from the form of contracts, without considering their subject matter; and of course Mr. Langdell's work does not offer it as the only one.

Another very clear principle is found in contracts for the sale or lease of a thing, and the like. Here the qualities or characteristics that the owner promises the thing shall have go to describe the thing the buyer promises to accept. If any of the promised traits are missing in the thing offered, the buyer may refuse to accept it—not merely on the ground that he has not been offered the equivalent for keeping his promise, but also on the ground that he never promised to accept what is offered him. We have seen that where the contract contains a statement about the condition of the thing at a time earlier than the moment for accepting it, the past condition may not always be held to enter into the description of the thing to be accepted. But no such escape is possible here. Still, there are limits to the right of refusal even in this class of cases. If the thing promised is specific, the dominance of that part of the description which identifies the object by reference to the senses is sometimes strikingly shown. One case has gone so far as to hold that performance of an executory contract—one still to be carried out—to purchase a specific thing cannot be refused because the thing fails to come up to the warranted quality.

Footnote: Possibly Behn v. Burness, stated above, might have been dealt with in this way. The ship offered was not a ship that had been in the port of Amsterdam at the date of the contract. It was therefore not such a ship as the contract called for.

Another principle of dependency to be drawn from the form of the contract itself is that performance of the promise on one side may be plainly intended to furnish the means for performing the promise on the other. If a tenant promised to make repairs, and the landlord promised to supply him with wood for the purpose, it is believed that today, whatever the old decisions may have been, the tenant's duty to repair would depend on the landlord's supplying the material when it was called for.

Footnote: Mr. Langdell puts this as a case of equivalence, but I believe the explanation above is the true one. It will be noticed that this is hardly a true case of condition, but merely a limitation of the scope of the tenant's promise. So a covenant to serve as an apprentice in a trade, which the other party covenants to teach, can only be performed if the other will teach, and must therefore be limited to that event.

Another case, of a somewhat exceptional kind, is where a party to a bilateral contract agrees to do certain things and to give security for his performance. Here it is plain good sense to hold that giving the security is a condition of performance on the other side, if that is possible. For the demand for security shows that the party making it was not content to rely on the other side's bare promise. He would be forced to rely on it if he had to perform before the security was given, and so the very object of requiring it would be defeated.

This last case suggests what is very forcibly impressed on anyone who studies the cases: that, after all, the most important element of decision is not any technical principle of contracts, or even any general one, but a consideration of the nature of the particular transaction as a practical matter. Suppose A promises B to do a day's work for two dollars, and B promises A to pay two dollars for a day's work. Here the two promises cannot be performed at the same time. The work will take all day; the payment, half a minute. How are you to decide which is to be done first—that is, which promise depends on performance by the other side? Only by reference to the habits of the community and to convenience. It is not enough to say that on the principle of equivalence a man is not presumed to mean to pay for a thing until he has it. The work is payment for the money as much as the money is payment for the work, and one of them must be paid for in advance. The question is why, if one man is not presumed to mean to pay money until he has money's worth, the other is presumed to mean to give money's worth before he has money. No answer can be got from any general theory. The fact that employers as a class can be trusted for wages more safely than the employed can be trusted for their labor, or that the employers have had the power and have been the lawmakers, or other considerations—it does not matter which—have determined that the work is to be done first. But the grounds of decision are purely practical, and can never be drawn out of grammar or logic.

A reference to practical considerations will be found running all through the subject. Take another instance. The plaintiff declared on a mutual agreement between himself and the defendant that he would sell, and the defendant would buy, certain Donskoy wool, to be shipped by the plaintiff at Odessa and delivered in England. Among the terms of the contract was one that the names of the vessels should be declared as soon as the wool was shipped. The defense was that the wool had been bought, as both parties knew, to be resold in the course of the defendant's business; that it was an article of fluctuating value, and could not be sold until the names of the ships carrying it had been declared as the contract provided; and that the plaintiff did not declare the names of the vessels as agreed. The court's decision was given by one of the greatest technical lawyers who ever lived, Baron Parke. Yet he never dreamed of giving any technical or merely logical reason for it. After stating the facts deemed material to the question whether declaring the names of the vessels was a condition of the duty to accept—in the words just given—he stated the ground of decision thus: "Looking at the nature of the contract, and the great importance of it to the object with which the contract was entered into with the knowledge of both parties, we think it was a condition precedent."

Footnote: Mr. Langdell says that a bought note—the broker's written note of a purchase—though part of a bilateral contract, is to be treated as unilateral; that it may be presumed the language of the contract relied on was that of a bought note; and that it was therefore a condition in favor of the defendant, who made it. I do not quite understand how this can be assumed, when the declaration states a bilateral contract, and the question arose on demurrer to a plea which also states that the plaintiff "was by the agreement bound to declare" the names. How remote this explanation is from the actual ground of decision will be seen.
