Lecture XI: Successions—II. Inter Vivos
(Part 1 of 2)

A century after the Norman Conquest, the principal contracts known to the common law and suable in the King's Courts were suretyship and debt. The heir, as the general representative of his ancestor's rights and obligations, was liable for the ancestor's debts, and he was the proper person to sue for the debts owed to the estate. By the time of Edward III, in the fourteenth century, this had changed. Debts had ceased to concern the heir except secondarily. The executor took his place, both for collecting debts and for paying them. It is said that even when the heir was bound, he could not be sued unless the executor had no assets.

But there was another ancient obligation which had a different history. I mean the warranty which arose upon the transfer of property—the seller's duty to stand behind the title he had passed. We should call it a contract. But it probably presented itself to the minds of Glanvill's predecessors simply as a duty or obligation which the law attached to a transaction aimed at something else. In the same way, the liability of a bailee, which is now treated as arising from his undertaking, was originally raised by the law out of the position in which he stood toward third persons.

After the Conquest we do not hear much of warranty except in connection with land, and this fact at once accounts for its having had a different history from debt. The obligation of warranty was to defend the title, and, if the defence failed, to give the evicted owner other land of equal value. If an ancestor had conveyed lands with warranty, this obligation could not be fulfilled by his executor, but only by his heir, to whom his other lands had descended. Conversely, when a warranty had been made to a grantee who then died, his heir was the only person with an interest in enforcing it, because the land descended to him. So the heir continued to represent his ancestor in the rights and obligations of warranty after the executor had relieved him of the debts, just as, before that time, he had represented his ancestor in every respect.

If a man was sued for property which he had bought from another, the regular course of litigation was for the defendant to summon in his seller to take charge of the defence. The seller in turn summoned in his own seller, if he had one, and so on, until the suit reached a party in the chain of title who finally took the burden of the case upon himself. To call in a warrantor this way was to "vouch" him; he was then the "vouchee." A contrast which was stated early between the Lombard law and the Roman held equally between the Anglo-Saxon and the Roman. It was said that the Lombard presents his grantor, while the Roman stands in his grantor's shoes—Langobardus dat auctorem, Romanus stat loco auctoris.

Suppose, now, that A gave land to B, and B conveyed it on to C. If C was sued by D, who claimed a better title, C practically got the benefit of A's warranty. When C summoned B, B would summon A, and so A would defend the case in the end. But it might happen that B had died between the time he conveyed to C and the time the action was begun. If B left an heir, C might still be protected. But suppose B left no heir. Then C got no help from A, who in the other event would have defended his suit. This no doubt was the law in the Anglo-Saxon period, but it was plainly unsatisfactory. We may guess, with a good deal of confidence, that a remedy would be found as soon as there was machinery to make one possible. The machinery was furnished by the Roman law. Under that system the buyer stood in the place of his seller, and a fusion of the Roman rule with the Anglo-Saxon was all that was needed.

Bracton, who modelled his book on the writings of the medieval civilians, shows how this thought was used. He first puts the case of a conveyance with the usual clause binding the grantor and his heirs to warrant and defend the grantee and his heirs. Then he goes on: "Again one may make his gift greater and make other persons quasi heirs [of his grantee], although, in fact, they are not heirs, as when he says in the gift, to have and to hold to such a one and his heirs, or to whomsoever he shall choose to give or assign the said land, and I and my heirs will warrant to the said so and so, and his heirs, or to whomsoever he shall choose to give or assign the said land, and their heirs, against all persons. In which case if the grantee shall have given or assigned the land, and then have died without heirs, the [first] grantor and his heirs begin to hold the place of the first grantee and his heirs, and are in place of the first grantee's heir (pro herede) so far as concerns warranting to his assigns and their heirs according to the clause contained in the first grantor's charter, which would not be but for the mention of assigns in the first gift. But so long as the first grantee survives, or his heirs, they are held to warranty, and not the first grantor."

Here we see that, to entitle the assign—the person to whom the grantee later transferred the land—to the benefit of the first grantor's warranty, assigns had to be mentioned in the original grant and covenant. The scope of the ancient obligation was not extended without the warrantor's assent. But when it was extended, it was not by a contrivance like a modern letter of credit, which is an open offer to whoever comes forward under its terms. Such a conception would have been impossible at that stage of the law. By mentioning assigns, the first grantor did not offer a covenant to anyone who might afterward buy the land. If that had been the notion, a contract would have bound the first grantor directly to the assign as soon as the land was sold, and there would have been two warranties arising from the same clause—one to the first grantee, and a second to the assign. But in fact the assign recovered on the original warranty to the first grantee. He could come on the first grantor only after his immediate grantor's heirs had failed. By mentioning assigns, the first grantor simply enlarged the limits of his grantee's succession. The assign could vouch the first grantor only on the principles of succession. That is to say, he could do so only when, the first grantee's blood having failed, the first grantee's feudal relation to the first grantor—his persona—came to be carried on by the assign.

Footnote: Bracton says so in another place: what is said of heirs may equally be said of assigns, and that warranty must be made to assigns by way of the gift is proved by a case in the circuit of W. de Ralegh—"and this especially, if the first chief lord and first feoffor has taken the homage and service of the assign." Bracton also gives the reason which led to assigns being mentioned at all.

This was not only carrying out the fiction with technical consistency; it was using the fiction with good sense, as fictions generally have been used in the English law. In practice it made little difference whether the assign got the benefit of the first grantor's warranty mediately or immediately, so long as he got it. The trouble arose where he could not summon the mesne grantor—the one in the middle of the chain—and the new right was given him for that case alone. Later, the assign did not have to wait for his immediate grantor's blood to fail, but could take advantage of the first grantor's warranty from the beginning.

Footnote: I do not stop to inquire whether this was due to the statute of Quia Emptores, by which the assign was made to hold directly of the first grantor, or whether some other explanation must be found.

It might be suggested that all this goes to show that the first grantor's duty to warrant arose from the assign's becoming his man and owing him homage. The answer is that the first grantor was not bound unless he had mentioned assigns in his grant, homage or no homage. In this Bracton is confirmed by all the later authorities.

Another rule, on which there are vast stores of forgotten learning, will show how exactly the fiction fell in with the earlier law. Only those who were privy in estate with the person to whom the warranty was originally given could vouch the original warrantor—that is, only those who held the very estate which that person had held. Looking back to the early procedure, we can see that of course only those in the same chain of title could get the benefit of a former owner's warranty, even at one remove. The ground on which a man was bound to warrant was that he had conveyed the property to the person who summoned him. So a man could summon no one but his own grantor, and the successive vouchers came to an end when the last vouchee could not call on anyone from whom he had bought. Now, when the process was shortened, no one was made liable to summons who would not have been liable before. The present owner was allowed to vouch directly those who otherwise would have been bound indirectly to defend his title, but no others. So he could summon only those from whom his grantor derived his title. But this was expressed equally well in terms of the fiction. To vouch, the present owner must have the estate of the person to whom the warranty was made. As every lawyer knows, the estate does not mean the land. It means the status, or persona, in regard to that land which another formerly sustained. The same word was used in alleging a right by prescription—"that he and those whose estate he hath have for time whereof memory runneth not to the contrary," etc.—and it will be remembered that there the word answers to the same requirement of succession.

To return to Bracton: it must be understood that his description of assigns as quasi heredes, "quasi heirs," is not accidental. He describes them that way whenever he has occasion to speak of them. He even pushes the reasoning from the analogy of inheritance to extremes, and refers to it in countless passages. For instance: "It should be noted that of heirs some are true heirs and some quasi heirs, in place of heirs, etc.; true heirs by way of succession quasi heirs, etc. by the form of the gift; such as assigns," etc.

If it should be suggested that Bracton's language is only a piece of medieval scholasticism, there are several answers. In the first place, it is nearly contemporary with the first appearance of the right in question. This is shown by his citing authority for it, as for something which might be disputed. He says, "And that warranty must be made to assigns according to the form of the gift is proved [by a case] in the circuit of W. de Ralegh, about the end of the roll," etc. It is not justifiable to assume that a contemporary explanation of a new rule had nothing to do with its appearance. Again, it is clear, as has been shown, that the assign got the benefit of the warranty to the first grantee, not of a new one to himself. And Bracton's explanation of how this was worked out falls in with what we have seen of the course of the German and Anglo-Saxon law, and with the pervading thought of the Roman law. Finally, and most important, the requirement that the assign should be in of the first grantee's estate—should hold that same estate—has remained a requirement from that day to this. The fact that the same thing is required, in the same words, as in prescription goes far to show that the same technical thought has governed both.

I have said that Glanvill's predecessors probably regarded warranty as an obligation incident to a conveyance rather than as a contract. But when it became usual to insert the undertaking to warrant in a deed, or charter of feoffment, it lost something of its former isolation as a duty standing by itself, and it could be generalized. It was a promise by deed, and a promise by deed was a covenant. No doubt it was a covenant with peculiar consequences attached to it. It also differed from some other covenants in the scope of its obligation, as will be shown later. But still it was a covenant, and it could sometimes be sued on as such. The Year Books of Edward III speak of it as a covenant which "falls in the blood," as distinguished from those where the acquittance fell on the land and not on the person.

The importance of this circumstance lies in the way the law of warranty worked upon the other covenants which took its place. When the old actions for land gave way to more modern and speedier forms, warrantors were no longer vouched in to defend, and if a grantee was evicted, damages took the place of a grant of other land. The ancient warranty disappeared. It was replaced by the covenants which we still find in our deeds—the covenants for title: for seisin, for right to convey, against incumbrances, for quiet enjoyment, of warranty, and for further assurance. But the principles on which an assign could have the benefit of these covenants were derived from those which governed warranty, as anyone may see by looking at the earlier decisions.

For instance, the question of what was a sufficient assignment to give an assign the benefit of a covenant for quiet enjoyment was argued and decided on the authority of the old cases of warranty.

The assign, as in warranty, came in under the old covenant with the first covenantee, not by any new right of his own. Thus, in an action by an assign on a covenant for further assurance, the defendant set up a release given by the original covenantee after the suit had begun. The court held that the assignee should have the benefit of the covenant. "They held, that although the breach was in the time of the assignee, yet if the release had been by the covenantee (who is a party to the deed, and from whom the plaintiff derives) before any breach, or before the suit commenced, it had been a good bar to the assignee from bringing this writ of covenant. But the breach of the covenant being in the time of the assignee,... and the action brought by him, and so attached in his person, the covenantee cannot release this action wherein the assignee is interested." The covenantee, even after assignment, remains the legal party to the contract. The assign comes in under him, and does not end his control over it until, by breach and action, a new right attaches in the assign's person, distinct from the rights derived from the persona of his grantor. Later, as the original foundation of his rights sank gradually out of sight, the assign got a more independent standing, and a release after assignment became ineffectual, at least in the case of a covenant to pay rent.

Footnote: These cases show an order of development parallel to the history of the assignment of other contracts which are not negotiable.

Only privies in estate with the original covenantee can have the benefit of covenants for title. It has been shown that the earlier history of the ancient warranty required a similar limit on its benefits before the assign was allowed to sue, and that the fiction by which he got that right could not carry it beyond that limit. This analogy also was followed. For instance, a tenant in tail male—one whose estate could pass only to his male descendants—made a lease for years with covenants of right to let and for quiet enjoyment, and then died without male issue. The lessee assigned the lease to the plaintiff. The plaintiff was soon turned out, and brought an action on the covenant against the lessor's executor. It was held that he could not recover, because he was not privy in estate with the original covenantee. The lease, which was the original covenantee's estate, had come to an end before it was assigned to the plaintiff: it ended with the lessor's death and the termination of the estate tail out of which it had been granted.

The only point still needed to make the analogy between covenants for title and warranty complete was a requirement that assigns be mentioned before they could sue. In modern times, of course, such a requirement, if it existed, would be purely formal. It would matter only as an ear-mark by which to trace the history of a doctrine. It would help our studies if we could say that wherever assigns are to get the benefit of a covenant as privies in estate with the covenantee, they must be mentioned in the covenant. Whether such a requirement exists or not would be hard to tell from the decisions alone. It is commonly supposed not to. But the popular opinion on this trifling point springs from a failure to understand one of the great antinomies of the law—one of its built-in contradictions—which must now be explained.

So far as we have gone, we have found that wherever one party steps into the rights or obligations of another without in turn filling the situation of fact of which those rights or obligations are the legal consequences, the substitution is explained by a fictitious identification of the two individuals, derived from the analogy of inheritance. We have seen this identification consciously worked out in the creation of the executor, whose entire status is governed by it. We have seen it still consciously applied in the narrower sphere of the heir. And we have found it hidden at the root of the relation between buyer and seller in at least two cases, prescription and warranty, when the history of that relation is dug into deeply enough.

But although it would be more symmetrical if this analysis exhausted the subject, there is another class of cases in which rights are transferred on a wholly different plan. In the last Lecture, explaining the succession between buyer and seller by which a prescriptive right is created—such as a right of way over neighboring land to the land bought and sold—I showed that a man who had wrongfully taken possession of the land by force, instead of buying it, would not be treated as a successor, and would get no benefit from his disseisee's earlier use of the way. But when the former possessor has already gained a right of way before he is turned out, a new principle comes into play. Suppose the owner of the land over which the way ran stopped it up, and was sued by the wrongful possessor. A defence that the disseisor had not succeeded to the former owner's rights would not prevail. The disseisor would be protected in his possession of the land against everyone but the rightful owner, and he would be protected equally in his use of the way. This rule of law does not rest on a succession between the wrongful possessor and the owner, which is out of the question. Nor can it be defended on the same ground as the protection given to the occupation of the land itself. That ground is that the law defends possession against everything except a better title. But, as I have said before, the common law does not recognize possession of a way. A man who has used a way for ten years without title cannot sue even a stranger for stopping it. He was a trespasser at the beginning, and he is nothing but a trespasser still. There must be a right against the servient owner—the owner of the land the way runs over—before there is a right against anybody else. At the same time, it is clear that a way is no more capable of possession because somebody else has a right to it than if no one had.

How comes it, then, that one who has neither title nor possession is so far favored? The answer is to be found, not in reasoning, but in a failure to reason. In the first Lecture of this course, the thought we now have to deal with was shown in its theological stage, to borrow Comte's well-known phrase, as where an axe was made the object of criminal process; and also in its metaphysical stage, where only the language of personification survived, but survived to confuse reasoning. The case I have put seems to illustrate the latter. The language of the law of easements was built up out of similes drawn from persons at a time when noxal surrender was still familiar. Then, as often happens, language reacted upon thought, and conclusions about the rights themselves were drawn from the terms in which they happened to be expressed. When one estate was said to be enslaved to another, or a right of way was said to be a quality or incident of a neighboring piece of land, men's minds were not alert to see that these phrases were only so many personifying metaphors, which explained nothing unless the figure of speech was true.

The French commentator Rogron deduced the negative nature of servitudes—the Roman name for easements—from the rule that the land owes the services, not the person: Praedium non persona servit. For, said Rogron, since the land alone is bound, it can be bound only passively. Austin called this an "absurd remark." But the jurists from whom we have inherited our law of easements were content with no better reasoning. Papinian himself wrote that servitudes cannot be partially extinguished, because they are owed by lands, not by persons. Celsus decides in this way the very case I took for my illustration: even if possession of a dominant estate is acquired by forcibly throwing out the owner, the way will be retained, since the estate is possessed in the quality and condition in which it is taken. The commentator Godefroi tersely adds that there are two such conditions, slavery and freedom; and his antithesis is as old as Cicero. So, in another passage, Celsus asks what else the rights attaching to land are but qualities of that land. So Justinian's Institutes speak of servitudes which inhere in buildings. So Paulus speaks of such rights as being accessory to bodies. "And thus," adds Godefroi, "rights may belong to inanimate things." It followed easily from all this that a sale of the dominant estate carried existing easements with it—not because the buyer succeeded to the seller's place, but because land is bound to land.

All these figures imply that land is capable of having rights, as Austin recognizes. Indeed, he even says that the land "is erected into a legal or fictitious person, and is styled 'praedium dominans.'" But if this means anything more than an explanation of what the Roman metaphors imply, it goes too far. The dominant estate was never "erected into a legal person," either by conscious fiction or as a result of primitive beliefs. It could not sue or be sued, as a ship can in the admiralty. No one supposes that its possessor could maintain an action for an interference with an easement that happened before his time, as an heir could for an injury to property of the hereditas jacens—the estate lying vacant between the death and the heir's entry. If land had ever been systematically treated as capable of acquiring rights, the time of a disseisee might have been added to that of the wrongful occupant. The ground would have been that the land, and not this or that individual, was gaining the easement, and that a long association between the enjoyment of the privilege and the land was enough. That has never been the law.

All that can be said is that the metaphors and similes naturally led to the rule which has prevailed. And since this rule was as good as any other, or at least was unobjectionable, it was drawn from the figures of speech without attracting attention, before anyone had seen that they were only figures, which proved nothing and justified no conclusion.

Because easements were said to belong to the dominant estate, it followed that whoever possessed the land had a right of the same degree over what was incidental to it. If the true meaning had been that a way or other easement admits of possession, is taken possession of along with the land to which it runs, and is protected in its enjoyment on the same grounds as possession in other cases, the thought could have been understood. But that was not the meaning of the Roman law, and, as has been shown, it is not the doctrine of ours. We must take it that easements have become an incident of land through an unconscious and unreasoned assumption that a piece of land can have rights. It need not be said that this is absurd, although the rules of law which are based upon it are not so.

Absurd or not, the similes as well as the principles of the Roman law reappear in Bracton. He says, "The servitude by which land is subjected to [other] land, is made on the likeness of that by which man is made the slave of man." "For rights belong to a free tenement, as well as tangible things.... They may be called rights or liberties with regard to the tenements to which they are owed, but servitudes with regard to the tenements by which they are owed.... One estate is free, the other subjected to slavery." "[A servitude] may be called an arrangement by which house is subjected to house, farm to farm, holding to holding." No passage has met my eye in which Bracton expressly decides that an easement goes with the dominant estate upon a disseisin. But what he says leaves little doubt that he followed the Roman law in this as in other things.

The writ against a disseisor was for "so much land and its appurtenances"—its attached rights—which must mean that he who had the land, even wrongfully, had the appurtenances. So Bracton says an action is in rem "whether it is for the principal thing, or for a right which adheres to the thing,... as when one sues for a right of way, ... since rights of this sort are all incorporeal things, and are quasi possessed and reside in bodies, and cannot be got or kept without the bodies in which they inhere, nor in any way had without the bodies to which they belong." And again: "Since rights do not admit of delivery, but are transferred with the thing in which they are, that is, the bodily thing, he to whom they are transferred forthwith has a quasi possession of those rights as soon as he has the body in which they are."

Footnote: All these passages assume that a right has already been acquired and inheres in the land.

There is no doubt about the later law, as was said at the outset.

We have thus traced into our law two competing and mutually inconsistent principles. On the one hand is the conception of succession, or privity; on the other, that of rights inhering in a thing. Bracton seems to have wavered a little, from a sense that the two might come into conflict. The benefit of a warranty was confined to those who, by the act and consent of the grantee, succeeded to his place. It did not pass to assigns unless assigns were mentioned. Bracton supposes grants of easements both with and without mention of assigns, which looks as if he thought the difference might matter with regard to easements also. He further says that if an easement is granted to A, his heirs and assigns, all of these are allowed the use in succession by the form of the grant, and all others are wholly excluded. But he is not speaking of what a disseisor's rights would be as against someone without a better title, and he immediately adds that these are rights over a bodily object belonging to a bodily object.

It may be doubted whether the mention of assigns was ever necessary to attach an easement to land, and it is very certain that it did not stay necessary for long. Even so, the difficulty I have referred to grew greater as time went on. It would have been easily disposed of if the only rights which could be annexed to land were easements, such as a right of way. It might then have been said that these were limited interests in land, less than ownership in extent but like it in kind, and therefore properly transferred by the same means as ownership. A right of way, it might have been argued, is not to be approached from the point of view of contract. It does not presuppose any promise on the part of the servient owner. His obligation, though more troublesome to him than to others, is the same as everyone else's. It is the purely negative duty not to obstruct or interfere with a right of property.

But although the test of which rights go with the land may have been something of that kind, it will not help us understand the cases without a good deal of explanation. For such rights might exist to active services, which had to be performed by whoever held the servient estate. It strikes our ear strangely to hear a right to services from an individual called a right of property, as distinguished from contract. Still, this will be found to have been the way such rights were regarded. Bracton argues that it is no wrong to the lord for the tenant to alienate—to transfer—land held by free and perfect gift, on the ground that the land is bound and charged with the services into whose hands soever it may come. The lord is said to have a fee in the homage and services; and therefore no entry upon the land which does not disturb them injures him. It is the tenement which imposes the obligation of homage, and the same is true of villein and other feudal services.

The law remained unchanged when feudal services took the form of rent. Even in our modern leases for a term of years, rent is still treated as something issuing out of the leased premises. So to this day, if you hire a whole house and it burns down, you have to pay without abatement, because you still have the land out of which the rent issues. But if you hire only a suite of rooms and they are burned, you pay rent no longer, because you no longer have the tenement out of which it comes.

It is obvious that this reasoning leads to the conclusion that a disseisor of the tenant would be bound as much as the tenant himself, and the early law adopted that conclusion. The lord could demand the services, or collect the rent, from anyone who had the land, because, as was said in language very like Bracton's, "the charge of the rent goes with the land."

Then as to the right to the rent. In early law rent was treated as a real right—a right in a thing—of which a man could be disseised, and for which a possessory action could be brought. If, as was very often the case, the leased land lay within a manor, the rent was parcel of the manor—a part of it. So there was some ground for saying that one who was seised of the manor—that is, who possessed the lands occupied by the lord of the manor and was recognized by the tenants as lord—had the rents as incident to it. Thus Brian, Chief Justice of England under Henry VII, says, "If I am disseised of a manor, and the tenants pay their rent to the disseisor, and then I re-enter, I shall not have the back rent of my tenants which they have paid to my disseisor, but the disseisor shall pay for all in trespass or assize." This opinion was evidently founded on the notion that the rent was attached to the chief land like an easement. Sic fit ut debeantur rei a re: so it comes about that things are owed to a thing by a thing.

Different principles might have applied when the rent was not parcel of a manor, but only part of the reversion. If the lease and the rent were merely internal divisions of that estate, the rent could not be claimed except by one who was privy to that estate. A disseisor would get a new and different fee, and would not have the estate of which the rent was part. So it would seem that in such a case the tenant could refuse to pay him rent, and that paying him would be no defence against the true owner. Nevertheless, if the tenant recognized the disseisor, the disseisor would be protected against those who could not show a better title. Furthermore, the rent was so far annexed to the land that whoever came by the reversion lawfully could collect it, including the superior lord in case of escheat. Yet escheat meant the extinction of the fee of which the lease and rent were parts. Bracton regarded the lord as coming in under the tenant's title, pro herede—in the heir's place, in privity—but it was soon correctly settled that he did not; he came in paramount, by a title above the tenant's. This instance, therefore, comes very near that of a disseisor.
