Lecture XI: Successions—II. Inter Vivos
(Part 2 of 2)

Services and rent, then, were, and to some extent still are, dealt with by the law from the point of view of property. They were things that could be owned and transferred like other property. They could be possessed even by a wrongdoer, and possessory remedies were given for them.

No such notion was applied to warranties, or to any right that was regarded wholly from the point of view of contract. And when we turn to the history of those remedies for rent that sounded in contract, we find that the law regarded them in just that way. The actions of debt and covenant could not be maintained without privity. In the ninth year of Henry VI (1430–31) it was doubted whether an heir who had inherited the reversion could bring debt for the rent. And it was held that a grantee of the reversion, although he had the rent, could not have that remedy for it. A few years later it was decided that the heir could maintain debt. In the reign of Henry VII the remedy was extended to the devisee, the person who took the reversion under a will. He, as I remarked above, seemed more akin to the heir than a grantee did, and was more easily likened to him. It was then logically necessary to give assigns the same action, and this followed. The privity of contract followed the estate, so that the assignee of the reversion could sue whoever then held the term of the lease. On like grounds he was afterwards allowed to maintain covenant. But these actions have never been allowed for or against persons who were not privy in estate with the lessor and the lessee respectively, because privity to the contract could never be worked out without succession to the title.

However, all these niceties had no application to the old freehold rents of the feudal period, because the contractual remedies did not reach them until the time of Queen Anne. The freehold rent was just as much real estate as an acre of land, and it was sued for by the similar remedy of an assize, which asked that the plaintiff be put back into possession.

The allowance of contractual remedies shows something about rent and feudal services of that kind. They were dealt with as things capable of possession, and looked at generally from the point of view of property rather than contract; yet they come much nearer to the nature of a contract than a mere duty not to interfere with a right of way does. Other cases come nearer still. In early law, prescription and custom impose active duties over a wide field. Sometimes the duty is attached to the ownership of certain land; sometimes the right is; and sometimes both are, as in the case of an easement. When the service was for the benefit of other land, the fact that the burden, in popular language, fell upon one parcel was of itself a reason for the benefit attaching to the other.

Here are instances of different kinds. A parson might be bound by custom to keep a bull and a boar for the use of his parish. A right could be attached to a manor by prescription to have a convent sing in the manor chapel. A right might be gained by the same means to have certain land fenced by the owner of the neighboring lot. Now, it may readily be conceded that even rights like the last two, when attached to land, were looked at as property, and were spoken of as things that could be granted. It may be conceded that in many cases where the statement sounds strange to modern ears, the obligation was regarded as falling on the land alone, and not on the person of the tenant. And it may be conjectured that this view arose naturally and reasonably because there was originally no remedy to compel performance of such services except a distress—a seizure of goods—levied on the servient land.

Footnote: I assume that when an obligation is spoken of as falling upon the land, it is understood to be only a figure of speech. Of course rights and obligations belong only to human beings.

But any such distinction between obligations for which the primitive remedy was distress alone, and all others, if it ever existed, must soon have faded from view. After the last examples, the line between rights that can be deemed rights of property and rights that are mere contracts is hard to see. A covenant to repair is commonly supposed to be a pure matter of contract. What is the difference between a duty to repair and a duty to fence? The difficulty remains almost as great as ever of finding the dividing line between the two competing principles of transfer—succession on the one side, and possession of the dominant land on the other.

If a right in the nature of an easement could be attached to land by prescription, it could equally be attached by grant. If it went with the land in the one case, even into the hands of a disseisor, it must have gone with it in the other. No satisfactory distinction could be based on the way the right was acquired, and none was attempted. As the right was not confined to assigns, there was no need to mention assigns. In modern times at least, if not in early law, such rights can be created by covenant as well as by grant. And on the other hand, it is ancient law that an action of covenant may be maintained upon an instrument of grant. The result of all this was that, in such cases, not only a right created by covenant but the action of covenant itself might go to assigns even though they were not mentioned—and this at a time when mentioning them was essential to give them the benefit of a warranty.

Footnote: The action is case in the Prior of Woburn's Case. The old Natura Brevium of Fitzherbert says, in a note, that the writ for fencing a close lay only upon a prescriptive right, and that if the duty to fence rested on an indenture the plaintiff was put to his writ of covenant. But see what is said below.

Logically, these premises led one step farther. Not only assigns who were not named, but disseisors, should have been allowed to maintain their action on the contract, since they had the right arising out of it. Indeed, if the plaintiff had a right which, if obtained by grant, would have entitled him to covenant, it was open to argument that he should be allowed the same action when he had the right by prescription—although, as we have seen in the case of rent, it did not follow in practice that because a man had a right he had the contractual remedies for it. Covenant required a specialty, but prescription was said to be a good enough specialty. Where, then, was the line to be drawn between covenants that passed only to successors and those that went with the land?

The difficulty becomes more striking the further we examine the early law. For side by side with the personal warranty discussed so far, there was another warranty, not yet mentioned, by which particular land alone was bound. The personal warranty bound only the warrantor and his heirs. As was said in a case of the time of Edward I, "no one can bind assigns to warranty, since warranty always extends to heirs who claim by succession and not by assignment." But when particular land was bound, the warranty went with it, even into the hands of the King, because, as Bracton says, the thing goes with its burden to every one. Fleta writes that every possessor will be held. There cannot be a doubt that a disseisor would have been bound just as much as one whose possession was lawful.

Footnote: The printed text of Bracton reads that the thing goes "with the man" (cum homine); that is obviously a misprint for "with its burden" (cum onere).

We are now ready for a case decided under Edward III. It has been discussed from the time of Fitzherbert and Coke down to Lord St. Leonards and Mr. Rawle; it is still law; and it is said to remain unexplained to this day. It shows the judges hesitating between the two conceptions to which this Lecture has been devoted. If those conceptions are understood, I think the explanation will be clear.

Pakenham brought covenant, as heir of the covenantee, against a prior. The covenant had been made by the defendant's predecessor with the plaintiff's great-grandfather, and it promised that the prior and convent would sing every week in a chapel in his manor, for him and his servants. The defendant first pleaded that the plaintiff and his servants were not living within the manor. But, not daring to rest his case on that, he pleaded that the plaintiff was not the heir—his elder brother was. The plaintiff replied that he was tenant of the manor: his great-grandfather had enfeoffed a stranger, who had enfeoffed the plaintiff and his wife, so that the plaintiff was tenant of the manor by purchase and privy to the ancestor. He added that the services had been rendered from a time whereof the memory of man ran not to the contrary.

It is evident from these pleadings that assigns were not mentioned in the covenant, and so it has always been taken. It also appears that the plaintiff was trying to stand on two grounds. The first was privity, as descendant and assign of the covenantee. The second was that the service was attached to the manor, by covenant or by prescription, so that he could maintain covenant as tenant of the manor, whichever source the duty arose from.

Justice Finchden put the case of parceners—co-heirs dividing an inheritance—making partition, and one of them covenanting with the other to acquit him of suit, that is, to discharge him of the duty of attending a lord's court. A purchaser has the benefit of that covenant. Belknap, for the defendants, agreed, but distinguished it. In that case, he said, the acquittance falls on the land and not on the person. (That is to say, such obligations follow the analogy of easements. As the burden falls on what is in effect a servient estate, the benefit goes with the dominant land to assigns, whether they are mentioned or not, and these obligations are not considered from the point of view of contract at all. Warranty, on the other hand, is a contract pure and simple, and lies in the blood—it falls on the person, not on the land.)

Finchden answered: all the more so in this case. For there the action was maintained because the plaintiff was tenant of the land from which the suit was due, and here he is tenant of the manor where the chapel is.

Justice Wichingham: "If the king grants warren"—the right to keep and hunt game—"to another who is tenant of the manor, he shall have warren, etc.; but the warren will not pass by the grant [of the manor], because the warren is not appendant to the manor. No more does it seem the services are here appendant to the manor." (Appendant means attached to it as a part.)

Chief Justice Thorpe, to Belknap: "There are some covenants on which no one shall have an action, but the party to the covenant, or his heir, and some covenants have inheritance in the land, so that whoever has the land by alienation, or in other manner, shall have action of covenant; [or, as it is stated in Fitzherbert's Abridgment, the inhabitants of the land as well as every one who has the land, shall have the covenant;] and when you say he is not heir, he is privy of blood, and may be heir: and also he is tenant of the land, and it is a thing which is annexed to the chapel, which is in the manor, and so annexed to the manor, and so he has said that the services have been rendered for all time whereof there is memory, whence it is right this action should be maintained." Belknap denied that the plaintiff had counted on any such prescription. But Thorpe said he had, and "we bear record of it," and the case was adjourned.

Footnote: Both editions of the Year Books have a colon here, marking the beginning of a new argument.

It will be seen that the discussion followed the lines marked out by the pleadings. One judge thought the plaintiff was entitled to recover as tenant of the manor. The other puisne—junior—judge doubted it, but agreed that the case must be argued on the analogy of easements. The Chief Justice first suggested that there might be sufficient privity, since the plaintiff was privy in blood and might be heir; then he turned to the other argument as more promising, and evidently founded his opinion on it. It would almost seem that he considered a prescriptive right enough to support the action, and it is pretty clear that he thought a disseisor would have had the same rights as the plaintiff.

In the reign of Henry IV another case arose, on a covenant very like the last. But this time the facts were reversed. The plaintiff counted as heir, but did not allege that he was tenant of the manor. The defendant, not denying the plaintiff's descent, pleaded in substance that he was not tenant of the manor in his own right. The question raised by the pleadings, therefore, was whether the heir of the covenantee could sue without being tenant of the manor. If the covenant was approached from the side of contract, the heir was a party to it, as representing the covenantee. If, on the other hand, it was treated as amounting to the grant of a service like an easement, it would naturally go with the manor, if it had been made to the lord of the manor. It seems to have been thought that such a covenant might go either way, according to whether it was made to the tenant of the manor or to a stranger. Markham, one of the judges, says: "In a writ of covenant one must be privy to the covenant if he would have a writ of covenant or aid by the covenant. But, peradventure, if the covenant had been made with the lord of the manor, who had inheritance in the manor, ou issint come determination poit estre fait"—or in some such way that a determination could be made—"it would be otherwise." This was admitted. It was assumed that the covenant had not been made so as to attach to the manor; and the court, observing that the service was spiritual rather than temporal, were inclined to think the heir could sue. The defendant accordingly pleaded over and set up a release. It will be seen how fully this agrees with the earlier case.

Footnote: It was quite possible for two liabilities to exist side by side.

The distinction Markham drew is stated very clearly in a case reported by Lord Coke. In the argument of Chudleigh's Case the line is drawn this way: "Always, the warranty as to voucher requires privity of estate to which it was annexed," (that is, succession to the original covenantee,) "and the same law of a use.... But of things annexed to land, it is otherwise, as of commons, advowsons, and the like appendants or appurtenances.... So a disseisor, abator, intruder, or the lord by escheat, etc., shall have them as things annexed to the land. So note a diversity between a use or warranty, and the like things annexed to the estate of the land in privity, and commons, advowsons, and other hereditaments annexed to the possession of the land." (Commons are rights to pasture or take things from another's land; an advowson is the right to name the parson of a church; an abator or intruder is one who wrongfully steps into land before the rightful heir can.) And this, it seems to me, is the nearest approach that has ever been made to the truth.

In his Commentary on Littleton, Coke draws a distinction between a warranty, which binds the party to yield lands in recompense, and a covenant annexed to the land, which yields only damages. If Lord Coke had meant to distinguish between warranties and all the covenants that in our loose modern sense are said to run with the land, this statement would be less satisfactory than the one just quoted.

A warranty was a covenant that sometimes yielded only damages, and a covenant in the old law sometimes yielded land. Looking at the early cases, we are reminded of the still earlier German procedure, in which it did not matter whether the plaintiff's claim rested on a right of property in a thing or simply on a contract for it. Covenant was brought for a freehold under Edward I; and under Edward III it seems that a mill could be pulled down by the same action, when it was kept up contrary to an easement created by covenant. But Lord Coke did not mean to lay down any sweeping doctrine, for his conclusion is that "a covenant is in many cases extended further than the warrantie." Furthermore, the statement, as Lord Coke meant it, is perfectly consistent with the other and more important distinction—between warranties, on the one hand, and rights in the nature of easements, or covenants creating such rights, on the other. For Lord Coke's examples are confined to covenants of the second sort; they are in fact just the cases from the Year Books stated above.

Later writers, however, have wholly forgotten the distinction, and so it has failed to settle the disputed line between the conflicting principles. Covenants that started from the analogy of warranties, and others to which the language and reasoning of easements were applied, have been lumped together under the title of covenants running with the land. The phrase "running with the land" is appropriate only to covenants that pass like easements. But we can easily see how it came to be used more loosely.

It has already been shown that covenants for title, like warranties, went only to successors of the original covenantee. The technical expression for the rule was that they were annexed to the estate in privity. Nothing was easier than to overlook the technical use of the word "estate," and to say that such covenants went with the land. This was done, and at once every distinction became doubtful. It had probably been necessary to mention assigns in covenants for title, as it certainly had been to give them the benefit of the ancient warranty; for this seems to have been the formal mark of the covenants that passed only to privies. But it was not necessary to mention assigns in order to attach easements and the like to land. Why should it be necessary for one covenant running with the land more than for another? And if it was necessary for one, why not for all? In modern times the need for such mention has been supposed to be governed by a fanciful rule of Lord Coke's. On the other hand, the question is raised whether covenants that ought to pass irrespective of privity are not governed by the same rule that governs warranties.

These questions have not lost their importance. Covenants for title are in every deed, and other covenants, which, as it remains to show, belong to the other class, are only a little less common.

Chief among these is the covenant to repair. It has already been observed that an easement of fencing may be annexed to land, and I asked then what difference in kind there was between a right to have another person build such structures and a right to have him repair structures already built. There is evidence that the likeness was perceived. Only, since such covenants are rarely if ever made except in leases, there is always privity with the original parties. For the lease could not go by disseisin, and the reversion would not be likely to.

The Dean of Windsor's Case decides that such a covenant binds an assignee of the term, although he is not named. It is reported in two books of the highest authority: one reporter was Lord Coke, the other Croke, who was also a judge. Croke gives the reason this way: "For a covenant which runs and rests with the land lies for or against the assignee at the common law, quia transit terra cum onere, although the assignees be not named in the covenant." The Latin means "because the land passes with its burden." This is the reason that governed easements, and the very phrase used to explain why every possessor was bound by a covenant that bound a parcel of land to warranty. Coke says, "For such covenant which extends to the support of the thing demised is quodammodo appurtenant to it, and goes with it"—in a manner appurtenant to it. Again the language of easements. And to make this plainer, if need be, he adds, "If a man grants to one estovers to repair his house, it is appurtenant to his house." Estovers—wood a tenant may take for repairs—went with the land for repair, like other rights of common, which, as Lord Coke has told us, passed even to disseisors.

In the next reign the converse proposition was decided: that an assignee of the reversion was entitled in the same way to the benefit of the covenant, because "it is a covenant which runs with the land." The same law was applied, with still clearer reason, to a covenant to leave fifteen acres unploughed for pasture, which was held to bind an assignee not named; and, it would seem, to a covenant to keep land properly manured.

If the analogy that led to this class of decisions were followed out, a disseisor could sue or be sued on such covenants, if the other facts were of a kind to raise the question. Nothing but the novelty of the proposition need prevent its being accepted. It has been mentioned above that words of covenant may annex an easement to land, and that words of grant may imply a covenant. It would be rather narrow to give a disseisor one remedy and deny him another, where the right was one and the same words made both the grant and the covenant.

The language commonly used, however, throws doubt and darkness over this and every other question connected with the subject. That is a consequence, already referred to, of lumping together covenants for title and the class last discussed under the name of covenants running with the land. According to the general opinion, in the latter class of cases there must be privity of estate between covenantor and covenantee in order to bind the covenantor's assigns. Some have supposed this privity to be tenure; some, an interest of the covenantee in the covenantor's land; and so on. The first notion is false, the second misleading, and the proposition they are applied to is unfounded. Privity of estate, as used in connection with covenants at common law, does not mean tenure or easement; it means succession to a title. It is never necessary between covenantor and covenantee, or between any other persons, except between the present owner and the original covenantee. And on principle it is necessary between them only in those cases—such as warranties, and probably covenants for title—where the covenants are regarded wholly from the side of contract, and so the benefit goes by way of succession and not with the land.

Footnote: The phrase is used in a somewhat different sense in describing the relation between a tenant for life or years and a reversioner. The privity between them follows as an accidental consequence of their being as one tenant, and sustaining a single persona between them.

If it should now be asked again, at the end of this long discussion, where the line is to be drawn between these two classes of covenants, the answer is necessarily vague, given the state of the authorities. The following propositions may be of some use.

A. With regard to covenants that go with the land:

(1.) Where, either by tradition or by good sense, the burden of the obligation would be said, in a kind of shorthand, to fall on the land of the covenantor, the creation of such a burden is in theory a grant, a transfer of a partial interest in that land to the covenantee. Since the right of property so created can be asserted against every possessor of the land, it would not be extravagant or absurd to allow it to be asserted by the action of covenant.

(2.) Where such a right is granted to the owner of a neighboring piece of land for the benefit of that land, the right will be attached to the land and go with it into all hands. The action of covenant would be allowed to assigns not named, and it would not be absurd to give it to disseisors.

(3.) There is one case of a service whose burden does not fall upon land even in theory, but whose benefit might go at common law with the land it benefited. This is the case of singing and the like by a convent. It will be observed that the service, although it does not fall on land, is to be performed by a corporation permanently seated in the neighborhood. Similar cases are not likely to arise now.

B. With regard to covenants that go only with the estate in the land:

In general, the benefit of covenants that cannot be likened to grants, and whose burden does not fall on land, is confined to the covenantee and those who sustain his persona—namely, his executor or heir. In certain cases, of which the original and type was the ancient warranty, and of which the modern covenants for title are present examples, the circle of succession was enlarged by the mention of assigns, and assigns are still allowed to represent the original covenantee for the purposes of that contract. But it is only by way of succession that anyone other than the party to the contract can sue on it. Hence the plaintiff must always be privy in estate with the covenantee.

C. It is impossible, however, to tell by general reasoning what rights English law will hold to belong to the first class, or where the line will be drawn between the two. The authorities must be consulted as an arbitrary fact. It might sometimes seem that the test of the first class was whether the service was of a kind capable of being granted, so that if it rested purely in covenant it would not follow the land. But if this test were accepted, it has already been shown that, apart from tradition, some services that do follow the land could only be matter of covenant. Baron Parke calls the grant of light and air, a well-established easement, a covenant not to build on the servient land to the injury of the light. And although that might be doubted, we have seen that at least one well-established easement, that of fencing, can no more properly be considered a right granted out of the servient land than a hundred other services that would be merely matter of contract, if the law allowed them to be annexed to land in the same way. The duty to repair exists only by way of covenant, yet the reasoning of the leading cases is drawn from the law of easements. On the other hand, a covenant by a lessee to build a wall on the leased premises was held, in Spencer's Case, not to bind assigns unless they were mentioned; but Lord Coke says it would have bound them if it had purported to. The analogy of warranty makes its appearance, and throws doubt on the fundamental principle of the case. We can only say that the application of the law is limited by custom, and by the rule that new and unusual burdens cannot be imposed on land.

The general object of this Lecture is to discover the theory on which a man is allowed to enjoy a special right when the facts out of which the right arises are not true of him. The transfer of easements presented itself as one case to be explained. That case has now been analyzed, and its influence on the law has been traced. But the principle of such transfers is plainly anomalous, and does not affect the general doctrine of the law. The general doctrine is the one we have seen illustrated in prescription, in warranty, and in the covenants that followed the analogy of warranty. Another illustration, not yet mentioned, is to be found in the law of uses.

In old times a use—the right of a person for whose benefit land was held by another, the feoffee to uses—was a chose in action, a right enforceable only by suit. That is, it was regarded very nearly from the point of view of contract, and it had a history like the one traced in the other cases. At first it was doubted whether proof of such a secret trust ought to be allowed at all, even against the heir. It was allowed in the end, and then the principle of succession was extended to the assign. But it never went further. Only those who were privy in estate with the original feoffee to uses were bound by the use. A disseisor was no more bound by the confidence placed in the man he had disseised than he was entitled to vouch that man's warrantor. In the time of Henry VIII it was said that "where a use shall be, it is requisite that there be two things, sc. confidence, and privity:... as I say, if there be not privity or confidence, then there can be no use: and hence if the feoffees make a feoffment to one who has notice of the use, now the law will adjudge him seised to the first use, since there is sufficient privity between the first feoffor and him, for if he [i.e. the first feoffor] had warranted he [the last feoffee] should vouch as assign, which proves privity; and he is in in the per by the feoffees; but where one comes into the land in the post, as the lord by escheat or the disseisor, then the use is altered and changed, because privity is wanting." To be "in the per" was to hold through the feoffees, by title derived from them; to be "in the post" was to come in by a title of one's own, paramount to theirs.

To this day it is said that a trust is annexed in privity to the person and to the estate (which means, to the persona). It is not regarded as issuing out of the land, like a rent. So while a rent binds everyone who has the land, however he came by it, a disseisor is not bound by the trust. The case of the lord who takes by escheat has been doubted; and it will be remembered that Bracton and later authors differ over whether he comes in as a quasi heir or as a stranger.

Then as to the benefit of the use. We are told that the right to sue the subpoena—the writ by which the Chancellor enforced a use—did pass down to the heir, on the ground that the heir is the same person as his ancestor, but that it was not assets, not property available to pay the ancestor's debts. The cestui que use, the person for whose benefit the use was held, was given power to sell by an early statute. But as to trusts, Lord Coke tells us that in the reign of Queen Elizabeth all the judges in England held that a trust could not be assigned, "because it was a matter in privity between them, and was in the nature of a chose in action." Uses and trusts could both be left by will from an early day, however, and now trusts are as freely transferable as any form of property.

The history of early law everywhere shows that the difficulty of transferring a mere right was keenly felt when the situation of fact from which it sprang could not be transferred along with it. Analysis shows that the difficulty is real. The fiction that made such a transfer conceivable has now been explained, and its history has been followed until we have seen it become a general mode of thought. It is now a matter of course that the buyer stands in the shoes of the seller, or, in the language of an old law-book, that "the assign is in a manner quasi successor to his assignor." Whatever peculiarities of our law rest on that assumption may now be understood.
