<modernized_text>
PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND REVISED EDITION, 1884. BY THE EDITOR

If my poor Flatland friend retained the vigor of mind he had when he began writing these memoirs, I would not need to represent him in this preface. In this preface, he fully wishes to:

1. Thank his readers and critics in Spaceland, whose appreciation has so quickly required a second edition of this work.
2. Apologize for certain errors and misprints (for which, however, he is not entirely responsible).
3. Explain one or two misconceptions.

But he is no longer the same Figure he once was. Years of imprisonment and the heavy burden of disbelief and mockery have combined with the ideas, notions, and much of the terminology he acquired during his brief stay in Spaceland. Therefore, he has asked me to respond on his behalf to two specific objections - one of an intellectual nature, the other of a moral nature.

The first objection is that a Flatlander, seeing a Line, sees something that must appear thick to the eye as well as long (otherwise, it would not be visible if it had no thickness). Consequently, it is argued, he ought to acknowledge that his fellow Figures are not only long and wide, but also (though to a very slight degree) thick or high. This objection is plausible and, for Spacelanders, almost irresistible. When I first heard it, I did not know how to respond. But my poor old friend's answer seems to me to completely address it.

"I admit," he said when I mentioned this objection, "the truth of your critic's facts, but I deny their conclusions. It is true that we Flatlanders have an unrecognized Third Dimension called 'height,' just as it is true that you Spacelanders have an unrecognized Fourth Dimension, which I will call 'extra-height.' But we can no more be aware of our 'height' than you can of your 'extra-height.' Even I - who have been in Spaceland and had the privilege of understanding the meaning of 'height' for twenty-four hours - cannot now comprehend or visualize it through sight or reason; I can only apprehend it through faith.

"The reason is obvious. Dimension implies direction, measurement, and more or less. Now, all our Lines are equally and infinitesimally thick (or high, whichever you prefer). Consequently, there is nothing in them to lead our minds to the conception of that Dimension. No 'delicate micrometer' would avail us, for we would not know what to measure or in what direction. When we see a Line, we see something long and bright; brightness, as well as length, is necessary for a Line to exist. If the brightness vanishes, the Line is extinguished. Hence, all my Flatland friends, when I talk to them about the unrecognized Dimension visible in a Line, say, 'Ah, you mean brightness.' And when I reply, 'No, I mean a real Dimension,' they immediately challenge me, 'Then measure it, or tell us in what direction it extends.' This silences me, for I can do neither. Just yesterday, when the Chief Circle (our High Priest) visited the State Prison and asked me for the seventh time if I was any better, I tried to prove to him that he was 'high,' as well as long and wide, although he did not know it. But his reply was, 'You say I am "high"; measure my "high-ness" and I will believe you.' What could I do? How could I meet his challenge? I was crushed, and he left the room triumphant."
</modernized_text>

<explanation>
In this section, I have focused on the following key changes:

1. Simplifying complex sentence structures: Breaking down long, convoluted sentences into shorter, more manageable ones. For example, the opening paragraph was reduced from a single, lengthy sentence to a list of three concise points.

2. Modernizing vocabulary: Replacing archaic or formal terms with their more common modern equivalents, such as "vigor" instead of "vigour," "Figure" instead of "person/inhabitant," and "memoirs" instead of "Memoirs."

3. Providing contextual explanations: Clarifying references to the "Chief Circle" and the "State Prison" to help readers better understand the social hierarchy and setting of Flatland.

4. Maintaining the author's unique voice and style: While simplifying the language, I have tried to preserve the formal, academic tone and the protagonist's thoughtful, philosophical approach to the discussion of dimensions and perception.
</explanation>