Prologue

Idle reader: you can take my word for it, without my having to swear to it, that I wish this book, being the child of my brain, were the handsomest, the liveliest and the cleverest that anyone could imagine. But I have not been able to break the law of nature, by which every thing brings forth its own likeness. And so what could my barren and ill-cultivated wit bring forth but the history of a son who is dry and shrivelled and wilful and full of odd notions that never occurred to anybody else — a son, in short, conceived in a prison, where every discomfort has its lodging and every mournful noise makes its home? Peace and quiet, a pleasant place, cheerful fields, clear skies, the murmur of streams, a mind at rest — these do a great deal to make even the most barren muses fertile, and to bring into the world offspring that fill it with wonder and delight. It happens sometimes that a man has an ugly son with no charm at all, and the love he bears him ties a blindfold over his eyes so that he cannot see his faults; on the contrary, he takes them for talents and beauties, and repeats them to his friends as wit and elegance.

But I — who only seem to be Don Quixote's father, and am really his stepfather — have no wish to swim with the current of custom, or to beg you, dearest reader, very nearly in tears, as others do, to forgive or overlook the faults you may see in this son of mine. You are neither his relation nor his friend; you have your own soul in your own body and as free a will as the best of them; you are in your own house, where you are lord of everything, as the king is of his taxes; and you know the saying — under my own cloak, I can kill the king. All of which lets you off every kind of deference and obligation, so that you may say whatever you like about this history without fear of being run in for the bad you say of it or rewarded for the good.

I should have liked to give it to you plain and naked, without the ornament of a prologue, or the endless catalogue of the customary sonnets, epigrams and tributes that are usually stuck at the front of books. Because I can tell you that, although the book cost me some labour, nothing cost me more than making this preface you are now reading. Many a time I took up the pen to write it, and many a time I put it down again, because I did not know what to say. And once, when I was sitting stuck — the paper in front of me, the pen behind my ear, my elbow on the desk and my cheek on my hand, wondering what on earth to write — a friend of mine came in unexpectedly, a witty man and a shrewd one, who saw me sunk so deep in thought and asked me what was the matter. I made no secret of it. I told him I was thinking about the prologue I had to write for the history of Don Quixote, and that it had got me into such a state that I no longer wanted to write it, still less to bring the deeds of so noble a knight out into the light at all.

"Because how do you expect me not to be worried," I said, "about what that ancient lawgiver they call the public will say when it sees that, after all these years asleep in the silence of oblivion, I come out now, with all my years on my back, carrying a legend as dry as a rush mat, barren of invention, poor in style, thin in ideas and destitute of every kind of learning and doctrine — with no notes in the margins and no annotations at the end, the way I see other books have, however made-up and worldly they may be, so crammed with sayings from Aristotle and Plato and the whole herd of philosophers that they fill the reader with admiration and get their authors a reputation as well-read, learned, eloquent men? And then when they quote Holy Scripture! People will say they are so many St Thomases and Doctors of the Church, keeping up a decorum so ingenious that in one line they paint a distracted lover and in the next preach a nice little Christian sermon, which is a joy and a treat to hear or to read. My book will have none of this. I have nothing to note in the margin and nothing to annotate at the end, and I have no idea which authors I have followed, so as to put them at the front as everybody else does, in alphabetical order, beginning with Aristotle and ending with Xenophon and Zoilus or Zeuxis — even though one of them was a slanderer and the other a painter. My book will also have to do without sonnets at the front, or at least without sonnets by dukes, marquises, counts, bishops, great ladies or celebrated poets — though if I asked two or three tradesman friends of mine, I know they would give me some, and such that the ones by our most famous names in Spain could not touch them.

"In short, my dear sir and friend," I went on, "I have decided that Señor Don Quixote shall stay buried in his archives in La Mancha until heaven provides someone to furnish him with all the things he lacks. I find myself incapable of supplying them, out of my own inadequacy and want of learning, and because I am naturally idle and too lazy to go hunting for authors to say what I can perfectly well say without them. This is the cause of the suspense and abstraction you found me in — reason enough, I should think, given what you have just heard."

My friend, hearing this, struck himself on the forehead, let off a great volley of laughter, and said:

"Good God, brother, you have just cured me of an error I have been living in the whole time I have known you, all of which I have taken you for a sensible and prudent man in everything you did. But now I see you are as far from it as heaven is from earth. How is it possible that things of so little consequence, and so easily put right, have the power to stop and stupefy a mind as ripe as yours, and one so used to breaking through and trampling over much greater difficulties than these? On my faith, this does not come from any lack of ability, but from a surplus of laziness and a famine of common sense. Would you like to see whether what I say is true? Then pay attention, and you shall watch me demolish every one of your difficulties in the time it takes to open and shut your eyes, and put right all the defects that you say hold you up and make you afraid to bring out into the light of the world the history of your famous Don Quixote, the light and mirror of all knight-errantry."

"Tell me, then," I answered, "how do you propose to fill up the emptiness of my fear and bring the chaos of my confusion into daylight?"

To which he replied:

"The first thing that troubles you — the sonnets, epigrams and tributes you lack for the opening, and the fact that they ought to be by weighty people with titles — can be cured by your taking a little trouble and writing them yourself. Then you can christen them and put whatever name you please to them, fathering them on Prester John of the Indies or the Emperor of Trebizond, both of whom, I have it on good authority, were famous poets. And if they were not, and there should be some pedants and university men who snap at you behind your back and mutter about the truth of it, don't give twopence for them; because even if they prove the lie on you, they can't cut off the hand you wrote it with.

"As for citing in the margins the books and authors you took the sayings and maxims in your history from, all you have to do is work in, wherever it fits, some maxims or bits of Latin that you happen to know by heart — or that at least cost you very little trouble to look up. For example, when you are dealing with liberty and captivity, put:

Non bene pro toto libertas venditur auro.

[Liberty is not well sold for all the gold in the world.]

And then in the margin cite Horace, or whoever said it. If you are dealing with the power of death, come straight in with:

	Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
	Regumque turres.

[Pale death knocks with the same foot at the cottages of the poor and the towers of kings.]

If it is the friendship and love that God commands us to feel towards our enemy, get yourself into Holy Scripture at once, which you can do with the smallest amount of curiosity, and quote the words of God himself, at least: Ego autem dico vobis: diligite inimicos vestros. [But I say unto you: love your enemies.] If it is evil thoughts, come in with the Gospel: De corde exeunt cogitationes malae. [Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts.] If it is the unreliability of friends, there is Cato ready with his couplet:

	Donec eris felix, multos numerabis amicos,
	tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.

[While you are prosperous you will count many friends; if the weather turns cloudy, you will be alone.]

And with these scraps of Latin and others like them they will at least take you for a scholar, and being one is no small honour and profit these days.

"As for putting annotations at the end of the book, you can safely manage it like this. If you name some giant in your book, make him the giant Goliath, and with that alone, which will cost you next to nothing, you have a fine long note, since you can put: The giant Golias, or Goliath, was a Philistine whom the shepherd David killed with a great stone in the valley of Terebinth, as is told in the Book of Kings, in whatever chapter you find it written. After that, to show yourself a man learned in humane letters and a cosmographer, arrange for the river Tagus to be mentioned somewhere in your history, and you will find yourself with another famous note, thus: The river Tagus was so called after a king of the Spains; it rises in such and such a place and dies in the ocean, kissing the walls of the famous city of Lisbon; and it is thought to have golden sands, etc. If you are dealing with thieves, I will give you the story of Cacus, which I know by heart. If with loose women, there is the Bishop of Mondoñedo, who will lend you Lamia, Laida and Flora, and a note on them will do your credit no harm. If with cruel women, Ovid will hand over Medea. If with enchantresses and witches, Homer has Calypso and Virgil has Circe. If with valiant captains, Julius Caesar will lend you himself in his own Commentaries, and Plutarch will give you a thousand Alexanders. If you are dealing with love, with two ounces of Italian you will run straight into Leone Ebreo, who will fill your measure to the brim. And if you would rather not go abroad for it, you have Fonseca's On the Love of God at home, in which everything is summed up that you, or the most ingenious man alive, could want on the subject. In short, all you have to do is see that these names get mentioned, or these stories touched on, in your own; and leave the business of the notes and marginal citations to me, for I promise you I will fill your margins and use up four sheets of paper at the end of the book.

"Now let us come to the list of authors that other books have and yours lacks. The cure for that is very easy, because you have nothing to do but look for a book that cites them all, from A to Z, as you say. Then you put that same alphabet into your own book; and although the lie is perfectly obvious, since you had so little need to make use of them, it doesn't matter in the least. Perhaps there will even be somebody simple enough to believe that you have drawn on all of them in that plain, straightforward history of yours; and if it serves no other purpose, at least that long catalogue of authors will do to give the book a sudden air of authority. Besides, nobody is going to set about checking whether you followed them or not, since there is nothing in it for him.

"What is more — now that I come to think of it properly — this book of yours has no need whatever of any of the things you say it lacks, since the whole of it is an attack on books of chivalry, which Aristotle never thought about, and St Basil said nothing about, and Cicero never came across. Its fabulous absurdities have nothing to do with exactness of truth or with the observations of astrology; geometrical measurements are of no importance to it, nor is the refutation of arguments used in rhetoric; and it has no reason to preach at anybody, mixing the human with the divine, which is a kind of mixture no Christian understanding should ever be dressed in. It has only to make use of imitation in what it writes; and the more perfect that imitation is, the better the writing will be. And since this piece of writing of yours aims at nothing more than destroying the authority and standing that books of chivalry have in the world and among the common people, there is no reason for you to go begging maxims from philosophers, counsels from Holy Scripture, fables from poets, speeches from rhetoricians or miracles from saints. Just see to it that your sentences come out plainly, in meaningful, decent, well-placed words, and that your prose runs full and cheerful; paint what you mean as far as you can and as well as you possibly can, and make your ideas understood without tangling them up and darkening them. See to it, too, that reading your history makes the melancholy man laugh, and the cheerful man laugh harder; that the simple man is not bored, the clever man admires the invention, the serious man does not despise it and the prudent man cannot help praising it. In a word, keep your eye fixed on pulling down that ill-founded machine of chivalric books, hated by so many and praised by a great many more. If you managed that, you would not have managed a small thing."

I listened in complete silence to what my friend said, and his arguments stamped themselves on me so firmly that I approved them without any argument at all and decided to make my prologue out of them. In it, gentle reader, you will see the good sense of my friend, my own good fortune in finding such an adviser at a moment of such need, and your own relief at finding the history of the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha so honest and so free of complications — a man of whom the whole population of the district of the plain of Montiel holds the opinion that he was the chastest lover and the bravest knight seen in those parts for many years. I do not want to make too much of the service I am doing you in introducing you to so noble and honourable a knight; but I do want you to thank me for making you acquainted with the famous Sancho Panza, his squire, in whom, to my mind, I have concentrated for you every squirely grace that lies scattered through the whole pack of worthless books of chivalry.

And with that, God give you health, and may he not forget me. Vale.
