Chapter 2: Which Treats of the First Sally the Ingenious Don Quixote Made from His Own Country

These preparations made, he would wait no longer to put his plan into effect, urged on by the thought of how much the world was losing by his delay — such was the number of wrongs he meant to right, injuries to redress, injustices to mend, abuses to reform and debts to settle. And so, without telling a soul what he intended, and without anybody seeing him, one morning before daybreak — it was one of the hot days of July — he put on the whole of his armour, mounted Rocinante, fitted on his badly made helmet, slipped his shield onto his arm, took up his lance, and by the back gate of a yard rode out into the open country, hugely pleased and delighted to see how easily he had made a beginning on his heart's desire.

But no sooner was he in the open than a terrible thought struck him, one that very nearly made him abandon the whole enterprise before it started: it came into his head that he had not been dubbed a knight, and that by the laws of chivalry he neither could nor should take up arms against any knight; and that even if he had been dubbed, as a new knight he was bound to wear plain white armour with no device on his shield until he had earned one by his own efforts. These thoughts made him waver in his purpose; but his madness being stronger than any argument, he resolved to have himself dubbed a knight by the first man he met, in imitation of a great many others who had done the same, as he had read in the books that had brought him to this pass. As for the white armour, he meant to scour his own, when he got the chance, until it was whiter than ermine. With that he settled his mind and rode on, taking whatever road his horse chose, in the belief that this was where the whole force of adventure lay.

As he rode along, our brand-new adventurer talked to himself, saying:

"Who can doubt that in ages to come, when the true history of my famous deeds is brought to light, the sage who writes them down will begin his account of this my first sally, so early in the morning, in this manner? — 'Scarcely had ruddy Apollo spread over the face of the wide and spacious earth the golden threads of his beautiful hair, and scarcely had the little painted birds with their forked tongues greeted in sweet and honeyed harmony the coming of the rosy dawn, who, leaving the soft bed of her jealous husband, was showing herself to mortals through the doors and balconies of the Manchegan horizon, when the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, leaving the idle feathers of his bed, mounted his famous horse Rocinante and began to ride across the ancient and well-known plain of Montiel.'"

And it was the truth that he was riding across it. He went on:

"Happy the age and happy the century in which my famous exploits shall come to light — exploits worthy to be carved in bronze, cut in marble and painted on panels as a memorial for the future! And you, wise enchanter, whoever you may be, whose business it will be to chronicle this extraordinary history, I beg you not to forget my good Rocinante, my eternal companion on all my roads and journeys!"

Then he would begin again, as though he really were in love:

"O Princess Dulcinea, mistress of this captive heart! Great wrong have ye done me in dismissing me and reproaching me with the harsh command that I appear no more before your beauty. May it please you, lady, to be mindful of this heart of yours in bondage, that suffers so many sorrows for love of you."

He went on stringing together other absurdities of the same kind, all in the manner his books had taught him, imitating their language as closely as he could; and all the while he rode so slowly, and the sun climbed so fast and beat down so hot, that it would have been enough to melt his brains if he had had any.

He rode almost the whole of that day without anything happening worth telling, which drove him to despair, because he wanted to run into somebody at once, immediately, on whom he could test the strength of his mighty arm. There are authors who say his first adventure was the one at Puerto Lápice; others say it was the windmills. But what I have been able to establish in the matter, and what I have found written in the Annals of La Mancha, is that he rode all that day, and that at nightfall his nag and he were worn out and dying of hunger; and that, looking about him in every direction to see whether he could make out some castle or some shepherds' hut where he might take shelter and do something about his great hunger and want, he saw an inn not far from the road he was on — which was as though he had seen a star guiding him, not to the porch, but to the very palace of his redemption. He pushed on, and reached it just as night was falling.

There happened to be standing at the door two young women of the sort they call women of the town, who were on their way to Seville with some carriers who had chanced to break their journey at that inn for the night. And since to our adventurer everything he thought or saw or imagined seemed to be made and to happen after the fashion of what he had read, the moment he saw the inn it presented itself to him as a castle with its four towers and its spires of shining silver, complete with drawbridge and deep moat and all the trimmings that such castles are painted with. He came up towards the inn — which to him was a castle — and a little way off he reined Rocinante in, waiting for some dwarf to show himself between the battlements and blow a trumpet to signal that a knight was arriving at the castle. But seeing that they were slow about it, and that Rocinante was in a hurry to get to the stable, he went up to the door of the inn and saw the two loose women standing there, who seemed to him two beautiful maidens or two graceful ladies taking their ease in front of the castle gate.

Just then it happened that a swineherd who was rounding up a drove of pigs from some stubble-fields — pigs, begging your pardon, but that is what they are called — blew his horn, at which signal they gather; and instantly Don Quixote had what he wanted, which was a dwarf giving notice of his arrival. So with extraordinary satisfaction he came up to the inn and to the ladies, who, seeing a man of that sort coming, armed and carrying lance and shield, were frightened and were going indoors. But Don Quixote, gathering from their flight that they were afraid, raised his pasteboard visor, uncovered his dry and dusty face, and said to them with a courteous air and in a calm voice:

"Flee not, your graces, nor fear any discourtesy; for the order of chivalry which I profess neither touches nor concerns the doing of any to anyone, and least of all to maidens as highborn as your presences declare you to be."

The girls stared at him, hunting with their eyes for the face that the wretched visor hid; but when they heard themselves called maidens, a thing so far outside their line of business, they could not keep from laughing, and they laughed so hard that Don Quixote took offence and said:

"Modesty becomes the fair, and moreover it is great foolishness to laugh at a slight cause; but I say this not to vex you or to make you show ill temper, for mine is nothing but to serve you."

The language, which the ladies did not understand, and the sorry figure our knight cut, only increased their laughter and his annoyance; and it would have gone a good deal further if at that moment the innkeeper had not come out — a man who, being very fat, was very peaceable. Seeing that misshapen figure armed with such ill-matched equipment as the bridle, lance, shield and corselet, he came within an inch of joining the maidens in their expressions of delight. But in the end, in some awe of that whole apparatus of hardware, he decided to speak civilly, and said:

"If your worship, sir knight, is looking for lodging, then apart from a bed — for there is not one in this inn — everything else will be found here in great abundance."

Don Quixote, seeing the humility of the governor of the fortress (for that is what the innkeeper and the inn seemed to him), replied:

	"For me, sir castellan, anything will serve, for
	my trappings are my arms,
	my resting is to fight,

and so on."

The landlord thought he had been called a Castilian because he had been taken for one of the honest men of Castile, though in fact he was an Andalusian from the beach at Sanlúcar, no less a thief than Cacus and no less a rogue than a student page. So he answered:

"In that case, your worship's bed must be the naked rock and your sleep a perpetual watch; and if that is so, you may safely dismount, in the certainty of finding in this hovel occasion, and occasions, for not sleeping at all for a whole year, let alone for one night."

And saying this he went to hold the stirrup for Don Quixote, who dismounted with great difficulty and effort, like a man who had not broken his fast all that day.

He then told his host to take particular care of his horse, because it was the finest piece of horseflesh that ever ate bread in this world. The innkeeper looked it over and did not think it half as good as Don Quixote said; but he settled it in the stable and came back to see what his guest wanted. The maidens, who had by now made it up with him, were taking his armour off; and although they had got the breastplate and backpiece off him, they never could work out how to unfasten the gorget or get off the makeshift helmet, which he wore tied on with green ribbons. The knots could not be undone and the ribbons would have had to be cut, and to this he would not agree on any terms; so he spent the whole of that night with his helmet on, and made the drollest and strangest figure imaginable. And while they were disarming him — since he supposed that these battered and much-travelled creatures were great ladies of that castle — he said to them very gracefully:

	"Never was a knight so well
	waited on by ladies
	as Don Quixote was
	when he came from his village:
	damsels tended him;
	princesses, his hack —

or Rocinante, for that, my ladies, is my horse's name, and Don Quixote of La Mancha is mine. And although I had no wish to reveal myself until the deeds done in your service and for your good should have revealed me, the necessity of fitting this old ballad of Lancelot to the present occasion has caused you to learn my name before its proper season. But the time will come when your ladyships shall command and I obey, and the strength of my arm shall show how much I desire to serve you."

The girls, who were not used to hearing rhetoric of that kind, said not a word; they only asked whether he would like anything to eat.

"I would eat anything at all," answered Don Quixote, "because, as I understand it, it would do me a great deal of good."

It happened, as luck would have it, to be a Friday, and there was nothing in the whole inn but a few helpings of a fish that in Castile they call pollack, in Andalusia salt cod, in some places dried cod and in others little trout. They asked him whether his worship would perhaps eat some little trout, since there was no other fish to give him.

"So long as there are plenty of little trout," answered Don Quixote, "they can do duty for one trout; because it is all one to me whether I am given eight reals in small change or in a single piece of eight. What is more, these little trout may well be like veal, which is better than beef, or kid, which is better than goat. But whatever it is, let it come at once, for the labour and the weight of arms cannot be borne without the government of the guts."

They set his table for him at the inn door, for the cool of it, and the landlord brought him a portion of the badly soaked and worse cooked salt cod, and a loaf as black and grimy as his armour. But it was a thing to make you shout with laughter to watch him eat; because, with his helmet on and the visor up, he could get nothing into his mouth with his own hands unless somebody put it there for him, so one of the ladies had to do him this service. As for giving him a drink, that was impossible, and would have stayed impossible if the innkeeper had not bored out a reed and put one end in his mouth and poured the wine in at the other; and all this he took patiently rather than break the ribbons of his helmet.

While this was going on, a pig-gelder happened to arrive at the inn, and as he came up he blew his cane whistle four or five times — which finally settled it for Don Quixote that he was in some famous castle, and that they were serving him with music, and that the pollack was trout, the bread white, the whores ladies and the innkeeper the castellan of the castle; and so he counted his decision and his setting out well repaid. But what worried him most was that he had not yet been dubbed a knight, since it seemed to him that he could not lawfully enter on any adventure without first receiving the order of chivalry.
