Chapter 3: Which Tells the Comical Way Don Quixote Had Himself Dubbed a Knight

And so, tormented by this thought, he cut short his scanty inn supper; and when it was over he called the innkeeper, shut himself up with him in the stable, fell on his knees before him and said:

"Never will I rise from where I am, valiant knight, until your courtesy grants me a boon that I wish to ask of you, one that will redound to your praise and to the good of the human race."

The innkeeper, seeing his guest at his feet and hearing this sort of language, stood staring at him in confusion, not knowing what to do or say, and kept insisting that he get up; but Don Quixote would not, until he had to tell him that he granted the boon he was asking.

"I expected no less of your great magnificence, my lord," answered Don Quixote. "And so I tell you that the boon I have asked of you, and that your generosity has granted me, is that tomorrow morning you shall dub me a knight; and that tonight I shall keep watch over my arms in the chapel of this castle of yours; and tomorrow, as I have said, what I so much desire shall be accomplished, so that I may go, as is proper, through all four quarters of the world in search of adventures on behalf of the needy — which is the business of chivalry and of knights errant such as I am, whose desire is bent upon deeds of that kind."

The innkeeper, who, as has been said, was something of a sly rogue and already had some suspicions of his guest's want of wits, was quite convinced of it when he heard this speech; and, in order to have something to laugh at that night, he decided to humour him. So he told him he was entirely right in what he wanted and asked for, and that such a resolution was proper and natural in knights as distinguished as he appeared to be and as his gallant bearing showed him; and that he himself, in the years of his youth, had followed that honourable profession, going about the world in various parts in search of adventures — not omitting the Percheles of Málaga, the Isles of Riarán, the Compass of Seville, the Little Market of Segovia, the Olive Grove of Valencia, the Rondilla of Granada, the beach at Sanlúcar, the Colt of Córdoba, the Taverns of Toledo and various other places, where he had exercised the nimbleness of his feet and the deftness of his hands, doing a great many wrongs, courting a great many widows, undoing a few maidens and swindling a few minors; and, in short, making himself known in nearly every court and tribunal in the whole of Spain. And that at last he had retired to this castle of his, where he lived on his own property and other people's, taking in all knights errant of whatever rank and condition, purely out of the great affection he had for them and so that they should share their goods with him in payment of his good will.

He told him also that in this castle of his there was no chapel where he might keep watch over his arms, because it had been pulled down to be built again; but that in case of necessity he knew that the watch could be kept anywhere, and that tonight he might keep it in a courtyard of the castle; and that in the morning, God willing, the proper ceremonies would be performed, so that he should be dubbed a knight, and so much a knight that there could be no more of one in the world.

He asked whether he had any money with him. Don Quixote answered that he had not a farthing, because he had never read in the histories of knights errant that any of them had carried any. To this the innkeeper said that he was mistaken; that although it was not written down in the histories — because it had seemed to their authors that there was no need to write down a thing so obvious and so necessary to carry as money and clean shirts — that was no reason to believe they had not carried them. He might take it as certain and established that all the knights errant that so many books are stuffed and crammed with carried well-lined purses against whatever might befall them; and that they likewise carried shirts and a little box full of ointments to treat the wounds they took, because it was not every time that in the fields and deserts where they fought and came off wounded there was somebody to treat them — unless indeed they had some wise enchanter for a friend, who would come to their aid at once, carrying through the air on a cloud some damsel or dwarf with a flask of water of such virtue that on tasting a single drop of it they were instantly healed of their cuts and wounds as though they had never had anything the matter with them. But in the absence of that, knights in past ages had thought it right that their squires should be provided with money and other necessaries, such as lint and ointments for dressing wounds; and when it happened that such knights had no squires, which was seldom and rarely, they carried everything themselves in a pair of very slim saddlebags that hardly showed at all, slung behind the saddle as though it were something of greater importance — because, except on some such occasion, this business of carrying saddlebags was not much approved of among knights errant. And for this reason he advised him — since he might still command him as his godson, which he was so soon to become — not to travel from now on without money and without the provisions mentioned, and he would find how well off he was with them when he least expected it.

Don Quixote promised to do what he was advised with the greatest exactness; and so orders were given for him to keep watch over his arms in a large yard at one side of the inn. Gathering them all up, Don Quixote laid them on a trough that stood beside a well, and, slipping his shield onto his arm, took up his lance and began to pace up and down in front of the trough with a noble bearing; and as he began his pacing, night began to fall.

The innkeeper told everybody in the inn about his guest's madness, the watch over the arms and the dubbing he was expecting. They marvelled at so strange a kind of madness and went to watch him from a distance, and saw that with a calm air he sometimes paced up and down, and sometimes, leaning on his lance, fixed his eyes on the armour and did not take them off it for a long while. Night had closed in completely, but the moon was so bright that it could compete with the body that lent it its light, so that everything the new knight did was plainly seen by everybody.

Just then it occurred to one of the carriers in the inn to go and water his string of mules, and for that it was necessary to move Don Quixote's armour off the trough. Seeing him come, Don Quixote said to him in a loud voice:

"O thou, whoever thou art, presumptuous knight, that comest to lay hands on the arms of the most valiant errant that ever girded sword! Look to what thou doest, and touch them not, unless thou wouldst leave thy life in payment for thy presumption."

The carrier took no notice of these words — and it would have been better for him if he had, since he would have been taking care of his health. On the contrary, he took hold of the straps and flung the armour a good way from him. Seeing which, Don Quixote raised his eyes to heaven and, fixing his thoughts — so it appeared — on his lady Dulcinea, said:

"Help me, my lady, in this first insult offered to this breast of yours that is your vassal; let not your favour and protection fail me in this first trial."

And saying this and more to the same effect, he let go his shield, raised his lance in both hands and brought it down on the carrier's head with such a blow that he knocked him to the ground so badly hurt that if he had followed it with a second there would have been no need of a surgeon to treat him. That done, he gathered up his armour and went back to pacing with the same composure as before.

A little later, without anyone knowing what had happened — for the carrier was still stunned — a second one came up with the same intention of watering his mules; and as he went to move the armour and clear the trough, without a word and without asking anyone's help, Don Quixote let go his shield again, raised his lance again, and without breaking it to pieces made more than three of the second carrier's head, for he split it in four. At the noise all the people in the inn came running, the innkeeper among them. Seeing this, Don Quixote got his shield on his arm, laid his hand on his sword and said:

"O lady of beauty, strength and vigour of this feeble heart of mine! Now is the time to turn the eyes of your greatness upon this captive knight of yours, who awaits so great an adventure."

With this he recovered, as it seemed to him, such courage that if all the carriers in the world had attacked him he would not have taken a step back. The comrades of the wounded men, seeing the state they were in, began at a distance to rain stones down on Don Quixote, who sheltered himself as best he could behind his shield and dared not leave the trough for fear of abandoning his armour. The innkeeper shouted to them to leave him alone, because he had already told them the man was mad, and being mad he would get off even if he killed the lot of them. Don Quixote was shouting too, and louder, calling them treacherous cowards, and saying that the lord of the castle was a base-born scoundrel of a knight to allow knights errant to be treated in such a way, and that if he had received the order of chivalry he would have made him understand his treachery:

"But as for you, foul and low rabble, I take no account of you at all. Throw, come on, come here and do me what harm you can, and you shall see what payment you get for your folly and your insolence."

He said this with such spirit and such fearlessness that he put a terrible fright into his attackers; and for that reason, and because of the innkeeper's arguments, they stopped throwing, and he let the wounded be carried off and went back to his watch with the same quiet composure as before.

The innkeeper did not much care for his guest's jokes, and decided to cut it short and give him the confounded order of chivalry at once, before any further misfortune occurred. So, going up to him, he apologised for the insolence that low sort of people had shown him without his knowing anything about it, though they had been well punished for their presumption. He told him, as he had told him already, that there was no chapel in the castle, and that for what remained to be done none was needed; that the whole point of being dubbed a knight lay in the blow on the neck and the stroke on the shoulder, according to what he knew of the ceremonial of the order, and that this could be done in the middle of a field; and that he had already fulfilled the requirement about watching over the arms, since two hours' watch was enough, and he had stood more than four.

Don Quixote believed the whole of it, and said that he was there ready to obey him, and to finish it off as quickly as he could; because if he were attacked again once he was dubbed a knight, he did not intend to leave a soul alive in the castle, except those his host might tell him to spare, whom he would spare out of respect for him.

Warned and thoroughly alarmed by this, the castellan promptly brought out a ledger in which he entered the straw and barley he issued to the carriers, and with a candle-end that a boy fetched him, and with the two damsels already mentioned, he came to where Don Quixote was and told him to kneel. Then, reading out of his account-book as though he were saying some devout prayer, in the middle of the reading he raised his hand and gave him a good blow on the neck, and after it, with the man's own sword, a handsome stroke across the shoulder, muttering all the while under his breath as though he were praying. That done, he ordered one of the ladies to gird on his sword, which she did with great composure and discretion — and no little was needed to keep from bursting with laughter at every point of the ceremony; but the feats they had already seen from the new knight kept their laughter within bounds. As she girded on the sword, the good lady said:

"God make your worship a very fortunate knight and give you good luck in your fights."

Don Quixote asked her what she was called, so that he might know from then on to whom he was indebted for the favour received; because he meant to give her some share of the honour he would win by the strength of his arm. She answered very humbly that she was called La Tolosa, and that she was the daughter of a cobbler from Toledo who lived by the little stalls of Sancho Bienaya, and that wherever she might be she would serve him and hold him for her lord. Don Quixote begged her, for love of him, to do him the favour of taking a title from then on and calling herself Doña Tolosa. She promised she would; and the other buckled on his spur, and with her he had almost the same conversation as with the lady of the sword. He asked her name, and she said she was called La Molinera, and that she was the daughter of an honest miller of Antequera; and Don Quixote begged her too to take a title and call herself Doña Molinera, offering her fresh services and favours.

These ceremonies, never before seen in this world, having been rushed through at the gallop, Don Quixote could not wait to be in the saddle and out looking for adventures. Saddling Rocinante at once, he mounted, embraced his host, and thanked him for the favour of dubbing him a knight in such extraordinary terms that there is no possibility of setting them down. The innkeeper, to see him out of the inn, answered him with no less rhetoric, though in rather fewer words, and without asking him for the price of his lodging let him go, and good riddance.
