Chapter 4: Of What Happened to Our Knight When He Left the Inn

It must have been daybreak when Don Quixote rode out of the inn, so pleased with himself, so gallant, so overjoyed at finding himself dubbed a knight that the delight of it burst the girths of his horse. But remembering his host's advice about the very necessary provisions he ought to carry with him, and particularly the money and the shirts, he decided to go home and fit himself out with everything, and with a squire as well, reckoning on taking on a labourer who was a neighbour of his, a poor man with children, but very well suited to the squirely office of chivalry. With this in mind he turned Rocinante towards his village, and the horse, all but recognising his old haunts, set off so willingly that he seemed not to be putting his feet on the ground at all.

He had not gone far when it seemed to him that from a thicket on his right hand came faint cries, like somebody in distress; and he had hardly heard them before he said:

"I give thanks to heaven for the favour it does me, in putting occasions so promptly before me in which I can do what I owe to my profession and gather the fruit of my good intentions. These cries are certainly from some man or woman in need, who requires my favour and assistance."

And turning the reins, he headed Rocinante towards where the cries seemed to be coming from. A few steps into the wood he saw a mare tied to an oak, and tied to another a boy stripped to the waist, about fifteen years old, who was the one crying out — and not without cause, for a strapping farmer was laying into him with a belt, and every stroke came with a reproof and a piece of advice. He was saying:

"Hold your tongue and keep your eyes open."

And the boy was answering:

"I won't do it again, sir; by Christ's Passion, I won't do it again; I promise to look after the flock more carefully from now on."

Seeing what was going on, Don Quixote said in an angry voice:

"Discourteous knight, it ill becomes you to set upon one who cannot defend himself. Get on your horse and take your lance" — for there was a lance too, leaning against the oak the mare was tethered to — "and I will make you understand that what you are doing is the work of cowards."

The farmer, seeing that figure covered in armour standing over him and brandishing a lance in his face, gave himself up for dead, and answered civilly:

"Sir knight, this boy I am punishing is a servant of mine, employed to look after a flock of sheep I have hereabouts, and he is so careless that I lose one every day. And when I punish him for his carelessness — or his roguery — he says I do it out of meanness, so as not to pay him the wages I owe him; and before God and on my soul he lies."

"'Lies', in my presence, you vile peasant?" said Don Quixote. "By the sun that shines on us, I have half a mind to run you through with this lance. Pay him at once, without another word; if not, by the God who rules us I will finish and annihilate you on this spot. Untie him this minute."

The farmer hung his head and, without a word in reply, untied his servant. Don Quixote asked the boy how much his master owed him. He said nine months at seven reals a month. Don Quixote did the sum and found it came to sixty-three reals, and told the farmer to pay it out on the spot unless he wanted to die for it. The frightened peasant answered that, in the pass he was in and by the oath he had sworn — and he had not sworn anything yet — it was not so much, because there had to be deducted and taken into account three pairs of shoes he had given him and a real for two bleedings when he had been ill.

"That is all very well," replied Don Quixote, "but let the shoes and the bleedings stand against the lashes you have given him without any fault of his; for if he wore out the leather of the shoes you paid for, you have worn out the leather of his body; and if the barber let his blood when he was ill, you have let it when he was well. So on that score he owes you nothing."

"The trouble is, sir knight, that I have no money here. Let Andrés come home with me and I will pay him real by real."

"Me go with him?" said the boy. "Not on your life! No, sir, not for a moment; because the minute he gets me alone he'll flay me like a St Bartholomew."

"He will do nothing of the kind," replied Don Quixote. "It is enough that I command him, and he will respect me; and provided he swears it to me by the order of chivalry he has received, I will let him go free and guarantee the payment."

"Just listen to what your worship is saying, sir," said the boy, "for this master of mine is no knight and has never received any order of chivalry at all; he is Juan Haldudo the rich man, from over at Quintanar."

"That matters little," answered Don Quixote, "for there may well be knights among the Haldudos; besides which, every man is the son of his own deeds."

"That's true enough," said Andrés, "but this master of mine — what deeds is he the son of, when he denies me my wages and my sweat and labour?"

"I do not deny them, brother Andrés," answered the farmer; "and do me the kindness of coming with me, and I swear by all the orders of chivalry there are in the world to pay you, as I have said, real by real, and perfumed into the bargain."

"I let you off the perfume," said Don Quixote. "Give them to him in reals and I shall be satisfied. And mind you keep your oath; if not, by that same oath I swear to come back and look for you and punish you, and I shall find you even if you hide better than a lizard. And if you want to know who lays this on you, so as to feel more truly bound to carry it out, know that I am the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of wrongs and injustices. And so God be with you, and do not let what you have promised and sworn slip out of your mind, on pain of the penalty pronounced."

And so saying he spurred Rocinante and was soon well away from them. The farmer followed him with his eyes, and when he saw that he had passed out of the wood and was no longer in sight he turned to his servant Andrés and said:

"Come here, my son, I want to pay you what I owe you, as that undoer of wrongs commanded me."

"I'll swear you do," said Andrés. "And how right your worship will be to carry out the orders of that good knight — may he live a thousand years! Seeing how valiant he is and what a good judge, by St Roch, if you don't pay me he'll come back and do exactly what he said."

"I'll swear to that too," said the farmer; "but out of the great affection I bear you, I want to increase the debt so as to increase the payment."

And taking him by the arm he tied him to the oak again, where he gave him so many lashes that he left him for dead.

"Now call, Señor Andrés," said the farmer, "for the undoer of wrongs, and you'll see how he doesn't undo this one. Though I don't think it's finished being done yet, because I have a mind to flay you alive, as you were afraid of."

But in the end he untied him and gave him leave to go and look for his judge, so that he might execute the sentence pronounced. Andrés went off rather glum, swearing to go and find the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha and tell him point by point what had happened, and that he would have to pay for it sevenfold. For all that, he went off crying and his master stayed behind laughing.

And that was how the valiant Don Quixote undid the wrong; and he, delighted with what had happened and thinking he had made a most fortunate and lofty beginning to his knighthood, rode on towards his village in great satisfaction with himself, saying under his breath:

"Well may you call yourself the most fortunate of all the women alive on earth today, O beauty above all beauties, Dulcinea of El Toboso — since it has fallen to your lot to have subject and surrendered to your every wish and pleasure so valiant and so renowned a knight as Don Quixote of La Mancha is and shall be; who, as all the world knows, received the order of chivalry yesterday and today has undone the greatest wrong and injury that injustice ever framed or cruelty ever committed. Today he struck the whip from the hand of that pitiless enemy who was flogging that delicate child for no reason at all."

At this point he came to a place where the road divided into four, and at once there came into his mind those crossroads where knights errant used to stop and consider which of the roads to take; and to imitate them he sat still a while, and after thinking it over very thoroughly he dropped the rein and left his own choice to the horse's, and the horse followed his original intention, which was to make for his own stable.

After going about two miles, Don Quixote made out a great crowd of people, who, as it turned out afterwards, were some merchants of Toledo on their way to buy silk in Murcia. There were six of them, riding under sunshades, with four servants on horseback and three muleteers on foot. Don Quixote had hardly caught sight of them before he imagined this must be some fresh adventure; and, so as to copy in every way he could the passages he had read in his books, it seemed to him that here was one made to measure that he had been meaning to attempt. So with a noble bearing and great resolution he settled himself firmly in the stirrups, gripped his lance, brought his shield up to his chest, and, planting himself in the middle of the road, waited for those knights errant to come up — for that is what he took them for and judged them to be. And when they had got near enough to see and hear him, Don Quixote raised his voice and said, with an arrogant gesture:

"Let all the world stand still, unless all the world confesses that there is not in all the world a maiden more beautiful than the Empress of La Mancha, the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso."

The merchants stopped at the sound of this speech, and to look at the strange figure of the man who made it; and from the figure and the speech they saw at once that its owner was mad. But they wanted to see at their leisure where this confession they were being asked for would end, and one of them, who was something of a joker and very shrewd indeed, said to him:

"Sir knight, we do not know who this good lady you speak of may be. Show her to us; and if she is as beautiful as you make out, we will willingly and without any compulsion confess the truth that you require of us."

"If I showed her to you," replied Don Quixote, "what merit would there be in your confessing so obvious a truth? The whole point is that without seeing her you must believe it, confess it, affirm it, swear it and defend it; and if not, you are at war with me, you monstrous and arrogant people. Whether you come at me one by one, as the order of chivalry requires, or all together, as is the custom and the bad practice of your breed, here I stand and wait for you, trusting in the right that is on my side."

"Sir knight," said the merchant, "I beg your worship, in the name of all these princes here present, that — so as not to burden our consciences by confessing a thing we have never seen or heard of, and one so much to the prejudice of the empresses and queens of the Alcarria and Extremadura — your worship will be so good as to show us some portrait of this lady, even if it is no bigger than a grain of wheat; for you can tell the whole skein by a single thread, and we shall be satisfied and easy in our minds, and your worship will be content and paid off. In fact I think we are so far on your side already that even if her portrait shows us she is blind in one eye and that the other runs vermilion and brimstone, we would still, to oblige your worship, say everything you like in her favour."

"It runs nothing of the kind, you infamous rabble," answered Don Quixote, blazing with rage. "It runs nothing of the kind, I tell you, but amber and civet packed in cotton wool; and she is neither one-eyed nor hunchbacked, but straighter than a spindle out of the Guadarrama. But you shall pay for the enormous blasphemy you have uttered against beauty as great as my lady's."

And saying this he charged with his lance levelled at the man who had spoken, with such fury and rage that if good luck had not arranged for Rocinante to stumble and fall halfway there, it would have gone badly for the bold merchant. Rocinante went down, and his master rolled a good distance across the field; and, trying to get up, he never could — such an encumbrance were the lance, shield, spurs and helmet, together with the weight of that ancient armour. And while he was struggling to get up and failing, he kept saying:

"Fly not, cowardly people! Stay, base creatures! It is not by my own fault that I lie here, but by my horse's."

One of the muleteers, who cannot have been very well disposed, hearing the poor fallen man come out with all this arrogance, could not put up with it without answering him across the ribs. Going up to him, he took the lance, and after breaking it in pieces he began with one of them to give our Don Quixote such a beating that, in spite of all his armour, he ground him like grain. His masters shouted at him not to lay it on so hard and to leave the man alone, but the lad's blood was up and he would not leave the game until he had staked the whole rest of his rage; and fetching the other pieces of the lance he finished breaking them up on the wretched fallen man, who through that whole tempest of blows never shut his mouth, but went on threatening heaven and earth and the brigands, which was what they seemed to him.

The lad wore himself out, and the merchants went on their way with something to talk about for the rest of it — the poor cudgelled knight. And he, when he saw himself alone, tried once more whether he could get up; but if he could not do it when he was sound and well, how was he to do it now, pounded and half destroyed? And still he counted himself fortunate, since it seemed to him this was a misfortune proper to knights errant, and he put the whole of it down to his horse's fault; and it was not possible to get up, so bruised was he in every part of his body.
