Chapter 5: In Which the Story of Our Knight's Misfortune Is Continued

Finding, then, that he really could not stir, he decided to fall back on his usual remedy, which was to think of some passage out of his books; and his madness brought to his mind the one about Valdovinos and the Marquis of Mantua, when Carloto left him wounded in the mountains — a story known to children, not unfamiliar to young men, celebrated and even believed by old ones, and for all that no truer than the miracles of Mahomet. This struck him as made to measure for the situation he was in; and so, with every appearance of great suffering, he began to roll about on the ground and to say in a failing voice the very words they say the wounded knight of the wood said:

	Where art thou, lady mine,
	that thou grievest not at my pain?
	Either thou knowest it not, lady,
	or thou art false and disloyal.

And in this manner he went on with the ballad as far as those lines that say:

	O noble Marquis of Mantua,
	mine uncle and lord by blood!

And as luck would have it, when he got to this line a labourer from his own village and a neighbour of his happened to be passing, on his way back from taking a load of wheat to the mill. Seeing a man lying there, he came up and asked him who he was and what was wrong with him that he was complaining so mournfully. Don Quixote had no doubt at all that this was the Marquis of Mantua, his uncle; and so he answered nothing but went on with his ballad, in which he gave an account of his misfortune and of the love affair between the Emperor's son and his own wife — all exactly as the ballad sings it.

The labourer stood amazed, listening to this nonsense; and taking off the visor, which was already in pieces from the beating, he wiped his face, which was covered in dust; and he had hardly wiped it before he recognised him and said:

"Señor Quixana" — for that must have been his name when he was in his right mind and had not yet gone from a quiet gentleman to a knight errant — "who has put your worship in this state?"

But he only went on with his ballad in answer to everything he was asked. Seeing this, the good man got off his breastplate and backpiece as best he could, to see whether he had any wound; but he saw no blood and no mark of any kind. He tried to get him up off the ground, and with no little trouble hoisted him onto his own donkey, which seemed to him the steadier mount. He gathered up the armour, down to the splinters of the lance, and tied it all on Rocinante; and taking the horse by the rein and the ass by the halter, he set off towards his village, deep in thought at the nonsense Don Quixote was talking. And Don Quixote was no less deep in it, for being so pounded and broken that he could hardly keep his seat on the little donkey, and letting out sighs from time to time that carried up to heaven — so that once again he obliged the labourer to ask him to say what was wrong with him. And it seems as though the devil himself was bringing into his memory the tales that fitted his circumstances, because at that moment, forgetting all about Valdovinos, he remembered the Moor Abindarráez, and how the governor of Antequera, Rodrigo de Narváez, took him prisoner and carried him captive to his stronghold. So that when the labourer asked him again how he was and what he felt, he answered with the same words and speeches that the captive Abencerraje made to Rodrigo de Narváez, exactly as he had read the story in Jorge de Montemayor's Diana, where it is written down — making such apt use of it that the labourer was consigning himself to the devil at having to listen to such a machine of foolishness. By which he understood that his neighbour was mad, and he hurried on to reach the village so as to escape the tedium Don Quixote's long harangue was causing him. At the end of it Don Quixote said:

"Let your worship know, Señor Don Rodrigo de Narváez, that this beautiful Jarifa I have mentioned is now the lovely Dulcinea of El Toboso, for whom I have done, do and shall do the most famous deeds of chivalry that have been, are being or ever will be seen in this world."

To which the labourer answered:

"Look here, sir, sinner that I am — I am not Don Rodrigo de Narváez, nor the Marquis of Mantua, but Pedro Alonso, your neighbour; and your worship is not Valdovinos nor Abindarráez, but the honourable gentleman Señor Quixana."

"I know who I am," answered Don Quixote, "and I know that I can be not only the men I have named, but all the Twelve Peers of France as well, and all the Nine Worthies too; for my exploits will outdo everything they all did together and every one of them did singly."

With this talk and more like it they reached the village about nightfall; but the labourer waited until it was a little darker, so that the battered gentleman should not be seen making such a poor horseman. When it seemed to him the right time, he went into the town and up to Don Quixote's house, which he found in an uproar. The curate and the barber of the village were there, both of them great friends of Don Quixote, and the housekeeper was shouting at them:

"What does your worship think, Señor Licentiate Pero Pérez" — for that was the curate's name — "of my master's misfortune? Three days now and no sign of him, nor of the nag, nor of the shield, nor the lance, nor the armour. Miserable woman that I am! I am convinced — and it is as true as that I was born to die — that those cursed books of chivalry he has, and reads so constantly, have turned his brain. Now I remember hearing him say many a time, talking to himself, that he wanted to turn knight errant and go off through the world looking for adventures. Let those books be commended to Satan and Barabbas, for having ruined the finest understanding in the whole of La Mancha."

The niece said the same, and more besides:

"You should know, Master Nicholas" — that was the barber's name — "that many a time it happened that my uncle would be reading these heartless books of misfortunes for two days and nights together, at the end of which he would throw the book out of his hands, lay hold of his sword and go slashing at the walls; and when he was thoroughly worn out he would say he had killed four giants as big as four towers, and the sweat that ran off him from tiredness he said was blood from the wounds he had taken in the battle. Then he would drink off a great jug of cold water and be well and calm again, saying that the water was a most precious potion brought him by the sage Esquife, a great enchanter and a friend of his. But I am to blame for the whole thing, for not telling your worships about my uncle's ravings so that you could have done something about it before it came to this, and burnt all these excommunicated books — for he has plenty of them, and they thoroughly deserve to be burned, as if they belonged to heretics."

"That is what I say too," said the curate, "and upon my word tomorrow shall not pass without a public trial being held on them and their being condemned to the fire, so that they may not give anyone else who reads them the chance of doing what my good friend must have done."

The labourer and Don Quixote were listening to all this, and it finally made the labourer understand what was the matter with his neighbour; so he began to call out:

"Open, your worships, to Sir Valdovinos and to my lord the Marquis of Mantua, who comes sorely wounded, and to the Moorish lord Abindarráez, brought captive by the valiant Rodrigo de Narváez, governor of Antequera."

At these shouts they all came out, and as the men recognised their friend and the women their master and uncle, who had still not got down from the donkey because he could not, they ran to embrace him. He said:

"Hold, all of you. I come sorely wounded through my horse's fault. Carry me to my bed and send, if it be possible, for the wise Urganda, to treat and examine my wounds."

"Just look at that, confound it!" said the housekeeper at this. "Didn't my heart tell me exactly which foot my master was limping on! Come up, your worship, and welcome; for without that Hurgada of yours coming we shall know how to cure you here. Cursed, I say again, and a hundred times over, be these books of chivalry, that have brought your worship to this!"

They carried him to bed at once, and searching him for wounds could find none; and he said it was all bruising, from having taken a great fall with Rocinante his horse while fighting ten giants, the most outrageous and audacious that were to be found in a great part of the earth.

"Aha!" said the curate. "So there are giants in the dance, are there? By the holy cross, I will burn them tomorrow before nightfall."

They asked Don Quixote a thousand questions, and to none of them would he answer anything except that they should give him something to eat and let him sleep, which was what mattered most to him. This was done, and the curate questioned the labourer at great length about how he had found Don Quixote. He told him the whole of it, with the nonsense he had talked when he found him and while he was bringing him home; which only made the licentiate keener to do what he did the next day, which was to call on his friend Master Nicholas the barber and go with him to Don Quixote's house.
