Chapter 6: Of the Great and Comical Inquisition the Curate and the Barber Held in the Library of Our Ingenious Gentleman

He was still asleep. The curate asked the niece for the keys of the room where the books were — the authors of the mischief — and she gave them to him very willingly. They all went in, the housekeeper with them, and found more than a hundred large volumes, very handsomely bound, and a good many small ones. The moment the housekeeper saw them she hurried out of the room again and came back with a bowl of holy water and a sprinkler, and said:

"Take this, your worship, Señor Licentiate, and sprinkle the room, in case there should be here one of those enchanters the books are full of, and he should put a spell on us in return for the one we mean to put on them by driving them out of the world."

The licentiate laughed at the housekeeper's simplicity, and told the barber to hand him the books one at a time so that he could see what they were about, since there might be some that did not deserve punishment by fire.

"No," said the niece, "there is no reason to spare a single one, because they have all done the damage. It would be better to throw them out of the window into the yard, make a pile of them and set fire to it; or else take them out to the stable-yard, and there make the bonfire, and then the smoke will not be a nuisance."

The housekeeper said the same: such was the eagerness the two of them had for the death of those innocents. But the curate would not agree to it without at least reading the titles. And the first that Master Nicholas put into his hands was The Four Books of Amadís of Gaul, and the curate said:

"There seems to be something providential in this; because I have heard it said that this was the first book of chivalry printed in Spain, and that all the rest have taken their beginning and origin from it. And so it seems to me that, as the founder of so bad a sect, we ought to condemn it to the fire without any excuse."

"No, sir," said the barber, "for I have also heard it said that it is the best of all the books that have been written in that line; and so, as being unique in its art, it ought to be pardoned."

"That is true," said the curate, "and for that reason its life is spared for now. Let us see that other one next to it."

"It is," said the barber, "The Exploits of Esplandián, the lawful son of Amadís of Gaul."

"Then in truth," said the curate, "the goodness of the father shall not save the son. Here, mistress housekeeper: open that window and throw him into the yard, and let him make a beginning to the pile for the bonfire we are going to have."

The housekeeper did it with great satisfaction, and the good Esplandián went flying into the yard to wait with all patience for the fire that threatened him.

"On we go," said the curate.

"This next one," said the barber, "is Amadís of Greece; and I believe all the ones on this side are of the same family as Amadís."

"Then let them all go into the yard," said the curate; "for rather than not burn Queen Pintiquiniestra, and the shepherd Darinel and his eclogues, and the devilish tangled speeches of the man who wrote them, I would burn my own father along with them, if he came about in the shape of a knight errant."

"I am of that opinion," said the barber.

"And so am I," added the niece.

"Well then," said the housekeeper, "hand them over, and out into the yard with them."

They gave her the books, which were many, and she saved herself the stairs by pitching them down out of the window.

"Who is that tub of a thing?" said the curate.

"That," answered the barber, "is Don Olivante de Laura."

"The author of that book," said the curate, "was the same man who wrote The Garden of Flowers; and to tell the truth I cannot make up my mind which of the two books is the more truthful — or, to put it better, the less lying. All I can say is that this one goes into the yard for being absurd and arrogant."

"This next is Florismarte of Hyrcania," said the barber.

"So Sir Florismarte is here, is he?" replied the curate. "Then upon my faith he shall come to a quick end in the yard, in spite of his strange birth and his celebrated adventures; the hardness and dryness of his style allow of nothing else. Into the yard with him and with that other one, mistress housekeeper."

"With pleasure, sir," she would answer; and she carried out her orders with great cheerfulness.

"This is The Knight Platir," said the barber.

"That is an old book," said the curate, "and I find nothing in it that deserves pardon. Let it join the others without argument."

And so it was done. They opened another book and saw that it was called The Knight of the Cross.

"For the sake of so holy a name as this book bears, its ignorance might be forgiven; but then there is the saying: behind the cross stands the devil. Into the fire with it."

Taking up another book, the barber said:

"This is The Mirror of Chivalry."

"I know his worship already," said the curate. "In there go Sir Reinaldos of Montalbán with his friends and companions, greater thieves than Cacus, and the Twelve Peers, with that truthful historian Turpin. And to tell the truth I am inclined to sentence them to no more than perpetual banishment, if only because they have a share in the invention of the famous Matteo Boiardo, out of which the Christian poet Ludovico Ariosto also wove his cloth. And if I find Ariosto here, and speaking any language but his own, I shall show him no respect whatever; but if he speaks in his own tongue, I shall put him on my head."

"Well, I have him in Italian," said the barber, "but I don't understand him."

"Nor would it be a good thing if you did," answered the curate; "and here we would gladly excuse that captain for not having brought him to Spain and made a Castilian of him, for he stripped him of a great deal of his native worth. And the same will be done by everyone who tries to turn books of verse into another language: however much care they take and however much skill they show, they will never reach the pitch those books had at their first birth. In short, I say that this book, and all that are found dealing with these matters of France, should be thrown and deposited in a dry well until we can decide with more deliberation what is to be done with them — always excepting a certain Bernardo del Carpio that is going about, and another called Roncesvalles; for these, the moment they come into my hands, shall pass into the housekeeper's and out of hers into the fire, without any reprieve."

The barber confirmed the whole of it and thought it well and very rightly said, believing the curate to be so good a Christian and so great a friend of the truth that he would not say otherwise for anything in the world. And opening another book, he saw it was Palmerin of the Olive, and next to it another called Palmerin of England; seeing which, the licentiate said:

"Let that olive be split into kindling at once and burned until not even its ashes are left; and let that palm of England be kept and preserved as something unique, and let a case be made for it like the one Alexander found among the spoils of Darius, which he set aside for keeping the works of the poet Homer in. This book, my friend, has authority on two counts: first because it is very good in itself, and secondly because it is said that a wise king of Portugal wrote it. All the adventures at the castle of Miraguarda are excellent and very skilfully done; the speeches are courtly and clear, and observe and respect the character of the speaker with great propriety and understanding. So I say, saving your better judgement, Master Nicholas, that this one and Amadís of Gaul go free of the fire, and all the rest perish without any further sifting and searching."

"No, my friend," replied the barber. "This one I have here is the celebrated Don Belianís."

"Then that one," replied the curate, "along with its second, third and fourth parts, needs a little rhubarb to purge its excess of bile; and everything about the Castle of Fame will have to come out, and other impertinences of more consequence. For that they are given the longest term the law allows, and according as they mend, so shall they be treated with mercy or with justice. In the meantime keep them at your house, friend, but do not let anybody read them."

"With pleasure," answered the barber.

And without wishing to tire himself out reading any more books of chivalry, he told the housekeeper to take all the big ones and pitch them into the yard. This was not said to a fool or a deaf woman, but to one who was keener on burning them than on weaving a length of cloth, however large and fine. Grabbing nearly eight at once, she flung them out of the window; and taking so many together, one fell at the barber's feet, and he had a fancy to see whose it was, and saw it said: The History of the Famous Knight Tirant lo Blanc.

"Bless me!" said the curate, with a great shout. "So Tirant lo Blanc is here! Give him to me, friend; I reckon I have found in him a treasure of enjoyment and a mine of amusement. Here is Don Quirieleison of Montalbán, that valiant knight, and his brother Tomás of Montalbán, and the knight Fonseca, and the battle the brave Tirant fought with the mastiff, and the witticisms of the damsel Pleasure-of-my-life, and the loves and the wiles of the widow Repose, and the lady Empress in love with Hippolyte her squire. I tell you truly, friend, that for its style this is the best book in the world: here the knights eat, and sleep, and die in their beds, and make their wills before they die, with all sorts of things that every other book of the kind goes without. For all that, I tell you that the man who wrote it deserved, for not having done so many foolish things on purpose, to be sent to the galleys for the rest of his days. Take it home and read it, and you will see that everything I have told you about it is true."

"I shall," answered the barber. "But what are we to do with these small books that are left?"

"These," said the curate, "cannot be books of chivalry, but of poetry."

And opening one, he saw it was the Diana of Jorge de Montemayor, and said, thinking all the rest were of the same kind:

"These do not deserve to be burned like the others, because they do not do, and will not do, the harm the books of chivalry have done. They are books of the understanding, and nobody is the worse for them."

"Oh, sir!" said the niece. "Your worship may perfectly well order these to be burned like the rest; because it would be no great wonder if, my uncle having been cured of his chivalry sickness, he should read these and take it into his head to turn shepherd and go wandering about the woods and meadows singing and playing — and, what would be worse, turn poet, which they say is an incurable and catching disease."

"The young lady speaks the truth," said the curate, "and it will be as well to take this stumbling-block and occasion of sin out of our friend's way. And since we are beginning with Montemayor's Diana, I am of the opinion that it should not be burned, but that everything about the wise Felicia and the enchanted water should be cut out of it, and nearly all the longer verses; and let it keep, and welcome, its prose and the honour of being first in that line of books."

"This next," said the barber, "is the Diana called the second, by the man from Salamanca; and this is another with the same name, whose author is Gil Polo."

"Then let the one from Salamanca," answered the curate, "go and swell the number of the condemned in the yard; and let Gil Polo's be kept as if it were by Apollo himself. And get on, friend, and let us hurry, for it is growing late."

"This book," said the barber, opening another, "is The Ten Books of the Fortune of Love, composed by Antonio de Lofraso, a Sardinian poet."

"By the holy orders I received," said the curate, "since Apollo was Apollo and the muses muses and poets poets, so amusing and so preposterous a book as this has never been written; and in its own way it is the best and the most singular of all that have come out in that line into the light of the world; and the man who has not read it may reckon he has never read anything enjoyable in his life. Give it to me, friend, for I value having found it more than if somebody had given me a cassock of Florentine cloth."

He put it aside with the greatest satisfaction, and the barber went on:

"These next are The Shepherd of Iberia, The Nymphs of Henares and Disenchantments of Jealousy."

"Then there is nothing to be done," said the curate, "but hand them over to the secular arm of the housekeeper; and let nobody ask me why, or we should never be finished."

"This next is The Shepherd of Fílida."

"That is no shepherd," said the curate, "but a very polished courtier. Let it be kept like a precious jewel."

"This big one here," said the barber, "is called Treasury of Various Poems."

"If there were not so many of them," said the curate, "they would be more esteemed. This book needs weeding and cleaning of certain low things it has among its fine ones. Let it be kept, because its author is a friend of mine, and out of respect for other more heroic and lofty works he has written."

"This one," the barber went on, "is the Songbook of López Maldonado."

"The author of that book," replied the curate, "is also a great friend of mine, and his verses in his own mouth astonish anyone who hears them; and such is the sweetness of the voice he sings them in that it enchants you. He is a little long in the eclogues, but there was never too much of a good thing. Let it be kept with the chosen ones. But what book is that beside it?"

"The Galatea, by Miguel de Cervantes," said the barber.

"That Cervantes has been a great friend of mine for many years, and I know he is better versed in misfortunes than in verses. His book has something of good invention about it; it proposes something and concludes nothing. We must wait for the second part he promises; perhaps with amendment it will win the whole of the mercy that is now refused it. In the meantime, until we see, keep him shut up at your house, friend."

"With pleasure," answered the barber. "And here come three all together: The Araucana, by Don Alonso de Ercilla; The Austríada, by Juan Rufo, magistrate of Córdoba; and The Monserrat, by Cristóbal de Virués, a Valencian poet."

"All three of those books," said the curate, "are the best that have been written in heroic verse in the Castilian tongue, and can compete with the most famous of Italy. Let them be kept as the richest treasures of poetry that Spain possesses."

The curate grew tired of looking at any more books, and so, without further examination, he wanted all the rest burned wholesale. But the barber had already opened one that was called The Tears of Angelica.

"I should have wept them myself," said the curate on hearing the name, "if I had ordered such a book to be burned; because its author was one of the famous poets of the world, not only of Spain, and he was outstandingly happy in his translation of some of Ovid's fables."
