Chapter 7: Of the Second Sally of Our Good Knight Don Quixote of La Mancha

At this point Don Quixote began to shout:

"Here, here, valiant knights! Here is where you must show the strength of your mighty arms, for the courtiers are getting the best of the tournament!"

Running to see what all this noise and commotion was about, they got no further with the inquisition into the books that were left; and so it is believed that The Carolea and The Lion of Spain went into the fire unseen and unheard, along with The Deeds of the Emperor, written by Don Luis de Ávila, which must undoubtedly have been among those still to come; and perhaps, if the curate had seen them, they would not have suffered so severe a sentence.

When they reached Don Quixote he was already out of bed and still shouting and raving, laying about him on all sides with cuts and backstrokes, as wide awake as if he had never slept at all. They got hold of him and forced him back into bed; and after he had quietened down a little he turned to the curate and said:

"Certainly, my lord Archbishop Turpin, it is a great disgrace to those of us who call ourselves the Twelve Peers to let the courtier knights carry off the victory in this tournament so tamely, when we adventurers have won the prize on the three preceding days."

"Be quiet, my friend," said the curate. "God will be pleased to let the luck change, and what is lost today may be won tomorrow. Look to your health for the present, for it seems to me your worship must be excessively tired, if you are not sorely wounded."

"Wounded, no," said Don Quixote, "but pounded and broken, there is no doubt of that; because that bastard Don Roland has beaten me to a pulp with the trunk of an oak, and all out of envy, because he sees that I alone stand against his exploits. But my name is not Reinaldos of Montalbán if, when I get out of this bed, I do not make him pay for it, for all his enchantments. And for now, let them bring me something to eat, for I know that is what I need most, and leave the revenging to me."

They did so: they gave him something to eat and he fell asleep again, and they were left astonished at his madness.

That night the housekeeper burned and consumed every book there was in the yard and in the whole house; and some must have gone up in the flames that deserved to be kept in perpetual archives. But their luck, and the laziness of the inquisitor, did not allow it; and so the proverb was fulfilled in them, that sometimes the just pay for sinners.

One of the remedies the curate and the barber hit on for their friend's complaint was to have the room where the books had been walled and plastered up, so that when he got up he should not find it — perhaps if the cause were removed the effect would cease — and to say that an enchanter had carried them off, room and all. This was done with great speed. Two days later Don Quixote got up, and the first thing he did was go and look at his books; and, not finding the room where he had left it, he went about from one place to another looking for it. He would come to where the door used to be and feel for it with his hands, and turn his eyes this way and that over everything without saying a word; but after a good long while he asked his housekeeper which way the room with his books was. The housekeeper, who had been thoroughly briefed on what she was to answer, said:

"What room, or what nothing, is your worship looking for? There is no room and no books in this house any more, because the devil himself carried the whole lot away."

"It was not the devil," put in the niece, "but an enchanter who came on a cloud one night, the day after your worship left here; and getting down off a serpent he was riding, he went into the room, and I don't know what he did in there, but after a little while he flew out through the roof and left the house full of smoke. And when we thought to look at what he had done, we could see neither book nor room. Only my mistress and I remember very well that as the wicked old man was leaving he called out in a loud voice that, because of a secret enmity he bore the owner of those books and that room, he had done damage in this house that would be seen afterwards. He said too that he was called the sage Muñatón."

"He would have said Frestón," said Don Quixote.

"I don't know," answered the housekeeper, "whether he was called Frestón or Fritón; all I know is that his name ended in -tón."

"So it does," said Don Quixote. "He is a wise enchanter, a great enemy of mine, who has a grudge against me, because he knows by his arts and his learning that in the course of time I am to fight in single combat with a knight he favours, and that I am to defeat him without his being able to prevent it; and for that reason he does me every ill turn he can. And I tell him that he will have a hard time contradicting or avoiding what heaven has ordained."

"Who doubts it?" said the niece. "But who is asking your worship to get mixed up in these quarrels, uncle? Wouldn't it be better to stay peacefully at home and not go wandering about the world looking for bread better than wheaten, without stopping to think that many go for wool and come back shorn?"

"Oh, niece of mine," answered Don Quixote, "how badly you have reckoned it up! Before anybody shears me I shall have plucked out and pulled off the beard of every man who so much as thinks of touching the tip of a single hair of mine."

Neither of them cared to answer him back any further, because they saw that his temper was rising.

The fact of the matter is that he stayed at home for a fortnight very quietly, giving no sign of wanting to repeat his first ravings; during which days he had the most delightful conversations with his two friends the curate and the barber, in which he maintained that what the world stood in most need of was knights errant, and that in him knight-errantry should be brought back to life. The curate sometimes contradicted him and sometimes agreed, because without keeping up that device there was no getting on with him at all.

During this time Don Quixote worked on a labourer who was a neighbour of his, an honest man — if that title can be given to a man who is poor — but with very little salt in his headpiece. In short, he said so much to him, and persuaded and promised him so much, that the poor peasant made up his mind to go off with him and serve him as squire. Among other things Don Quixote told him that he should be ready to come willingly, because some adventure might befall in which, in the twinkling of an eye, he might win an isle and leave him governor of it. On the strength of these promises and others like them, Sancho Panza — for that was the labourer's name — left his wife and children and took service as his neighbour's squire.

Don Quixote then set about getting money; and by selling one thing and pawning another, and coming off badly on all of them, he raised a reasonable sum. He also fitted himself out with a round shield, which he borrowed from a friend, and, patching up his broken helmet as best he could, he warned his squire Sancho of the day and hour he meant to set out, so that he could provide himself with whatever he thought he most needed. Above all he charged him to bring saddlebags. Sancho said he would, and that he was thinking of bringing an ass he had, a very good one, because he was not used to going far on foot. Over the ass Don Quixote hesitated a little, casting about in his memory to see whether any knight errant had ever had a squire mounted asswise; but none came to mind. All the same, he decided that he should bring it, meaning to fit him out with a more honourable mount as soon as there was occasion, by taking the horse off the first discourteous knight he met. He provided himself with shirts and everything else he could, following the advice the innkeeper had given him. And all this being done and settled, without Panza taking leave of his children and wife, or Don Quixote of his housekeeper and niece, they left the village one night without a soul seeing them; and they rode so far that by daybreak they reckoned themselves safe from being found even if they were searched for.

Sancho Panza rode along on his donkey like a patriarch, with his saddlebags and his wineskin, and with a great longing to see himself governor of the isle his master had promised him. Don Quixote happened to take the same route and road he had taken on his first journey, across the plain of Montiel, which he crossed with less discomfort than the time before, because it was early morning and the sun's rays struck them slantwise and did not tire them. Then Sancho Panza said to his master:

"Mind your worship doesn't forget, sir knight errant, what you promised me about the isle; for I shall know how to govern it, however big it may be."

To which Don Quixote answered:

"You must know, Sancho Panza my friend, that it was a very common practice among the knights errant of old to make their squires governors of the isles or kingdoms they won; and I am determined that so gracious a custom shall not fail through me. On the contrary, I mean to improve on it: because they sometimes, and perhaps most times, waited until their squires were old; and then, when the men had had their fill of service and endured bad days and worse nights, they gave them some title of count, or at most marquis, of some valley or province of no great size. But if you live and I live, it may very well be that before six days are out I shall win a kingdom with others attached to it, exactly suited for crowning you king of one of them. And do not think it much, for things and events come to such knights in ways so unheard-of and unimagined that I might easily give you even more than I promise."

"In that case," answered Sancho Panza, "if I were to be a king by one of these miracles your worship talks about, then at the very least Juana Gutiérrez, my old woman, would come to be a queen and my children princes."

"Well, who doubts it?" answered Don Quixote.

"I doubt it," replied Sancho Panza; "because I reckon that if God rained kingdoms down on the earth, not one of them would sit well on the head of Mari Gutiérrez. I tell you, sir, she isn't worth twopence as a queen. Countess would suit her better, and even that with God's help."

"Leave it to God, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "and He will give what suits you best. But do not lower your spirits so far as to be content with anything less than being a governor."

"I won't, sir," answered Sancho, "especially having so distinguished a master as your worship, who will know how to give me whatever is good for me and whatever I can carry."
