Chapter 8: Of the Good Fortune the Valiant Don Quixote Had in the Dreadful and Never-Before-Imagined Adventure of the Windmills, with Other Events Worthy of Happy Remembrance

At this point they caught sight of thirty or forty windmills that stand on that plain; and as soon as Don Quixote saw them he said to his squire:

"Fortune is guiding our affairs better than we could have wished. Look over there, Sancho Panza my friend, where thirty or more monstrous giants are showing themselves, with whom I mean to do battle and take all their lives; and with their spoils we shall begin to grow rich. For this is a righteous war, and it is a great service to God to sweep so evil a breed off the face of the earth."

"What giants?" said Sancho Panza.

"Those you see over there," answered his master, "with the long arms; some of them have arms very nearly two leagues long."

"Look, your worship," answered Sancho, "those things over there aren't giants, they're windmills, and what look like arms on them are the sails, which the wind turns and makes the millstone go round."

"It is quite clear," answered Don Quixote, "that you are not versed in this business of adventures. They are giants; and if you are frightened, get out of the way and set yourself to praying while I go into fierce and unequal battle with them."

And saying this he put spurs to his horse Rocinante, paying no attention to the shouts his squire Sancho was giving him, warning him that beyond any doubt they were windmills and not giants that he was going to attack. But he was so set on their being giants that he neither heard his squire Sancho's shouts nor made out what they were, though he was already quite close; on the contrary, he went on calling at the top of his voice:

"Fly not, cowards and vile creatures, for it is one knight alone who attacks you!"

Just then a little wind got up and the great sails began to move, seeing which Don Quixote said:

"Though you wave more arms than the giant Briareus, you shall answer to me for it."

And saying this, and commending himself with all his heart to his lady Dulcinea, begging her to help him in this pass, well covered by his shield and with his lance in the rest, he charged at Rocinante's full gallop and rammed the first mill in front of him. He drove his lance into the sail, and the wind turned it with such fury that it smashed the lance to pieces, carrying horse and knight along with it, and Don Quixote went rolling across the field very badly knocked about. Sancho Panza came to the rescue at his donkey's full run, and when he got there he found his master could not stir, such a fall had Rocinante given him.

"God help us!" said Sancho. "Didn't I tell your worship to look carefully at what you were doing — that they were only windmills, and nobody could take them for anything else unless he had windmills of the same sort in his own head?"

"Be quiet, Sancho my friend," answered Don Quixote. "Matters of war, more than any others, are subject to continual change. What is more, I believe — and it is the truth — that the sage Frestón who stole my room and my books has turned these giants into windmills, to rob me of the glory of defeating them: such is the enmity he bears me. But in the end, in the very end, his wicked arts will avail him little against the goodness of my sword."

"God grant it, as He can," answered Sancho Panza.

And helping him to his feet, he got him back up onto Rocinante, whose shoulder was half out of joint. Talking over the adventure just past, they took the road for Puerto Lápice, because Don Quixote said it was impossible not to find many and various adventures there, it being a much-travelled place. But he rode along very downcast at having lost his lance; and saying so to his squire, he added:

"I remember reading that a Spanish knight called Diego Pérez de Vargas, having broken his sword in a battle, tore a heavy branch or bough from an oak, and with it did such things that day, and pounded so many Moors, that he was given the surname Machuca — the Pounder — and he and his descendants from that day on were called Vargas y Machuca. I tell you this because from the first oak or elm that offers itself I mean to tear off a bough as good and as heavy as that one; and I intend to do such deeds with it that you will count yourself fortunate to have deserved to come and see them, and to be a witness of things that will hardly be believed."

"In God's hands," said Sancho. "I believe every word your worship says. But straighten up a bit, because you seem to be riding all on one side — it must be the bruising from the fall."

"That is the truth," answered Don Quixote; "and if I do not complain of the pain, it is because knights errant are not allowed to complain of any wound, even if their guts are coming out through it."

"If that's so, I have nothing to say," answered Sancho. "But God knows I'd be glad enough if your worship did complain when something hurt. For myself, I can tell you I shall complain of the very smallest pain I get — unless that rule about not complaining applies to the squires of knights errant as well."

Don Quixote could not help laughing at his squire's simplicity, and told him he might very well complain, how and when he liked, whether he felt like it or not; for so far he had read nothing to the contrary in the order of chivalry. Sancho pointed out that it was dinner time. His master answered that for the present he had no need of it, and that Sancho might eat whenever he pleased. With this permission Sancho settled himself as comfortably as he could on his donkey, and taking out of the saddlebags what he had put into them, he rode along behind his master eating very deliberately, and from time to time tilting up the wineskin with such relish that the most pampered tavern-keeper in Málaga might have envied him. And while he went along in this fashion, taking pull after pull, he had no memory of any promise his master had made him, and thought it no hardship at all, but a great rest, to go about looking for adventures, however dangerous they might be.

In the end they spent that night among some trees, and from one of them Don Quixote tore off a dry branch that could very nearly serve him as a lance, and fitted to it the iron head he took off the one that had broken. All that night Don Quixote did not sleep, thinking about his lady Dulcinea, so as to conform to what he had read in his books, where knights would go many nights without sleeping in the forests and the wilderness, occupied with the memory of their ladies. Sancho Panza did not spend it in that way; having his stomach full, and not with chicory water, he carried the whole night off in a single sleep, and neither the sun's rays striking him in the face nor the singing of the birds, who greeted the coming of the new day in great numbers and very merrily, would have been enough to wake him if his master had not called him. As he got up he gave the wineskin a squeeze and found it rather thinner than the night before, and his heart sank, for it seemed to him they were not on a road that would soon make good the shortage. Don Quixote would not breakfast, because, as has been said, he had taken to living on delicious memories. They went back to the road they had started on for Puerto Lápice, and about three in the afternoon they came in sight of it.

"Here," said Don Quixote when he saw it, "we can dip our hands up to the elbows, brother Sancho Panza, in what they call adventures. But note that however great the dangers you may see me in, you are not to lay hand on your sword to defend me, unless you see that those attacking me are riff-raff and low people, in which case you may certainly help me. But if they are knights, it is in no way lawful or permitted you by the laws of chivalry to help me, until you are dubbed a knight yourself."

"Certainly, sir," answered Sancho, "your worship shall be very well obeyed in this; and all the more since I am naturally peaceable and no friend to getting into brawls and quarrels. Though it's true enough that where defending my own person is concerned I shan't take much account of those laws, since both divine and human law allow every man to defend himself against anyone who tries to wrong him."

"I say no less," answered Don Quixote; "but in this matter of helping me against knights you must keep your natural impulses in check."

"I say I'll do it," answered Sancho, "and I'll keep that commandment as well as I keep Sunday."

While they were talking, two friars of the order of St Benedict appeared on the road, mounted on two dromedaries — for the two mules they were riding were no smaller than that. They were wearing travelling goggles and carrying sunshades. Behind them came a coach, with four or five horsemen escorting it and two muleteers on foot. In the coach, as it turned out afterwards, was a Basque lady on her way to Seville, where her husband was, on his way out to the Indies with a very honourable appointment. The friars were not travelling with her, though they were on the same road; but Don Quixote had hardly caught sight of them before he said to his squire:

"Either I am much mistaken, or this is going to be the most famous adventure ever seen; because those black shapes over there must be, and beyond any doubt are, enchanters carrying off some princess they have stolen in that coach, and it is my business to undo this wrong with all my might."

"This is going to be worse than the windmills," said Sancho. "Look, sir, those are friars of St Benedict, and the coach must belong to some travellers. Look, I tell you to look very carefully at what you are doing, in case it's the devil deceiving you."

"I have told you already, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "that you know very little about the business of adventures. What I say is true, and you shall see it now."

And saying this he rode forward and placed himself in the middle of the road the friars were coming along; and when they had got close enough for him to think they could hear what he said, he called out in a loud voice:

"Devilish and monstrous crew, release this instant the noble princesses you are carrying off by force in that coach; or else make ready to receive a swift death, as the just punishment of your evil deeds."

The friars reined in and stood amazed, both at Don Quixote's figure and at his words, to which they answered:

"Sir knight, we are neither devilish nor monstrous, but two religious of St Benedict going along our road; and we do not know whether or not there are any princesses being carried off by force in that coach."

"Soft words are wasted on me, for I know you already, you perfidious rabble," said Don Quixote.

And without waiting for any further answer he spurred Rocinante and, with his lance levelled, charged the first friar with such fury and determination that if the friar had not let himself drop off the mule he would have brought him to the ground against his will, and badly wounded too, if he had not fallen dead. The second religious, seeing how his companion was being treated, dug his heels into the castle of his good mule and began to gallop across that plain, lighter than the wind itself.

Sancho Panza, seeing the friar on the ground, got nimbly down off his donkey, went at him and began to strip off his habit. Then two of the friars' servants came up and asked him why he was undressing him. Sancho answered that it belonged to him by right, as the spoils of the battle his master Don Quixote had won. The servants, who were not up to jokes and knew nothing about spoils or battles, seeing that Don Quixote had ridden off some way and was talking to the people in the coach, set on Sancho and knocked him down; and without leaving a hair in his beard they kicked him to a pulp and left him stretched on the ground without breath or sense. And without stopping a moment the friar got back on his mule, thoroughly frightened and cowed and with no colour in his face; and as soon as he was in the saddle he spurred after his companion, who was waiting for him a good way off to see how this alarm would turn out; and without waiting for the end of the whole business they went on their way, crossing themselves more often than if they had had the devil at their backs.

Don Quixote, as has been said, was talking to the lady in the coach, saying:

"Your beauty, my lady, may now dispose of your person as best pleases you, for the arrogance of your abductors lies in the dust, brought down by this strong arm of mine. And so that you may not be in pain to know the name of your deliverer, know that I am called Don Quixote of La Mancha, knight errant and adventurer, and captive of the peerless and beautiful Doña Dulcinea of El Toboso. And in payment of the benefit you have received from me, I want nothing but that you return to El Toboso and present yourself on my behalf before that lady, and tell her what I have done for your liberty."

Everything Don Quixote was saying was overheard by one of the squires escorting the coach, a Basque; who, seeing that he would not let the coach go forward but insisted that it must turn straight back to El Toboso, went up to Don Quixote and, taking hold of his lance, said to him in bad Castilian and worse Basque:

"Go, knight, and badly go thou; by the God that made me, if not leave coach, so kill thee as art here Biscayan."

Don Quixote understood him perfectly well, and answered with great composure:

"If thou wert a knight, which thou art not, I would already have punished thy folly and thy presumption, thou wretched creature."

To which the Basque replied:

"I no gentleman? I swear to God thou liest as Christian. If lance throwest and sword drawest, the water how soon shalt see thou carriest the cat! Biscayan on land, gentleman on sea, gentleman by the devil; and thou liest, and look to it if other thing sayest."

"Now shalt thou see, said Agrajes!" answered Don Quixote.

And throwing his lance on the ground, he drew his sword, got his shield on his arm and went at the Basque, determined to take his life. The Basque, seeing him come like that, would have liked to get down off the mule — which, being one of the bad hired sort, was not to be trusted — but could do nothing except draw his sword. It was lucky for him that he was next to the coach, from which he was able to snatch a cushion that served him as a shield; and then they went at each other as though they were two mortal enemies. The rest of the party wanted to make peace between them, but could not, because the Basque kept saying in his tangled speech that if they would not let him finish his battle he would kill his own mistress and everybody else who got in his way. The lady in the coach, astonished and terrified at what she was seeing, told the coachman to draw off a little way, and from a distance watched the fierce contest; in the course of which the Basque dealt Don Quixote a great slash on the shoulder, over the top of his shield, which, if it had landed undefended, would have opened him down to the waist.

Don Quixote, feeling the weight of that outrageous blow, gave a great shout, saying:

"O lady of my soul, Dulcinea, flower of beauty, come to the help of this knight of yours, who to satisfy your great goodness finds himself in this hard pass!"

The saying of this, and the gripping of the sword, and the covering himself well with his shield, and the charging at the Basque, were all one movement, for he had made up his mind to stake everything on the hazard of a single stroke.

The Basque, seeing him come at him like that, understood his courage well enough from his boldness, and resolved to do the same as Don Quixote; and so he waited for him well covered by his cushion, without being able to turn the mule one way or the other, for by now, out of sheer weariness and being unused to such childishness, it could not take a step.

So on came Don Quixote, as has been said, against the wary Basque, with his sword raised and his mind made up to split him down the middle; and the Basque was waiting for him with his sword up too and padded with his cushion; and all the bystanders were terrified and hanging on what would come of those enormous blows they were threatening each other with. And the lady in the coach and the rest of her maids were making a thousand vows and offerings to all the images and houses of devotion in Spain, that God might deliver their squire and themselves from the great danger they were in.

But here is the trouble with all this: that at this exact point the author of this history leaves the battle hanging, pleading that he found nothing more written about these exploits of Don Quixote than what he has already set down. It is true that the second author of this work refused to believe that so remarkable a history could have been abandoned to the laws of oblivion, or that the wits of La Mancha could have been so incurious as not to have among their archives or in their desks some papers dealing with this famous knight. And so, with that idea, he did not despair of finding the end of this delightful history, which, heaven being favourable to him, he did find in the manner that shall be told in the second part.
