Chapter 9: In Which Is Concluded and Ended the Stupendous Battle Between the Gallant Basque and the Valiant Manchegan

Part Two of the Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha

We left, in the first part of this history, the valiant Basque and the famous Don Quixote with their swords raised and bare, on the point of dealing two such furious downstrokes that, if they had landed squarely, they would at the very least have split and cleft the pair of them from top to bottom and opened them up like a pomegranate; and at that most uncertain moment the delicious history stopped and was cut off short, without its author giving us any notion where what was missing might be found.

This caused me great distress, because the pleasure of having read so little turned into annoyance at the thought of how poor a road there was to finding the great deal that, to my mind, was missing from so appetising a tale. It seemed to me impossible and against all good custom that so good a knight should have lacked some sage to take on the writing of his unheard-of exploits — a thing that never failed any of the knights errant,

	of those that people say
	go out upon their adventures,

because every one of them had one or two sages ready made, who not only wrote down their deeds but painted their smallest thoughts and trifles, however hidden. And so good a knight could not have been so unfortunate as to lack what Platir and others like him had in abundance. So I could not bring myself to believe that so gallant a history had been left maimed and crippled, and I laid the blame on the malice of time, the devourer and consumer of all things, which had either hidden it away or consumed it.

On the other hand, it seemed to me that since among his books there had been found such modern ones as Disenchantments of Jealousy and The Nymphs and Shepherds of Henares, his history must be modern too; and that even if it was not written down, it would be in the memory of the people of his village and of the villages round about. This notion left me confused and eager to know, really and truly, the whole life and miracles of our famous Spaniard Don Quixote of La Mancha, the light and mirror of Manchegan chivalry, and the first in our age and in these calamitous times to take up the labour and exercise of errant arms, and the righting of wrongs, the succouring of widows and the protection of those maidens who used to go about with their whips and their palfreys and the whole of their virginity on their backs, from hill to hill and from valley to valley; for unless some scoundrel, or some peasant with an axe and a steel cap, or some monstrous giant, forced them, there were maidens in past ages who at the end of eighty years, in the whole of which they had never once slept under a roof, went to their graves as intact as the mothers who bore them.

I say, then, that for these and many other reasons our gallant Quixote deserves continual and memorable praise; and some is not to be denied me either, for the labour and diligence I put into looking for the end of this agreeable history — although I know very well that if heaven, chance and fortune had not helped me, the world would have gone short of the pastime and the pleasure that anyone reading it attentively may have from it for very nearly two hours. Now, the finding of it happened in this way.

I was one day in the Alcaná of Toledo when a boy came up to sell some old notebooks and papers to a silk merchant; and since I am fond of reading, even torn papers in the street, moved by this natural inclination of mine I took up one of the notebooks the boy was selling, and saw that it was in characters I recognised as Arabic. And although I recognised them I could not read them, so I looked about to see whether there was any Spanish-speaking Moor about who could read them for me; and it was not very hard to find an interpreter of that kind — indeed, if I had been looking for one of a better and older language, I should have found him. In the end luck provided me with one; and telling him what I wanted and putting the book into his hands, he opened it in the middle, read a little of it, and began to laugh.

I asked him what he was laughing at, and he answered that it was at something written in the margin of that book by way of a note. I asked him to tell me what it was; and he, still laughing, said:

"Written here in the margin, as I said, is this: 'This Dulcinea of El Toboso, so often mentioned in this history, is said to have had the best hand for salting pork of any woman in the whole of La Mancha.'"

When I heard "Dulcinea of El Toboso" I was thunderstruck and left hanging, because it came to me at once that these notebooks contained the history of Don Quixote. With that idea I pressed him to read the beginning; and doing so, turning the Arabic straight into Castilian, he said it read: History of Don Quixote of La Mancha, written by Cide Hamete Benengeli, an Arab historian. It took a great deal of discretion to hide the delight I felt when the title of the book reached my ears; and snatching them from under the silk merchant's nose, I bought all the papers and notebooks from the boy for half a real — though if he had had any sense and had known how much I wanted them, he might safely have promised himself and carried off more than six reals from the sale.

I then went off with the Moor into the cloister of the cathedral, and begged him to turn all the notebooks that dealt with Don Quixote into Castilian, taking nothing away and adding nothing, offering him whatever payment he liked. He was satisfied with two arrobas of raisins and two bushels of wheat, and promised to translate them well and faithfully and very quickly. But I, to make the business easier and not to let go of so fine a find, took him home with me, where in a little over a month and a half he translated the whole of it, exactly as it is set down here.

In the first notebook there was a very lifelike picture of Don Quixote's battle with the Basque, both of them in the very posture the history describes, with their swords raised, the one covered by his shield and the other by his cushion, and the Basque's mule so true to life that you could tell it was a hired one a bowshot off. At the Basque's feet was written a label saying Don Sancho de Azpeitia, which must undoubtedly have been his name; and at Rocinante's feet was another that said Don Quixote. Rocinante was marvellously painted, so long and lanky, so wasted and thin, with such a backbone and so confirmed a consumptive, that he showed quite plainly with what care and propriety the name Rocinante had been given him. Next to him was Sancho Panza, holding his donkey by the halter, at whose feet was another label saying Sancho Shanks; and it must have been because, as the picture showed, he had a big belly, a short body and long shanks, and for that he must have been given the names Panza and Zancas — Paunch and Shanks — by which the history sometimes calls him. There were some other small details worth noticing, but they are all of little importance and do not bear on the true relation of the history; and no relation is a bad one so long as it is true.

If any objection can be raised against the truth of this one, it can only be that its author was an Arab, since it is very much in the nature of that nation to be liars; though as they are such enemies of ours, one may sooner suppose that he fell short in it than went too far. And so it seems to me; because where he could and should have let his pen run out in praise of so good a knight, he seems deliberately to pass over it in silence — a thing badly done and worse thought of, since historians ought to be exact, truthful and in no way partial, and neither interest nor fear, rancour nor affection should make them swerve from the road of truth, whose mother is history, rival of time, storehouse of deeds, witness of the past, example and counsel to the present, warning to what is to come. In this one I know there will be found everything anyone could wish for in the most agreeable history; and if anything good is missing from it, it is my belief that the fault lay with that dog of an author rather than with the subject. In short, its second part, following the translation, began in this way:

With the cutting swords of the two valiant and angry combatants raised on high, it looked as though they were threatening heaven and earth and the abyss, such was the boldness and bearing they had. And the first to bring down his blow was the choleric Basque, who struck with such force and such fury that, if his sword had not turned in mid-course, that single stroke would have been enough to put an end to the fierce contest and to all our knight's adventures. But his good fortune, which was keeping him for greater things, twisted his opponent's sword, so that although it caught him on the left shoulder it did him no other damage than to strip that whole side of its armour, carrying away with it a good part of the helmet along with half an ear; all of which came down with a dreadful crash, leaving him in a very bad way.

God help me — who is there that could properly tell now the rage that entered our Manchegan's heart when he saw himself served in that fashion? Let no more be said than this: that it was such that he rose again in his stirrups, and gripping his sword harder in both hands, he brought it down on the Basque with such fury, catching him squarely on the cushion and on the head, that, so good a defence being of no use, it was as if a mountain had fallen on him; and he began to pour blood from his nose and his mouth and his ears, and to look like falling off the mule, as he certainly would have done if he had not thrown his arms round its neck. But for all that his feet came out of the stirrups and then his arms let go; and the mule, terrified by that fearful blow, went galloping across the field, and after a few bucks brought its master to the ground.

Don Quixote sat watching him with great composure, and when he saw him fall he leapt off his horse and went up to him very nimbly, and putting the point of his sword between his eyes told him to surrender, or he would cut off his head. The Basque was so dazed that he could not answer a word, and it would have gone badly with him, blind with rage as Don Quixote was, if the ladies of the coach, who until then had watched the fight in a swoon of terror, had not come to where he was and begged him most earnestly to do them the great kindness and favour of sparing this squire of theirs his life. To which Don Quixote answered, with great haughtiness and gravity:

"Certainly, fair ladies, I am very content to do what you ask; but it must be on one condition and agreement, which is that this knight shall promise me to go to the town of El Toboso and present himself on my behalf before the peerless Doña Dulcinea, that she may do with him whatever she pleases."

The frightened and disconsolate lady, without stopping to consider what Don Quixote was asking, and without asking who Dulcinea might be, promised him that the squire would do everything he was ordered to do on his behalf.

"Then on the faith of that word I shall do him no further harm, though he had well deserved it of me."
