Chapter 10: Of the Amusing Conversation That Passed Between Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, His Squire

By this time Sancho Panza had got up, rather knocked about by the friars' servants, and had been watching his master Don Quixote's battle, praying to God in his heart that He might be pleased to give him the victory, and that in it he might win some isle to make him governor of, as he had promised. Seeing the quarrel over at last, and his master getting back up on Rocinante, he came to hold the stirrup; and before he mounted, Sancho went down on his knees in front of him and, taking his hand, kissed it and said:

"May it please your worship, my lord Don Quixote, to give me the government of the isle that has been won in this fierce quarrel; for however big it may be, I feel I have the strength to govern it as well as anybody who ever governed an isle in this world."

To which Don Quixote answered:

"Take note, brother Sancho, that this adventure and others like it are not adventures of isles, but of crossroads, in which nothing is won but a broken head or an ear the less. Have patience, for adventures will come along in which I can make you not only a governor but something better still."

Sancho thanked him warmly, and kissing his hand again and the skirt of his mail-coat, helped him up onto Rocinante; and he got on his own donkey and set off after his master, who, at a smart pace and without taking leave of the people in the coach or saying anything more to them, rode into a wood that was close by. Sancho followed at his ass's full trot, but Rocinante went so fast that, finding himself left behind, he had to shout to his master to wait for him. Don Quixote did so, reining Rocinante in until his tired squire came up, and when he arrived Sancho said:

"It seems to me, sir, that it would be a good idea for us to take sanctuary in some church; because, considering the state that man you fought with was left in, it wouldn't be at all surprising if they reported the business to the Holy Brotherhood and had us arrested. And upon my word, if they do, we shall sweat for it before we get out of gaol."

"Be quiet," said Don Quixote. "And where have you ever seen, or read, that a knight errant has been brought before a judge, however many homicides he may have committed?"

"I know nothing about homicides," answered Sancho, "and I never tasted one in my life. All I know is that the Holy Brotherhood has a say about people who fight out in the country, and I don't meddle in the other business."

"Then don't worry, my friend," answered Don Quixote, "for I would get you out of the hands of the Chaldeans, let alone the Brotherhood. But tell me, on your life: have you seen a more valiant knight than I am in all the known world? Have you read in any history of another who has, or ever had, more spirit in attacking, more staying power in persevering, more skill in wounding or more knack in bringing men down?"

"The truth is," answered Sancho, "that I have never read any history at all, because I can neither read nor write. But what I'll dare to bet is that I have never in all the days of my life served a bolder master than your worship, and please God these bold doings may not be paid for where I said. What I do beg of your worship is to see to yourself, for a great deal of blood is coming out of that ear; and I have lint here and a little white ointment in the saddlebags."

"All that could very well have been spared," answered Don Quixote, "if I had only remembered to make a flask of the balm of Fierabrás, for with a single drop of it we should save both time and medicines."

"What flask and what balm is that?" said Sancho Panza.

"It is a balm," answered Don Quixote, "the recipe for which I have by heart, and with it there is no need to fear death or to think of dying of any wound. And so, when I have made it and given it to you, all you have to do is this: when you see that in some battle they have cut me in half through the middle — as very often happens — neatly take the part of my body that has fallen to the ground, and with great delicacy, before the blood congeals, put it back on the other half that is left in the saddle, taking care to fit it on evenly and exactly. Then you will give me just two swallows of the balm I have mentioned, and you will see me come out sounder than an apple."

"If that's so," said Panza, "here and now I give up the government of the promised isle, and I want nothing else in payment of my many good services but that your worship should give me the recipe for that surpassing liquor. For I reckon that an ounce of it would be worth more than two reals anywhere, and I need nothing more than that to get through this life in comfort and respectability. But the thing to know now is whether it costs much to make."

"Three gallons of it can be made for less than three reals," answered Don Quixote.

"Sinner that I am!" said Sancho. "Then what is your worship waiting for, to make it and to teach it to me?"

"Quiet, my friend," answered Don Quixote. "I mean to teach you greater secrets than that and to do you greater favours. And for the present let us see to ourselves, for my ear hurts more than I could wish."

Sancho took the lint and the ointment out of the saddlebags. But when Don Quixote came to see his helmet broken he thought he would go out of his mind, and putting his hand on his sword and raising his eyes to heaven he said:

"I make a vow to the Creator of all things, and to the four holy Gospels where they are most fully written, to lead the life the great Marquis of Mantua led when he swore to avenge the death of his nephew Valdovinos — which was to eat no bread off a tablecloth, nor take his pleasure with his wife, and other things which, though I do not remember them, I here declare expressed — until I have taken full vengeance on the man who did me such an outrage."

Hearing this, Sancho said:

"Consider, your worship, my lord Don Quixote, that if the knight has carried out what he was ordered, and gone to present himself before my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, then he will have done his duty and deserves no further punishment unless he commits some fresh offence."

"You have spoken and hit the point very well," answered Don Quixote; "and so I annul the vow as far as taking fresh vengeance on him is concerned. But I make it and confirm it afresh, to lead the life I have described, until I take by force another helmet as good as this one from some knight. And do not think, Sancho, that I do this idly, for I have a good model to follow in it: this very same thing happened, word for word, over the helmet of Mambrino, which cost Sacripante so dear."

"Your worship can send such vows to the devil, sir," replied Sancho; "they are very bad for the health and very hard on the conscience. Just tell me now: if by any chance we don't meet a man in a helmet for many days, what are we to do? Is the vow to be kept, in spite of all the inconveniences and discomforts — sleeping in your clothes, and not sleeping in any town, and a thousand other penances that were in the vow of that mad old Marquis of Mantua that your worship wants to renew now? Look properly, your worship: no armed men go along these roads, only carriers and carters, who not only don't wear helmets but very likely have never heard one mentioned in the whole of their lives."

"You are wrong there," said Don Quixote, "because we shall not have been two hours at these crossroads before we see more men in armour than went against Albraca for the conquest of Angelica the Fair."

"All right, then, so be it," said Sancho, "and please God it may go well with us, and the time may come at last for winning this isle that is costing me so dear, and then let me die."

"I have told you already, Sancho, not to let that trouble you at all; for if an isle is not to be had, there is the kingdom of Denmark or of Sobradisa, which will fit you like a ring on your finger. And what is more, being on the mainland, you ought to be all the better pleased. But let us leave that for its own time, and see whether you have anything in those saddlebags for us to eat, because afterwards we must go and look for some castle to lodge in tonight and make the balm I told you of; for I swear to God this ear of mine is hurting a great deal."

"I have an onion here, and a bit of cheese and I don't know how many crusts of bread," said Sancho; "but they aren't dishes fit for so valiant a knight as your worship."

"How little you understand it!" answered Don Quixote. "I would have you know, Sancho, that it is an honour to knights errant not to eat for a month; and when they do eat, to eat whatever comes first to hand. And this would be plain to you if you had read as many histories as I have; for although there have been a great many, in none of them have I found any account of knights errant eating, except by chance and at some sumptuous banquets given for them, and the rest of the days they spent on flowers. And although it is to be understood that they could not get on without eating and without doing all the other natural offices — because, after all, they were men like ourselves — it is also to be understood that, spending most of their lives in forests and wildernesses and without a cook, their most usual food would be rustic fare of the sort you are offering me now. So, Sancho my friend, do not distress yourself over what pleases me. And do not go trying to make a new world, or knocking knight-errantry off its hinges."

"Forgive me, your worship," said Sancho; "for as I can neither read nor write, as I have said before, I don't know and haven't grasped the rules of the knightly profession. And from now on I'll stock the saddlebags with every kind of dried fruit for your worship, since you are a knight; and for myself, since I am not, I'll stock them with other things that fly and have more substance to them."

"I do not say, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "that knights errant are obliged to eat nothing but those fruits you speak of, only that their most ordinary sustenance must have been those, and certain herbs they found in the fields, which they knew and which I know too."

"It's a virtue," answered Sancho, "to know those herbs; for the way I imagine things going, one of these days we shall need to make use of that knowledge."

And bringing out what he had said he was carrying, the two of them ate in good peace and fellowship. But being anxious to find somewhere to lodge that night, they made very short work of their poor dry meal. They mounted at once and hurried to reach some inhabited place before dark; but the sun failed them, and with it the hope of getting what they wanted, when they were near some goatherds' huts, and so they decided to spend the night there. And as much as it grieved Sancho not to reach a town, so much did it please his master to sleep under the open sky, since it seemed to him that every time this happened to him he was performing an act of possession that made the proof of his knighthood easier.
