Chapter 11: Of What Happened to Don Quixote with Some Goatherds

He was made welcome by the goatherds with a good will; and Sancho, having settled Rocinante and his donkey as best he could, made straight for the smell given off by certain pieces of salted goat that were bubbling over the fire in a pot. And although he would have liked at that very moment to see whether they were ready to be transferred from the pot to his stomach, he did not, because the goatherds took them off the fire; and spreading some sheepskins on the ground they laid their rustic table in great haste and invited the two of them, with every sign of goodwill, to share what they had.

Six of them sat down round the skins — all there were at the fold — having first, with clumsy ceremony, begged Don Quixote to sit on a trough they turned upside down for him. Don Quixote sat down, and Sancho remained standing to serve him the cup, which was made of horn. Seeing him on his feet, his master said:

"So that you may see, Sancho, the good that knight-errantry has in it, and how near those who follow any office in it are to coming quickly to be honoured and esteemed by the world, I want you to sit here at my side and in the company of these good people, and to be one and the same thing with me, who am your master and natural lord: eat off my plate and drink where I drink. For the same may be said of knight-errantry as is said of love: that it makes all things equal."

"Many thanks!" said Sancho. "But I can tell your worship that so long as I have plenty to eat, I would eat it as well or better standing up and by myself as sitting beside an emperor. And in fact, if the truth is to be told, what I eat in my own corner without airs and graces, even if it is bread and an onion, tastes far better to me than the turkeys at other tables where I have to chew slowly, drink little, wipe my mouth often, and not sneeze or cough if I want to, or do other things that being alone and free bring with them. So, sir, these honours that your worship wants to do me for being a servant and hanger-on of knight-errantry, as I am, being your worship's squire — turn them into something else of more comfort and profit to me; for these, though I take them as received in full, I renounce from now until the end of the world."

"For all that, you shall sit down; because God exalts him who humbles himself."

And taking him by the arm, he forced him to sit beside him.

The goatherds understood nothing of this jargon about squires and knights errant, and did nothing but eat and hold their tongues and stare at their guests, who with great relish and appetite were stowing away pieces of salt goat the size of your fist. When the meat course was over they spread a great quantity of dried acorns on the sheepskins, and along with them set out half a cheese harder than if it had been made of mortar. The drinking-horn was not idle all this while, for it went round so often — now full, now empty, like the bucket of a waterwheel — that it easily emptied one of the two wineskins that were on show.

When Don Quixote had thoroughly satisfied his stomach, he took up a handful of acorns and, looking at them attentively, let his voice run out into words like these:

"Happy the age and happy the centuries that the ancients called golden — and not because gold, which in this iron age of ours is so highly valued, was got in that fortunate one without any labour, but because those who lived then did not know these two words, thine and mine. In that holy age all things were held in common. To get his ordinary food no man had to take any trouble but to reach up his hand and take it from the sturdy oaks, which stood generously inviting him with their sweet ripe fruit. The clear springs and running rivers offered him, in magnificent abundance, delicious and transparent water. In the clefts of the rocks and the hollows of the trees the diligent and prudent bees set up their republic, offering to any hand, without asking anything in return, the fertile harvest of their sweetest labour. The noble cork trees shed of themselves, with no other artifice than their own courtesy, their broad light bark, with which men began to roof their houses, propped on rough stakes, only as a defence against the weather.

"All was peace then, all friendship, all concord. The heavy blade of the crooked plough had not yet dared to open or violate the merciful bowels of our first mother, for she of her own accord, without being forced, offered from every part of her fertile and spacious breast whatever could satisfy and sustain and delight the children who then possessed her. Then indeed the simple and lovely shepherdesses went from valley to valley and hillock to hillock, with their hair in a plait or loose, in no more clothing than was needed to cover decently what decency requires, and always has required, to be covered; and their ornaments were not those in use now, on which the purple of Tyre and silk tortured in so many ways are lavished, but a few green leaves of burdock and ivy woven together — with which they went about, perhaps, as grand and as well turned out as our court ladies go now with the rare and outlandish inventions that idle curiosity has taught them.

"In those days the loving thoughts of the soul were dressed simply and plainly, in the very way and manner the soul conceived them, without hunting for an artificial roundabout of words to set them off. Fraud, deceit and malice had not yet mixed themselves with truth and plain dealing. Justice kept within her own bounds, and neither favour nor self-interest dared disturb or offend her, as they so much diminish and disturb and persecute her now. The law of a judge's whim had not yet planted itself in his understanding, because then there was nothing to judge and nobody to be judged. Maidens and modesty went about, as I have said, wherever they pleased, alone and their own mistresses, without fear that another's licence or lustful intent would harm them; and if they came to ruin it was of their own liking and their own free will.

"And now, in these detestable ages of ours, no woman is safe, even if another labyrinth like the one in Crete hides her and shuts her in; because there, through the chinks or on the air, with the zeal of accursed importunity, the pestilence of love gets in and wrecks her whole seclusion. For the protection of these, as time went on and wickedness increased, the order of knights errant was instituted: to defend maidens, protect widows and succour orphans and the needy. Of this order am I, brother goatherds; and I thank you for the entertainment and the good welcome you give me and my squire. For although by natural law all living men are obliged to favour knights errant, still, knowing that without knowing this obligation you took me in and made much of me, it is only right that with all the goodwill I have I should thank you for yours."

Our knight made this whole long harangue — which might very well have been spared — because the acorns they gave him brought the Golden Age to his mind, and he took it into his head to deliver that useless discourse to the goatherds, who listened without answering him a word, thoroughly bemused and open-mouthed. Sancho too kept quiet, and ate acorns, and paid very frequent visits to the second wineskin, which they had hung from a cork tree to keep the wine cool.

Don Quixote was longer talking than they were finishing supper; at the end of which one of the goatherds said:

"So that your worship may say with more truth, sir knight errant, that we entertained you with a prompt and hearty goodwill, we should like to give you some pleasure and diversion by getting a mate of ours to sing, who will not be long in getting here. He is a very sharp lad and very much in love, and, above all, he can read and write and is such a player on the rebec that there is nothing left to wish for."

Hardly had the goatherd finished saying this when the sound of the rebec reached them, and shortly afterwards the player arrived: a young man of about twenty-two, very good-looking. His mates asked him whether he had eaten, and when he said yes the one who had made the offer said:

"In that case, Antonio, you can do us the pleasure of singing a little, so that this gentleman our guest may see that there are people in the hills and woods too who know something about music. We have told him about your accomplishments and we want you to show them and prove us right. So on your life, sit down and sing the ballad of your love that your uncle the prebendary wrote for you, which they thought so well of in the village."

"With pleasure," answered the young man.

And without waiting to be asked twice he sat down on the stump of a lopped oak, and tuning his rebec he presently began to sing, very gracefully, in this manner:

Antonio

	I know you love me, Olalla,
	although you have never said so,
	not even with your eyes,
	those silent tongues of love.
	Because I know you have your wits,
	I hold it that you want me;
	for love was never wretched
	that was once acknowledged.
	It is true enough that sometimes,
	Olalla, you have given me signs
	that you have a soul of bronze
	and a white breast of flint.
	But there, among your scoldings
	and your most virtuous refusals,
	hope will sometimes show me
	the hem of her skirt.
	My faith throws itself at the lure —
	faith that has never been able
	to shrink for not being called
	or swell for being chosen.
	If love is a courtesy,
	then from the courtesy you have
	I gather that the end of my hopes
	must be the one I imagine.
	And if attentions count for anything
	towards making a heart kind,
	some of those I have paid you
	strengthen my case.
	For if you have taken note of it,
	you must have seen more than once
	that I have worn on a Monday
	the clothes that did me honour on Sunday.
	Since love and fine clothes
	travel the same road,
	I have wanted at all times
	to look well in your eyes.
	I leave out the dancing I gave up for you,
	and I say nothing of the music
	you have heard at unlikely hours
	and at the first cock-crow.
	I do not count the praises
	I have spoken of your beauty;
	which, though they were true,
	have made me disliked by some.
	Teresa of the Berrocal,
	when I was praising you, said to me:
	"There is a man who thinks he adores an angel
	and comes to adore an ape;
	thanks to a lot of trinkets
	and to false hair,
	and to hypocritical beauties
	that would deceive Love himself."
	I gave her the lie and she was angry;
	her cousin took her part;
	he challenged me, and you know
	what I did and what he did.
	I do not want you by the bushel,
	nor court you and serve you
	for the sake of keeping you;
	my design is a better one.
	The Church has yokes
	that are bows of silk;
	put your neck in the collar
	and you will see me put in mine.
	And if not, I swear from this moment,
	by the most blessed saint there is,
	never to come out of these mountains
	except to be a friar.

With that the goatherd made an end of his song; and although Don Quixote begged him to sing some more, Sancho Panza would not have it, being more disposed for sleep than for listening to songs. And so he said to his master:

"Your worship might do well to settle now where you are to spend the night, for the work these good men do all day does not allow them to spend their nights singing."

"I understand you, Sancho," Don Quixote answered him; "for it is quite clear to me that those visits to the wineskin call for repayment in sleep rather than in music."

"It tastes good to all of us, God be praised," answered Sancho.

"I do not deny it," replied Don Quixote; "but settle yourself where you like. Men of my profession look better watching than sleeping. But all the same, Sancho, it would be as well if you dressed this ear of mine again, for it is hurting more than it need."

Sancho did as he was told; and one of the goatherds, seeing the wound, told him not to worry, for he would put something on it that would heal it easily. Taking some leaves of rosemary, of which there was plenty about, he chewed them and mixed them with a little salt, and applying them to the ear he bandaged it up very well, assuring him that no other medicine was needed; and so it proved.
