Chapter 12: Of What a Goatherd Told Those Who Were with Don Quixote

While this was going on, another of the lads who brought them their supplies from the village arrived, and said:

"Do you know what's happening down in the village, mates?"

"How could we know?" answered one of them.

"Then you must know," the lad went on, "that this morning that famous shepherd-scholar called Grisóstomo died, and it is whispered that he died of love for that bedevilled girl Marcela, rich Guillermo's daughter, the one who goes about these wilds dressed as a shepherdess."

"For Marcela, you mean," said one.

"That's who I mean," answered the goatherd. "And the best of it is that he ordered in his will that they were to bury him out in the country, as though he were a Moor, and at the foot of the crag where the cork-tree spring is; because, so they say, and they say he said it himself, that is the place where he first saw her. And he ordered other things too, of such a kind that the priests of the village say they must not be carried out, and it is not right that they should be, because they look like heathen practices. To all of which that great friend of his, Ambrosio the scholar, who also dressed himself as a shepherd along with him, answers that everything must be carried out without a single thing missing, exactly as Grisóstomo left orders; and the whole village is in an uproar over it. But from what they say, in the end it will be done as Ambrosio and all the shepherds who are his friends want; and tomorrow they are coming to bury him with great pomp where I have said. And I reckon it will be very well worth seeing; at any rate I shan't miss going to see it, even if I knew I couldn't get back to the village tomorrow."

"We'll all do the same," answered the goatherds, "and we'll draw lots for who is to stay behind and look after everybody's goats."

"You're right, Pedro," said one; "though there'll be no need to take that trouble, for I'll stay for the lot of you. And don't put it down to virtue or to any want of curiosity in me, but to the fact that I can't walk for that stake that went through my foot the other day."

"For all that, we thank you," answered Pedro.

And Don Quixote begged Pedro to tell him who the dead man was and who the shepherdess; to which Pedro answered that all he knew was that the dead man was a rich gentleman, from a village up in those mountains, who had been a student for many years at Salamanca, at the end of which he had come home with the reputation of being very learned and very well read.

"They said in particular that he knew the science of the stars, and of what the sun and the moon get up to away in the sky; because he could tell us the exact cripse of the sun and the moon."

"It is called an eclipse, my friend, not a cripse, when those two great luminaries go dark," said Don Quixote.

But Pedro, not stopping over trifles, went on with his tale:

"He could tell too whether the year was going to be plentiful or sterrile."

"Sterile is what you mean, my friend," said Don Quixote.

"Sterile or sterrile," answered Pedro, "it all comes out the same in the end. And I tell you that with what he said his father and his friends, who believed him, grew very rich, because they did what he advised them, when he told them: 'Sow barley this year, not wheat; this year you can sow chickpeas and not barley; next year will be a good one for oil; the three after it you won't get a drop.'"

"That science is called astrology," said Don Quixote.

"I don't know what it's called," replied Pedro, "but I know he knew all that, and more besides. Anyhow, not many months went by after he came home from Salamanca before he turned up one day dressed as a shepherd, with his crook and his sheepskin, having taken off the long gown he wore as a scholar; and along with him another great friend of his called Ambrosio, who had been his fellow-student, dressed as a shepherd too. I was forgetting to say that Grisóstomo, the dead man, was a great hand at writing verses; so much so that he wrote the carols for Christmas Eve and the plays for Corpus Christi that the lads of our village used to act, and everyone said they were first-rate.

"When the villagers saw the two scholars turned shepherds so suddenly, they were amazed, and could not guess what had moved them to make so strange a change. By this time Grisóstomo's father was dead, and he was left the heir to a great deal of property, both goods and land, and no small quantity of stock, large and small, and a great deal of money — of all of which the young man was left absolute master; and to tell the truth he deserved it all, for he was a very good companion, and charitable, and a friend to good men, and he had a face like a blessing. Afterwards it came to be understood that he had changed his clothes for no other reason than to go about these wild places after that shepherdess Marcela our lad mentioned just now, with whom the poor dead Grisóstomo had fallen in love.

"And now I want to tell you, because it is right you should know it, who this girl is. Perhaps — and there is no perhaps about it — you will never have heard the like of it in all the days of your life, even if you live more years than sorrow."

"Say Sarah," put in Don Quixote, unable to bear the goatherd's swapping of words.

"Sorrow lives long enough," answered Pedro; "and if you are going to keep picking me up on my words at every step, sir, we shall not be finished in a year."

"Forgive me, my friend," said Don Quixote; "I only said it because there is such a difference between sorrow and Sarah. But you answered very well, because sorrow does live longer than Sarah. Go on with your story, and I will not interrupt you again in anything."

"Well then, my dear good sir," said the goatherd, "in our village there was a farmer even richer than Grisóstomo's father, whose name was Guillermo, and to whom God gave, besides his many and great riches, a daughter, at whose birth her mother died — the most respected woman there was in all these parts. I seem to see her now, with that face of hers that had the sun on one side of it and the moon on the other; and above all a good manager and a friend to the poor, for which I believe her soul must be enjoying God in the next world at this very hour. Of grief at the death of so good a wife her husband Guillermo died, leaving his daughter Marcela, a young girl and rich, in the charge of an uncle of hers who is a priest and holds a benefice in our village.

"The girl grew up so beautiful that she made us remember her mother's beauty, which was very great; and even so it was reckoned that the daughter's would go beyond it. And so it did, for when she got to be fourteen or fifteen nobody looked at her without blessing God for having made her so lovely, and most of them fell in love and were lost for her. Her uncle kept her very carefully and very much shut up; but for all that the fame of her great beauty spread so far that, as much for it as for her great riches, her uncle was begged and solicited and pestered to give her in marriage, not only by the men of our own village but by men from many leagues round, and the best of them at that. But he — who is an upright good Christian — although he would have liked to marry her off as soon as he saw she was of age, would not do it without her consent, and never had an eye to the profit and advantage that holding the girl's property while he put off her marriage offered him. And upon my word this was said in more than one gossiping circle in the village, to the good priest's credit."

For I want you to know, sir knight errant, that in these little places everything is talked about and everything is gossiped over; and take it from me, as I take it from myself, that a clergyman must be uncommonly good to make his parishioners speak well of him, particularly in the villages.

"That is the truth," said Don Quixote, "and go on, for the tale is a very good one, and you, good Pedro, tell it with a very good grace."

"May the Lord's grace not fail me, for that is the one that matters. And for the rest, you must know that although her uncle put the suitors before his niece and told her the qualities of each one in particular, of the many who asked for her, and begged her to marry and to choose to her own liking, she never answered anything but that for the present she did not want to marry, and that being so young she did not feel fit to bear the burden of matrimony. With these excuses, which seemed reasonable enough, her uncle left off pestering her and waited for her to get on a little in years and know how to choose a companion to her own taste. For he used to say, and said very rightly, that parents ought not to settle their children against their will.

"But lo and behold, when nobody was expecting it, one day the fastidious Marcela turns up as a shepherdess; and with her uncle and the whole village powerless against it, all advising her not to, she took to going out into the fields with the other village girls and to minding her own flock. And once she came out in public and her beauty was seen openly, I could not properly tell you how many rich young men, gentlemen and farmers, have taken to Grisóstomo's costume and go courting her about these fields. One of them, as has been said already, was our dead friend, of whom they said that he had stopped loving her and had begun to worship her.

"And nobody should think that because Marcela put herself into that free way of living, so unconstrained and with so little or no seclusion in it, she has therefore given any sign, or the shadow of one, that could damage her modesty and her good name. On the contrary, such and so great is the vigilance with which she looks after her honour that of all who court and solicit her not one has boasted, or could truthfully boast, that she has given him the smallest hope of getting what he wants. For although she does not run away or shun the company and conversation of the shepherds, and treats them courteously and in a friendly way, the moment any one of them comes to declare his intentions to her — even if they are as proper and holy as marriage — she flings him off as though from a catapult.

"And with this turn of temper she does more damage in this country than if the plague had come into it; because her friendliness and her beauty draw the hearts of those who deal with her into serving her and loving her, but her disdain and her plain speaking drive them to the point of despair. And so they do not know what to call her, but shout after her that she is cruel and ungrateful, with other titles of the same kind, which show plainly enough what her disposition is like. If you were to be here some day, sir, you would hear these hills and valleys ringing with the laments of the disappointed men who follow her.

"Not far from here there is a place where there are almost two dozen tall beeches, and there is not one of them that has not the name of Marcela carved and written on its smooth bark; and over some of them a crown carved in the same tree, as though the lover were saying more plainly that Marcela wears it and deserves it out of all human beauty. Here one shepherd sighs, there another complains; over there you hear love songs, over here despairing dirges. There is one who spends all the hours of the night sitting at the foot of some oak or rock, and there, without once closing his weeping eyes, sunk and carried away in his own thoughts, the sun finds him in the morning; and there is another who, without giving his sighs a moment's rest or truce, in the middle of the burning heat of the most oppressive summer afternoon, stretched out on the scorching sand, sends his complaints up to merciful heaven. And over this one and that one, and over those and these, the beautiful Marcela triumphs, free and unconcerned; and all of us who know her are waiting to see what her pride will come to, and who is to be the lucky man who will come and tame so terrible a nature and enjoy so extraordinary a beauty.

"Since everything I have told you is such well-established truth, I am inclined to believe that what our lad said about the cause of Grisóstomo's death is true too. And so I advise you, sir, not to fail to be at his burial tomorrow, which will be well worth seeing, for Grisóstomo has many friends, and it is not half a league from this place to the one where he has ordered himself to be buried."

"I shall bear it in mind," said Don Quixote, "and I thank you for the pleasure you have given me with the telling of so delicious a tale."

"Oh!" replied the goatherd, "I don't know the half of what has happened to Marcela's lovers; but it may be that tomorrow we shall run into some shepherd on the road who will tell us. And for now it will be as well if you go and sleep under a roof, because the night air might do your wound harm — though the medicine you have had put on it is such that there is nothing to fear from any accident."

Sancho Panza, who by now was consigning the goatherd's endless talking to the devil, urged for his part that his master should go inside and sleep in Pedro's hut. He did so, and spent most of the rest of the night in memories of his lady Dulcinea, in imitation of Marcela's lovers. Sancho Panza settled himself between Rocinante and his donkey and slept, not like a rejected lover, but like a man who had been kicked to a pulp.
