Chapter 13: In Which the Tale of the Shepherdess Marcela Is Concluded, with Other Events

Hardly had day begun to show itself on the balconies of the east when five of the six goatherds got up and went to wake Don Quixote, and to ask him whether he was still minded to go and see Grisóstomo's famous funeral, and to say that they would keep him company. Don Quixote, who wanted nothing better, got up and told Sancho to saddle and pack at once, which he did with great dispatch, and with the same dispatch they all took the road.

They had not gone a quarter of a league when, at a crossing of paths, they saw coming towards them some six shepherds dressed in black sheepskins and with their heads crowned with garlands of cypress and bitter oleander. Each of them carried a stout holly staff in his hand. With them came two gentlemen on horseback, very well fitted out for travelling, with three servants on foot accompanying them. When they met they greeted each other courteously, and asking one another where they were going they learned that they were all bound for the place of the burial; and so they all began to travel together.

One of the horsemen, speaking to his companion, said:

"It seems to me, Señor Vivaldo, that we shall count the delay we make in seeing this famous funeral well spent; and famous it cannot fail to be, judging by the extraordinary things these shepherds have told us, both about the dead shepherd and about the murderous shepherdess."

"So it seems to me too," answered Vivaldo; "and I would delay not one day but four for the sake of seeing it."

Don Quixote asked them what they had heard about Marcela and Grisóstomo. The traveller said that early that morning they had met these shepherds, and that seeing them in such mournful dress they had asked them the reason for it; that one of them had told the story, describing the strangeness and the beauty of a shepherdess called Marcela, and the love of the many who courted her, and the death of that Grisóstomo whose funeral they were going to. In short, he told everything that Pedro had told Don Quixote.

This talk ended and another began, the man called Vivaldo asking Don Quixote what it was that moved him to go armed in that fashion through so peaceful a country. To which Don Quixote answered:

"The profession I follow neither allows nor permits me to go about in any other way. Easy living, luxury and repose were invented for soft courtiers; but toil, unrest and arms were invented and made only for those whom the world calls knights errant, of whom I, though unworthy, am the least of all."

The moment they heard this they all took him for a madman; and to make sure of it and see what sort of madness his was, Vivaldo asked him again what he meant by "knights errant".

"Have your worships not read," answered Don Quixote, "the annals and histories of England, which deal with the famous exploits of King Arthur, whom in our Castilian speech we constantly call King Artús — of whom there is an ancient and common tradition throughout that kingdom of Great Britain that this king did not die, but that by the art of enchantment he was turned into a crow, and that in the course of time he is to come back and reign and recover his kingdom and his sceptre? For which reason it cannot be proved that from that time to this any Englishman has ever killed a crow. Well, in the time of that good king that famous order of chivalry of the Knights of the Round Table was instituted, and there took place, exactly as they are told, the loves of Sir Lancelot of the Lake and Queen Guinevere, with that most honourable lady Quintañona as their go-between and confidante — from which came that ballad so well known and so much sung in our Spain:

	Never was a knight
	so well waited on by ladies
	as Lancelot was
	when he came from Britain —

with that sweet and gentle progress of his amorous and valiant deeds. From then on, passing from hand to hand, that order of chivalry went spreading and extending through many and various parts of the world; and famous in it and known for their deeds were the valiant Amadís of Gaul, with all his sons and grandsons down to the fifth generation, and the valorous Felixmarte of Hyrcania, and the never-sufficiently-praised Tirant lo Blanc; and almost in our own days we saw and conversed with and heard the invincible and valiant knight Don Belianís of Greece. This, then, gentlemen, is what it is to be a knight errant, and what I have described is the order of his chivalry; in which, as I have said before, I, sinner though I am, have made my profession, and I profess the very thing those knights professed. And so I go through these solitudes and wildernesses looking for adventures, with my mind made up to offer my arm and my person to the most dangerous that fortune may send me, in aid of the weak and the needy."

By these words the travellers were finally satisfied that Don Quixote was out of his wits, and what kind of madness had the mastery of him; at which they felt the same astonishment that everyone felt on first coming to know of it. And Vivaldo, who was a very shrewd man of a cheerful disposition, so as to get through the little of the road they said was left without tedium, and to bring them to the mountain where the burial was, wanted to give him occasion to go further with his absurdities. And so he said:

"It seems to me, sir knight errant, that your worship has professed one of the strictest professions on earth, and I reckon that even that of the Carthusian friars is not so strict."

"As strict it may very well be," answered our Don Quixote, "but that it is as necessary to the world I am within two fingers of doubting. Because, if the truth is to be told, the soldier who carries out what his captain orders does no less than the captain who gives the order. What I mean is that religious men, in all peace and quiet, ask heaven for the good of the earth; but we soldiers and knights put into execution what they ask for, defending it with the valour of our arms and the edges of our swords — not under a roof, but under the open sky, set up as a target for the unbearable rays of the sun in summer and the bristling frosts of winter. So we are God's ministers on earth, and the arms by which His justice is carried out on it. And since matters of war and everything touching and concerning them cannot be put into execution without sweating and struggling and labouring, it follows that those who profess it undoubtedly have greater labour than those who in quiet peace and repose are praying God to favour those who can do little for themselves.

"I do not mean to say, and it does not even cross my mind, that the state of a knight errant is as good as that of a cloistered religious; I only want to infer, from what I suffer, that it is undoubtedly more laborious and more belaboured, and hungrier and thirstier, more wretched, more ragged and more louse-ridden. Because there is no doubt that the knights errant of the past went through a great deal of misfortune in the course of their lives. And if some of them rose to be emperors by the valour of their arms, upon my word it cost them a good deal of their blood and their sweat; and if those who rose to that rank had gone without enchanters and sages to help them, they would have been thoroughly cheated of their desires and thoroughly deceived in their hopes."

"I am of that opinion," replied the traveller; "but one thing among many others strikes me very badly in knights errant, and it is that when they find themselves on the point of undertaking some great and dangerous adventure, in which there is plain danger of losing their lives, they never at that instant of attacking remember to commend themselves to God, as every Christian is obliged to do in such dangers; on the contrary, they commend themselves to their ladies with as much eagerness and devotion as if the ladies were their God — a thing that seems to me to smell somewhat of heathenism."

"Sir," answered Don Quixote, "that cannot possibly be otherwise, and the knight errant who did anything else would be in a bad way; for it is already the use and custom in knight-errantry that a knight errant who, on undertaking some great feat of arms, has his lady before him, should turn his eyes on her softly and lovingly, as though asking her with them to favour and protect him in the doubtful pass he is entering; and even if nobody hears him, he is obliged to say a few words under his breath commending himself to her with all his heart. And of this we have countless examples in the histories. Nor is it to be understood from this that they are to leave off commending themselves to God; there is time and place for that in the course of the business."

"For all that," replied the traveller, "I still have a scruple; which is that I have often read that words pass between two knights errant, and one thing leading to another their anger takes fire, and they wheel their horses and take a good stretch of ground, and then, without more ado, at full gallop they come at each other again; and in the middle of the charge they commend themselves to their ladies. And what usually comes of the encounter is that one of them goes over his horse's crupper, run through and through with his opponent's lance, and it goes so with the other too that if he did not hold on to his horse's mane he could not help coming to the ground. And I do not see how the dead man had any time to commend himself to God in the course of so headlong a business. It would have been better if the words he spent in the charge commending himself to his lady had been spent on what he owed and was bound to as a Christian. What is more, I reckon that not all knights errant have ladies to commend themselves to, because not all of them are in love."

"That cannot be," answered Don Quixote. "I say it cannot be that there should be a knight errant without a lady, because it is as proper and natural for such men to be in love as it is for the sky to have stars; and you may be quite sure that no history has ever been seen in which a knight errant is found without a love. And by the very fact of his being without one he would not be held a legitimate knight, but a bastard, and one who got into the fortress of the said chivalry not by the door but over the wall, like a robber and a thief."

"For all that," said the traveller, "it seems to me, if I remember rightly, that I have read that Don Galaor, brother of the valiant Amadís of Gaul, never had a particular lady to commend himself to; and for all that he was thought none the less of, and was a very valiant and famous knight."

To which our Don Quixote answered:

"Sir, one swallow does not make a summer. What is more, I know that in secret that knight was very much in love. Besides, his liking every woman who took his fancy was a natural failing that he could not keep a hand on. But in short, it is very well established that he had one alone whom he had made mistress of his will, and to her he commended himself very often and very secretly, because he prided himself on being a discreet knight."

"Then if it is of the essence that every knight errant must be in love," said the traveller, "your worship may well be believed to be so, being of the profession. And unless your worship prides yourself on being as discreet as Don Galaor, I beg you as earnestly as I can, in the name of the whole of this company and my own, to tell us the name, the country, the rank and the beauty of your lady; for she would count herself fortunate to have the whole world know that she is loved and served by such a knight as your worship appears to be."

At this Don Quixote gave a great sigh and said:

"I cannot say whether my sweet enemy is pleased or not that the world should know I serve her. I can only say, in answer to what is asked of me with such courtesy, that her name is Dulcinea; her country El Toboso, a village of La Mancha; her rank must be at the least that of a princess, since she is my queen and my lady; her beauty superhuman, since in her are made true all the impossible and chimerical attributes of beauty that the poets give their ladies — that her hair is gold, her forehead the Elysian fields, her eyebrows the rainbow, her eyes suns, her cheeks roses, her lips coral, her teeth pearls, her neck alabaster, her breast marble, her hands ivory, her whiteness snow; and the parts that modesty has hidden from human sight are such, as I think and believe, that discreet consideration can only prize them and not compare them."

"We should like to know her lineage, race and family," said Vivaldo.

To which Don Quixote answered:

"She is not of the ancient Roman Curtii, Caii and Scipios, nor of the modern Colonnas and Orsinis; nor of the Moncadas and Requesenes of Catalonia, still less of the Rebellas and Villanovas of Valencia; nor the Palafoxes, Nuzas, Rocabertis, Corellas, Lunas, Alagones, Urreas, Foces and Gurreas of Aragon; nor the Cerdas, Manriques, Mendozas and Guzmanes of Castile; nor the Alencastros, Pallas and Meneses of Portugal. But she is of the Tobosos of La Mancha — a line which, though modern, is such that it may give a noble beginning to the most illustrious families of the centuries to come. And let nobody argue with me about this, except on the conditions Cervino set at the foot of the trophy of Roland's arms, which said:

	let no man move them
	who cannot prove himself against Roland."

"Although mine is of the Cachopines of Laredo," answered the traveller, "I shall not dare set it beside the Tobosos of La Mancha — though, to tell the truth, that surname has never reached my ears until now."

"As if it would not have reached them!" replied Don Quixote.

All the rest were listening with great attention to the conversation of the two, and even the goatherds and shepherds themselves recognised how utterly wanting in wits our Don Quixote was. Only Sancho Panza thought that everything his master said was true, knowing who he was and having known him since his birth; and what he had some doubts about was believing that business of the lovely Dulcinea of El Toboso, because no such name and no such princess had ever come to his notice, though he lived so near El Toboso.

They were going along in this talk when they saw, coming down through the gap between two high mountains, some twenty shepherds, all dressed in black woollen skins and crowned with garlands which, as it turned out afterwards, were of yew and of cypress. Six of them were carrying a bier, covered with a great variety of flowers and branches. Seeing which, one of the goatherds said:

"Those coming there are the men carrying Grisóstomo's body, and the foot of that mountain is the place where he ordered them to bury him."

So they hurried to get there, and arrived just as those coming had set the bier down on the ground; and four of them with sharp mattocks were digging the grave beside a hard rock.

The two parties greeted each other courteously; and then Don Quixote and those who had come with him fell to looking at the bier, and on it they saw, covered with flowers, a dead body dressed as a shepherd, of about thirty years old to look at; and although he was dead, he showed that in life he had had a handsome face and a gallant bearing. Round about him on the bier itself were some books and a great many papers, some open and some folded. And all who were looking at this, and those who were opening the grave, and everybody else who was there, kept a wonderful silence, until one of the men who had carried the dead man said to another:

"Look carefully, Ambrosio, whether this is the place Grisóstomo spoke of, since you want what he left ordered in his will to be carried out so exactly."

"This is it," answered Ambrosio; "for many a time in this place my unhappy friend told me the story of his misfortune. Here he told me he first saw that mortal enemy of the human race; here too it was that he first declared to her a passion as honourable as it was loving; and here it was, the last time, that Marcela finished undeceiving and disdaining him, so that she put an end to the tragedy of his miserable life. And here, in memory of so many misfortunes, he wanted to be laid in the bowels of eternal oblivion."

And turning to Don Quixote and the travellers, he went on:

"That body, gentlemen, which you are looking at with pitying eyes, was the storehouse of a soul in which heaven had placed an infinite share of its riches. That is the body of Grisóstomo, who was unique in wit, alone in courtesy, extreme in gentleness, a phoenix in friendship, generous without measure, grave without presumption, cheerful without vulgarity, and, in short, first in everything that goes to being good, and without a second in everything that went to being unfortunate. He loved well, and was hated; he adored, and was disdained; he pleaded with a wild beast, he importuned a piece of marble, he ran after the wind, he shouted into the wilderness, he served ingratitude — from which he got for his reward the spoils of death in the middle of the course of his life, which was ended by a shepherdess whom he was trying to make immortal, so that she might live in people's memory, as those papers you are looking at would very well show, if he had not ordered me to give them to the fire as soon as I had given his body to the earth."

"You would be using greater severity and cruelty with them," said Vivaldo, "than their owner himself; for it is neither just nor right that the will of a man should be carried out when what he orders goes outside all reasonable sense. Augustus Caesar would not have had a good name if he had allowed what the divine Mantuan left ordered in his will to be put into execution. So, Señor Ambrosio, now that you are giving your friend's body to the earth, do not go giving his writings to oblivion; for if he ordered it as an injured man, it is not right that you should carry it out as an unwise one. On the contrary, by giving these papers life, see that Marcela's cruelty has life for ever, so that it may serve as an example in the times to come to the living, to keep away and flee from falling down such precipices as this. For I already know, and so do all of us who come here, the story of this loving and desperate friend of yours; and we know of your friendship, and the occasion of his death, and what he left ordered at the end of his life. From which lamentable history one may gather how great was Marcela's cruelty, and Grisóstomo's love, and the faith of your friendship, and the end that waits for those who gallop with a loose rein down the path that raving love sets before their eyes. Last night we heard of Grisóstomo's death, and that he was to be buried in this place; and so, out of curiosity and pity, we left the direct road we were on and agreed to come and see with our eyes what had so grieved us in the hearing. And in payment for this pity, and for the wish that was born in us to remedy it if we could, we beg you, wise Ambrosio — at least I beg it of you for my own part — that instead of burning these papers you will let me carry off a few of them."

And without waiting for the shepherd to answer, he put out his hand and took some of those that were nearest; seeing which, Ambrosio said:

"Out of courtesy I shall let you keep the ones you have already taken, sir; but to imagine that I shall leave off burning the rest is an idle thought."

Vivaldo, who was anxious to see what the papers said, opened one of them at once and saw that it was headed: Song of Despair. Ambrosio heard him and said:

"That is the last paper the unhappy man wrote; and so that you may see, sir, the pass his misfortunes had brought him to, read it out so as to be heard; for the time they take to open the grave will give you room enough for it."

"I shall do it very willingly," said Vivaldo.

And as all the bystanders had the same wish, they gathered round him; and reading in a clear voice, he saw that it went like this:
