Chapter 14: In Which Are Set Down the Despairing Verses of the Dead Shepherd, with Other Unlooked-For Events

Grisóstomo's Song

	Since you insist, cruel one, that the force
	of your harsh severity be published abroad
	from tongue to tongue and from one people to another,
	I shall make hell itself lend my sad breast
	a note of grief, to wrench the ordinary
	use of my voice out of its course.
	And matching my desire, which strains
	to tell my pain and your exploits,
	the terrible voice shall carry the sound,
	and mixed with it, for greater torment,
	pieces of my own wretched entrails.
	Listen, then, and lend an attentive ear
	not to any ordered music but to the noise
	that comes up out of the depths of my bitter heart,
	driven by a raving I cannot help,
	for my own relief and your annoyance.

	The roaring of the lion, the terrifying howl
	of the fierce wolf, the horrible hiss
	of the scaly serpent, the appalling
	bellow of some monster, the ominous
	croaking of the crow, the uproar
	of the wind fought over an unquiet sea;
	the implacable bellow of the beaten bull,
	the pitiable cooing of the widowed dove,
	the mournful song of the envied owl,
	together with the weeping
	of all the black infernal crew —
	let them all come out with my grieving soul,
	mixed into one sound, in such a way
	that all the senses are confounded;
	for the cruel pain that is in me
	demands new methods to be told.

	The sands of father Tagus shall not hear
	the sad echoes of so much confusion,
	nor the olives of the famous Betis:
	for my hard sorrows shall be scattered
	on high crags and in deep hollows,
	with a dead tongue and with living words;
	or in dark valleys, or on lonely
	beaches stripped of human dealing,
	or where the sun has never shown its light,
	or among the venomous multitude
	of beasts that the Libyan plain feeds.
	For although in the desert wastes
	the hoarse and uncertain echoes of my hurt
	may sound with your unmatched severity,
	by the privilege of my short destiny
	they shall be carried through the wide world.

	Disdain kills; patience is brought down
	by a suspicion, true or false;
	jealousy kills with a harsher rigour;
	long absence throws a life out of order;
	against a fear of being forgotten
	firm hope of good fortune is no use.
	In all of them there is certain, unavoidable death;
	but I — a miracle never seen! — live on,
	jealous, absent, disdained and certain
	of the suspicions that have killed me;
	and in the forgetting that feeds my fire,
	and among so many torments, my sight
	never manages to see hope even as a shadow,
	nor do I, in my despair, look for her;
	rather, to go to the extreme in my complaint,
	I swear to be without her for ever.

	Can a man, by any chance, in one instant
	hope and fear, or is it right to do it,
	when the grounds for fear are the more certain?
	Ought I, with harsh jealousy standing before me,
	to shut these eyes, when I must see it
	through a thousand wounds opened in my soul?
	Who would not throw the doors wide open
	to mistrust, when he sees
	disdain uncovered, and his suspicions —
	oh, bitter conversion! — turned into truths,
	and clean truth turned into a lie?
	Oh, in the kingdom of love you fierce tyrants,
	jealousies, put a blade into these hands!
	Give me, disdain, a twisted rope.
	But, alas for me, with a cruel victory
	your memory smothers even my suffering.

	I die, then; and so as never to hope
	for good fortune in death or in life,
	I shall be obstinate in my fancy.
	I shall say that the man who loves well is right,
	and that the freest soul is the one most surrendered
	to love's ancient tyranny.
	I shall say that my perpetual enemy
	has a soul as beautiful as her body,
	and that her forgetfulness is born of my own fault,
	and that, by the harms he does us, love
	keeps his empire in a just peace.
	And with this opinion and a hard noose,
	hastening the wretched hour
	that her disdain has brought me to,
	I shall offer body and soul to the winds,
	with no laurel or palm of good to come.

	You, who by so many wrongs show me
	the reason that forces me to do this wrong
	to the weary life I loathe —
	since you see already the plain proof
	that this deep wound in my heart gives you
	of how gladly I offer myself to your severity —
	if by any chance you think I deserve
	that the clear sky of your beautiful eyes
	should cloud over at my death, do not let it:
	for I want no reparation from you
	for making you a present of my soul's spoils.
	Rather, laughing at the funeral,
	show that my end was your holiday;
	though it is great simplicity to advise you of it,
	since I know your glory stands
	in my life reaching its end so soon.

	Let them come, for it is time, out of the deep abyss —
	Tantalus with his thirst; let Sisyphus come
	with the terrible weight of his stone;
	let Tityus bring his vulture, and likewise
	let Ixion not hold back with his wheel,
	nor the sisters who labour so hard;
	and let them all together transfer
	their mortal anguish into my breast, and in low voices —
	if such things are owed to a man in despair —
	sing sad, sorrowing obsequies
	over a body that is denied even a shroud.
	And let the three-faced porter of hell,
	with a thousand other chimeras and monsters,
	carry the mournful counterpoint;
	for no better pomp seems to me
	to be deserved by a lover who is dead.

	Song of despair, do not complain
	when you leave my sad company;
	rather, since the cause that gave you birth
	increases her good fortune by my misery,
	be not sad even in the grave.

Those who had listened thought well of Grisóstomo's song, although the man who read it said it did not seem to him to square with the account he had heard of Marcela's modesty and goodness, because in it Grisóstomo complained of jealousy and suspicion and absence, all to the prejudice of Marcela's good name and reputation. To which Ambrosio, as one who knew his friend's most hidden thoughts, answered:

"So that you may satisfy yourself on that doubt, sir, you should know that when the unhappy man wrote this song he was away from Marcela, having gone away from her of his own accord, to see whether absence would use its ordinary powers on him. And as there is nothing that does not torment an absent lover, and no fear that does not overtake him, so Grisóstomo was tormented by imagined jealousies and dreaded suspicions as though they had been real. And with that, the truth that fame proclaims of Marcela's goodness stands where it did; for apart from being cruel, and a little arrogant, and a great deal disdainful, envy itself neither ought nor is able to find any fault in her."

"That is the truth," answered Vivaldo.

And as he was about to read another of the papers he had saved from the fire, he was stopped by a marvellous vision — for that is what it seemed — which suddenly presented itself to their eyes. For on top of the rock where they were digging the grave there appeared the shepherdess Marcela, so beautiful that her beauty went beyond her reputation. Those who had never seen her before looked at her in wonder and silence, and those who were used to seeing her were left no less astonished than those who never had. But hardly had Ambrosio seen her when, with every sign of an indignant spirit, he said:

"Have you come, by any chance, fierce basilisk of these mountains, to see whether the wounds of this poor wretch whose life your cruelty took will bleed at your presence? Or have you come to gloat over the cruel exploits of your nature, or to watch from that height, like another pitiless Nero, the burning of his Rome in flames, or to trample arrogantly on this unhappy corpse, as Tarquin's ungrateful daughter trampled on her father's? Tell us quickly what you have come for, or what it is that pleases you most; for since I know that Grisóstomo's thoughts never failed to obey you in life, I shall see to it that, now he is dead, the thoughts of all those who called themselves his friends obey you too."

"I come, Ambrosio, for none of the things you have said," answered Marcela, "but to speak up for myself and to make plain how unreasonable are all those who blame me for their sufferings and for Grisóstomo's death. And so I beg all of you who are here to listen to me, for it will not take much time or many words to persuade sensible people of a truth.

"Heaven made me beautiful, you say, and so beautiful that my beauty moves you to love me whether you will or no; and for the love you show me, you say — and even demand — that I am obliged to love you back. By the natural understanding that God has given me I know that everything beautiful is lovable; but I cannot see that, merely by being loved, a thing that is loved for being beautiful is obliged to love whoever loves it. What is more, it might happen that the lover of the beautiful thing was ugly; and since ugliness deserves to be shunned, it comes very badly to say, 'I love you because you are beautiful; you must love me although I am ugly.'

"But even supposing the beauty is equal on both sides, it does not follow that the desires must be equal too; for not all beauties fall in love. Some of them delight the eye without conquering the will. If every beauty made men fall in love and conquered them, our wills would go wandering about confused and lost, not knowing where they were to stop; for the beautiful objects being infinite, the desires would have to be infinite too. And from what I have heard, true love is not divided, and must be voluntary and not forced. This being so, as I believe it is, why do you want me to surrender my will by force, obliged by nothing but your saying that you love me?

"If not, tell me this: if heaven had made me ugly instead of beautiful, would it have been just for me to complain of you for not loving me? What is more, you must consider that I did not choose the beauty I have; such as it is, heaven gave it me freely, without my asking for it or choosing it. And just as the viper does not deserve to be blamed for the poison it carries, although it kills with it, since nature gave it, so neither do I deserve to be reproved for being beautiful. For beauty in a virtuous woman is like a distant fire or a sharp sword: the one does not burn, and the other does not cut, anybody who does not come near them. Honour and virtue are ornaments of the soul, without which the body, even if it is beautiful, ought not to look so. Then if modesty is one of the virtues that most adorn and beautify body and soul, why should a woman who is loved for being beautiful lose it, in order to fall in with the intention of a man who, for his own pleasure alone, uses all his strength and cunning to make her lose it?

"I was born free, and in order to be able to live free I chose the solitude of the fields. The trees of these mountains are my company, the clear waters of these streams my mirrors; with the trees and the waters I share my thoughts and my beauty. I am a distant fire and a sword laid far off. Those I have made fall in love by the sight of me I have undeceived with my words. And if desires are kept alive by hopes, then since I gave no hope to Grisóstomo or to anyone else, it may fairly be said of the end of any of them that he was killed by his own obstinacy rather than by my cruelty.

"And if I am charged with his intentions having been honourable, and that for that reason I was obliged to meet them, I say that when, in this very place where they are now digging his grave, he declared to me the goodness of his intention, I told him that mine was to live in perpetual solitude, and that the earth alone should enjoy the fruit of my seclusion and the spoils of my beauty. And if, with all that plain speaking, he chose to persist against hope and to sail against the wind, is it any wonder that he drowned in mid-ocean of his own folly? If I had led him on, I should have been false; if I had contented him, I should have gone against my own better intention and purpose. He persisted after being undeceived; he despaired without being hated. Consider now whether it is reasonable that I should be blamed for his pain.

"Let the man who is deceived complain; let the man who has been cheated of promised hopes despair; let the man I call to trust me, and the man I accept take pride in it. But let no man call me cruel or a murderer whom I do not promise, deceive, call or accept.

"Heaven has not so far willed that I should love by destiny, and to think that I am going to love by choice is a waste of time. Let this general undeceiving serve each of those who court me for his own particular profit; and let it be understood from now on that if anybody dies for me, he does not die of jealousy or of being scorned, since a woman who loves nobody can give nobody cause for jealousy; and plain speaking is not to be counted as disdain.

"Let the man who calls me a wild beast and a basilisk leave me alone as a harmful and evil thing; let the man who calls me ungrateful not serve me; the man who calls me unapproachable not approach me; the man who calls me cruel not follow me. For this wild beast, this basilisk, this ungrateful, cruel and unapproachable woman will not seek them out or serve them or approach them or follow them in any way whatever.

"If Grisóstomo was killed by his impatience and his headlong desire, why should my decent conduct and my reserve be blamed for it? If I keep my purity in the company of the trees, why should a man who wants me to keep it in the company of men want me to lose it? I have, as you know, property of my own, and I do not covet other people's; I have a free nature and I do not care to be subject to anyone. I neither love nor hate anybody. I do not deceive this man or solicit that one, I do not trifle with one or amuse myself with another. The decent conversation of the village girls hereabouts and the care of my goats are my amusement. My desires have these mountains for their boundary; and if they go beyond them, it is to contemplate the beauty of the sky — steps by which the soul travels towards its first dwelling."

And saying this, without waiting for any answer, she turned her back and went into the thickest part of a wood that was near, leaving everyone there astonished as much by her good sense as by her beauty. And some of them — those who had been wounded by the powerful arrow of the rays of her lovely eyes — showed signs of wanting to follow her, taking no advantage of the plain undeceiving they had just heard. Seeing which, and thinking that here was a good opportunity to make use of his chivalry in succouring maidens in distress, Don Quixote laid his hand on the hilt of his sword and said, in a loud and distinct voice:

"Let no person, of whatever state and condition, dare to follow the beautiful Marcela, on pain of falling under my furious indignation. She has shown, with clear and sufficient arguments, how little or no blame she has had in Grisóstomo's death, and how far she is from consenting to the desires of any of her lovers; for which reason it is only just that, instead of being followed and persecuted, she should be honoured and esteemed by all the good people of the world, since she shows that in it she is the only woman who lives with so honourable an intention."

Whether it was because of Don Quixote's threats, or because Ambrosio told them to finish what they owed their good friend, not one of the shepherds stirred or moved from there until, the grave being finished and Grisóstomo's papers burned, they laid his body in it, not without many tears from the bystanders. They closed the grave with a heavy stone until a slab should be finished which, Ambrosio said, he meant to have made, with an epitaph that was to read like this:

	Here lies the wretched frozen body
	of a lover who was a shepherd of flocks,
	and lost for want of love.
	He died at the hands of the severity
	of a shy, beautiful, ungrateful girl,
	through whom the tyranny of love
	spreads out its empire.

Then they scattered a great many flowers and branches over the grave, and all offering their condolences to his friend Ambrosio, they took their leave of him. Vivaldo and his companion did the same, and Don Quixote took leave of his hosts and of the travellers, who begged him to come with them to Seville, it being so convenient a place for finding adventures that in every street and round every corner more of them offer themselves than anywhere else. Don Quixote thanked them for the information and for the goodwill they showed in wanting to do him a kindness, and said that for the present he neither wished nor ought to go to Seville until he had cleared all those mountains of the thieving scoundrels that they were said to be full of. Seeing his firm resolve, the travellers would not press him any further, but taking their leave again they left him and went on their road; on which they did not lack for things to talk about, both the story of Marcela and Grisóstomo and the madnesses of Don Quixote. And he made up his mind to go and look for the shepherdess Marcela and offer her everything he could in her service. But things did not turn out as he expected, as is told in the course of this true history, the second part ending here.
