Chapter 15: In Which Is Told the Unlucky Adventure That Don Quixote Ran Into When He Ran Into Some Heartless Yangüesan Carriers

Part Three of the Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha

The wise Cide Hamete Benengeli relates that as soon as Don Quixote had taken leave of his hosts and of everyone who had been at the shepherd Grisóstomo's burial, he and his squire went into the same wood they had seen the shepherdess Marcela go into. And having spent more than two hours going about in it, looking for her everywhere without being able to find her, they came to a stop in a meadow full of fresh grass, beside which ran a quiet, cool stream — so inviting that it tempted, and indeed compelled, them to spend the hours of the afternoon heat there, which was by now beginning to come on in earnest.

Don Quixote and Sancho dismounted, and leaving the donkey and Rocinante at their liberty to crop the abundant grass, they ransacked the saddlebags; and without any ceremony, in good peace and fellowship, master and man ate what they found in them.

Sancho had not troubled to hobble Rocinante, being confident that he knew him for so meek an animal and so little given to lust that all the mares in the pastures of Córdoba would not have led him into mischief. But fate — and the devil, who does not sleep all the time — arranged matters so that a herd of Galician ponies belonging to some Yangüesan carriers happened to be grazing in that valley; for it is these men's custom to take their midday rest with their string of animals in places where there is grass and water, and the spot Don Quixote had chanced upon suited them exactly. Now it so happened that a desire came upon Rocinante to disport himself with the lady ponies. And the moment he caught their scent he abandoned his natural pace and habit and, without asking his master's leave, broke into a brisk little trot and went off to communicate his need to them. But they, who to all appearances were keener on grazing than on anything else, received him with their hoofs and their teeth in such a way that in no time at all his girths were broken and he was left saddleless and stripped. But what he must have felt still more was that the carriers, seeing the violence being done to their mares, came running with their staves and gave him so many blows that they brought him down in a bad way on the ground.

By this time Don Quixote and Sancho, who had watched Rocinante's beating, came up panting; and Don Quixote said to Sancho:

"From what I can see, friend Sancho, these are no knights, but low fellows of base breeding. I say it because you may perfectly well help me to take due vengeance for the injury that has been done to Rocinante before our very eyes."

"What the devil sort of vengeance are we to take," answered Sancho, "when there are more than twenty of them and no more than two of us — and perhaps not even two, but one and a half?"

"I count for a hundred," replied Don Quixote.

And without any more discussion he laid his hand on his sword and charged the Yangüesans; and Sancho Panza did the same, urged and moved by his master's example. And at the first stroke Don Quixote dealt one of them a slash that opened the leather jerkin he was wearing, along with a good part of the shoulder inside it. The Yangüesans, seeing themselves roughly handled by two men alone when there were so many of them, ran to their staves, and getting the pair of them in the middle they began to lay on with great energy and enthusiasm. The truth is that at the second stroke they had Sancho on the ground, and the same happened to Don Quixote, for all his skill and his good courage; and it was his luck to come down at the feet of Rocinante, who had not yet got up — from which one may judge the fury with which staves smash away when they are in rustic and angry hands.

The Yangüesans, seeing the mess they had made, loaded up their string of animals with all the speed they could and went on their way, leaving the two adventurers in a bad state and in a worse temper.

The first to come round was Sancho Panza; and finding himself next to his master, he said in a sick and pitiful voice:

"Señor Don Quixote! Oh, Señor Don Quixote!"

"What do you want, brother Sancho?" answered Don Quixote in the same feeble and doleful tone as Sancho.

"I should like, if it were possible," answered Sancho Panza, "for your worship to give me two swallows of that drink of Fiery Brass, if your worship happens to have it there to hand. Perhaps it will be as good for broken bones as it is for wounds."

"If I had it here, unlucky man that I am, what more should we need?" answered Don Quixote. "But I swear to you, Sancho Panza, on the word of a knight errant, that before two days are out — unless fortune orders otherwise — I shall have it in my possession, or my hands will have failed me badly."

"And in how many days does your worship reckon we shall be able to move our feet?" replied Sancho Panza.

"For my own part," said the battered knight, "I could not put a limit to those days. But I am to blame for the whole thing, because I had no business to lay my hand on my sword against men who were not knights like myself. And so I believe that the god of battles has allowed this punishment to be given me as a penalty for breaking the laws of chivalry. For which reason, Sancho Panza, it is as well that you should be warned of what I am now going to tell you, because it matters a great deal to the health of us both. And it is this: when you see rabble of that kind doing us some injury, do not wait for me to lay my hand on my sword against them, because I shall do no such thing; instead, put your own hand to your sword and punish them entirely to your taste. And if knights come to their aid and defence, I shall be able to defend you and set about them with all my might; for you must have seen by a thousand signs and proofs how far the valour of this strong arm of mine extends."

Such was the arrogance the poor gentleman was left in by his victory over the valiant Basque. But his master's advice did not strike Sancho Panza as good enough for him to let it pass without an answer, so he said:

"Sir, I am a peaceable man, a quiet one, an easy one, and I know how to swallow any injury, because I have a wife and children to keep and bring up. So let it be a piece of advice to your worship too — since it cannot be an order — that on no account will I lay a hand on my sword, either against a peasant or against a knight; and that from this moment, before God, I forgive every injury that has been done me and that ever will be done me, whether it was done, or is being done, or is to be done, by a person high or low, rich or poor, gentleman or commoner, without excepting any rank or condition whatever."

Hearing which, his master answered him:

"I wish I had breath enough to speak a little more comfortably, and that this pain I have in my rib would let up just enough for me to make you understand, Panza, the mistake you are in. Come here, sinner: if the wind of fortune, so contrary to us until now, should turn in our favour, filling the sails of our desire so that we come safely and without any check into port on one of the isles I have promised you — what would become of you, if, having won it, I made you lord of it? Are you going to make that impossible by not being a knight, and not wanting to be one, and having neither the courage nor the intention to avenge your injuries and defend your dominion? For you must know that in kingdoms and provinces newly conquered the tempers of the natives are never so settled, nor so much on the new lord's side, that there is not something to fear from their making some new move to upset things again and, as they say, try their luck once more. And so the new possessor needs understanding, to know how to govern, and courage, to attack and defend himself whatever happens."

"In this business that has just happened to us," answered Sancho, "I wish I had had that understanding and that courage your worship speaks of. But I swear to you, on the word of a poor man, that I am fitter for plasters than for parleys. See whether your worship can get up, and we will help Rocinante, though he doesn't deserve it, since he was the chief cause of all this pounding. I would never have believed such a thing of Rocinante; I took him for a chaste person and as peaceable as myself. Well, they are right when they say it takes a long time to get to know people, and that there is nothing certain in this life. Who would have said that after those tremendous sword-slashes your worship gave that unlucky knight errant, there would come, express and hot on their heels, this great tempest of sticks that has broken over our backs?"

"Yours, at least, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "must be used to squalls of that sort. But mine, brought up between fine linen and Holland cloth, will obviously feel the pain of this misfortune more keenly. And if it were not that I imagine — imagine, do I say? I know for a certainty — that all these discomforts are inseparable from the exercise of arms, I would let myself die here of sheer vexation."

To this the squire replied:

"Sir, since these misfortunes are part of chivalry's own harvest, tell me, your worship: do they come round very often, or have they set seasons when they happen? Because it seems to me that after two such harvests we shall be no use for the third, unless God in his infinite mercy comes to our help."

"You must know, friend Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "that the life of knights errant is subject to a thousand dangers and misfortunes; and neither more nor less, it is in the immediate power of knights errant to become kings and emperors, as experience has shown in the case of many and various knights whose histories I know in full. And I could tell you now, if the pain would let me, of some who by the valour of their arm alone have risen to the high positions I have mentioned; and these same men were seen, before and after, in all sorts of calamities and miseries. For the valorous Amadis of Gaul found himself in the power of his mortal enemy Archelaus the enchanter, of whom it is taken as an established fact that, having him prisoner, he tied him to a pillar in a courtyard and gave him more than two hundred lashes with his horse's reins. And there is even a secret author, and one of no small credit, who says that the Knight of the Sun was caught in a certain castle by a trapdoor that gave way under his feet, and in falling found himself in a deep pit underground, bound hand and foot, and there they gave him one of those things they call a clyster, of snow-water and sand, which very nearly finished him; and if he had not been helped in that great trouble by a wise man who was a great friend of his, it would have gone very badly with the poor knight. So I may well pass among such good company, for the affronts those men suffered were greater than the one we are suffering now. Because I want you to be informed, Sancho, that wounds given with whatever instruments happen to be in a man's hand are no affront; and this stands in the law of duelling, written in express words: that if a shoemaker hits another man with the last he has in his hand, although it is genuinely made of wood, it will not therefore be said that the man he hit with it has been cudgelled. I say this so that you shall not think that, because we have come out of this brawl pounded, we have come out of it affronted; because the weapons those men carried, the ones they mashed us with, were nothing but their staves, and not one of them, so far as I recollect, had a rapier, a sword or a dagger."

"They gave me no chance," answered Sancho, "to look into it that far. Because I had hardly laid a hand on my trusty blade when they crossed my shoulders with their pine-staves in such a way that they took the sight out of my eyes and the strength out of my feet and laid me down where I am now lying; and where it gives me no trouble at all to wonder whether the business of the staves was an affront or not, but a great deal of trouble to feel the pain of the blows, which are going to stay printed on my memory as firmly as on my back."

"For all that, I would have you know, brother Panza," replied Don Quixote, "that there is no memory time does not put an end to, and no pain death does not carry off."

"And what greater misfortune can there be," replied Panza, "than one that has to wait for time to put an end to it and death to carry it off? If this trouble of ours were the kind that is cured with a couple of plasters, it wouldn't be so bad; but I can see that all the poultices in a hospital won't be enough to get us even into a decent state."

"Leave off that and draw strength out of weakness, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "for that is what I mean to do. And let us see how Rocinante is, for it seems to me the poor beast has not had the smallest share in this misfortune."

"There is nothing to wonder at in that," answered Sancho, "he being so good a knight errant. What I wonder at is that my donkey should have got off free and without costs, where we have come out without ribs."

"Fortune always leaves one door open in misfortunes, to give a remedy for them," said Don Quixote. "I say it because that little beast can now make up for the lack of Rocinante and carry me from here to some castle where I may be cured of my wounds. What is more, I shall not count such a mount a dishonour, because I remember reading that the good old Silenus, tutor and schoolmaster to the merry god of laughter, entered the city of the hundred gates riding very comfortably on a very handsome ass."

"It may well be true that he rode, as your worship says," answered Sancho, "but there is a great difference between riding and going slung across like a sack of rubbish."

To which Don Quixote answered:

"Wounds received in battle give honour rather than take it away. So, friend Panza, do not argue with me any more; but as I have told you already, get up as best you can and put me on top of your donkey in whatever way pleases you most, and let us get away from here before night comes and catches us in this wilderness."

"But I have heard your worship say," said Panza, "that it is very much a knight errant's business to sleep out on moors and in deserts for most of the year, and that they count it a great piece of luck."

"That is," said Don Quixote, "when they cannot do otherwise, or when they are in love. And this is so true that there has been a knight who stayed on a rock, in sun and shade and in all the inclemencies of heaven, for two years without his lady knowing anything about it. And one of these was Amadis, when, calling himself Beltenebros, he lodged on the Poor Rock — for eight years or eight months, I am not sure which, because I am not very good on the reckoning. Enough that he was there doing penance for some vexation or other that the lady Oriana had caused him. But let us leave this now, Sancho, and get it over before some other misfortune happens to the donkey, as it did to Rocinante."

"Even that would be the devil's own work," said Sancho.

And letting off thirty groans, and sixty sighs, and a hundred and twenty curses and damnations on whoever had brought him there, he got up, sticking halfway like a Turkish bow, unable to finish straightening himself. And with all this labour he harnessed his ass, which had also gone somewhat astray with the excessive freedom of that day. Then he got Rocinante up; and if that animal had had a tongue to complain with, it is safe to say that neither Sancho nor his master would have outdone him.

In the end Sancho settled Don Quixote on the ass and tied Rocinante on behind; and leading the ass by the halter, he set off, more or less, towards where he thought the high road might be. And fortune, which was guiding his affairs from good to better, had not let him go a short league before it brought him to the road, on which he made out an inn that, to his annoyance and to Don Quixote's satisfaction, was bound to be a castle. Sancho insisted it was an inn and his master that it was not, but a castle; and the argument lasted so long that they had time to reach it without finishing it, and Sancho went straight in with his whole train, without any further inquiry.
