Chapter 16: Of What Happened to the Ingenious Gentleman in the Inn That He Imagined to Be a Castle

The innkeeper, seeing Don Quixote slung across the ass, asked Sancho what was wrong with him. Sancho answered that it was nothing, only that he had had a fall down off a rock and his ribs were somewhat bruised. The innkeeper had for a wife a woman not of the sort usually found in that trade, because she was naturally kind-hearted and felt for the troubles of her neighbours; and so she came at once to see to Don Quixote, and made a daughter of hers — a girl, unmarried and very good-looking — help her to nurse their guest.

There was also a servant at the inn, a girl from Asturias, broad in the face, flat at the back of the head, snub-nosed, blind in one eye and not very sound in the other. It is true that the elegance of her figure made up for the rest of her shortcomings: she did not stand five foot from her feet to her head, and her shoulders, which weighed on her somewhat, made her look at the ground rather more than she would have liked. This graceful young woman, then, helped the daughter, and between them they made Don Quixote a very bad bed in a garret which gave clear signs of having served for many years, in earlier times, as a hayloft. A carrier was also lodged in it, whose bed was made up a little way beyond our Don Quixote's; and although it was put together out of the pack-saddles and blankets of his mules, it had a great advantage over Don Quixote's, which consisted only of four badly planed boards laid on two trestles of unequal height; a mattress so thin it might have been a quilt, full of lumps which, if they had not shown through some of the holes that they were made of wool, would to the touch have been taken for pebbles, given how hard they were; two sheets made of the leather they use for shields; and a blanket whose threads, if anyone had wanted to count them, could have been counted without losing one.

In this accursed bed Don Quixote lay down, and the innkeeper's wife and her daughter plastered him from top to toe, with Maritornes — for that was the Asturian's name — holding the light for them. And as she was putting on the poultices, the innkeeper's wife saw Don Quixote so bruised in places that she said it looked more like a beating than a fall.

"They were not blows," said Sancho; "it was just that the rock had a lot of points and knobs on it, and each one had made its own bruise."

And he added:

"Manage it, madam, so that there are a few pieces of tow left over, for there will be no lack of somebody who needs them; my own back aches a bit too."

"In that case," answered the innkeeper's wife, "you must have had a fall as well."

"I did not fall," said Sancho Panza; "but with the shock I got at seeing my master fall, my body aches in such a way that I feel as if I had been given a thousand strokes with a stick."

"That could very well be," said the daughter; "for it has often happened to me to dream I was falling from the top of a tower and never getting to the ground, and when I woke up out of the dream I found myself as bruised and battered as if I really had fallen."

"That's just the point, madam," answered Sancho Panza: "that I, without dreaming anything at all — being wider awake than I am now — find myself with hardly fewer bruises than my master Don Quixote."

"What is this knight called?" asked Maritornes the Asturian.

"Don Quixote of La Mancha," answered Sancho Panza; "and he is a knight adventurer, and one of the best and strongest that the world has seen this long while."

"And what is a knight adventurer?" asked the girl.

"Are you so new in the world that you don't know?" answered Sancho Panza. "Then let me tell you, sister, that a knight adventurer is a thing that in two shakes is thrashed and is an emperor. Today he is the most wretched creature in the world and the most in need, and tomorrow he will have two or three kingdoms' crowns to give away to his squire."

"Then how is it that you, being squire to so good a master," said the innkeeper's wife, "have not so much as an earldom, by the look of you?"

"It is still early days," answered Sancho; "we have only been out looking for adventures for a month, and so far we have not run into any that is one. And sometimes it happens that you look for one thing and find another. The truth is that if my master Don Quixote recovers from this wound, or fall, and I am not left crippled by it, I would not change my prospects for the best title in Spain."

Don Quixote had been listening to all this talk very attentively, and sitting up in bed as best he could and taking the innkeeper's wife by the hand, he said to her:

"Believe me, beauteous lady, you may call yourself fortunate for having lodged my person in this castle of yours — which person is such that, if I do not praise it, it is because of what they say, that self-praise debases. But my squire will tell you who I am. I say only that I shall keep the service you have rendered me eternally written in my memory, to be grateful to you for it as long as my life lasts. And would to high heaven that love did not hold me so surrendered and so subject to his laws, and to the eyes of that beautiful ingrate whose name I say between my teeth; for then the eyes of this fair maiden would be the masters of my liberty."

The innkeeper's wife and her daughter and good Maritornes were bewildered to hear the knight errant's speeches, which they understood about as well as if he had been talking Greek, although they gathered clearly enough that the whole of it was aimed at compliments and gallantry. Being unused to language of the sort, they looked at him and marvelled, and he seemed to them a different kind of man from the ones in ordinary use; and thanking him in innkeeperly phrases for his offers, they left him. And Maritornes the Asturian saw to Sancho, who needed it no less than his master.

Now the carrier had arranged with her that they should enjoy themselves together that night, and she had given him her word that once the guests were quiet and her employers asleep she would come and look for him and satisfy him in whatever he asked. And it is told of this good girl that she never gave a promise of that kind that she did not keep, even if she gave it on a mountainside and with no witness at all; because she prided herself greatly on being a gentlewoman, and did not consider it any disgrace to be in service at an inn, since it was misfortunes and bad luck, she said, that had brought her to that condition.

Don Quixote's hard, narrow, mean and treacherous bed stood first, in the middle of that star-lit stable; and next to it Sancho made up his own, which consisted only of a rush mat and a blanket that looked more like sheared canvas than wool. Beyond these two beds came the carrier's, put together, as has been said, out of the pack-saddles and the whole harness of the two best mules he had with him, although there were twelve of them, sleek, fat and famous; for he was one of the rich carriers of Arévalo, according to the author of this history, who makes particular mention of this carrier because he knew him very well, and some will even have it that he was some sort of relation of his. Besides which, Cide Mahamate Benengeli was a most inquisitive historian and most exact in everything; which can be plainly seen, since the details set down here, minute and trivial as they are, he was unwilling to pass over in silence. From which the solemn historians might take an example — the ones who tell us of great actions so briefly and so scantily that we barely get a taste of them, leaving in the inkwell, whether through carelessness or malice or ignorance, the most substantial part of the work. A thousand blessings on the author of Tablante de Ricamonte, and on the author of that other book which tells the deeds of Count Tomillas, and on the exactness with which they describe everything!

To go on, then: after the carrier had visited his string of mules and given them their second feed, he stretched himself out on his pack-saddles and settled down to wait for his most punctual Maritornes. Sancho was by now poulticed and lying down, and although he did his best to sleep, the pain in his ribs would not let him; and Don Quixote, with the pain in his own, lay with his eyes as wide open as a hare's. The whole inn was silent, and in the whole of it there was no other light than what came from a lamp that hung burning in the middle of the entry.

This marvellous stillness, and the thoughts our knight always carried about with him of the incidents that are related at every turn in the books that had caused his misfortune, brought to his imagination one of the strangest pieces of madness that can readily be imagined. Which was that he fancied he had arrived at a famous castle — for, as has been said, every inn he lodged in was a castle to his mind — and that the innkeeper's daughter was the daughter of the lord of the castle, and that she, conquered by his gallantry, had fallen in love with him and promised that she would come that night, unknown to her parents, to lie with him for a good while. And holding this whole chimera he had built himself for firm and valid, he began to be troubled and to think about the perilous pass in which his chastity was about to be put; and he resolved in his heart to commit no treachery against his lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, even if Queen Guinevere herself and her lady Quintañona were to present themselves in front of him.

While he was thinking about this nonsense, the time and the hour arrived — an unlucky one for him — of the Asturian's coming. In her shift and barefoot, with her hair caught up in a fustian net, she came into the room where the three of them were lodged with silent, careful steps, looking for the carrier. But she had hardly reached the door when Don Quixote heard her; and sitting up in bed, in spite of his poultices and the pain in his ribs, he stretched out his arms to receive his beauteous maiden. The Asturian, drawn in on herself and saying nothing, going along with her hands out in front of her feeling for her beloved, ran into Don Quixote's arms; and he seized her tightly by one wrist, and pulling her towards him — she not daring to say a word — made her sit down on the bed.

He felt her shift next, and although it was made of sacking, to him it seemed to be of the finest and thinnest silk. On her wrists she wore some glass beads, but to him they gave off the gleam of precious oriental pearls. Her hair, which was something in the nature of a horse's mane, he set down for threads of the most brilliant Arabian gold, whose brightness put out the light of the sun itself. And her breath, which without any doubt smelt of yesterday's salad left standing overnight, seemed to him to give off from her mouth a soft and aromatic fragrance. In short, he painted her in his imagination in exactly the shape and manner he had read about in his books of that other princess who came to see the sorely wounded knight, conquered by her love for him, with all the ornaments that are set down here. And so great was the poor gentleman's blindness that neither the touch of her, nor her breath, nor other things the good girl had about her undeceived him — things that would have made anybody vomit who was not a carrier. On the contrary, it seemed to him that he had the goddess of beauty in his arms. And holding her fast, he began to say to her in a low and loving voice:

"I could wish I were in a condition, beautiful and noble lady, to be able to repay so great a favour as the one you have done me with the sight of your great beauty. But fortune, which never tires of persecuting good men, has been pleased to put me in this bed, where I lie so pounded and broken that even if my will wanted to satisfy yours it would be impossible. And what is more, there is added to this impossibility another and a greater one, which is the pledged faith I have given to the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso, sole lady of my most hidden thoughts. If it were not for that standing in the way, I should not be so witless a knight as to let slip the fortunate opportunity that your great goodness has put me in."

Maritornes was in an agony and sweating at finding herself gripped like this by Don Quixote, and without understanding or paying attention to a word he was saying, she was trying to get herself free without speaking. The good carrier, whom his bad desires were keeping awake, had heard his mistress from the moment she came in at the door. He had listened attentively to everything Don Quixote said, and, jealous that the Asturian should have broken her word to him for somebody else, he came closer to Don Quixote's bed and stood still, to see what all this talk he could not understand would come to. But when he saw that the girl was struggling to get loose and Don Quixote labouring to hold her, he did not think much of the joke; and raising his arm high he let fall so terrible a punch on the enamoured knight's narrow jaws that he bathed his whole mouth in blood. And not content with that, he climbed on top of his ribs and at more than a trot walked up and down the whole length of them.

The bed, which was a little frail and on no firm foundations, being unable to bear the addition of the carrier, came down on the floor; and at the great noise of it the innkeeper woke, and immediately imagined it must be some brawl of Maritornes', because when he shouted for her she did not answer. With this suspicion he got up, and lighting a lamp went towards where he had heard the scuffle. The girl, seeing her master coming, and knowing what a terrible temper he had, all frightened and flustered took refuge in Sancho Panza's bed, where he was still asleep, and there she huddled down and rolled herself into a ball. The innkeeper came in saying:

"Where are you, you whore? I'll be bound this is your doing."

At this Sancho woke up, and feeling that weight almost on top of him, thought he had the nightmare, and began throwing punches in every direction; and among others he landed I do not know how many on Maritornes, who, stung by the pain, threw modesty out of the window and gave Sancho back so many in return that in spite of himself she woke him thoroughly. And he, finding himself handled in that fashion and not knowing by whom, hauled himself up as best he could and closed with Maritornes, and between the two of them there began the hardest-fought and funniest skirmish in the world.

The carrier, then, seeing by the light of the innkeeper's lamp how his lady was faring, left Don Quixote and ran to give her the help she needed. The innkeeper did the same, but with a different intention, because he went to punish the girl, believing beyond a doubt that she alone was the cause of all that harmony. And so, as the saying goes — the cat to the rat, the rat to the rope, the rope to the stick — the carrier laid into Sancho, Sancho into the girl, the girl into him, the innkeeper into the girl, and all of them pounded away so busily that they never gave themselves a moment's rest. And the best of it was that the innkeeper's lamp went out; and as they were left in the dark, they all set about one another so pitilessly and so blindly that wherever they put a hand they left nothing sound.

It happened that there was lodging at the inn that night an officer of the sort they call the Old Holy Brotherhood of Toledo, who, hearing the extraordinary uproar of the fight, took hold of his staff of office and the tin box with his warrants in it and came into the room in the dark, calling out:

"Hold, in the name of the law! Hold, in the name of the Holy Brotherhood!"

And the first person he ran into was the battered Don Quixote, who was lying on his back on his collapsed bed, entirely senseless; and getting his hand by chance on his beard, he went on shouting:

"Help for the law!"

But seeing that the man he had hold of did not stir or move, he took it into his head that he was dead and that the people in the room were his murderers; and on this suspicion he raised his voice, calling out:

"Shut the inn door! Take care nobody gets out — there's a man been killed in here!"

This shout startled everybody, and each of them dropped the fight at the point the shout caught them. The innkeeper withdrew to his room, the carrier to his pack-saddles, the girl to her corner; only the unfortunate Don Quixote and Sancho could not move from where they were. At this the officer let go of Don Quixote's beard and went out to look for a light so as to find the criminals and arrest them; but he did not find one, because the innkeeper had deliberately put out the lamp when he retired to his room, and the officer was obliged to go to the fireplace, where with a great deal of trouble and time he lit another lamp.
