Chapter 17: In Which Are Continued the Innumerable Hardships That the Brave Don Quixote and His Good Squire Sancho Panza Went Through in the Inn Which, to His Misfortune, He Took for a Castle

By this time Don Quixote had come round out of his swoon; and in the same tone of voice with which he had called his squire the day before, when he was stretched out in the valley of the staves, he began calling him now:

"Friend Sancho, are you asleep? Are you asleep, friend Sancho?"

"How am I supposed to sleep, curse it," answered Sancho, full of misery and resentment, "when it looks for all the world as if every devil in hell had been at me tonight?"

"You may well believe it," answered Don Quixote, "because either I know very little, or this castle is enchanted. Because you must know — but what I am going to tell you now, you must swear to me you will keep secret until after my death."

"I swear it," answered Sancho.

"I say it," replied Don Quixote, "because I am an enemy to taking away anybody's good name."

"I say I swear it," Sancho said again, "and that I'll keep quiet about it until after your worship's days are over — and please God I may be able to let it out tomorrow."

"Do I treat you so badly, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "that you would like to see me dead as soon as that?"

"It isn't for that," answered Sancho, "but because I'm an enemy to keeping things too long, and I shouldn't like them to go rotten on me from being kept."

"Let it be for whatever reason it likes," said Don Quixote. "I trust more to your affection and your courtesy. And so you must know that tonight there has happened to me one of the strangest adventures that I could ever find words for. To tell it you shortly: a little while ago there came to me the daughter of the lord of this castle, who is the neatest and fairest maiden to be found over a great part of the earth. What could I tell you about the ornament of her person? What about her gallant understanding? What about other hidden things which, to keep the faith I owe my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, I shall let pass untouched and in silence? I will only tell you that heaven, envious of so great a good as fortune had put in my hands — or perhaps, and this is the more likely, because as I have said this castle is enchanted — while I was with her in the sweetest and most loving conversation, there came, without my seeing her or knowing where it came from, a hand fixed to the arm of some monstrous giant, and planted such a punch on my jaws that I have them all bathed in blood; and afterwards it pounded me in such a way that I am worse off than I was yesterday, when the Yangüesans, on account of Rocinante's excesses, did us the injury you know of. From which I gather that the treasure of this maiden's beauty must be guarded by some enchanted Moor, and cannot be meant for me."

"Nor for me either," answered Sancho, "because more than four hundred Moors have been thumping me, in such a way that the pounding with the staves was cakes and ale by comparison. But tell me, sir: how do you come to call this a good and rare adventure, when it has left us in the state it has? Your worship at least came off less badly, since you had that incomparable beauty you speak of in your hands; but what did I get except the greatest hammering I expect to get in the whole of my life? Unlucky me, and unlucky the mother that bore me, for I am no knight errant and never mean to be one, and the largest share of all the disasters falls to me!"

"So you were beaten too?" answered Don Quixote.

"Haven't I told you I was, curse my ancestry?" said Sancho.

"Don't distress yourself, my friend," said Don Quixote; "I shall make the precious balm now, and we shall be cured with it in the twinkling of an eye."

By this time the officer had finished lighting his lamp and came in to look at the man he thought was dead. And as soon as Sancho saw him come in — seeing him arrive in his shirt, with a cloth round his head and a lamp in his hand, and with a very ugly face on him — he asked his master:

"Sir, could this by any chance be the enchanted Moor, coming back to punish us in case he left anything in the inkwell?"

"It cannot be the Moor," answered Don Quixote, "because those under enchantment let themselves be seen by nobody."

"If they don't let themselves be seen, they let themselves be felt," said Sancho; "and if they don't, my back can speak to it."

"So could mine," answered Don Quixote, "but that is not evidence enough to believe that this man we can see is the enchanted Moor."

The officer came up; and finding them talking in such a peaceable conversation, he was taken aback. It is true that Don Quixote was still lying on his back, unable to move for being so thoroughly pounded and plastered. The officer went over to him and said:

"Well, how goes it, my good man?"

"I would speak with better breeding," answered Don Quixote, "if I were you. Is it the custom in this country to talk in that fashion to knights errant, you blockhead?"

The officer, finding himself so badly treated by a man of such a bad appearance, could not stand it; and lifting the lamp, oil and all, he brought it down on Don Quixote's head in such a way that he left him very well cracked indeed. And as everything was left in the dark, he went straight out; and Sancho Panza said:

"There's no doubt about it, sir, this is the enchanted Moor; and he must be keeping the treasure for other people, and for us he keeps nothing but the punches and the lamp-blows."

"That is how it is," answered Don Quixote, "and there is no need to take any notice of these matters of enchantment, or any reason to lose our temper or get angry over them; for since they are invisible and imaginary, we shall find nobody to take our revenge on, however hard we try. Get up, Sancho, if you can, and call the governor of this fortress, and try to get me a little oil, wine, salt and rosemary to make the health-giving balm; for indeed I think I have great need of it now, because a great deal of blood is running out of the wound this phantom has given me."

Sancho got up with a good deal of pain in his bones and went off in the dark to where the innkeeper was; and running into the officer, who was listening to hear how his enemy was getting on, he said:

"Sir, whoever you may be, do us the favour and the kindness of giving us a little rosemary, oil, salt and wine, which is needed to cure one of the best knights errant on earth, who is lying in that bed there, sorely wounded by the hands of the enchanted Moor who is in this inn."

When the officer heard that, he took him for a man out of his wits; and as it was already beginning to get light he opened the inn door and, calling the innkeeper, told him what this good fellow wanted. The innkeeper supplied him with everything he asked for, and Sancho carried it to Don Quixote, who was lying with his hands on his head, complaining of the pain of the blow with the lamp, which had done him no more harm than to raise two rather large lumps; and what he thought was blood was nothing but the sweat he was sweating in the anguish of the past storm.

To be brief, he took his simples, out of which he made a compound, mixing them all together and boiling them for a good while, until it seemed to him they were exactly right. He then asked for some flask to pour it into, and as there was none in the inn, he settled on putting it into a tin oil-can that the innkeeper made him a free gift of. Next he said over the can more than eighty Our Fathers, and as many Hail Marys, Salves and Creeds, accompanying every word with a cross by way of a blessing; at all of which Sancho, the innkeeper and the officer were present, the carrier by now being quietly about the business of looking after his mules.

This done, he decided to make trial at once, on himself, of the virtue of that precious balm as he imagined it; and so he drank down what would not go into the can and was left over in the pot it had been boiled in — very nearly a quart. And he had hardly finished drinking it when he began to vomit in such a way that there was nothing left in his stomach; and with the retching and heaving of the vomit an enormous sweat broke out on him, so he gave orders that they should wrap him up and leave him alone. They did so, and he stayed asleep for more than three hours; at the end of which he woke up and felt his body enormously relieved, and so much better of his battering that he considered himself cured. And he genuinely believed he had hit on the balm of Fierabrás, and that with that remedy he could from then on take on any wreck, battle or brawl whatever, however dangerous, without any fear at all.

Sancho Panza, who also took his master's recovery for a miracle, begged him to give him what was left in the pot, which was no small quantity. Don Quixote granted it, and taking it in both hands, in good faith and better spirits, Sancho tipped it down his throat and got very little less inside him than his master had. Now the fact is that poor Sancho's stomach cannot have been as delicate as his master's, and so, before he could vomit, he was seized with such gripings and heavings, with such sweats and faintings, that he thought good and truly that his last hour had come; and finding himself so afflicted and distressed, he cursed the balm and the thief who had given it to him. Seeing him in that state, Don Quixote said:

"I believe, Sancho, that all this trouble comes on you from not being a dubbed knight; because it is my opinion that this liquor cannot be any good to those who are not."

"If your worship knew that," replied Sancho, "bad luck to me and all my kin! — then why did you let me taste it?"

At this the brew did its work, and the poor squire began to empty himself at both ends with such urgency that neither the rush mat he had lain down on again nor the canvas blanket he was covering himself with were of any further use. He sweated and sweated again with such spasms and seizures that not only he but everybody thought his life was ending. This squall and bad passage lasted him nearly two hours, at the end of which he was not left as his master had been, but so pounded and broken that he could not hold himself up.

But Don Quixote, who, as has been said, felt relieved and well, wanted to set off at once in search of adventures, since it seemed to him that all the time he was delaying there was being taken away from the world and from those in it who needed his favour and protection — the more so given the confidence and assurance his balm gave him. And so, forced on by this desire, he saddled Rocinante himself and put the pack-saddle on his squire's donkey, and helped him to dress too and to get up on the ass. Then he mounted; and going over to a corner of the inn, he took hold of a pike that was standing there, to serve him as a lance.

Everybody in the inn was watching him — there were more than twenty people. The innkeeper's daughter was watching him too, and he for his part never took his eyes off her, and every now and then let out a sigh that seemed to be torn from the depths of his entrails; and they all supposed it must be from the pain he felt in his ribs — at any rate, that is what those supposed who had seen him being poulticed the night before.

When the two of them were mounted, standing at the inn door, he called the innkeeper and said to him in a very calm and solemn voice:

"Many and very great, sir governor, are the favours I have received in this castle of yours, and I remain under the deepest obligation to be grateful to you for them all the days of my life. If I can repay you for them by making you avenged on some arrogant person who has done you an injury, know that my office is nothing else but to help those who can do little for themselves, to avenge those who receive wrongs, and to punish treachery. Search your memory, and if you find anything of that sort to commend to me, you have only to say so; for I promise you, by the order of knighthood I have received, to have you satisfied and paid to the full extent of your wishes."

The innkeeper answered him with the same composure:

"Sir knight, I have no need for your worship to avenge me for any injury, because I know how to take whatever revenge I think fit when they are done me. All I need is for your worship to pay me the bill you have run up in the inn tonight — for the straw and barley for your two beasts as well as for the supper and the beds."

"So this is an inn?" replied Don Quixote.

"And a very respectable one," answered the innkeeper.

"I have lived in error until now," answered Don Quixote, "for I truly thought it was a castle, and not a bad one. But since it turns out that it is not a castle but an inn, what can be done for the moment is that you should excuse me the payment; for I cannot go against the order of knights errant, of whom I know for certain — never having read anything to the contrary until now — that they never paid for lodging or anything else at any inn they stayed at, because whatever good welcome is given them is owed to them by custom and by right, in payment for the unbearable hardship they suffer looking for adventures night and day, in winter and in summer, on foot and on horseback, in thirst and in hunger, in heat and in cold, exposed to all the inclemencies of heaven and to all the discomforts of earth."

"That has very little to do with me," answered the innkeeper. "Pay me what is owing to me, and let us have no more tales or chivalries; the only account I keep is the one for collecting what belongs to me."

"You are a fool and a bad innkeeper," answered Don Quixote.

And putting his legs to Rocinante and levelling his pike, he rode out of the inn without anybody stopping him; and without looking to see whether his squire was following, he got a good distance off.

The innkeeper, who saw him go without paying, went to collect from Sancho Panza; who said that since his master had refused to pay, he would not pay either, because, being squire to a knight errant as he was, the same rule and reason held for him as for his master about not paying anything in inns and taverns. The innkeeper was very much annoyed at this, and threatened him that if he did not pay he would collect it in a way he would be sorry for. To which Sancho answered that, by the law of chivalry his master had received, he would not pay a single copper if it cost him his life; because he was not going to let the good old custom of knights errant be lost on his account, nor were the squires of such knights who were still to come into the world going to complain of him and reproach him with breaking so just a privilege.

It was poor Sancho's bad luck that among the people in the inn there happened to be four wool-carders from Segovia, three needle-makers from the Colt quarter of Córdoba, and two men from the Fair district of Seville — a merry crowd, well-meaning, mischievous and playful; who, almost as if they had been prompted and moved by one and the same spirit, came up to Sancho and pulled him off the ass. One of them went in for the blanket off the innkeeper's bed, and tipping Sancho into it they looked up and saw that the ceiling was rather lower than they needed for their work, and decided to go out into the yard, which had the sky for its ceiling. And there, with Sancho in the middle of the blanket, they began to toss him up in the air and to amuse themselves with him as people do with a dog at carnival time.

The shouts the wretched blanketed man let out were so many that they reached his master's ears; who, deciding to stop and listen carefully, believed some new adventure was coming his way — until he plainly recognised that the man shouting was his squire. And turning his reins, he came up to the inn at a laboured gallop; and finding it shut, he rode round it to see whether he could find any way in. But he had not got as far as the walls of the yard, which were not very high, when he saw the bad game they were playing with his squire. He saw him go up and down through the air with such grace and quickness that, if his anger had let him, I am inclined to think he would have laughed. He tried to climb from the horse onto the top of the wall, but he was so pounded and broken that he could not even dismount; and so, from on top of the horse, he began to hurl so many insults and abuses at the men who were tossing Sancho that it is not possible to write them down. But for all that they did not stop laughing or stop their work, nor did the flying Sancho leave off his complaints, mixed now with threats and now with entreaties; but it was all of very little use, and no use at all, until out of sheer weariness they let him be.

They brought his ass over to him and helped him up on it, and wrapped him in his coat. And Maritornes, who was a compassionate soul, seeing him so exhausted, thought it right to help him out with a jug of water, and so she fetched him one from the well, it being colder there. Sancho took it and was raising it to his mouth when he stopped at the shouts his master was giving him:

"Sancho, my son, don't drink water! My son, don't drink it, it will kill you! Look — I have the most holy balm here" — and he showed him the can of the brew — "and with two drops of that you will be cured beyond a doubt."

At these shouts Sancho turned his eyes sideways at him and said, in louder ones still:

"Has your worship forgotten, by any chance, that I am not a knight? Or do you want me to finish bringing up what is left of my insides from last night? Keep your liquor and all the devils along with it, and leave me alone."

And to finish saying this and to begin drinking were all one; but as at the first swallow he saw that it was water, he did not want to go any further with it, and begged Maritornes to bring him some wine, which she did with a very good will, and paid for it out of her own money. For it is said of her that, although she was in that line of work, she had certain shades and distant hints of a Christian about her.

As soon as Sancho had drunk, he dug his heels into his ass; and the inn door being thrown wide open for him, he rode out of it very well pleased at not having paid anything and at having got his own way, even though it had been at the expense of his usual sureties, which were his shoulders. It is true that the innkeeper kept his saddlebags in payment of what was owing; but Sancho never missed them, he came out in such a state. The innkeeper wanted to bar the door properly as soon as he saw him outside, but the blanket-men would not have it — a crowd who, even if Don Quixote had genuinely been one of the knights errant of the Round Table, would not have valued him at two farthings.
