Chapter 18: In Which Are Set Down the Words That Passed Between Sancho Panza and His Master Don Quixote, with Other Adventures Worth Relating

Sancho reached his master so wilted and faint that he could not urge his donkey along. When Don Quixote saw him in that state he said:

"Now, my good Sancho, I am finally convinced that that castle, or inn, is enchanted beyond a doubt; because those men who amused themselves with you so outrageously — what could they be but phantoms and people from the other world? And I confirm it by the fact that when I was at the wall of the yard watching the acts of your sad tragedy, it was not possible for me to climb it, nor could I even get down off Rocinante, because they must have had me under an enchantment. For I swear to you, on the faith of what I am, that if I could have climbed up or got down I would have avenged you in such a way that those villains and scoundrels would have remembered the joke for ever — even if in doing it I had knowingly gone against the laws of chivalry, which, as I have often told you already, do not allow a knight to lay a hand on a man who is not one, except in defence of his own life and person in a case of urgent and great necessity."

"I would have avenged myself too if I could, knight or no knight; but I couldn't. Though it's my belief that those men who had their fun with me were not phantoms or enchanted men, as your worship says, but men of flesh and bone like ourselves. And every one of them, from what I heard them called while they were tossing me, had his own name: one of them was called Pedro Martínez and another Tenorio Hernández, and I heard that the innkeeper was called Juan Palomeque the Left-handed. So, sir, your not being able to get over the yard wall or down off your horse was something other than enchantments. And what I get clear out of all this is that these adventures we go about looking for are going to bring us, in the end, to so many misadventures that we shan't know which is our right foot. And what would be better and more sensible, according to my poor understanding, would be for us to go back to our village, now it's harvest time and there's the farm to see to, and give up gadding about from pillar to post and from ditch to bucket, as they say."

"How little you know, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "about the business of chivalry! Be quiet and have patience, for the day will come when you will see with your own eyes what an honourable thing it is to follow this calling. If not, tell me: what greater satisfaction can there be in the world, or what pleasure can equal that of winning a battle and triumphing over one's enemy? None, beyond any doubt."

"That must be so," answered Sancho, "although I know nothing about it. All I know is that since we became knights errant — or your worship did, for there's no reason to count me in so honourable a number — we have never won a single battle except the one with the Basque, and even out of that your worship came with half an ear and half a helmet the less. From then till now it has been all sticks and more sticks, punches and more punches, with me getting the blanket-tossing on top of it, and having it done to me by enchanted persons I can't take revenge on — so that I might find out how far the pleasure of beating your enemy goes, as your worship says."

"That is the grief I have, and the one you ought to have, Sancho," answered Don Quixote. "But from now on I shall try to get hold of a sword made with such mastery that no kind of enchantment can be worked on the man who carries it. And it might even be that fortune would bring me the one belonging to Amadis when he called himself the Knight of the Burning Sword, which was one of the best swords any knight in the world ever had; because, besides having the virtue I have mentioned, it cut like a razor, and there was no armour, however strong or however enchanted, that could stand in its way."

"I am so lucky," said Sancho, "that when that happened and your worship did come to find a sword like that, it would turn out to serve and benefit dubbed knights only, like the balm; and the squires can go hang."

"Don't be afraid of that, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "heaven will do better than that by you."

Don Quixote and his squire were going along in this conversation when Don Quixote saw a great thick cloud of dust coming towards them along the road they were on; and seeing it, he turned to Sancho and said:

"This is the day, Sancho, on which the good fortune my luck has in store for me is to be seen. This is the day, I say, on which the valour of my arm is to be shown as much as on any other, and on which I am to do deeds that will stay written in the book of Fame for all the centuries to come. Do you see that cloud of dust rising over there, Sancho? Well, the whole of it is thick with an enormous army made up of various and innumerable peoples, marching along that way."

"By that reckoning there must be two," said Sancho, "because over here on the opposite side there's another cloud of dust just like it going up."

Don Quixote turned to look at it and saw that it was true; and being extraordinarily pleased, he concluded without a shadow of doubt that they were two armies coming to attack and meet each other in the middle of that broad plain. For at every hour and every moment his fancy was full of those battles, enchantments, incidents, absurdities, loves and challenges that are told of in the books of chivalry, and everything he said or thought or did was directed towards things of that kind. And the cloud of dust he had seen was being raised by two great flocks of sheep and rams coming along that same road from two different directions, which, because of the dust, could not be made out until they came close. And Don Quixote insisted so vehemently that they were armies that Sancho came to believe it and to say to him:

"Sir, what are we to do, then?"

"Do?" said Don Quixote. "Favour and help the needy and the defenceless. And you must know, Sancho, that the one coming towards our front is led and commanded by the great emperor Alifanfarón, lord of the great island of Taprobana; this other one marching at my back belongs to his enemy, the king of the Garamantes, Pentapolin of the Rolled-up Sleeve, because he always goes into battle with his right arm bare."

"But why do these two lords dislike each other so much?" asked Sancho.

"They dislike each other," answered Don Quixote, "because this Alifanfarón is a raging pagan and is in love with Pentapolin's daughter, who is a very beautiful and moreover very charming lady, and a Christian; and her father will not hand her over to the pagan king unless he first gives up the law of his false prophet Mohammed and comes over to hers."

"By my beard," said Sancho, "if Pentapolin isn't doing exactly right, and I mean to help him all I can!"

"In that you will be doing what you ought, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "because to go into battles of this kind it is not required that a man be a dubbed knight."

"I understand that well enough," answered Sancho; "but where are we to put this ass so that we can be sure of finding him again when the scuffle is over? Because I don't believe going into one mounted on that sort of steed has been the custom up to now."

"That is true," said Don Quixote. "What you can do with him is leave him to his own adventures, whether he gets lost or not; because we shall have so many horses after we come out victorious that even Rocinante is in danger of my exchanging him for another. But listen to me carefully and look, for I want to give you an account of the chief knights coming in these two armies. And so that you may see them and note them better, let us withdraw to that little rise over there, from which the two armies must be visible."

They did so, and stationed themselves on a hillock from which the two flocks that Don Quixote had made into armies would have been perfectly visible if the clouds of dust they were raising had not blurred and blinded the view. But for all that, seeing in his imagination what he neither saw nor was there, he began to say in a raised voice:

"That knight you see over there in the yellow armour, who carries on his shield a crowned lion lying at a maiden's feet, is the valorous Laurcalco, lord of the Silver Bridge. The other one in the armour with gold flowers, who carries on his shield three silver crowns on a blue field, is the dreaded Micocolembo, grand duke of Quirocia. The other one with the giant limbs on his right hand is the never-frightened Brandabarbarán of Boliche, lord of the three Arabias, who comes armed in that serpent's skin and has for a shield a door which, by all report, is one of those of the temple Samson pulled down when with his own death he took vengeance on his enemies.

"But turn your eyes this other way and you will see, in front of and at the head of this other army, the always victorious and never vanquished Timonel of Carcajona, prince of New Biscay, who comes armed in armour quartered blue, green, white and yellow, and carries on his shield a gold cat on a tawny field, with a motto that says Miau, which is the beginning of the name of his lady, who is said to be the peerless Miulina, daughter of the duke Alfeñiquén of the Algarve. The other one, who loads and weighs down the loins of that powerful mare and comes in armour as white as snow with a white shield and no device at all, is a new knight, French by nation, called Pierres Papin, lord of the baronies of Utrique. The other one, who is beating the flanks of that dappled, nimble zebra with his iron heels and carries the arms of the blue vairs, is the mighty duke of Nerbia, Espartafilardo of the Wood, who has for a device on his shield an asparagus plant, with a motto in Castilian that says: My fortune creeps."

And in this way he went on naming a great many knights of the one squadron and the other that he was imagining, and gave every one of them his arms, colours, devices and mottoes off the top of his head, carried away by the imagination of that madness of his such as was never seen before. And without stopping he went on:

"This squadron in front of us is formed and made up of people of various nations. Here are those who drank the sweet waters of the famous Xanthus; the mountain men who tread the Massylian fields; those who sift the finest and smallest gold in happy Arabia; those who enjoy the famous cool banks of the clear Thermodon; those who bleed golden Pactolus by many and various channels; the Numidians, unreliable in their promises; the Persians, famous for bows and arrows; the Parthians and the Medes, who fight as they run away; the Arabs, whose houses move; the Scythians, as cruel as they are fair-skinned; the Ethiopians with their pierced lips; and infinite other nations whose faces I know and see, although I cannot recall their names.

"In this other squadron come those who drink the crystal streams of the olive-bearing Betis; those who smooth and polish their faces with the liquor of the ever rich and golden Tagus; those who enjoy the profitable waters of the divine Genil; those who tread the fields of Tartessos, abundant in pasture; those who take their pleasure in the Elysian meadows of Jerez; the men of La Mancha, rich and crowned with golden ears of corn; those clothed in iron, ancient relics of the Gothic blood; those who bathe in the Pisuerga, famous for the gentleness of its current; those who pasture their flocks in the wide meadows of the winding Guadiana, celebrated for its hidden course; those who shiver with the cold of the wooded Pyrenees and with the white flakes of the lofty Apennine; in short, all that Europe holds and encloses within itself."

Good God, how many provinces he named, how many nations he called over, giving each one, with marvellous quickness, the attributes that belonged to it — wholly absorbed and steeped in what he had read in his lying books! Sancho Panza hung on his words without saying any of his own, and every now and then turned his head to see whether he could catch sight of the knights and giants his master was naming; and as he could make out none of them, he said:

"Sir, I commend to the devil any man, or giant, or knight of all the ones your worship is talking about that shows up anywhere in all this — at least, I can't see them. Perhaps it's all enchantment, like the phantoms last night."

"How can you say that?" answered Don Quixote. "Can't you hear the neighing of the horses, the sounding of the trumpets, the noise of the drums?"

"I hear nothing," answered Sancho, "except a great deal of bleating of sheep and rams."

And that was the truth, because the two flocks were coming close by now.

"The fear you are in," said Don Quixote, "is making you neither see nor hear straight, Sancho; because one of the effects of fear is to confuse the senses and make things seem other than they are. And if you are so much afraid, get away to one side and leave me alone; alone I am enough to give the victory to whichever side I give my help to."

And saying this he put spurs to Rocinante, and with his lance in the rest went down the slope like a thunderbolt. Sancho shouted after him:

"Come back, your worship, Señor Don Quixote! I swear to God they're rams and sheep you're going to charge! Come back — cursed be the father that begot me! What madness is this? Look, there isn't a giant or a knight, or cats, or armour, or shields quartered or whole, or blue vairs or devilish ones. What are you doing? Sinner that I am before God!"

Not even for that did Don Quixote turn back; instead he went on shouting at the top of his voice:

"Now then, knights, all of you who follow and serve under the banners of the valorous emperor Pentapolin of the Rolled-up Sleeve — follow me, all of you! You shall see how easily I give him his revenge on his enemy Alifanfarón of Taprobana!"

Saying this, he charged into the middle of the squadron of sheep and began to spear them with as much courage and daring as if he were really spearing his mortal enemies. The shepherds and drovers who were with the flock shouted at him to stop; but seeing that it was no use, they unfastened their slings and began to salute his ears with stones the size of your fist. Don Quixote paid no attention to the stones; instead, riding about in all directions, he was saying:

"Where are you, arrogant Alifanfarón? Come out to me. I am a single knight, and I want to try your strength man to man and take your life from you, in payment for the life you are taking from the valorous Pentapolin of the Garamantes."

At this moment a pebble came along from the brook — one of the smooth white ones they call sugared almonds — and hitting him in the side, buried two of his ribs in his body. Finding himself so badly handled, he was sure he was dead or mortally wounded; and remembering his liquor, he pulled out his can and put it to his mouth and began to pour the liquor into his stomach. But before he had finished getting down what seemed to him enough, along came another almond and hit him so squarely on the hand and on the can that it smashed the can to pieces, taking three or four teeth and molars out of his mouth on its way and badly crushing two fingers of his hand.

Such was the first blow, and such the second, that the poor knight had no choice but to come down off the horse. The shepherds came up to him and believed they had killed him; and so, in great haste, they rounded up their flock and loaded up the dead beasts, of which there were more than seven, and without looking into anything further they went off.

All this time Sancho was up on the slope watching the mad things his master was doing, tearing at his beard and cursing the hour and the moment fortune had introduced him to the man. Seeing him, then, fallen on the ground and the shepherds gone by now, he came down off the slope and went over to him, and found him in a very bad way, though he had not lost consciousness, and said to him:

"Didn't I tell you, Señor Don Quixote, to come back, and that what you were going to attack were not armies but flocks of rams?"

"That is how that thieving enchanter, my enemy, can make things disappear and counterfeit them. You must know, Sancho, that it is a very easy matter for such people to make us see whatever they like; and this malignant creature who persecutes me, envious of the glory he saw I was going to win from this battle, has turned the squadrons of enemies into flocks of sheep. If you don't believe it, do one thing for me, Sancho, on my life, so that you may be undeceived and see that what I tell you is true. Get up on your ass and follow them quietly, and you will see how, when they have gone a little way from here, they turn back into what they were at first, and stop being rams and become men, whole and upright, exactly as I described them to you before. But don't go now, because I need your help and support. Come here to me and look how many teeth and molars I am missing, for it seems to me I haven't one left in my mouth."

Sancho came so close that he almost put his eyes into his mouth — and it was just at the moment when the balm had done its work in Don Quixote's stomach. And at the very instant Sancho got there to look into his mouth, he shot out everything he had inside him, harder than out of a musket, and landed the whole of it in the compassionate squire's beard.

"Holy Mary!" said Sancho. "And what is this that's happened to me? There's no doubt the poor sinner is wounded to death, since he's vomiting blood out of his mouth."

But looking into it a little more closely, he made out by the colour, taste and smell that it was not blood but the balm out of the can that he had seen him drink; and he was so disgusted that his stomach turned over and he vomited his insides up all over his own master, and the pair of them were left as fine as pearls. Sancho went to his ass to get something out of the saddlebags to clean himself with and to see to his master; and when he could not find them he came near to losing his wits. He cursed himself all over again, and resolved in his heart to leave his master and go home, even if he lost the wages for what he had served and his hopes of the government of the promised isle.

At this Don Quixote got up, and putting his left hand over his mouth so that the rest of his teeth should not fall out, he took hold with the other of Rocinante's reins — for the horse had never stirred from his master's side, so loyal and well-conditioned was he — and went over to where his squire was, leaning on his ass with his hand against his cheek, looking like a man deep in thought. And seeing him in that condition, with every sign of such sadness, Don Quixote said to him:

"You must know, Sancho, that one man is no more than another unless he does more than another. All these squalls that come on us are signs that the weather will soon clear and things will go well for us; because it is not possible for either the bad or the good to last, and it follows from this that, the bad having lasted a long time, the good must be close. So you ought not to distress yourself over the misfortunes that happen to me, since you get no share of them."

"How do I not?" answered Sancho. "Was the man they tossed in a blanket yesterday, by any chance, anybody but my father's son? And the saddlebags I'm missing today, with all my valuables in them — do they belong to anybody but the same man?"

"You are missing the saddlebags, Sancho?" said Don Quixote.

"That I am," answered Sancho.

"In that case we have nothing to eat today," replied Don Quixote.

"That would be so," answered Sancho, "if there were none of those herbs to be found in these meadows that your worship says he knows, the ones that knights errant as unlucky as your worship generally make up such shortages with."

"For all that," answered Don Quixote, "I would rather have at this moment a quarter-loaf of bread, or a whole loaf and two heads of salt herring, than all the herbs Dioscorides describes, even in the edition illustrated by Doctor Laguna. But in spite of everything, get up on your donkey, my good Sancho, and come along after me; for God, who provides for all things, will not fail us, the more so as we are so much about his service as we are — since he does not fail the gnats in the air, or the little worms in the earth, or the tadpoles in the water; and he is so merciful that he makes his sun rise on the good and on the wicked, and sends his rain on the unjust and the just."

"Your worship," said Sancho, "would have made a better preacher than a knight errant."

"Knights errant knew about everything and have to know about everything, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "because in past ages there was a knight errant who would stop and deliver a sermon or a discourse in the middle of an army camp as though he had taken his degree at the University of Paris; from which it may be inferred that the lance never blunted the pen, nor the pen the lance."

"Very well then, let it be as your worship says," answered Sancho. "Let us get away from here now and try to find somewhere to lodge tonight; and please God it may be in a place where there are no blankets, nor blanket-men, nor phantoms, nor enchanted Moors — because if there are, I'll give the whole business to the devil, bag and baggage."

"Ask God for it yourself, my son," said Don Quixote, "and lead on wherever you like, for this time I want to leave our lodging to your choice. But give me your hand here and feel with your finger, and look carefully at how many teeth and molars I am missing on this right side of the upper jaw, which is where I feel the pain."

Sancho put his fingers in, and while he was feeling about he said:

"How many molars did your worship use to have on this side?"

"Four," answered Don Quixote, "not counting the wisdom tooth, all of them whole and very sound."

"Your worship should think carefully about what you're saying, sir," answered Sancho.

"I say four, if it was not five," answered Don Quixote; "because in the whole of my life I have never had a tooth or a molar pulled out of my mouth, nor has one fallen out or been eaten away by decay or by any rheum."

"Well, on this lower part," said Sancho, "your worship has no more than two molars and a half; and on the upper, not half a one nor any at all — it's as smooth up there as the palm of my hand."

"Unlucky man that I am!" said Don Quixote, hearing the sad news his squire gave him. "I would rather they had cut off an arm, as long as it was not my sword arm; because I would have you know, Sancho, that a mouth without molars is like a mill without a millstone, and a tooth is to be prized far above a diamond. But we who profess the strict order of chivalry are subject to all this. Mount up, my friend, and lead on, and I will follow you at whatever pace you like."

Sancho did so, and set off towards where he thought he might find shelter, without leaving the high road, which ran very straight along there. Going along little by little, then — because the pain in Don Quixote's jaws would not let him settle or attend to making any speed — Sancho decided to entertain him and take his mind off it by telling him something; and among the other things he said was what will be told in the following chapter.
