Chapter 20: Of the Unheard-Of and Unparalleled Adventure Achieved by the Valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha with Less Danger Than Any Ever Achieved by Any Famous Knight in the World

"It isn't possible, my dear sir, but that this grass is evidence that there must be some spring or stream close by that keeps it damp. So it would be a good idea for us to go a little further on, and we shall come across somewhere to relieve this terrible thirst that is wearing us out — which without any doubt causes more suffering than hunger does."

Don Quixote thought the advice good; and taking Rocinante by the rein, and Sancho his ass by the halter after loading onto him the leavings of the supper, they began to make their way up the meadow by touch, because the darkness of the night let them see nothing at all. But they had not gone two hundred paces when there came to their ears a great noise of water, as though it were falling from some great high crags. The noise delighted them enormously; and stopping to listen and make out which direction it was coming from, they heard all at once another din that watered down their pleasure at the water — Sancho's especially, since he was naturally timid and of small courage.

What they heard, I say, was blows being struck in a steady rhythm, with a certain creaking of iron and chains, which, accompanied by the furious din of the water, would have put terror into any heart other than Don Quixote's. The night, as has been said, was dark, and they happened to have got in among some tall trees whose leaves, moved by the soft wind, made a low and frightening sound. So that the loneliness, the place, the darkness, the noise of the water and the whispering of the leaves — all of it caused horror and dread, especially when they found that the blows did not stop, and the wind did not sleep, and the morning did not come; with the addition to all this of not knowing where they were. But Don Quixote, with his intrepid heart for company, leapt onto Rocinante, and bracing his buckler on his arm and levelling his pike, he said:

"Friend Sancho, you must know that I was born, by heaven's will, in this iron age of ours in order to bring back to life in it the age of gold, or the golden age as it is usually called. I am the man for whom are reserved the dangers, the great exploits, the valorous deeds. I am, I say again, the man who is to bring back the Knights of the Round Table, the Twelve Peers of France and the Nine Worthies, and who is to consign to oblivion the Platirs, the Tablantes, the Olivantes and Tirantes, the Phoebuses and Belianises, along with the whole crowd of the famous knights errant of the past, doing in this age I find myself in such great things, such strange things and such feats of arms as shall darken the brightest of theirs.

"You mark well, faithful and loyal squire, the darkness of this night, its strange silence, the muffled and confused noise of these trees, the fearful sound of that water we came looking for, which seems to be falling and hurling itself down from the high mountains of the moon, and that ceaseless hammering that wounds and hurts our ears. All of which things, together and each one on its own, are enough to instil fear, dread and terror in the breast of Mars himself, let alone in a man not used to incidents and adventures of the kind. Well, all this that I am painting for you is fuel and a spur to my courage, which is already making my heart burst in my breast with the desire it has to take on this adventure, however difficult it shows itself to be.

"So tighten Rocinante's girths a little, and God be with you, and wait for me here three days and no more; and if I have not come back within them, you may go back to our village, and from there, as a favour and a good turn to me, you will go to El Toboso, where you will tell my incomparable lady Dulcinea that her captive knight died attempting things that might make him worthy of being able to call himself hers."

When Sancho heard his master's words he began to weep with the greatest tenderness in the world and to say to him:

"Sir, I don't know why your worship wants to take on this terrifying adventure. It's night now, nobody can see us here, we can very well turn aside and get out of the danger even if we don't drink for three days; and since there's nobody to see us, there'll be nobody to mark us down as cowards. What's more, I've heard the priest of our village preach — the one your worship knows well — that whoever looks for danger dies in it. So it isn't right to tempt God by taking on such a monstrous business, where a man can't get out except by a miracle. And it's enough of them that heaven has worked for your worship already, in saving you from being tossed in a blanket as I was, and in bringing you out the winner, free and safe, from among all those enemies who were with the dead man.

"And if none of this moves or softens that hard heart, let it be moved by thinking and believing that your worship will hardly have got away from here before I, out of pure fright, give up my soul to whoever wants to carry it off. I left my own country and left children and wife to come and serve your worship, thinking I'd be worth more and not less; but as greed bursts the sack, so it has torn my hopes apart. Just when I had them liveliest, of getting that wretched, ill-starred isle your worship has promised me so many times, I find that in payment and exchange for it you now want to leave me in a place as far from human company as this. For the love of the one God, sir, let no such wrong be done me. And if your worship will not give up attempting this business altogether, at least put it off till the morning. For by what the science I learnt when I was a shepherd shows me, it can't be three hours from now to daybreak, because the mouth of the Horn is over our heads and midnight is on the line of the left arm."

"How can you tell, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "where that line falls, or where that mouth or that nape of the neck you speak of is, when the night is so dark that not a single star appears in the whole sky?"

"That's so," said Sancho; "but fear has a great many eyes and sees things underneath the ground, let alone up above in the sky. Besides which, by good reasoning it can easily be worked out that it isn't long from here to daylight."

"Let it be as long or as short as it likes," answered Don Quixote. "It shall not be said of me, now or at any time, that tears and entreaties turned me aside from doing what I owed to my knightly style. And so I beg you, Sancho, to be quiet; for God, who has put it into my heart to attempt this unheard-of and terrifying adventure now, will take care to look after my safety and to comfort your sorrow. What you have to do is tighten Rocinante's girths properly and stay here, for I shall be back soon, alive or dead."

Sancho, then, seeing his master's final resolve and how little his tears, advice and entreaties were worth with him, decided to make use of his own ingenuity and get him to wait for daylight if he could. And so, while he was tightening the horse's girths, quietly and without being noticed he tied Rocinante's two feet together with his ass's halter, so that when Don Quixote tried to set off he could not, because the horse could only move by jumping. Seeing the success of his trick, Sancho Panza said:

"There you are, sir: heaven, moved by my tears and my prayers, has ordained that Rocinante can't stir. And if you insist and spur him and beat him, it will be putting fortune out of temper and kicking, as they say, against the pricks."

Don Quixote was in despair at this; and the more he put his legs to the horse, the less he could move him. And without seeing through to the tying, he thought it best to calm down and wait either for daybreak or for Rocinante to move, believing beyond a doubt that this came from somewhere other than Sancho's ingenuity; and so he said to him:

"Since this is how it is, Sancho, and Rocinante cannot move, I am content to wait for the dawn to smile, even though I weep at how long she takes to come."

"There's no need to weep," answered Sancho, "for I'll keep your worship entertained by telling stories from now till daybreak — unless you want to get down and sleep a little on the green grass, the way knights errant do, so as to be more rested when the day comes and the moment for taking on this altogether extraordinary adventure that's waiting for you."

"What do you mean, get down? What do you mean, sleep?" said Don Quixote. "Am I by any chance one of those knights who take their rest in the middle of dangers? Sleep yourself, since you were born to sleep, or do whatever you like; I shall do what I see best fits my purpose."

"Don't be angry, my dear sir," answered Sancho, "I didn't mean anything by it."

And going up to him, he put one hand on the front of the saddle and the other on the back, so that he was left hugging his master's left thigh, not daring to move a finger's breadth away from him: such was the fear he had of the blows, which were still sounding away at their intervals. Don Quixote told him to tell some story to entertain him, as he had promised; to which Sancho said he would if the terror of what he was hearing would let him.

"But for all that, I'll make an effort to tell a story which, if I manage to tell it and nobody stops me, is the best of all stories. And let your worship pay attention, because I'm starting now.

"Once upon a time there was what there was, and may the good that comes be for everybody and the harm for whoever goes looking for it. And your worship should note, sir, that the beginning the ancients gave their tales was not just anything, but a saying of Cato the Senseless, the Roman, which goes: 'and the harm for whoever goes looking for it' — which fits here like a ring on a finger, so that your worship will keep still and not go looking for harm anywhere, and we'll go back by another road, since nobody is forcing us to follow this one where so many frights come over us."

"Get on with your story, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and leave the road we are to follow to me."

"I say, then," Sancho went on, "that in a village in Extremadura there was a shepherd who kept goats — I mean he was a goatherd — and this shepherd or goatherd, as I say, of my story was called Lope Ruiz; and this Lope Ruiz was in love with a shepherdess called Torralba, and this shepherdess called Torralba was the daughter of a rich stockman, and this rich stockman —"

"If you tell your story like that, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "saying everything twice over, you will not be finished in two days. Tell it straight through and tell it like a man of sense; and if not, don't tell it at all."

"The way I'm telling it," answered Sancho, "is the way all tales are told where I come from, and I don't know how to tell it any other way, and it isn't right for your worship to ask me to take up new customs."

"Tell it however you like," answered Don Quixote; "since fate wills that I cannot help listening to you, go on."

"So then, dear sir of my soul," Sancho went on, "as I've said already, this shepherd was in love with Torralba the shepherdess, who was a strapping girl, hard to handle and rather on the mannish side, because she had a bit of a moustache — I can see her now."

"So you knew her, then?" said Don Quixote.

"I didn't know her," answered Sancho, "but the man who told me this story told me it was so certain and true that when I told it to somebody else I could safely swear I'd seen the whole thing myself. So then, as the days came and the days went, the devil, who never sleeps and who tangles everything up, arranged it so that the love the shepherd had for the shepherdess turned into hatred and ill will. And the cause of it, according to spiteful tongues, was a certain quantity of little jealousies she gave him, of the kind that go past the line and get into forbidden country. And from then on the shepherd loathed her so much that, to avoid seeing her, he decided to get out of that part of the country and go where his eyes would never see her again. Torralba, finding herself scorned by Lope, straight away loved him better than she ever had before."

"That is women's nature," said Don Quixote: "to scorn the man who loves them and love the man who loathes them. Go on, Sancho."

"It so happened," said Sancho, "that the shepherd carried out what he'd decided; and driving his goats in front of him, he set off across the fields of Extremadura to cross over into the kingdom of Portugal. Torralba, who got to hear of it, went after him, and followed him on foot and barefoot a long way behind, with a staff in her hand and saddlebags round her neck, in which she carried — so it's said — a piece of a mirror and a bit of a comb and some little pot or other of face paint. But whatever she was carrying, which I don't mean to go into now, all I'll say is that they say the shepherd came with his flock to cross the river Guadiana, and at that season it was swollen and almost over its banks; and at the place where he arrived there was no boat or barge, and nobody to take him or his flock over to the other side. Which distressed him a great deal, because he could see Torralba coming up very close now and she'd give him a lot of grief with her pleading and her tears.

"But he went on looking about until he saw a fisherman who had a boat beside him — such a small one that only one person and one goat could fit in it. Even so, he spoke to him and settled with him to carry him and the three hundred goats he had with him across. The fisherman got into the boat and took one goat over; he came back and took another; he came back again and took another over."

And Sancho added: "Let your worship keep count of the goats the fisherman is taking over; because if you lose track of one of them, the story is finished and it won't be possible to tell another word of it.

"To go on, then, and I say that the landing place on the other side was full of mud and slippery, and the fisherman took a long time going and coming. For all that, he came back for another goat, and another, and another —"

"Take it that he has taken them all over," said Don Quixote. "Don't go coming and going like that, or you will not have got them across in a year."

"How many have gone over so far?" said Sancho.

"How the devil should I know?" answered Don Quixote.

"There you are, that's just what I said: that you should keep a good count. Well, by God, the story's finished, because there's no going on with it."

"How can that be?" answered Don Quixote. "Is knowing the exact number of goats that have gone over so essential to the story that if one of them is got wrong you cannot go on with it?"

"No, sir, not at all," answered Sancho. "But at the very instant I asked your worship to tell me how many goats had gone over and you answered that you didn't know, everything I had left to tell went clean out of my memory. And upon my word, there was a lot of virtue and enjoyment in it."

"So the story," said Don Quixote, "is finished already?"

"As finished as my own mother," said Sancho.

"I tell you truly," answered Don Quixote, "that you have told one of the newest tales, stories or histories that anybody in the world could have thought of; and that such a way of telling it and of leaving off will never be seen and can never have been seen in anyone's whole life — though I expected nothing else from your good sense. But I am not surprised, since perhaps these blows, which do not stop, must have got your understanding into a muddle."

"That may well be," answered Sancho, "but I know that where my story's concerned there's no more to say: it ends right where the mistake in counting the goats' crossing begins."

"Let it end where it likes, and welcome," said Don Quixote, "and let us see whether Rocinante can move."

He put his legs to him again, and again the horse gave a jump and stood still: he was tied that thoroughly.

At this point it appears that either the cold of the morning, which was coming on, or something loosening that Sancho had eaten at supper, or that it was simply nature — which is what one ought most to believe — brought upon him the will and the desire to do what nobody else could do for him. But so much fear had got into his heart that he did not dare move the black of a fingernail away from his master. And to think of not doing what he needed to do was not possible either. So what he did, for the sake of peace, was to let go with his right hand, which he had hold of the back of the saddle with; and with it, quietly and without any noise at all, he undid the running knot his breeches were held up by, without help from any other; and once it was off, they came down at once and stayed round him like fetters. After this he lifted his shirt as best he could and put both his buttocks out into the air, which were not very small ones.

This done — and he thought it was the most he had to do to get out of that terrible strait and distress — another and a greater one came over him, which was that it seemed to him he could not relieve himself without making a racket and a noise. And he began to clench his teeth and hunch his shoulders, gathering in his breath as much as he possibly could. But with all these efforts he was so unlucky that in the end he came to make a little noise, quite different from the one that was frightening him so much. Don Quixote heard it and said:

"What sound is that, Sancho?"

"I don't know, sir," he answered. "It must be something new; adventures and misadventures never begin small."

He tried his luck again, and it went so well for him that with no more noise or disturbance than the last, he found himself free of the load that had given him so much trouble. But as Don Quixote had as lively a sense of smell as of hearing, and Sancho was so close and stitched to him that the vapours went up almost in a straight line, it could not be helped that some of them reached his nostrils. And they had hardly got there when he went to their rescue, pinching them between two fingers; and in a somewhat nasal tone he said:

"It seems to me, Sancho, that you are very much afraid."

"So I am," answered Sancho; "but how does your worship see it now more than at any other time?"

"In that now more than at any other time you smell, and not of amber," answered Don Quixote.

"That may well be," said Sancho, "but it isn't my fault, it's your worship's, for dragging me about at unearthly hours and along these unaccustomed ways."

"Move three or four of them off over there, my friend," said Don Quixote — all this without taking his fingers from his nose — "and from now on take more care of your own person and of what you owe to mine. It is the great deal of conversation I have with you that has bred this disrespect."

"I'll bet," replied Sancho, "that your worship thinks I've done something with my person that I shouldn't have."

"Stirring it only makes it worse, friend Sancho," answered Don Quixote.

In this conversation and others like it master and man passed the night. But seeing that morning was coming on fast, Sancho very carefully untied Rocinante and did up his breeches. As soon as Rocinante found himself free, although he was not in the least spirited by nature, it seems he felt it, and began to paw the ground — because as for curvetting, with all due respect to him, he did not know how.

Seeing, then, that Rocinante was moving at last, Don Quixote took it for a good sign, and believed it was a sign that he should attempt that terrifying adventure.

By this time the dawn had finished breaking and things could be made out distinctly, and Don Quixote saw that he was among some tall trees — chestnuts, which cast a very dark shade. He noticed too that the hammering had not stopped, but he could not see what might be causing it. And so, without delaying any longer, he made Rocinante feel his spurs; and taking leave of Sancho again, he ordered him to wait there for three days at the most, as he had told him once before, and that if he had not come back by the end of them he should take it for certain that God had been pleased to let his days come to an end in that dangerous adventure. He repeated the message and embassy he was to carry on his behalf to his lady Dulcinea; and told him that as far as the payment for his services went he need not worry, because he had left his will made before he came away from his village, in which he would find himself paid everything to do with his wages, pro rata, for the time he had served. But that if God brought him out of that danger safe and sound and without a scratch, he could count the promised isle as far more than certain.

Sancho began to weep all over again, hearing his good master's pitiful words all over again, and he made up his mind not to leave him until the very last passage and end of the business.

From these tears and this honourable resolution of Sancho Panza's the author of this history concludes that he must have been well born, and at the very least an Old Christian. His feeling softened his master somewhat, but not so much that he showed any weakness; instead, hiding it as best he could, he began to ride towards the direction from which it seemed to him the noise of the water and of the hammering came.

Sancho followed him on foot, leading his donkey by the halter as he usually did — that perpetual companion of his good fortunes and his bad. And having gone a good way among those chestnuts and shady trees, they came out into a little meadow that lay at the foot of some high rocks, down which an enormous head of water came hurling itself. At the foot of the rocks stood some badly made houses, more like the ruins of buildings than houses, out of which they made out that the noise and din of that hammering, which still had not stopped, was coming.

Rocinante was upset by the din of the water and of the blows; and Don Quixote, quieting him, went on getting closer to the houses little by little, commending himself with all his heart to his lady, begging her to favour him in that terrifying journey and enterprise, and on the way commending himself to God as well, that he would not forget him. Sancho never left his side, stretching his neck and his gaze out as far as he could between Rocinante's legs to see whether he could make out yet what was keeping him in such suspense and such dread.

Another hundred paces or so they went, when, on turning a corner, there appeared plain and open the very cause — it could be nothing else — of that horrible and, to them, terrifying noise that had kept them so suspended and so frightened all night long. And it was — take it, reader, without grief and annoyance — six fulling hammers, which with their alternating blows made all that din.

When Don Quixote saw what it was, he went dumb and stiffened from head to foot. Sancho looked at him and saw that he had his head bent down on his chest, with every sign of being mortified. Don Quixote looked at Sancho too, and saw that he had his cheeks blown out and his mouth full of laughter, with evident signs of being about to burst with it; and his melancholy could not do so much with him that at the sight of Sancho he could keep from laughing himself. And when Sancho saw that his master had begun, he let go of the dam in such a way that he had to hold his sides in with his fists to keep from bursting with laughter. Four times he quieted down, and four times he went back to his laughing with the same violence as the first; at which Don Quixote was already giving himself to the devil — and the more so when he heard him say, by way of mockery:

"You must know, friend Sancho, that I was born, by heaven's will, in this iron age of ours in order to bring back to life in it the golden age, or the age of gold. I am the man for whom are reserved the dangers, the great exploits, the valorous deeds..."

And in this fashion he went on repeating all or most of the speeches Don Quixote had made the first time they heard the terrifying blows.

Seeing, then, that Sancho was making fun of him, Don Quixote was so mortified and so angry that he lifted his pike and gave him two blows with it such that, if he had taken them on the head as he took them on the back, Don Quixote would have been free of paying him any wages, except to his heirs. Seeing that he was drawing such earnest out of his own joking, and afraid his master might carry it further, Sancho said to him very humbly:

"Calm down, your worship; before God, I'm only joking."

"Well, because you are joking, I am not," answered Don Quixote. "Come here, my merry gentleman: does it seem to you that if these had been not fulling hammers but some other dangerous adventure, I would not have shown the spirit needed to undertake it and finish it? Am I obliged, by any chance, being a knight as I am, to know and distinguish sounds and tell which are fulling hammers and which are not? Especially when it might be — as it is the truth — that I have never seen them in my life, whereas you will have seen them, low peasant that you are, bred and born among them. If not, make these six hammers turn into six giants and throw them at my beard one by one, or all together; and if I do not lay every one of them heels up, make whatever mockery of me you like."

"That's enough, my dear sir," replied Sancho. "I confess I've been a bit too free with my laughing. But tell me, your worship, now that we're at peace — and so may God bring you out of every adventure that happens to you as safe and sound as he has brought you out of this one — hasn't it been a thing to laugh at, and isn't it a thing to tell, the great fright we've had? At least the one I had; for as for your worship, I know already that you don't know it and don't know what fear or dread is."

"I do not deny," answered Don Quixote, "that what has happened to us is a thing worth laughing at; but it is not a thing worth telling, because not everybody is discerning enough to put things in their proper place."

"At least," answered Sancho, "your worship knew how to put the pike in its proper place, aiming at my head and hitting me on the back — thanks be to God and to the trouble I took to dodge sideways. But there, it'll all come out in the wash; and I've heard it said, 'He loves you well who makes you cry.' Besides which, great lords generally give a servant a pair of breeches straight after a bad word; though I don't know what they generally give him after giving him a beating, unless it's that knights errant give isles after beatings, or kingdoms on the mainland."

"The dice might well fall in such a way," said Don Quixote, "that everything you say would come true. And forgive what is past, since you are a man of sense and know that a man's first impulses are not in his own hands. And be warned from now on about one thing, so that you may hold back and restrain yourself from talking too much with me: in all the books of chivalry I have read — and they are infinite — I have never found any squire who talked as much with his lord as you do with yours. And truly I count it a great fault, in you and in me: in you, in that you esteem me too little; in me, in that I do not let myself be esteemed more. Why, Gandalín, squire to Amadis of Gaul, was count of the Firm Isle, and one reads of him that he always spoke to his lord with his cap in his hand, his head bent and his body doubled over more turquesco. And what shall we say of Gasabal, squire to Don Galaor, who was so silent that, to make the excellence of his marvellous silence clear to us, his name is mentioned only once in the whole of that history, great as it is and true as it is? From all I have said you are to infer, Sancho, that it is necessary to make a difference between master and man, between lord and servant, and between knight and squire. So from today onwards we must treat one another with more respect and without teasing each other; because however I may come to be angry with you, it will be the worse for the pitcher. The favours and benefits I have promised you will arrive in their own time; and if they do not arrive, at least the wages are not to be lost, as I have told you already."

"Everything your worship says is all very well," said Sancho; "but I'd like to know, in case the time for the favours doesn't come and it's necessary to fall back on the time for the wages, how much a knight errant's squire earned in those days, and whether they were hired by the month or by the day, like bricklayers' labourers."

"I do not believe," answered Don Quixote, "that such squires were ever on wages, but on favour. And if I have now assigned you one in the sealed will I left at home, it was for what might happen; because I still do not know how chivalry will turn out in these calamitous times of ours, and I would not have my soul suffer in the next world for small matters. Because I want you to know, Sancho, that in this world there is no more dangerous condition than that of the adventurers."

"That's true enough," said Sancho, "since the mere noise of the hammers of a fulling mill could disturb and unsettle the heart of so valorous a wandering adventurer as your worship. But you may be quite sure that from now on I won't open my lips to make fun of your worship's affairs, but only to honour you, as my master and natural lord."

"In that way," replied Don Quixote, "you will live long on the face of the earth; because after our parents, our masters are to be respected as if they were."
