Chapter 21: Which Treats of the High Adventure and Rich Prize of Mambrino's Helmet, with Other Things That Happened to Our Invincible Knight

At this it began to rain a little, and Sancho would have liked them to go inside the fulling mill; but Don Quixote had taken such a loathing to it, on account of the heavy joke, that he would on no account go in. And so, turning off the road to the right hand, they came out on another like the one they had travelled the day before.

A little further on, Don Quixote made out a man on horseback with something on his head that shone as though it were gold; and he had hardly caught sight of him when he turned to Sancho and said:

"It seems to me, Sancho, that there is no proverb that is not true, because they are all maxims drawn from experience itself, the mother of all the sciences — and especially the one that says, 'Where one door shuts, another opens.' I say it because if last night fortune shut on us the door of the thing we were looking for, deceiving us with the fulling hammers, now she throws another wide open for us, on a better and more certain adventure; and if I fail to get in through it, the fault will be mine, without my being able to lay it on knowing little about fulling mills or on the darkness of the night. I say this because, if I am not mistaken, there is a man coming towards us with Mambrino's helmet on his head — the one I swore that oath about, as you know."

"Your worship should be careful what you say, and more careful what you do," said Sancho; "I shouldn't like it to be another lot of fulling mills that finished off the fulling and pounding of our wits."

"The devil take you for a man!" replied Don Quixote. "What has a helmet to do with fulling mills?"

"I know nothing about it," answered Sancho; "but upon my word, if I were allowed to talk as much as I used to, perhaps I'd give such reasons that your worship would see he was mistaken in what he says."

"How can I be mistaken in what I say, you scrupulous traitor?" said Don Quixote. "Tell me, don't you see that knight coming towards us on a dappled grey horse, with a golden helmet on his head?"

"What I see and make out," answered Sancho, "is nothing but a man on a grey ass like mine, with something on his head that shines."

"Well, that is Mambrino's helmet," said Don Quixote. "Get off to one side and leave me alone with him. You shall see how, without saying a word, to save time, I finish this adventure, and the helmet I have wanted so long is left mine."

"I'll take care to get off to one side," replied Sancho; "but please God, I say again, it may be marjoram and not fulling mills."

"I have told you already, brother, not to mention that business of the fulling mills to me again, not even in thought," said Don Quixote; "for I vow — and I say no more — to full your soul for you."

Sancho shut up, afraid his master might carry out the oath he had hurled at him, round as a cannonball.

Now the fact of the matter about the helmet and the horse and the knight Don Quixote could see is this. In that district there were two villages, one so small that it had neither an apothecary nor a barber, and the other, which was next to it, had both. And so the barber of the larger one served the smaller, where a sick man had need of being bled and another of getting a shave; and it was for these that the barber was coming, and he had a brass basin with him. And luck would have it that just as he was coming along it began to rain; and so that his hat, which must have been new, should not be spoiled, he put the basin on his head — and as it was clean, it shone from half a league off. He was riding a grey ass, as Sancho said, and this was why Don Quixote took it for a dappled grey horse and a knight and a helmet of gold; because everything he saw he fitted very easily to his deranged chivalries and his ill-starred fancies.

And when he saw the poor knight getting close, without stopping to argue with him at all he lowered his pike and charged at full stretch of Rocinante's gallop, meaning to run him through from side to side; but as he reached him, without checking the fury of his charge, he shouted:

"Defend yourself, wretched creature, or hand over to me of your own free will what is so justly owed me!"

The barber, who without thinking of it or fearing it saw that phantom coming down on him, had no other way of saving himself from the blow of the lance than to let himself drop off the ass; and he had not touched the ground before he was up again, nimbler than a fallow deer, and running off across that plain so fast that the wind could not have caught him. He left the basin on the ground, and Don Quixote was satisfied with that, and said the pagan had shown good sense and had imitated the beaver, which, finding itself pressed by the hunters, bites and tears off with its own teeth the thing it knows by natural instinct it is being hunted for. He ordered Sancho to pick up the helmet; who, taking it in his hands, said:

"By God, it's a good basin, and it's worth a piece of eight as surely as a maravedi."

And handing it to his master, Don Quixote put it straight on his head, turning it this way and that, looking for the visor; and when he could not find it he said:

"There is no doubt that the pagan this famous helmet was originally forged to fit must have had an enormous head; and the worst of it is that half of it is missing."

When Sancho heard him call the basin a helmet he could not hold in his laughter; but his master's temper came into his mind and he stopped in the middle of it.

"What are you laughing at, Sancho?" said Don Quixote.

"I'm laughing," he answered, "at the thought of the great head the pagan owner of this headpiece had, because the thing is the spitting image of a barber's basin and nothing else."

"Do you know what I imagine, Sancho? That this famous piece, this enchanted helmet, must by some strange accident have come into the hands of somebody who did not know how to recognise or value it; and that, without knowing what he was doing, seeing it was of the purest gold, he must have melted down the other half to make use of the price, and out of this half he made this thing, which looks like a barber's basin, as you say. But be that as it may: to me, who know what it is, its transmutation makes no difference. I shall get it seen to in the first place where there is a blacksmith, and in such a way that the one the god of the smithies made and forged for the god of battles will not have the advantage of it, or even come near it. And in the meantime I shall wear it as best I can, for something is better than nothing — the more so as it will certainly be enough to protect me from a stone."

"That will be so," said Sancho, "if it isn't thrown with a sling, as they threw them in that fight between the two armies, when they blessed your worship's molars for you and broke the can with that most blessed brew in it that made me vomit up my insides."

"I am not much grieved at having lost it," said Don Quixote, "because as you know, Sancho, I have the recipe by heart."

"So do I," answered Sancho, "but if I ever make it or taste it again in my life, may my hour come here and now. What's more, I don't mean to put myself in the way of needing it, because I mean to guard myself with all five of my senses against being wounded or wounding anybody. As for being tossed in a blanket again, I say nothing, because misfortunes of that kind can hardly be prevented; and if they come, there's nothing to do but hunch your shoulders, hold your breath, shut your eyes and let yourself go wherever luck and the blanket take you."

"You are a bad Christian, Sancho," said Don Quixote, hearing this, "because you never forget an injury once it has been done you. Let me tell you that it is the mark of noble and generous breasts to take no notice of childish things. What foot did you come away lame on, what rib broken, what head cracked, that you cannot forget that joke? For when the thing is properly weighed up, it was a joke and a piece of fun; and if I did not understand it so, I would have gone back there long ago and done more damage in your revenge than the Greeks did for the stolen Helen. Who, if she had been alive in this age, or my Dulcinea in that one, could be sure she would not have the reputation for beauty that she has."

And here he gave a sigh and sent it up to the clouds. And Sancho said:

"Let it pass for a joke, then, since the revenge can't pass for earnest. But I know what quality the earnest and the joking were of, and I know too that they'll never fall out of my memory, any more than they'll come off my back. But leaving that aside, tell me, your worship: what are we to do about this dappled grey horse that looks like a grey ass, which that Martino your worship knocked down has left abandoned here? Because by the way he took to his heels and made off like a shot, he doesn't look likely to come back for it ever. And by my beard, the grey is a good one!"

"It is not my custom," said Don Quixote, "to strip those I defeat, nor is it a practice of chivalry to take their horses and leave them on foot — unless it were that the victor had lost his own in the fight, in which case it is lawful to take the loser's, as won in lawful war. So, Sancho, leave that horse, or ass, or whatever you want it to be; because as soon as its owner sees us a good way off from here, he will come back for it."

"God knows I'd like to take it," replied Sancho, "or at least swap it for this one of mine, which doesn't seem to me as good. Truly the laws of chivalry are narrow ones, if they don't stretch as far as letting a man swap one ass for another; and I'd like to know whether I could at least swap the harness."

"On that I am not very certain," answered Don Quixote; "and in a case of doubt, until I am better informed, I say that you may swap them, if you are in extreme need of them."

"So extreme," answered Sancho, "that if they had been for my own person I couldn't have needed them more."

And then, empowered by that permission, he performed a mutatio caparum and turned his donkey out beyond all beauty, leaving him improved by a third and a fifth. This done, they breakfasted on the remains of the camp supplies they had stripped off the pack-mule and drank the water of the fulling-mill stream, without turning their faces to look at the mills: such was the loathing they had for them on account of the fright they had put them in.

Their hunger cut short, then, and their gloom along with it, they mounted; and without taking any set road — since it is very much the way of knights errant not to take a fixed one — they set off riding wherever Rocinante's will took them, which carried his master's along with it, and the donkey's too, since the donkey always followed wherever the horse led, in good love and fellowship. For all that, they came back to the high road and followed it at a venture, with no other plan at all.

Going along like this, Sancho said to his master:

"Sir, will your worship give me leave to talk with you a little? Since you laid that harsh commandment of silence on me, more than four things have gone rotten in my stomach, and there's one I have on the tip of my tongue now that I shouldn't like to see spoiled."

"Say it," said Don Quixote, "and be brief in your speeches, for none of them is enjoyable if it is long."

"I say, then, sir," answered Sancho, "that these last few days I've been thinking how little there is to be won or gained by going about looking for these adventures your worship looks for in these wildernesses and crossroads, where, even when the most dangerous ones are won and finished, there's nobody to see them or hear about them. And so they'll have to stay in everlasting silence, to the harm of your worship's purpose and of what they deserve. And so it seems to me it would be better — saving your worship's better judgement — if we went to serve some emperor, or some other great prince who has a war on, in whose service your worship could show the valour of his person, his great strength and his greater understanding. Which being seen by the lord we served, he'd be bound to reward us, each according to his deserts; and there'd be no lack of somebody there to put your worship's exploits into writing, for a lasting memorial. Of mine I say nothing, since they're not to go outside the limits proper to a squire; though I can tell you that if it's the custom in chivalry to write down squires' exploits, I don't think mine will be left out between the lines."

"You do not speak badly, Sancho," answered Don Quixote; "but before it comes to that, it is necessary to go about the world, as it were on probation, looking for adventures, so that by finishing some of them a man may acquire such a name and fame that when he comes to the court of some great monarch the knight is already known by his deeds. And so that hardly will the boys have seen him come in at the city gate before they will all follow and surround him, shouting and saying, 'This is the Knight of the Sun,' or of the Serpent, or of whatever other emblem it was under which he had performed great exploits. 'This,' they will say, 'is the man who defeated in single combat the huge giant Brocabruno of the Great Strength; the man who freed the Great Mameluke of Persia from the long enchantment he had been under for almost nine hundred years.'

"And so, from mouth to mouth, they will go proclaiming your deeds; and then, at the uproar of the boys and the rest of the people, the king of that kingdom will come to the windows of his royal palace, and as soon as he sees the knight and recognises him by his arms or by the device on his shield, he cannot help saying, 'Come now! Let all my knights who are in my court go out to receive the flower of chivalry, who is arriving!' At which command they will all go out, and the king will come as far as the middle of the staircase and embrace him very closely and give him the kiss of peace on the cheek; and then he will lead him by the hand to the lady queen's apartment, where the knight will find her with her daughter the princess, who is bound to be one of the loveliest and most perfect maidens that could be found, with a great deal of trouble, over a great part of the discovered earth.

"After this, immediately and directly, it will come about that she sets her eyes on the knight and he on hers, and each will seem to the other something more divine than human; and without knowing how or why, they will be left caught and tangled in the intricate net of love, and in great distress in their hearts at not knowing how they are to speak to one another and reveal their longings and their feelings.

"From there they will take him, no doubt, to some room of the palace, richly furnished, where, having taken his armour off him, they will bring him a rich scarlet cloak to cover himself with; and if he looked well in armour, he is bound to look as well and better in his doublet. Night coming on, he will have supper with the king, the queen and the princess, where he will never take his eyes off her, looking at her by stealth from the people around; and she will do the same with the same shrewdness, because, as I have said, she is a very discerning maiden.

"The tables will be cleared, and all at once there will come in at the door of the hall an ugly little dwarf with a beautiful lady, who comes behind the dwarf between two giants, with a certain adventure devised by a most ancient sage, and whoever finishes it will be held to be the best knight in the world. The king will then command that all those present should try it, and none of them will bring it to a finish and a conclusion but the guest knight, greatly to the profit of his fame — at which the princess will be perfectly delighted, and will count herself contented and repaid besides for having placed and settled her thoughts in so high a quarter.

"And the good of it is that this king, or prince, or whatever he is, has a very hard-fought war on with another as powerful as himself; and the guest knight asks him, after some days he has been at his court, for leave to go and serve him in that war. The king will give it him with a very good will, and the knight will kiss his hands courteously for the favour he does him.

"And that night he will take leave of his lady the princess through the grille of a garden that gives onto the room where she sleeps, through which he had already spoken to her many other times, with a lady-in-waiting the princess trusted a great deal as go-between and party to it all. He will sigh, she will faint, the lady will fetch water, she will be very distressed because morning is coming and she would not have them discovered, for her mistress's honour's sake. In the end the princess will come to herself and give her white hands through the grille to the knight, who will kiss them a thousand times over and bathe them in tears. It will be settled between the two of them how they are to let each other know their good or bad fortunes, and the princess will beg him to stay away as little as he can; he will promise it her with many oaths; he kisses her hands again and takes his leave with such feeling that he comes near to ending his life.

"He goes from there to his room, throws himself on his bed, cannot sleep for the pain of the parting, gets up very early in the morning, goes to take leave of the king and the queen and the princess. He is told, after taking leave of the two of them, that the lady princess is unwell and cannot receive a visit; the knight thinks it is from grief at his going, his heart is pierced through, and he comes near to giving an open sign of his pain. The go-between lady is standing there and has to notice it all, and goes off to tell her mistress, who receives her with tears and tells her that one of the greatest griefs she has is not knowing who her knight is, and whether or not he is of a line of kings. The lady assures her that so much courtesy, breeding and valour as her knight's could not be contained except in a royal and lofty subject; the poor girl comforts herself with this; she does her best to be comforted, so as not to give her parents a bad impression of her; and at the end of two days she comes out in public.

"The knight has gone by now. He fights in the war, defeats the king's enemy, wins many cities, triumphs in many battles, comes back to court, sees his lady in the usual place, and it is arranged that he shall ask her father for her as his wife in payment for his services. The king will not give her to him, because he does not know who he is; but for all that, either by carrying her off or by some other means whatever, the princess comes to be his wife and her father comes to count it a great piece of luck, because it turns out on inquiry that the knight is the son of a valorous king of some kingdom or other — I believe it cannot be on the map. The father dies, the princess inherits, the knight is king in two words. Here comes in at once the doing of favours to his squire and to all those who helped him rise to so high an estate: he marries his squire to a lady-in-waiting of the princess's, who will no doubt be the one who was the go-between in his love affair, and who is the daughter of a very great duke."

"That's what I ask, and fair play," said Sancho. "That's what I'm holding to, because the whole of it is bound to happen to your worship to the letter, now you're calling yourself the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance."

"Do not doubt it, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "because by the same road and the same steps I have described, knights errant rise and have risen to be kings and emperors. All that remains now is to look about and see which king of the Christians or of the pagans has a war on and has a beautiful daughter. But there will be time to think of this, since, as I have told you, one must first win fame elsewhere before going to court.

"There is another thing I lack, too. Supposing a king is found with a war and a beautiful daughter, and that I have won incredible fame throughout the universe, I do not see how it could be found that I am of a line of kings, or at least second cousin to an emperor; because the king will not give me his daughter to wife unless he is first thoroughly satisfied on this, however much my famous deeds may deserve it. So through this defect I am afraid of losing what my arm has well deserved. It is quite true that I am a gentleman of a known house, holding property in my own right and entitled to the five-hundred-sueldo indemnity; and it might be that the sage who writes my history would trace out my kindred and descent in such a way that he would find me the fifth or sixth in descent from a king.

"Because I would have you know, Sancho, that there are two kinds of lineage in the world. Some trace and bring down their descent from princes and monarchs, whom time has little by little undone, and they have finished in a point like a pyramid stood upside down. Others had their beginning in low people and go climbing step by step until they come to be great lords. So that the difference is that some were what they are no longer, and others are what they were not. And I might be one of these — that after inquiry my beginning would prove to have been great and famous, with which the king my father-in-law-to-be ought to be satisfied. And if not, the princess is bound to love me in such a way that in spite of her father, even if she knew clearly that I was the son of a water-carrier, she will take me for her lord and her husband. And if not, here comes in carrying her off and taking her wherever I like best; because time or death will put an end to her parents' anger."

"Here comes in nicely too," said Sancho, "what some unscrupulous people say: 'Don't ask as a favour what you can take by force.' Though it fits better to say: 'A leap over the hedge is worth more than good men's prayers.' I say it because if the lord king, your worship's father-in-law, won't be brought round to handing over my lady the princess, there's nothing for it, as your worship says, but to carry her off and spirit her away. But the trouble is that until peace is made and the kingdom is enjoyed in quiet, the poor squire may go hungry as far as the favours are concerned — unless the go-between lady, who's to be his wife, comes away with the princess and he shares his bad luck with her until heaven ordains otherwise; because I suppose his master could give her to him for his lawful wife straight away."

"There is nobody to prevent that," said Don Quixote.

"Well, if that's how it is," answered Sancho, "there's nothing for it but to commend ourselves to God and let luck run wherever it can best direct things."

"May God do it," answered Don Quixote, "as I desire and as you, Sancho, need. And let him be mean who thinks himself mean."

"Let it be so, in God's name," said Sancho, "for I'm an Old Christian, and that's enough for me to be a count with."

"It is more than enough," said Don Quixote; "and even if you were not, it would make no difference, because, since I shall be king, I can very well give you nobility without your buying it or serving me with anything for it. Because once I make you a count, there you are a gentleman, and let them say what they like — for upon my word they will have to call you 'your lordship', however much it annoys them."

"And I'll be bound I'd know how to carry off the tittle!" said Sancho.

"Title you should say, not tittle," said his master.

"So be it," answered Sancho Panza. "I say I'd know how to manage it well enough; because upon my life, I was beadle of a confraternity once, and the beadle's robes sat so well on me that everybody said I had the presence to be steward of the same confraternity. So what will it be when I put a duke's gown on my back, or dress myself in gold and pearls like a foreign count? It's my belief they'll come a hundred leagues to see me."

"You will look well," said Don Quixote, "but it will be necessary for you to shave your beard often; because, thick, tangled and untidy as you keep it, if you do not take a razor to it every two days at the least, they will see what you are from a musket shot away."

"What is there to it," said Sancho, "except to take a barber and keep him on wages in the house? And if it's necessary I'll even make him walk behind me like a grandee's master of horse."

"But how do you know," asked Don Quixote, "that grandees have their masters of horse walk behind them?"

"I'll tell you," answered Sancho. "Some years ago I spent a month at court, and there I saw a very small gentleman walking about, who they said was a very great one, with a man following him on horseback at every turn he took, so that he looked like nothing so much as his tail. I asked why that man didn't come alongside the other one instead of always walking behind him. They answered me that he was his master of horse, and that it was the custom of grandees to have such men behind them. I've known it so well ever since that I've never forgotten it."

"I say you are right," said Don Quixote, "and that in the same way you may have your barber behind you. Customs did not all come in together, nor were they invented all at once, and you may be the first count to have his barber behind him. And in fact shaving a man is a matter of greater trust than saddling a horse."

"Let the business of the barber be my responsibility," said Sancho, "and let your worship's be to try to come to be king and to make me a count."

"So it shall be," answered Don Quixote.

And raising his eyes, he saw what will be told in the following chapter.
