Chapter 22: Of the Liberty Don Quixote Gave to a Number of Unfortunates Who Were Being Taken, Against Their Will, Where They Had No Wish to Go

Cide Hamete Benengeli, Arab author and Manchegan, relates in this most grave, high-sounding, minute, sweet and imagined history that after the words related at the end of chapter twenty-one had passed between the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha and Sancho Panza his squire, Don Quixote raised his eyes and saw coming along the road he was on some twelve men on foot, strung like beads by the neck on a great iron chain, and all of them with manacles on their hands. There were also two men on horseback and two on foot with them: those on horseback with wheel-lock muskets, and those on foot with javelins and swords. And as soon as Sancho Panza saw them he said:

"That's a chain of galley slaves, people forced by the king, on their way to the galleys."

"What do you mean, forced?" asked Don Quixote. "Is it possible that the king uses force on anybody?"

"I don't say that," answered Sancho, "but that they're people who for their crimes have been condemned to serve the king in the galleys by force."

"In short," replied Don Quixote, "however it may be, these people are being taken by force and not of their own will."

"That's so," said Sancho.

"Then in that case," said his master, "here comes in the exercise of my office: to undo violence and to help and succour the wretched."

"Your worship should note," said Sancho, "that justice, which is the king himself, is not using force or doing injury to people of this kind, but punishing them for their crimes."

At this the chain of galley slaves came up, and Don Quixote in very courteous terms asked those who were guarding them to be good enough to inform him and tell him the reason, or reasons, why they were taking these people along in that fashion. One of the mounted guards answered that they were galley slaves, people belonging to His Majesty on their way to the galleys, and that there was nothing more to say, nor did he have anything more to know.

"For all that," replied Don Quixote, "I should like to learn from each one of them in particular the cause of his misfortune."

He added to these such other and such polite terms, to move them to tell him what he wanted, that the other mounted guard said to him:

"Although we have the register and the certificate of each of these unfortunates' sentences here with us, this is no time to stop and get them out and read them. Your worship may go up and ask the men themselves, and they will tell you if they choose — and choose they will, because they are people who take pleasure in doing and telling knaveries."

With this permission, which Don Quixote would have taken even if it had not been given him, he went up to the chain and asked the first man for what sins he was going along in so bad a fashion. He answered that it was for being in love that he was going along in that way.

"For that and no more?" replied Don Quixote. "Why, if they send men to the galleys for being in love, I might have been rowing in them long ago."

"The love isn't the kind your worship thinks," said the galley slave. "Mine was that I was so fond of a washing basket crammed with white linen that I hugged it to me so tightly that if the law hadn't taken it off me by force, I wouldn't have let go of it of my own will even now. It was caught in the act, there was no room for torture, the case was concluded, they fitted out my shoulders with a hundred, and three straight in the gurapas by way of an extra, and the job was done."

"What are gurapas?" asked Don Quixote.

"Gurapas are galleys," answered the galley slave.

He was a young fellow of about twenty-four, and he said he was from Piedrahíta. Don Quixote asked the same of the second, who did not answer a word, so downcast and gloomy did he look; but the first answered for him, and said:

"This one, sir, is going as a canary — I mean, as a musician and a singer."

"How is that?" repeated Don Quixote. "Do musicians and singers go to the galleys too?"

"Yes, sir," answered the galley slave, "for there's nothing worse than singing under pressure."

"On the contrary," said Don Quixote, "I have heard it said that he who sings frightens away his troubles."

"Here it's the other way about," said the galley slave: "he who sings once weeps for the rest of his life."

"I do not understand it," said Don Quixote.

But one of the guards said to him:

"Sir knight, 'singing under pressure' means, among these unholy people, confessing under torture. They gave this sinner the torture and he confessed his crime, which was being a rustler, that is a thief of livestock; and because he confessed they sentenced him to six years in the galleys, besides the two hundred lashes he is already carrying on his back. And he goes along thoughtful and sad all the time, because the other thieves who stayed behind and the ones who are here abuse him and grind him down and make a mock of him and think nothing of him, because he confessed and hadn't the courage to say no. Because they say that a no has as many letters in it as a yes, and that a criminal is lucky enough when his life or his death lies on his own tongue and not on the witnesses and the evidence; and to my mind they are not very far off the road."

"And that is how I understand it too," answered Don Quixote.

Passing on to the third, he asked what he had asked the others; who answered at once and with a great deal of coolness, and said:

"I'm going for five years to the lady gurapas for being short of ten ducats."

"I would give twenty with a very good will," said Don Quixote, "to get you out of that trouble."

"That strikes me," answered the galley slave, "like a man who has money in the middle of the ocean and is dying of hunger with nowhere to buy what he needs. I say it because if I'd had at the right moment those twenty ducats your worship is offering me now, I'd have greased the clerk's quill with them and sharpened up the attorney's wits, in such a way that today I'd have found myself in the middle of the Zocodover square in Toledo and not on this road, leashed like a greyhound. But God is great: patience, and enough said."

Don Quixote passed on to the fourth, a man with a venerable face and a white beard that came down below his chest; who, on hearing himself asked the reason he was there, began to cry and did not answer a word. But the fifth condemned man served him as a tongue, and said:

"This honourable man is going for four years to the galleys, after having paraded the usual streets dressed up in state and on horseback."

"That is," said Sancho Panza, "as it seems to me, having been put to public shame."

"That's it," replied the galley slave; "and the offence they gave him this penalty for is having been a broker of ears — and of the whole body too. What I mean, in fact, is that this gentleman is going as a pimp, and for likewise having his touch and trimming of sorcery."

"If they had not added that touch and trimming," said Don Quixote, "then for pure pimping alone he would not deserve to go and row in the galleys, but to command them and be their admiral. For the office of pimp is not just anything: it is an office for people of discernment and absolutely necessary in a well-ordered state, and it ought to be practised only by people very well born. And indeed there ought to be an inspector and examiner of them, as there is of the other trades, with a fixed and known number of them, like the brokers on the exchange. And in this way a great many evils would be avoided that are caused by this office and occupation being in the hands of stupid people of little understanding — such as women of small account, pages and rascals of few years and little experience, who at the most necessary moment, when it is a question of laying a plan that matters, let the crumbs freeze between the mouth and the hand and do not know which is their right hand.

"I should like to go further and give the reasons why it is proper to make a careful choice of those who are to hold so necessary an office in the state, but this is not the right place for it; some day I shall tell it to somebody who can see to it and put it right. I only say now that the pain caused me by seeing these white hairs and this venerable face in such distress, for pimping, has been taken away by the addition of his being a sorcerer — although I know very well that there are no spells in the world that can move or force the will, as some simple people think. Our will is free, and there is no herb or enchantment that can force it. What certain simple women and certain knavish tricksters generally do is to make up some mixtures and poisons that drive men mad, giving people to understand that they have the power to make them love — which is, as I say, an impossibility, to force the will."

"That's the truth," said the good old man; "and in fact, sir, in the matter of sorcery I was not to blame; in the matter of pimping I couldn't deny it. But I never thought I was doing any harm by it: my whole intention was that everybody should enjoy themselves and live in peace and quiet, without quarrels or troubles. But this good intention has been no use at all to me in keeping me from going where I don't expect to come back from, considering the weight of my years and a trouble with my water that doesn't let me rest for a moment."

And here he went back to his weeping as before; and Sancho felt so much pity for him that he took a four-real piece out of his shirt and gave it to him as alms.

Don Quixote went on and asked another his offence, who answered with no less, but with a great deal more, style than the last one:

"I'm here because I carried my games too far with two first cousins of mine, and with two other sisters who weren't mine. In the end I carried the game so far with all of them that the result of it was the family growing so tangled that there's no devil can sort it out. Everything was proved against me, there was no favour to be had, I had no money, I was on the point of losing my gullet, they sentenced me to six years in the galleys, and I agreed to it: it's the punishment for my fault. I'm young, let life last, for with it everything can be got. If your worship, sir knight, has anything to relieve us poor wretches with, God will repay you in heaven, and we on earth will take care to pray to God in our prayers for your worship's life and health, and may it be as long and as good as your fine appearance deserves."

This one was in a student's dress, and one of the guards said he was a great talker and a very fine Latinist.

Behind all these came a man of very good appearance, about thirty years old, except that when he looked at you he squinted one eye a little into the other. He was tied differently from the rest, because he had a chain on his leg so long that it wound right round his body, and two rings at his throat, one on the chain and the other one of the kind they call a keep-friend or a foot-friend, from which two irons came down to his waist, and to these were fastened two manacles holding his hands, shut with a heavy padlock; so that he could not raise his hands to his mouth, nor lower his head to reach his hands.

Don Quixote asked why this man was going along with so many more irons than the others. The guard answered him that it was because this one man had more crimes on him than all the rest put together, and that he was so daring and such a great scoundrel that even taking him along in that fashion they were not safe from him, but were afraid he would escape from them.

"What crimes can he have," said Don Quixote, "if they have deserved no greater penalty than being sent to the galleys?"

"He is going for ten years," replied the guard, "which is the same as civil death. There is no need to know more than that this good man is the famous Ginés de Pasamonte, who by another name is called Ginesillo de Parapilla."

"Señor commissary," said the galley slave then, "go gently, and let us not start sorting out names and surnames now. Ginés is my name and not Ginesillo, and Pasamonte is my family and not Parapilla, as your worship says. And let everybody take a turn around himself, and he will not be doing badly."

"Speak with less swagger, my lord thief above the ordinary size," replied the commissary, "unless you want me to shut you up in a way you won't like."

"It is plain to see," answered the galley slave, "that a man goes along as God is pleased to have him; but one day somebody will find out whether my name is Ginesillo de Parapilla or not."

"Well, isn't that what they call you, you liar?" said the guard.

"They do," answered Ginés, "but I'll see to it that they don't call me it — or I'd tear them out somewhere I'm saying between my teeth. Sir knight, if you have anything to give us, give it us now and go with God; you're becoming a nuisance with all this wanting to know about other people's lives. And if you want to know mine, know that I am Ginés de Pasamonte, whose life is written by these thumbs."

"He speaks the truth," said the commissary: "he has written his own history himself, and there is nothing to touch it, and he leaves the book in pawn in the prison for two hundred reals."

"And I mean to redeem it," said Ginés, "even if it were pledged for two hundred ducats."

"Is it as good as that?" said Don Quixote.

"It is so good," answered Ginés, "that it's a bad year for Lazarillo de Tormes and for everything of that kind that has been written or ever will be. What I can tell your worship is that it deals in truths, and truths so fine and so entertaining that no lies can equal them."

"And what is the book called?" asked Don Quixote.

"The Life of Ginés de Pasamonte," answered the man himself.

"And is it finished?" asked Don Quixote.

"How can it be finished," he answered, "when my life isn't finished yet? What is written is from my birth up to the moment they sent me to the galleys this last time."

"So you have been in them before?" said Don Quixote.

"In the service of God and the king I was in them another four years, and I know already what the ship's biscuit and the whip taste like," answered Ginés. "And it doesn't grieve me much to be going to them, because there I'll have the chance to finish my book. I've a great many things left to say, and in the galleys of Spain there's more leisure than a man needs — though I don't need much more for what I have to write, since I know it by heart."

"You seem clever," said Don Quixote.

"And unlucky," answered Ginés, "because misfortunes always persecute good wits."

"They persecute scoundrels," said the commissary.

"I have told you already, Señor commissary," answered Pasamonte, "to go gently. Those gentlemen didn't give you that staff to ill-treat us poor wretches who are going along here, but to guide us and take us where His Majesty commands. If not — by the life of — enough! It might be that one day the stains that were made at the inn will come out in the wash. And let everybody hold his tongue, and live well and speak better, and let us get on our way, for this is a great deal too much amusement."

The commissary raised his staff high to strike Pasamonte in answer to his threats; but Don Quixote put himself in between and begged him not to ill-treat the man, since it was not much that a man whose hands were tied so tightly should have his tongue a little loose. And turning to all those on the chain, he said:

"From everything you have told me, dearest brothers, I have gathered clearly that although they have punished you for your faults, the penalties you are going to suffer give you very little pleasure, and that you are going to them very unwillingly and very much against your own will; and that it might be that the small courage that man had under torture, and this one's lack of money, and the other's lack of influence, and finally the judge's crooked judgement, may have been the cause of your ruin and of your not having got the justice that was on your side.

"All of which presents itself to my mind in such a way that it is telling me, persuading me and even forcing me to show in your case the purpose for which heaven threw me into the world and made me profess in it the order of chivalry that I profess, and the vow I made in it to favour the needy and those oppressed by the powerful. But because I know that one part of prudence is that what can be done by fair means should not be done by foul, I want to beg these gentlemen the guards and the commissary to be good enough to untie you and let you go in peace; there will be no lack of others to serve the king on better occasions. For it seems to me a hard case to make slaves of those whom God and nature made free.

"What is more, gentlemen guards," Don Quixote added, "these poor men have committed nothing against you. Let each of them settle it with his own sin. There is a God in heaven who does not neglect to punish the wicked or to reward the good, and it is not right that honourable men should be executioners of other men when nothing in it concerns them. I ask this with this gentleness and calm, so that I may have something to thank you for if you carry it out; and if you will not do it willingly, this lance and this sword, with the valour of my arm, will make you do it by force."

"A pretty piece of foolery!" answered the commissary. "That's a fine joke he has come out with after all this time! He wants us to let the king's convicts go, as though we had authority to release them or he had any to order us to! Your worship had better get on your way, sir, and good luck to you, and straighten that basin you have on your head, and don't go looking for three feet on a cat."

"You are the cat, and the rat, and the rascal!" answered Don Quixote.

And saying and doing, he charged him so suddenly that, without giving him time to put himself on his guard, he brought him down on the ground badly wounded by a thrust of the lance; and it turned out well for him, because this was the one with the musket. The other guards were astonished and taken aback by the unlooked-for event; but recovering themselves, those on horseback put their hands to their swords and those on foot to their javelins and charged Don Quixote, who waited for them with great calm.

And no doubt it would have gone badly for him if the galley slaves, seeing the chance that offered itself of getting their liberty, had not gone after it and set about breaking the chain they were strung on. The confusion was such that the guards — now running to the galley slaves, who were getting themselves loose, now attacking Don Quixote, who was attacking them — did nothing of any use.

Sancho for his part helped to free Ginés de Pasamonte, who was the first to leap out into the open free and unencumbered; and, charging at the fallen commissary, he took his sword and his musket from him, with which, aiming at one and marking down another without ever firing it, he left not a guard in the whole field, because they all fled — as much from Pasamonte's musket as from the many stones the loosed galley slaves were throwing at them.

Sancho was much saddened by this business, because it came into his mind that the men who were running away were bound to report the affair to the Holy Brotherhood, who would come out with the alarm bell ringing to look for the offenders. And he said so to his master, and begged him that they should get away from there at once and take cover in the mountains, which were near.

"That is all very well," said Don Quixote, "but I know what it is proper to do now."

And calling all the galley slaves, who were milling about in an uproar and had stripped the commissary down to the skin, they all gathered round him to hear what he would order them, and he said to them:

"It is the mark of well-born people to be grateful for the benefits they receive, and one of the sins that most offends God is ingratitude. I say it because you have already seen, gentlemen, by plain experience, the benefit you have received from me. In payment for it I should like — and it is my will — that, loaded with that chain I took off your necks, you should set out at once and go to the city of El Toboso, and there present yourselves before the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso and tell her that her knight, he of the Sorrowful Countenance, sends her his greetings, and give her a point-by-point account of everything that has taken place in this famous adventure, up to your being set at the liberty you wanted. And this done, you may go wherever you like and good luck go with you."

Ginés de Pasamonte answered for them all, and said:

"What your worship orders us, sir and our deliverer, is impossible with every kind of impossibility to carry out; because we can't go along the roads together, but only singly and separately, each one his own way, trying to get into the bowels of the earth so as not to be found by the Holy Brotherhood, who without any doubt are bound to come out looking for us. What your worship can do, and it's right that you should, is to change that service and toll to the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso into a certain quantity of Hail Marys and Creeds, which we'll say for your worship's intention; and that's a thing that can be done by night and by day, running away or resting, in peace or in war. But to think that we're going back now to the fleshpots of Egypt — I mean, to take up our chain and set out on the road to El Toboso — is to think that it's night now when it isn't yet ten in the morning, and it's asking us for that the way you'd ask an elm tree for pears."

"Then I swear by all that's holy," said Don Quixote, in a temper by now, "Don son of a whore, Don Ginesillo de Paropillo, or whatever you call yourself, that you shall go alone, tail between your legs, with the whole chain on your back!"

Pasamonte, who was not in the least long-suffering, and who by now had made out that Don Quixote was not very sane — since he had committed such an absurdity as wanting to give them their freedom — seeing himself treated in that fashion, winked at his companions; and drawing off to one side, they began to rain such a quantity of stones on Don Quixote that he could not get his hands going fast enough to cover himself with his buckler, and poor Rocinante took no more notice of the spur than if he had been made of bronze. Sancho got behind his ass and with him defended himself from the cloud and hailstorm that was raining down on the pair of them.

Don Quixote could not shield himself so well but that any number of pebbles hit him about the body, with such force that they brought him down on the ground; and he had hardly fallen when the student was on top of him and took the basin off his head and gave him three or four blows with it on the back and as many more on the ground, with which he smashed it to pieces. They took off him a jerkin he was wearing over his armour, and they would have taken his stockings if the greaves had not got in the way. They took Sancho's coat, and leaving him stripped to his shirt and sharing out among themselves the rest of the spoils of the battle, they each went their own way, with more care about escaping the Brotherhood they were afraid of than about loading themselves with the chain and going to present themselves before the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso.

The donkey and Rocinante, Sancho and Don Quixote were left alone: the donkey with his head down and thoughtful, shaking his ears every now and then, thinking the storm of stones that was still troubling his ears had not stopped; Rocinante stretched out beside his master, for he had come down to the ground too from another stone; Sancho in his shirt and afraid of the Holy Brotherhood; and Don Quixote in the deepest gloom at finding himself so badly used by the very men he had done so much good to.
