Chapter 23: Of What Happened to the Famous Don Quixote in the Sierra Morena, Which Was One of the Rarest Adventures Related in This True History

Finding himself so badly used, Don Quixote said to his squire:

"I have always heard it said, Sancho, that doing good to low fellows is throwing water into the sea. If I had believed what you told me, I should have avoided this trouble; but it is done now: patience, and let it be a lesson from here on."

"Your worship will learn that lesson," answered Sancho, "about as much as I'm a Turk. But since you say that if you had believed me you'd have avoided this damage, believe me now and you'll avoid a greater one; because I can tell you that with the Holy Brotherhood there's no using chivalry — they don't give two maravedis for all the knights errant there are. And I tell you I fancy I can hear their arrows humming past my ears already."

"You are a coward by nature, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "but so that you shall not say I am obstinate and never do what you advise, this once I mean to take your advice and get away from the fury you are so afraid of. But it must be on one condition: that never, in life or in death, are you to tell anybody that I withdrew and got away from this danger out of fear, but only to satisfy your entreaties. And if you say anything else, you will be lying in it; and from now for then, and from then for now, I give you the lie, and say that you lie and will lie every time you think it or say it. And do not argue with me any more; because at the mere thought of my withdrawing and retiring from any danger — especially this one, which seems to carry some sort of a hint of a shadow of fear about it — I am ready to stay here and wait, alone, not only for the Holy Brotherhood you speak of and are afraid of, but for the brothers of the twelve tribes of Israel, and the seven Maccabees, and Castor and Pollux, and all the brothers and brotherhoods there are in the world."

"Sir," answered Sancho, "retreating isn't running away, and waiting isn't good sense when the danger is bigger than the hope; and it's for wise men to keep themselves today for tomorrow and not stake everything on one day. And let me tell you that although I'm a clumsy peasant, I still understand something about what they call good management. So don't be sorry for having taken my advice: get up on Rocinante if you can — and if you can't, I'll help you — and follow me, for my wits tell me we have more need of our feet now than of our hands."

Don Quixote mounted without answering him another word; and with Sancho leading the way on his ass, they went into one side of the Sierra Morena, which was close by. Sancho meant to cross the whole of it and come out at El Viso or Almodóvar del Campo, and hide for some days in those wild places so as not to be found if the Brotherhood came looking for them. What encouraged him in this was having seen that the store of provisions carried on his ass had come free out of the fight with the galley slaves — a thing he judged a miracle, considering what the galley slaves carried off and searched for.

As soon as Don Quixote got into those mountains his heart lifted, those places seeming to him well suited for the adventures he was looking for. There came back into his memory the marvellous things that had happened to knights errant in solitudes and wild places of that kind. He rode along thinking about all this, so absorbed and carried away by it that he thought of nothing else. Nor did Sancho have any other care — once it seemed to him that they were travelling somewhere safe — than to satisfy his stomach with what was left of the clerical spoils. And so he went along behind his master, sitting side-saddle on his donkey, taking things out of a sack and stowing them in his belly; and he would not have given a farthing to run across another adventure while he was going along like that.

At this he raised his eyes and saw that his master had stopped and was trying with the point of his pike to lift some bundle or other that was lying on the ground; so he hurried up to help him if it were needed. And when he arrived it was just as his master was raising on the point of his pike a saddle cushion with a portmanteau attached to it, half rotten, or altogether rotten and falling apart; but it weighed so much that it was necessary for Sancho to get down to pick them up, and his master told him to see what was in the portmanteau.

Sancho did it very smartly; and although the portmanteau was fastened with a chain and its padlock, through the torn and rotted parts of it he could see what was inside, which was four shirts of fine Holland linen and other linen things, no less remarkable than clean; and in a handkerchief he found a good little pile of gold crowns. And as soon as he saw them he said:

"Blessed be all heaven, that has thrown us an adventure with some profit in it!"

And searching further, he found a little pocket-book, richly bound. Don Quixote asked for this, and told him to keep the money and take it for himself. Sancho kissed his hands for the favour, and stripping the bag of its linen, he put it into the provisions sack. All of which Don Quixote saw, and said:

"It seems to me, Sancho — and it is not possible that it should be anything else — that some traveller who had lost his way must have passed through these mountains, and been set on by robbers and killed, and that they brought him to bury him in this out-of-the-way place."

"That can't be," answered Sancho, "because if they were robbers they wouldn't have left this money here."

"You are right," said Don Quixote; "and so I cannot guess or make out what this can be. But wait: we shall see whether there is anything written in this little pocket-book by which we can pick up the trail and come to know what we want."

He opened it, and the first thing he found written in it, as in a rough draft though in a very good hand, was a sonnet; which, reading it aloud so that Sancho should hear it too, he found went like this:

	Either Love lacks understanding,
	or he has cruelty to spare, or my pain
	is not equal to the cause that condemns me
	to the harshest kind of torment.

	But if Love is a god, it follows
	that he is ignorant of nothing; and it is very good reasoning
	that a god should not be cruel. Then who ordains
	the terrible grief that I adore and feel?

	If I say it is you, Fili, I am wrong;
	so much evil does not fit inside so much good,
	nor does this ruin come to me from heaven.

	I shall have to die soon, which is the surest thing;
	for when the cause of the trouble is not known,
	it is a miracle to hit on the medicine.

"There's nothing to be learnt from that ballad," said Sancho, "unless we can ride that filly there to the end of the road."

"What filly is here?" said Don Quixote.

"It seemed to me," said Sancho, "that your worship named a filly there."

"I said Fili, not filly," answered Don Quixote; "and this, without any doubt, is the name of the lady the author of this sonnet is complaining about. And upon my word he must be a reasonable poet, or I know little of the art."

"So your worship understands verses as well?" said Sancho.

"And more than you think," answered Don Quixote; "and you shall see it when you carry a letter, written in verse from top to bottom, to my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso. Because I want you to know, Sancho, that all, or most, of the knights errant of the past age were great versifiers and great musicians; for these two accomplishments, or graces rather, go with wandering lovers. It is true that the verses of the knights of the past have more spirit than polish in them."

"Read some more, your worship," said Sancho; "you'll find something to satisfy us."

Don Quixote turned the page and said:

"This is prose, and it looks like a letter."

"A letter to be sent, sir?" asked Sancho.

"By the beginning it looks like nothing but a love letter," answered Don Quixote.

"Then read it out loud, your worship," said Sancho, "for I greatly enjoy these matters of love."

"With pleasure," said Don Quixote.

And reading it aloud, as Sancho had asked him to, he found it went like this:

Your false promise and my certain misfortune are carrying me to a place from which the news of my death will come back to your ears sooner than the words of my complaints. You threw me over, ungrateful woman, for a man who has more, not for a man who is worth more, than I am; but if virtue were a wealth that people valued, I should not envy other men's good fortune or weep for my own bad. What your beauty raised up, your actions have pulled down: by the one I understood you were an angel, and by the others I know you are a woman. Stay in peace, you who caused my war, and may heaven grant that your husband's deceits stay hidden for ever, so that you may not be left repenting what you did and I may not take a revenge I do not want.

Having finished reading the letter, Don Quixote said:

"Less can be got out of this than out of the verses — except that whoever wrote it is some rejected lover."

And leafing through almost the whole of the little book, he found other verses and letters, some of which he could read and some not; but what all of them contained was complaints, laments, mistrust, pleasures and displeasures, favours and disdains, some of them celebrated and others wept over.

While Don Quixote was going through the book, Sancho was going through the portmanteau, not leaving a corner of the whole of it, nor of the cushion, that he did not search, examine and investigate; nor a seam that he did not unpick, nor a tuft of wool that he did not pull apart, so that nothing should be left for want of diligence or through carelessness — such an appetite had the crowns he had found awakened in him, and there were more than a hundred of them. And although he found nothing more than what he had found, he counted the flights in the blanket, the vomiting of the brew, the blessings of the staves, the carrier's punches, the loss of the saddlebags, the theft of his coat and all the hunger, thirst and weariness he had gone through in his good master's service as well spent, since it seemed to him he was more than very well paid by the favour he had received in being given what they had found.

The Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance was left with a great desire to know who the owner of the portmanteau might be, guessing from the sonnet and the letter, from the gold money and from the very good shirts, that he must be some person of standing who was in love, and whom his lady's disdain and bad treatment must have driven to some desperate extremity. But as no living person appeared anywhere in that uninhabitable and rugged place from whom he could get information, he thought of nothing but going on, taking no other road than the one Rocinante wanted, which was wherever he could get along, always with the notion that some strange adventure could not fail to turn up among those thickets.

Going along, then, with this thought, he saw a man leaping over the top of a little hill that came into view in front of him, going from crag to crag and from bush to bush with extraordinary agility. He seemed to be half naked, with a thick black beard, a great deal of tangled hair, bare feet and nothing at all on his legs; his thighs were covered by a pair of breeches, apparently of tawny velvet, but so torn to pieces that his flesh showed through in many places. He had nothing on his head; and although he went past with the quickness that has been described, the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance saw and noted all these particulars. And although he tried, he could not follow him, because it was not given to Rocinante's weakness to go over that rough ground, especially as he was naturally short-stepped and phlegmatic.

Don Quixote immediately imagined that this was the owner of the cushion and the portmanteau, and he resolved in himself to look for him, even if he had to spend a year going about those mountains until he found him. And so he ordered Sancho to get down off the ass and cut across one side of the mountain, while he would go along the other, and it might be that with this effort they would come across the man who had got away from them in such a hurry.

"I can't do that," answered Sancho, "because the moment I get away from your worship, fear is on me at once and attacks me with a thousand kinds of frights and visions. And let what I say serve as notice that from now on I shall not move a finger's breadth from your presence."

"So be it," said the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance; "and I am very glad you want to make use of my courage, which will not fail you even if the courage of your body fails. Come along after me now, little by little or however you can, and make lanterns of your eyes. We shall go round this little sierra; perhaps we shall come across the man we saw, who without any doubt is none other than the owner of our find."

To which Sancho answered:

"It would be a good deal better not to look for him; because if we find him and he happens to be the owner of the money, it's clear I'll have to give it back. So it would have been better, without going to this useless trouble, for me to keep it in good faith until its true owner turned up by some other way that was less inquisitive and less industrious — and perhaps it would have been at a time when I'd have spent it, and then the king would have let me off."

"You are mistaken there, Sancho," answered Don Quixote; "since we have already fallen into a suspicion of who the owner is, and have him almost in front of us, we are obliged to look for him and give it back to him. And even if we did not look for him, the strong suspicion we have that he is the man puts us as much in the wrong as if he were. So, friend Sancho, do not be distressed at looking for him, considering the distress it will take away from me if I find him."

And so he spurred Rocinante, and Sancho followed him with his usual donkey. And having gone round part of the mountain, they found in a stream, fallen and dead and half eaten by dogs and pecked at by crows, a mule with its saddle and bridle on — all of which confirmed them still further in the suspicion that the man who had run away was the owner of the mule and of the cushion.

While they were looking at it they heard a whistle like that of a shepherd looking after his flock, and all at once, on their left hand, there appeared a good number of goats, and behind them, on top of the mountain, appeared the goatherd who was looking after them, who was an old man. Don Quixote shouted to him and asked him to come down to where they were. He answered at the top of his voice, asking what had brought them to that place, which was seldom or never trodden except by the feet of goats or of wolves and other wild beasts that went about there. Sancho answered him that he should come down and they would give him a full account of everything. The goatherd came down, and on reaching where Don Quixote was, he said:

"I'll wager you're looking at the hired mule that's lying dead in that hollow. Well, upon my word, it's been in that spot six months now. Tell me: have you come across its owner anywhere about?"

"We have come across nobody," answered Don Quixote, "except a cushion and a little portmanteau that we found not far from this place."

"I found it too," answered the goatherd, "but I never wanted to pick it up or go near it, being afraid of some mishap and of their claiming it off me as stolen goods; for the devil is subtle, and things come up under a man's feet for him to trip and fall over without his knowing how or why."

"That's exactly what I say," answered Sancho: "I found it too, and I wouldn't go within a stone's throw of it. There I left it and there it stays as it was — I don't want a dog with a bell on it."

"Tell me, my good man," said Don Quixote, "do you know who the owner of these things may be?"

"What I can tell you," said the goatherd, "is that about six months ago, more or less, there arrived at a shepherds' hut some three leagues from this place a young man of fine build and bearing, riding that very mule that's lying dead there, and with the same cushion and portmanteau you say you found and didn't touch. He asked us which part of this sierra was the wildest and most hidden; we told him it was this one where we are now — and that's the truth of it, because if you go half a league further in, you may not manage to find your way out. And I'm amazed at how you've been able to get here, for there's no road or path that leads to this place.

"I say, then, that on hearing our answer the young man turned his reins and headed for the place we'd pointed out, leaving us all pleased with his fine appearance and astonished at his question and at the haste with which we saw him ride off and turn towards the sierra. And from then on we never saw him again, until some days later he came out on the road at one of our shepherds and, without saying anything to him, went up to him and gave him a great many punches and kicks, and then went to the flock's she-ass and took all the bread and cheese she was carrying; and this done, he went back into the sierra with extraordinary quickness.

"When some of us goatherds learnt of this, we went looking for him for nearly two days through the thickest part of this sierra, at the end of which we found him lodged in the hollow of a thick and mighty cork tree. He came out to us very meekly, his clothes torn by now and his face disfigured and burnt by the sun in such a way that we hardly knew him; except that his clothes, torn as they were, along with what we knew of them, gave us to understand he was the man we were looking for.

"He greeted us courteously, and in a few very well-chosen words he told us not to be surprised at seeing him going about in that way, because it was necessary for him so as to carry out a certain penance that had been laid on him for his many sins. We begged him to tell us who he was, but we could never get it out of him. We also asked him that when he needed food, which he could not do without, he'd tell us where we could find him, because we'd bring it to him with a great deal of love and care; and that if this too was not to his liking, he should at least come out and ask for it, and not take it from the shepherds. He thanked us for our offer, asked pardon for the past attacks, and promised to ask for it from then on for the love of God, without giving anybody any trouble. As for where he lived, he said he had no dwelling but whatever chance offered him wherever night caught him.

"And he ended his talk with such tender weeping that we who had listened to him would have been made of stone if we hadn't joined him in it, thinking how we'd seen him the first time and what we saw him now. Because, as I've said, he was a very fine, well-favoured young man, and in his courteous and well-ordered speech he showed himself to be well born and a very courtly person; for even though we who were listening to him were rustics, his breeding was such that it was enough to make itself known to rusticity itself.

"And in the middle of the best of his talk he stopped and went dumb; he fixed his eyes on the ground for a good while, during which we all stood still and in suspense, waiting to see what that trance would come to, with no small pity at seeing it. Because from the way he opened his eyes and stared fixedly at the ground for a long time without moving an eyelash, and other times shut them, pressing his lips together and arching his eyebrows, we easily saw that some fit of madness had come over him.

"But he soon gave us to understand that what we thought was true, because he leapt up in a great fury from the ground where he'd thrown himself and attacked the first man he found next to him with such spirit and rage that if we hadn't pulled him off him he'd have killed him with his fists and his teeth. And all the time he was doing it he was saying: 'Ah, treacherous Fernando! Here, here you shall pay me for the wrong you did me: these hands shall pull out your heart, where every wickedness together has its lodging and its lair, and above all fraud and deceit!' And to these he added other speeches, all aimed at speaking ill of this Fernando and branding him a traitor and a false man.

"We got him off, then, with no small trouble; and he, without saying another word, went away from us and dived into these thickets and brambles at a run, in such a way that he made it impossible for us to follow him. From this we conclude that his madness comes on him in fits, and that somebody called Fernando must have done him some bad turn, as heavy a one as the state it has brought him to shows. And all of this has been confirmed since then by the times — and there have been many of them — that he has come out on the road, sometimes to ask the shepherds to give him some of what they are carrying to eat, and other times to take it from them by force; because when he is in his fit of madness, even if the shepherds offer it him willingly, he won't accept it but takes it with his fists; and when he is in his senses he asks for it for the love of God, courteously and politely, and gives a great many thanks for it, and not without tears.

"And I tell you truly, gentlemen," the goatherd went on, "that yesterday I and four lads — two of them servants and two friends of mine — made up our minds to look for him until we find him; and once he is found, whether by force or willingly, we mean to take him to the town of Almodóvar, which is eight leagues from here, and there we'll cure him if his trouble has any cure, or we'll find out who he is when he's in his senses, and whether he has relations we can give news of his misfortune to.

"This, gentlemen, is what I can tell you about what you've asked me; and understand that the owner of the things you found is the same man you saw go past as fast as he was naked" — for Don Quixote had already told him how he had seen that man leaping across the sierra.

Don Quixote was astonished at what he had heard from the goatherd, and was left with an even greater desire to know who the unfortunate madman was; and he resolved in himself what he had already been thinking: to look for him over the whole mountain, without leaving a corner or a cave in it unexamined, until he found him. But luck did better than he thought or hoped, because at that very instant there appeared, out of a ravine in a mountainside that came out where they were, the young man he was looking for, who was talking to himself about things that could not be understood close to, let alone from a distance. His clothes were as they have been described, except that when he came near, Don Quixote saw that a jerkin torn to pieces that he was wearing was scented with amber; from which he finally understood that a person who wore clothes of that kind could not be of the lowest quality.

On reaching them, the young man greeted them in a harsh, unmusical voice, but with a great deal of courtesy. Don Quixote returned his greetings with no less politeness, and dismounting from Rocinante, with a fine bearing and grace he went to embrace him and held him a good while tightly in his arms, as though he had known him a long time. The other — whom we may call the Ragged One of the Sorry Countenance, as we call Don Quixote he of the Sorrowful — after letting himself be embraced, pushed him a little away from himself, and putting his hands on Don Quixote's shoulders, stood looking at him as though he wanted to see whether he knew him — no less astonished, perhaps, at seeing Don Quixote's figure, build and armour than Don Quixote was at seeing him. In short, the first to speak after the embracing was the Ragged One, and he said what will be told further on.
