Chapter 24: In Which the Adventure of the Sierra Morena Is Continued

The history says that Don Quixote listened to the ragged Knight of the Sierra with the very closest attention; who, going on with his talk, said:

"Certainly, sir, whoever you may be — for I do not know you — I thank you for the signs of goodwill and the courtesy you have shown me. And I could wish I were in a condition to repay with more than the will the kindness you have shown me in the good welcome you have given me; but my luck will not give me anything else to answer the good turns that are done me with, except a good desire to repay them."

"Mine," answered Don Quixote, "are desires to serve you — so much so that I had made up my mind not to leave these mountains until I had found you and learnt from you whether some kind of remedy could be found for the grief that the strangeness of your life shows you to be suffering; and if it were necessary to look for it, to look for it with all possible diligence. And if your misfortune were of the kind that has its doors shut against every sort of consolation, I meant to help you weep and lament over it as best I could, since it is still a consolation in misfortunes to find somebody who is sorry for them.

"And if my good intention deserves to be repaid with any kind of courtesy, I beg you, sir, by the great courtesy I see is shut up in you — and at the same time I conjure you by the thing you have most loved or most love in this life — to tell me who you are and the cause that has brought you to live and die in these solitudes like a brute beast, since you dwell among them so far from your own self, as your dress and person show. And I swear," Don Quixote added, "by the order of chivalry I received, unworthy and sinner though I am, and by the profession of knight errant, that if in this you gratify me, sir, I will serve you with all the earnestness that being who I am obliges me to: either by remedying your misfortune, if it has a remedy, or by helping you to weep over it, as I have promised you."

The Knight of the Wood, hearing the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance talk in this way, did nothing but look at him, and look at him again, and look him up and down once more; and after he had had a good look at him, he said:

"If you have anything to give me to eat, for the love of God give it me; and once I have eaten I will do everything I am told, in gratitude for the good wishes that have been shown me here."

Sancho at once got something out of his sack, and the goatherd out of his pouch, and with them the Ragged One satisfied his hunger, eating what they gave him like a man in a daze, so fast that he left no space between one mouthful and the next — for he bolted them rather than swallowed them. And while he was eating, neither he nor those who were watching him said a word. When he had finished eating he signed to them to follow him, which they did, and he took them to a little green meadow that lay round the turn of a rock not far from there. On reaching it he stretched himself out on the ground, on the grass, and the rest did the same; and all this without anybody speaking, until the Ragged One, having settled himself in his place, said:

"If it is your pleasure, gentlemen, that I should tell you in a few words the immensity of my misfortunes, you must promise me that you will not interrupt the thread of my sad history with any question or with anything else; because the moment you do, whatever I am telling will stop there."

These words of the Ragged One's brought to Don Quixote's memory the tale his squire had told him, when he got the number of goats that had crossed the river wrong and the story was left hanging. But to come back to the Ragged One, he went on to say:

"I make this stipulation because I would like to get quickly past the tale of my misfortunes; for bringing them back to mind serves no other purpose than to add fresh ones. And the less you ask me, the sooner I shall have finished telling them — though I shall not leave anything untold that is of any importance for satisfying your curiosity completely."

Don Quixote promised it in the name of the rest, and with this assurance the man began like this:

"My name is Cardenio; my birthplace, one of the best cities of this Andalusia; my family, noble; my parents, rich; my misfortune, so great that my parents must have wept over it and my family felt it, without being able to relieve it with their wealth — for the goods of fortune are generally worth little for putting right the sorrows heaven sends.

"There lived in this same country a heaven, in which love placed all the glory I could ever have wished for myself: such is the beauty of Luscinda, a young lady as noble and as rich as I am, but with more good fortune and less constancy than was owing to my honourable love for her. This Luscinda I loved, wanted and worshipped from my earliest and tenderest years, and she loved me with that simplicity and good will her few years allowed. Our parents knew what we intended and were not sorry about it, because they could see clearly that if it went further it could have no other end than our marrying, a thing which the equality of our families and wealth almost arranged of itself.

"Our ages grew, and with them the love of us both — so much so that Luscinda's father thought that for the sake of appearances he was obliged to refuse me the entry of his house, imitating in this almost exactly the parents of that Thisbe the poets have made so much of. And this refusal was adding flame to flame and desire to desire; because although they put silence on our tongues, they could not put it on our pens, which, with more freedom than tongues, generally give whoever they like to understand what is shut up in the soul — for very often the presence of the thing we love disturbs and strikes dumb the most determined intention and the boldest tongue.

"Oh heavens, how many notes I wrote her! How many charming and modest answers I had! How many songs I composed and how many love poems, in which the soul declared and set down its feelings, painted its burning desires, dwelt on its memories and gave itself pleasure!

"In the end, finding myself at my wits' end and my soul consuming itself with the desire to see her, I decided to put into practice and finish off in a moment the thing that seemed to me most likely to bring me the reward I wanted and deserved. And this was to ask her father for her as my lawful wife, which I did; to which he answered that he thanked me for the goodwill I showed in honouring him and in wanting to honour myself with something of his, but that since my father was alive it was for him by right to make that request; because if it were not done with his full goodwill and pleasure, Luscinda was not a woman to be taken or given by stealth.

"I thanked him for his good intention, thinking he was right in what he said, and that my father would come round to it as soon as I told him. And with this intention, at that very instant, I went to tell my father what I wanted. And just as I went into a room where he was, I found him with an open letter in his hand, which, before I could say a word to him, he gave me, saying: 'By that letter, Cardenio, you will see how ready Duke Ricardo is to do you a favour.'"

This Duke Ricardo, as you gentlemen must already know, is a grandee of Spain who has his estate in the best part of this Andalusia.

"I took the letter and read it, and it was couched in such pressing terms that even I thought it wrong of my father not to do what it asked, which was to send me at once to where the duke was; because he wanted me to be a companion, not a servant, to his eldest son, and he took it on himself to put me in a position that would match the esteem he had for me. I read the letter and went dumb as I read it, and more so when I heard my father saying to me: 'In two days from now, Cardenio, you will set off to do the duke's will; and give thanks to God that he is opening a road for you along which you may reach what I know you deserve.' To these he added other fatherly words of advice.

"The time for my departure came. I spoke to Luscinda one night and told her everything that was happening, and I did the same to her father, begging him to wait some days and put off giving her in marriage until I saw what Ricardo wanted of me. He promised me it, and she confirmed it with a thousand oaths and a thousand faintings.

"I came, in the end, to where Duke Ricardo was. I was so well received and treated by him that from the first envy began to do its work, the old servants feeling it towards me, since it seemed to them that the signs the duke gave of favouring me were bound to be to their disadvantage. But the one who was most delighted with my coming was a second son of the duke's called Fernando, a dashing young man, a gentleman, generous and amorous; who in a short time wanted me to be so much his friend that it gave everybody something to talk about. And although the eldest was fond of me and did me kindnesses, he did not go to the lengths that Don Fernando loved and treated me with.

"Now the fact is that, as among friends there is no secret that is not shared, and the favour I was in with Don Fernando had stopped being favour and become friendship, he told me all his thoughts — especially one love affair which was giving him a certain amount of unease. He was in love with a farmer's daughter, one of his father's vassals — and her parents were very rich — and she was so beautiful, modest, sensible and virtuous that nobody who knew her could decide which of these things she excelled in most.

"These very good qualities of the beautiful country girl brought Don Fernando's desires to such a pass that he decided, in order to get his way and conquer her integrity, to give her his word to be her husband — because any other way was attempting the impossible. I, obliged by his friendship, tried with the best arguments I knew and the most vivid examples I could to stop him and turn him away from such a purpose. But seeing it was no use, I decided to tell the business to Duke Ricardo his father. But Don Fernando, being shrewd and sharp, suspected and feared this, since it seemed to him that I was obliged, as a good servant, not to keep hidden a thing that was so much to the injury of my lord the duke's honour.

"And so, to distract and deceive me, he told me he could find no better remedy for driving out of his memory the beauty that had him so much in its power than going away for some months; and that he wanted the going away to be that the two of us should come to my father's house, with the excuse they would give the duke that he was coming to see and bargain for some very good horses in my city, which is the mother of the best in the world.

"I had hardly heard him say this when, moved by my own love, I would have approved his decision as one of the soundest imaginable even if it had not been so good a one, since I saw what a fine chance and opportunity it offered me of seeing my Luscinda again. With this thought and this desire I approved his idea and encouraged his purpose, telling him to put it into practice as quickly as possible, because in fact absence does its work in spite of the firmest attachments. By the time he came to tell me this, as was found out afterwards, he had already enjoyed the country girl on the strength of being her husband, and was waiting for a chance to declare himself in safety, afraid of what the duke his father would do when he found out about his folly.

"It happened, then, that as love in young men is for the most part not love but appetite — which, since it has pleasure for its final end, comes to an end on reaching it, and what looked like love has to go back the way it came, because it cannot go past the limit nature set it, a limit nature never set on what is true love — I mean that as soon as Don Fernando had enjoyed the country girl, his desires were quieted and his eagerness cooled. And if at first he had pretended to want to go away in order to cure them, now he genuinely tried to go so as not to have to carry them out.

"The duke gave him leave and ordered me to go with him. We came to my city; my father received him as the man he was; I saw Luscinda again straight away, and my desires came back to life, though they had never been dead or deadened. Of these I gave an account, to my cost, to Don Fernando, since it seemed to me that by the law of the great friendship he was showing I ought to hide nothing from him. I praised Luscinda's beauty, charm and good sense in such a way that my praises stirred up in him the desire to see a young lady adorned with so many good qualities. I satisfied him in it, by my short-sighted luck, showing her to him one night by the light of a candle, through a window where the two of us used to talk to each other. He saw her in a house-gown, and such that all the beauties he had seen up to then were put out of his mind. He was struck dumb, lost his senses, was left entranced and, in the end, as much in love as you will see in the course of the tale of my misfortune.

"And to inflame his desire further — which he hid from me and revealed only to heaven when he was alone — fortune willed that he should find one day a note of hers asking me to ask her father for her as my wife, so sensible, so modest and so loving that on reading it he told me that in Luscinda alone were shut up all the graces of beauty and understanding that were shared out among the rest of the women in the world.

"It is quite true, and I want to confess it now, that although I could see how justly Don Fernando was praising Luscinda, it grieved me to hear those praises out of his mouth; and I began to be afraid and suspicious of him, because no moment went past in which he did not want us to talk about Luscinda, and he would start the conversation even if he had to drag it in by the hair — a thing that woke a certain something of jealousy in me. Not that I feared any reverse in Luscinda's goodness and faith; but for all that, my luck made me afraid of the very thing she was assuring me of. Don Fernando always contrived to read the papers I sent Luscinda and the ones she answered me with, on the grounds that he greatly enjoyed the good sense of us both.

"It happened, then, that Luscinda having asked me for a book of chivalry to read, which she was very fond of, and it being the one about Amadis of Gaul —"

Don Quixote had hardly heard him name a book of chivalry when he said:

"If your worship had told me at the beginning of your history that her worship the lady Luscinda was fond of books of chivalry, no other exaggeration would have been needed to give me to understand the loftiness of her understanding; because she would not have had so good a one as you, sir, have painted her with, if she had lacked a taste for such delicious reading. So as far as I am concerned, there is no need to spend any more words in declaring her beauty, worth and understanding to me; simply from having understood her taste, I confirm her as the most beautiful and most intelligent woman in the world.

"And I could wish, sir, that your worship had sent her, along with Amadis of Gaul, the excellent Don Rugel of Greece; for I know the lady Luscinda would greatly enjoy Daraida and Geraya, and the wise sayings of the shepherd Darinel, and those admirable verses of his pastorals, sung and performed by him with all charm, discretion and ease. But a time may come when that omission can be made good, and the making good of it need take no longer than your worship's being pleased to come with me to my village; for there I can give you more than three hundred books, which are the delight of my soul and the entertainment of my life — although it is my belief that I have none left at all, thanks to the malice of wicked and envious enchanters.

"And your worship must forgive me for having gone against what we promised about not interrupting your talk; for on hearing of matters of chivalry and of knights errant, it is as much in my power to stop talking about them as it is in the power of the sun's rays to stop giving heat, or the moon's to stop bringing damp. So: your pardon, and go on, which is what most matters now."

While Don Quixote was saying what has just been set down, Cardenio's head had fallen on his chest, with every sign of his being deep in thought. And although Don Quixote told him twice to go on with his history, he neither raised his head nor answered a word; but at the end of a good while he raised it and said:

"There is no getting it out of my mind, nor will there be anybody in the world who can get it out, or make me understand anything else — and the man who understood or believed the contrary would be a blockhead — but that that great villain Master Elisabat was living in sin with Queen Madásima."

"That he was not, I swear it!" answered Don Quixote in a great temper — and he hurled his usual oath at him. "And that is a very great piece of malice, or knavery rather. Queen Madásima was a very great lady, and it is not to be supposed that so high a princess would live in sin with a quack surgeon; and whoever understands the contrary is lying like a very great scoundrel. And I shall give him to understand it, on foot or on horseback, armed or unarmed, by night or by day, or however it best pleases him."

Cardenio was looking at him very attentively — the fit of his madness having come on him by now, and he was in no state to go on with his history; nor would Don Quixote have listened to it, so much had what he had heard about Madásima disgusted him. A strange business: that he should take her part as though she had genuinely been his own true and natural lady — that is what his excommunicated books had brought him to.

I say, then, that as Cardenio was mad by now, and heard himself called a liar and a scoundrel with other insults of the same kind, he did not think much of the joke, and he picked up a stone he found next to him and struck Don Quixote such a blow on the chest with it that he knocked him over on his back. Sancho Panza, seeing his master brought to that pass, went for the madman with his fist clenched; and the Ragged One received him in such a way that with one punch he laid him at his feet, and then got on top of him and pounded his ribs entirely to his own satisfaction. The goatherd, who tried to defend him, ran the same risk. And after he had them all beaten and pounded, he left them and went off with perfect calm to hide himself in the mountain.

Sancho got up, and with the rage he was in at finding himself thrashed so undeservedly, he went to take his revenge on the goatherd, telling him that it was his fault for not having warned them that this man's madness took him in fits; because if they had known that, they would have been on their guard and able to look out for themselves. The goatherd answered that he had said so already, and that if Sancho had not heard it, it was not his fault. Sancho Panza answered back, and the goatherd answered back again, and the end of the answering back was that they caught each other by the beard and exchanged such punches that if Don Quixote had not made peace between them they would have torn each other to pieces. Sancho, grappling with the goatherd, was saying:

"Let me be, your worship, Sir Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance; with this man, who is a peasant like myself and hasn't been dubbed a knight, I can perfectly safely get satisfaction for the injury he's done me, fighting him hand to hand like an honourable man."

"That is so," said Don Quixote, "but I know that he is not at all to blame for what has happened."

With this he calmed them down; and Don Quixote went back to asking the goatherd whether it would be possible to find Cardenio, because he was left with an enormous desire to know the end of his history. The goatherd told him what he had told him at first, which was that he did not know his hiding place for certain; but that if he went about much in that district, he could not fail to find him, either sane or mad.
