Chapter 25: Which Treats of the Strange Things That Happened to the Brave Knight of La Mancha in the Sierra Morena, and of His Imitation of Beltenebros' Penance

Don Quixote took his leave of the goatherd, and getting up on Rocinante again, he ordered Sancho to follow him, which Sancho did with his donkey, very much against his will. They went further and further, little by little, into the roughest part of the mountain; and Sancho was dying to talk with his master and wanted him to begin the conversation, so as not to go against what he had been ordered. But being unable to put up with so much silence, he said to him:

"Señor Don Quixote, will your worship give me your blessing and my leave? I want to go home from here, to my wife and children, with whom at any rate I shall talk and hold forth as much as I like. Because for your worship to want me to go about with him through these lonely places by day and by night and not talk to him when I feel like it is burying me alive. If only luck had it that the animals talked, as they used to talk in old Isop's day, it wouldn't be so bad, because then I'd discuss whatever came into my head with my donkey and get through my bad luck that way. It's a hard thing, and one a man can't bear patiently, to go about looking for adventures all your life and find nothing but kicks and blanket-tossings, brickbats and punches — and on top of all that we've got to sew up our mouths and not dare say what a man has in his heart, as though we were dumb."

"I understand you, Sancho," answered Don Quixote. "You are dying for me to lift the ban I have laid on your tongue. Take it as lifted, and say what you like, on condition that this lifting is to last no longer than while we are going about these mountains."

"So be it," said Sancho. "Let me talk now, for afterwards God knows what will happen. And starting to enjoy this safe-conduct, I say: what did it matter to your worship to stand up so hard for that Queen Magimasa, or whatever her name is? Or what did it signify whether that abbot was her friend or not? For if your worship had let it pass, since you weren't her judge, I really believe the madman would have gone on with his story, and we'd have saved the blow with the stone, and the kicks, and more than half a dozen cuffs besides."

"Upon my word, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "if you knew as I know what an honourable and distinguished lady Queen Madásima was, I know you would say I showed a great deal of patience, since I did not break the mouth such blasphemies came out of. Because it is a very great blasphemy to say or think that a queen was living in sin with a surgeon. The truth of the story is that this Master Elisabat the madman spoke of was a very prudent man of very sound advice, and served the queen as tutor and physician; but to think she was his mistress is an absurdity that deserves very heavy punishment. And so that you may see that Cardenio did not know what he was saying, you must note that when he said it he was already out of his senses."

"That's what I say," said Sancho: "that there was no call to take any account of a madman's words. Because if good luck hadn't helped your worship and steered the stone at your chest instead of your head, we'd have been in a fine state for standing up for that lady of mine, God confound her. And I'll bet Cardenio wouldn't have got off on grounds of madness!"

"Against the sane and against the mad alike, every knight errant is obliged to stand up for the honour of women, whoever they may be — much more so for queens of such high rank and worth as Queen Madásima was, for whom I have a particular affection on account of her good qualities. Because besides having been beautiful, she was moreover very prudent and very patient in her calamities, and she had a great many; and Master Elisabat's advice and company were of a great deal of use and relief to her in being able to bear her troubles with prudence and patience. And from this the ignorant and ill-meaning common people took occasion to say and think that she was his mistress; and they lie, I say it again, and will lie another two hundred times, all who think or say such a thing."

"I neither say it nor think it," answered Sancho. "Let them settle it themselves; let them eat it with their own bread. Whether they were living in sin or not, they'll have given God the account. I come from my own vineyards, I know nothing; I'm no friend to knowing about other people's lives; a man who buys and lies feels it in his own purse. What's more, naked I was born and naked I find myself: I neither lose nor gain. And supposing they were — what's it to me? Plenty of people think there's bacon hanging when there isn't even a hook. But who can put gates on an open field? Besides which, they said things about God himself."

"God help me," said Don Quixote, "what a string of foolish things you are threading together, Sancho! What have the proverbs you are stringing on got to do with what we are discussing? On your life, Sancho, be quiet; and from now on busy yourself with spurring your ass and leave off busying yourself with what does not concern you. And understand with all five of your senses that everything I have done, am doing and shall do is very much founded on reason and very much in accordance with the rules of chivalry, which I know better than all the knights who ever professed them in the world."

"Sir," answered Sancho, "and is it a good rule of chivalry that we should go about lost in these mountains, with no path or road, looking for a madman who, once we've found him, may take it into his head to finish what he left half done — not of his story, but of your worship's head and my ribs, and break them completely?"

"Be quiet, I tell you again, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "for I would have you know that what brings me to these parts is not so much the desire to find the madman as the desire to perform here a deed by which I shall win everlasting name and fame throughout the whole of the discovered earth; and it will be such a deed that I shall set the seal with it on everything that can make a knight errant perfect and famous."

"And is it a very dangerous deed, this?" asked Sancho Panza.

"No," answered the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, "although the dice might fall in such a way that we threw a losing cast instead of a winning one. But the whole thing will depend on your diligence."

"On my diligence?" said Sancho.

"Yes," said Don Quixote, "because if you come back quickly from where I mean to send you, my suffering will quickly be over and my glory will quickly begin. And since it is not right that I should keep you in suspense any longer, waiting to see what my words are coming to, I want you to know, Sancho, that the famous Amadis of Gaul was one of the most perfect knights errant. I have not put it well when I say one of them: he was the only one, the first, the unique one, the lord of all who were in the world in his time. A bad year and a bad month to Don Belianis and to all those who say he equalled him in anything, because they are mistaken, I swear it.

"I say likewise that when a painter wants to come out famous in his art, he tries to imitate the originals of the most singular painters he knows; and this same rule holds for all the other trades and callings of any account that serve for the adornment of nations. And so it must be done, and is done, by the man who wants to win a name for prudence and endurance, imitating Ulysses, in whose person and labours Homer paints us a living portrait of prudence and endurance — as Virgil likewise showed us, in the person of Aeneas, the valour of a dutiful son and the shrewdness of a brave and understanding captain, not painting or revealing them as they were but as they ought to have been, so as to leave their virtues as an example to the men who came after.

"In this same way Amadis was the north star, the morning star, the sun of brave and loving knights, whom all of us who serve under the banner of love and chivalry ought to imitate. This being so, as it is, I find, friend Sancho, that the knight errant who imitates him most closely will be nearest to attaining the perfection of chivalry. And one of the things in which this knight most showed his prudence, worth, courage, endurance, constancy and love was when he withdrew, scorned by the lady Oriana, to do penance on the Poor Rock, changing his name to Beltenebros — a name, certainly, that was significant and proper to the life he had chosen of his own free will.

"So that it is easier for me to imitate him in this than in cleaving giants, beheading serpents, killing dragons, routing armies, wrecking fleets and undoing enchantments. And since these places are so well suited for effects of the kind, there is no reason to let the opportunity go by that now offers me its forelock so conveniently."

"In short," said Sancho, "what is it your worship means to do in this out-of-the-way place?"

"Have I not told you already," answered Don Quixote, "that I want to imitate Amadis, playing here the man in despair, the idiot and the madman — imitating at the same time the brave Don Roland, when he found in a spring the evidence that Angelica the Fair had done a base thing with Medoro, and out of grief at it went mad and tore up the trees, muddied the waters of the clear springs, killed shepherds, destroyed flocks, burnt huts, pulled down houses, dragged mares about and did a hundred thousand other outrages worthy of everlasting name and record?

"And although I do not intend to imitate Roland, or Orlando, or Rotolando — for he had all three of these names — point by point in all the mad things he did and said and thought, I shall make a sketch of them, as best I can, in those that seem to me the most essential. And it may be that I shall come to be satisfied with the imitation of Amadis alone, who without doing any mad things that caused damage, but only weeping and grieving, won as much fame as the best of them."

"It seems to me," said Sancho, "that the knights who did such things were provoked and had a cause for those follies and penances. But your worship — what cause have you for going mad? What lady has scorned you, or what evidence have you found to give you to understand that the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso has done anything childish with Moor or Christian?"

"That is just the point," answered Don Quixote, "and that is the fine thing about my business. For a knight errant to go mad with a cause deserves neither thanks nor gratitude: the touch of it is to go out of my wits without any occasion, and give my lady to understand that if I do this dry, what would I do wet? What is more, I have occasion enough in the long absence I have kept from my ever-lady Dulcinea of El Toboso; for as you heard that shepherd Ambrosio say the other day, whoever is absent has all the ills and fears them all.

"So, friend Sancho, do not waste time advising me to give up so rare, so happy and so unheard-of an imitation. Mad I am, and mad I must be until you come back with the answer to a letter I mean to send by you to my lady Dulcinea. And if it is such as my faithfulness deserves, my idiocy and my penance will be over; and if it is the opposite, I shall be mad in earnest, and being so, I shall feel nothing. So that whichever way she answers, I shall come out of the struggle and the labour you leave me in, either enjoying the good news you bring me, as a sane man, or not feeling the bad news you bring me, as a madman.

"But tell me, Sancho: have you got Mambrino's helmet safely put away? For I saw that you picked it up off the ground when that ungrateful fellow tried to smash it to pieces. But he could not — from which one may see the fineness of its temper."

To which Sancho answered:

"By the living God, Sir Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, I can't stand or bear patiently some of the things your worship says. They make me start imagining that everything you tell me about chivalries and winning kingdoms and empires, about giving away isles and doing other favours and grand things the way knights errant do — that the whole of it must be so much wind and lies, and all humbug, or humbuggery, or whatever we call it. Because when a man hears your worship say that a barber's basin is Mambrino's helmet, and doesn't come out of that error in more than four days, what's he to think except that whoever says and maintains such a thing must be addled in his judgement? I've got the basin in the sack, all battered, and I'm taking it to have it seen to at home and shave myself in it, if God ever gives me the grace to see my wife and children again one day."

"Look, Sancho, by the same one you swore by just now I swear to you," said Don Quixote, "that you have the shortest understanding any squire in the world has or ever had. Is it possible that in all the time you have gone about with me you have not noticed that all the things belonging to knights errant look like fantasies, follies and absurdities, and that they are all done the wrong way round? And not because it is really so, but because there is always a crowd of enchanters going about among us who change and alter all our affairs and turn them about according to their taste, and according to whether they feel like favouring us or destroying us. And so what looks to you like a barber's basin looks to me like Mambrino's helmet, and will look like something else to somebody else.

"And it was rare foresight in the sage who is on my side to make what really and truly is Mambrino's helmet look like a basin to everybody; because it being of such value, the whole world would persecute me to take it from me. But since they see it is nothing more than a barber's basin, they do not trouble to go after it — as was well shown by the man who tried to break it and left it lying on the ground without taking it away. Upon my word, if he had recognised it he would never have left it. Keep it, my friend, for I do not need it at present; on the contrary, I am about to take off all this armour and be left as naked as when I was born, if I decide to follow Roland rather than Amadis in my penance."

Talking like this, they came to the foot of a high mountain that stood alone, almost like a sheer crag, among many others that surrounded it. A gentle little stream ran along its skirt, and all round it there was a meadow so green and so lush that it was a pleasure to the eyes that looked at it. There were a great many wild trees about, and some plants and flowers that made the place a peaceful one. This site the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance chose for doing his penance; and so, on seeing it, he began to say in a loud voice, as though he were out of his senses:

"This is the place, O heavens, that I appoint and choose for weeping over the misfortune you yourselves have put me in! This is the spot where the moisture of my eyes shall swell the waters of this little stream, and my continual and deep sighs shall set the leaves of these mountain trees continually moving, in testimony and token of the pain my harried heart suffers!

"O you, whoever you may be, rustic gods who have your dwelling in this uninhabitable place, hear the complaints of this unhappy lover, whom a long absence and some imagined jealousies have brought to lament among these wild places and to complain of the hard nature of that beautiful and ungrateful woman, the limit and end of all human beauty!

"O you wood nymphs and dryads, who have the custom of living in the thickets of the mountains — so may the nimble and lustful satyrs, by whom you are loved, though in vain, never disturb your sweet peace — help me to lament my misfortune, or at least do not grow tired of hearing it!

"O Dulcinea of El Toboso, day of my night, glory of my pain, north star of my roads, star of my fortune — so may heaven give you good fortune in whatever you may see fit to ask of it — consider the place and the state to which your absence has brought me, and answer with the proper return what my faithfulness deserves!

"O solitary trees, who from today on are to keep my solitude company, give some sign, by the soft movement of your branches, that my presence does not displease you!

"O you, my squire, agreeable companion in my more prosperous and my more adverse fortunes, take careful note of what you shall see me do here, so that you may tell and recite it to the total cause of it all!"

And saying this, he got down off Rocinante, and in a moment took off his bridle and his saddle; and giving him a slap on the hindquarters, he said to him:

"Freedom is given you by one who is left without it, O horse as outstanding for your deeds as you are unlucky in your fortune. Go where you like, for you carry it written on your forehead that neither Astolfo's hippogriff nor the famous Frontino, who cost Bradamante so dear, could equal you in speed."

Seeing this, Sancho said:

"Bless the man who has spared us the trouble of unsaddling the grey; because upon my word there'd have been no lack of little pats to give him and things to say in his praise. Though if he were here I wouldn't let anybody unsaddle him, since there'd be no call for it — the general rules for the man in love or the man in despair had nothing to do with him, seeing that his master, who was me while God willed it, was neither. And truly, Sir Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, if it's the case that my going and your worship's madness are meant in earnest, it'll be as well to saddle Rocinante again to make up for the lack of the grey, because it'll save time on my going and coming; for if I do it on foot, I don't know when I'll get there or when I'll be back, since when it comes down to it I'm a bad walker."

"I say, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "let it be as you like, for your plan does not seem bad to me. And I say that you shall set off three days from now, because in that time I want you to see what I do and say for her, so that you can tell her about it."

"But what more have I got to see," said Sancho, "than what I've seen?"

"You are well up in the tale!" answered Don Quixote. "I have still to tear my clothes, scatter my armour about and knock my head against these rocks, along with other things of that sort that are bound to astonish you."

"For the love of God," said Sancho, "let your worship be careful how you give yourself those knocks on the head; because you might come to such a rock, and at such a point, that with the very first one the whole machinery of this penance would be finished. And I'd be of the opinion that since your worship thinks the knocks on the head are necessary here and that this business can't be done without them, you might be satisfied — seeing that the whole thing is pretended and a made-up affair and a joke — you might be satisfied, I say, with giving them to yourself in the water, or on something soft like cotton wool; and leave the rest to me, for I'll tell my lady that your worship was giving them to yourself on the point of a rock harder than a diamond."

"I am grateful for your good intention, friend Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "but I want you to be informed that all these things I am doing are not done in joke but very much in earnest; because otherwise it would be going against the orders of chivalry, which command us not to tell any lie, on pain of being treated as relapsed heretics — and doing one thing for another is the same as lying. So my knocks on the head must be genuine, solid and valid, without anything sophistical or fanciful about them. And it will be necessary for you to leave me some lint to dress myself with, since fortune willed that we should lose the balm we lost."

"It was worse losing the ass," answered Sancho, "since the lint and everything else was lost along with him. And I beg your worship not to remember that accursed brew again; just to hear it mentioned turns my soul over, let alone my stomach. And I beg you further: reckon that the three days you gave me as a term for watching the mad things you do are over already, because I take them as seen and as settled beyond appeal, and I'll tell my lady marvels. So write the letter and send me off at once, because I have a great desire to come back and get your worship out of this purgatory I'm leaving you in."

"Purgatory, do you call it, Sancho?" said Don Quixote. "You would have done better to call it hell, and worse than that, if there is anything worse."

"For him that hath hell," answered Sancho, "nulla is retentio, as I've heard it said."

"I do not understand what retentio means," said Don Quixote.

"Retentio," answered Sancho, "means that whoever's in hell never comes out of it and can't. Which will be the other way round for your worship, or my feet will be doing badly by me, so long as I've got spurs to liven up Rocinante with. Just put me once and for all in El Toboso and in front of my lady Dulcinea, and I'll tell her such things about the follies and mad tricks — which are all one — that your worship has done and is still doing, that I'll get her softer than a glove, even if I find her harder than a cork tree; and with her sweet, honeyed answer I'll come back through the air like a witch and get your worship out of this purgatory, which looks like hell and isn't, since there's hope of getting out of it — which, as I've said, the people who are in hell haven't got, and I don't think your worship will say otherwise."

"That is the truth," said the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance; "but how shall we manage about writing the letter?"

"And the donkey-warrant as well," added Sancho.

"It shall all be included," said Don Quixote; "and it would be a good thing, since there is no paper, if we wrote it as the ancients did, on tree leaves or on little wax tablets — though that would be as hard to find now as paper. But it has just come into my memory where it will be well, and more than well, to write it: in the little pocket-book that was Cardenio's. And you will take care to have it copied onto paper, in a good hand, in the first place you come to where there is a schoolmaster; and if not, any parish clerk will copy it for you. And do not give it to any notary to copy, for they write a legal hand that Satan himself could not read."

"But what is to be done about the signature?" said Sancho.

"Amadis's letters are never signed," answered Don Quixote.

"That's all very well," answered Sancho, "but the warrant has to be signed of necessity; and if that's copied, they'll say the signature is a forgery and I'll be left without any donkeys."

"The warrant shall go in the same little book, signed; and when my niece sees it she will make no difficulty about carrying it out. And as far as the love letter goes, you will put as the signature: 'Yours until death, the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance.' And it will make very little difference that it goes in another hand, because as far as I can recall, Dulcinea cannot write or read, and in the whole of her life she has never seen my handwriting or a letter of mine; for my love and hers have always been platonic, going no further than a modest look. And even that so seldom that I could truthfully swear that in the twelve years I have loved her more than the light of these eyes that the earth will one day eat, I have not seen her four times — and it might even be that of those four times she never once noticed I was looking at her: such is the seclusion and confinement her father, Lorenzo Corchuelo, and her mother, Aldonza Nogales, have brought her up in."

"Well, well!" said Sancho. "So Lorenzo Corchuelo's daughter is the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, otherwise called Aldonza Lorenzo?"

"That is she," said Don Quixote, "and she is the one who deserves to be lady of the whole universe."

"I know her well," said Sancho, "and I can tell you she throws the bar as well as the strongest lad in the whole village. Praise the Giver, she's a girl with some go in her, straight up and down and hair on her chest, and she can pull the beard out of the mud for any knight errant, or knight to be, who has her for his lady. Oh, the son of a bitch, what a pair of lungs she's got, and what a voice! I can tell you that one day she got up on top of the village bell tower to call some lads of her father's who were out in a fallow field, and although they were more than half a league off, they heard her as clearly as if they'd been standing at the foot of the tower. And the best thing about her is that she's not a bit prim, because she's got a lot of the courtier in her: she jokes with everybody and makes a laugh and a game out of everything.

"Now I say, Sir Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, that not only can and should your worship do mad things for her, but you can with perfect justice despair and hang yourself as well; and nobody who hears of it will fail to say you did extremely well, even if the devil carries you off for it. And I'd like to see myself on the road now, just to look at her, because it's a long time since I saw her and she must be changed by now, for it wears a woman's face out a great deal to be always out in the fields, in the sun and the wind.

"And I'll confess a truth to your worship, Señor Don Quixote: up till now I've been in a great ignorance, because I thought, in good faith and sincerity, that the lady Dulcinea must be some princess your worship was in love with, or some such person as would deserve the rich presents your worship has sent her — the Basque and the galley slaves and a good many others there must be, seeing how many victories your worship must have won and did win in the time when I wasn't yet your squire. But when you think about it properly, what is it to the lady Aldonza Lorenzo — I mean the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso — that the men your worship sends her and is going to send her should go and kneel down in front of her? Because it might be that at the moment they arrived she'd be scutching flax or threshing on the threshing floor, and they'd be embarrassed to see her, and she'd laugh and be annoyed at the present."

"I have told you many times before now, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that you are a very great talker, and that although your wit is blunt, you often manage a sharp point. But so that you may see how foolish you are and how discerning I am, I want you to listen to a short story.

"You must know that a beautiful widow, young, free and rich, and above all easy-going, fell in love with a lay brother, a plump, well-set-up young fellow. His superior came to hear of it, and one day said to the good widow, by way of brotherly reproof: 'I am astonished, madam, and not without a great deal of cause, that a woman as distinguished, as beautiful and as rich as your worship should have fallen in love with a man as coarse, as low and as stupid as so-and-so, when there are in this house so many masters, so many licentiates and so many theologians among whom your worship might pick as though among pears, saying "I'll have this one, I won't have that one".' But she answered him with a great deal of grace and ease: 'Your worship, my dear sir, is very much mistaken, and thinks in a very old-fashioned way, if you think I have chosen badly in so-and-so, idiot as he seems to you; because for what I want him for, he knows as much philosophy as Aristotle, and more.'

"So, Sancho, for what I want Dulcinea of El Toboso for, she is worth as much as the highest princess on earth. Why, not all the poets who praise ladies under a name they give them at their own pleasure really have such ladies. Do you suppose that the Amaryllises, the Phyllises, the Silvias, the Dianas, the Galateas, the Alidas and the rest of them that the books, the ballads, the barbers' shops and the playhouses are full of were genuinely ladies of flesh and blood, and belonged to the men who celebrate them and celebrated them? Certainly not: most of them are invented, to give a subject for their verses and so that people should take them for men in love and for men with spirit enough to be so.

"And so it is enough for me to think and believe that the good Aldonza Lorenzo is beautiful and virtuous; and as far as family goes it matters little, since nobody is going to make inquiries into it in order to give her some order of knighthood, and I reckon to myself that she is the highest princess in the world. Because you must know, Sancho, if you do not know it, that two things alone stir a man to love more than any others, and they are great beauty and a good name; and these two things are found perfectly in Dulcinea, because in being beautiful no woman equals her, and in a good name few come near her.

"And to have done with the whole thing: I imagine that everything I say is exactly so, with nothing over and nothing lacking; and I paint her in my imagination as I want her, both in beauty and in rank. Helen does not come near her, nor does Lucretia reach her, nor any other of the famous women of ages past, Greek, barbarian or Latin. And let each man say what he likes; for if I am reproved for this by the ignorant, I shall not be punished by the strict."

"I say your worship is right in everything," answered Sancho, "and that I am an ass. Though I don't know why I put the word ass in my mouth, since you're not to mention rope in the house of a man who's been hanged. But let's have the letter, and goodbye — I'm off."

Don Quixote took out the pocket-book, and going off to one side, with great calm he began to write the letter; and on finishing it he called Sancho and told him he wanted to read it to him so that he could learn it by heart, in case he lost it on the road, because with his bad luck anything might be feared. To which Sancho answered:

"Let your worship write it two or three times there in the book and give it me, and I'll carry it safe; because to think that I'm going to learn it by heart is nonsense — my memory is so bad that I often forget my own name. But for all that, say it to me, your worship, for I'd very much like to hear it, since it must go like something out of a mould."

"Listen, this is how it goes," said Don Quixote:

Don Quixote's Letter to Dulcinea of El Toboso

Sovereign and lofty lady:

He that is wounded by the point of absence and pierced to the very tissues of the heart, sweetest Dulcinea of El Toboso, sendeth thee that health which he himself hath not. If thy beauty scorn me, if thy worth be not to my profit, if thy disdain be my undoing, then, howbeit I be a man of much sufferance, ill shall I be able to hold out in this affliction, which, besides being grievous, is very long-lasting. My good squire Sancho shall give thee full report, O fair ingrate, my beloved enemy, of the state in which I am left for thy sake. If it please thee to succour me, I am thine; and if not, do that which liketh thee, for by the ending of my life I shall have satisfied thy cruelty and my own desire.

Thine until death,

The Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance

"By my father's life," said Sancho when he had heard the letter, "that's the loftiest thing I ever heard. Bless me, how your worship says everything you want to say in there, and how well the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance fits into the signature! I tell you truly that your worship is the very devil, and there's nothing you don't know."

"Everything is needed," answered Don Quixote, "for the office I follow."

"Come on, then," said Sancho, "put the order for the three donkeys on the other side, and sign it very clearly so that they'll know it when they see it."

"With pleasure," said Don Quixote.

And having written it, he read it to him; and it went like this:

Your worship will please, by this first of donkeys, my dear niece, to deliver to Sancho Panza, my squire, three of the five I left at home and which are in your worship's charge. Which three donkeys I hereby order to be made over and paid for as against as many received here in cash, which is duly evidenced; and on his receipt they shall be well delivered. Done in the bowels of the Sierra Morena, the twenty-second of August of the present year.

"That's fine," said Sancho. "Let your worship sign it."

"There is no need to sign it," said Don Quixote, "only to put my flourish, which is the same thing as a signature; and for three asses, or even for three hundred, it would be enough."

"I trust your worship," answered Sancho. "Let me be — I'll go and saddle Rocinante, and your worship get ready to give me your blessing; because I mean to set off at once, without watching the idiocies your worship is going to perform. I'll say I saw you do so many that she won't want any more."

"At the very least I want you, Sancho — and because it is necessary that it should be so, I say I want you — to see me stripped, and to do a dozen or two mad things, which I shall do in less than half an hour; because having seen them with your own eyes, you may safely swear to any others you care to add. And I assure you that you will not tell as many as I mean to do."

"For the love of God, my dear sir, don't let me see your worship stripped; it will give me a great deal of grief and I shan't be able to help crying. And my head is in such a state from the weeping I did last night over the grey that I'm in no condition to get into fresh weeping. And if it's the case that your worship wants me to see some mad things, do them with your clothes on, briefly, and the ones that come handiest.

"What's more, none of it was needed as far as I'm concerned; and as I've said already, it would save the road for my coming back, which is to be with the news your worship wants and deserves. And if not, let the lady Dulcinea look out; because if she doesn't answer as she ought to, I make a solemn vow to whoever I can that I'll get the right answer out of her stomach with kicks and slaps. Because where is it to be borne that a knight errant as famous as your worship should go mad, without rhyme or reason, over a — ? Don't make me say it, madam, for by God I'll let fly and sell the whole lot at twelve, even if it never sells. I'm a fine one for that! She little knows me! Well, upon my word, if she knew me she'd keep my day as a fast!"

"Upon my word, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "by the look of it you are no saner than I am."

"I'm not so mad," answered Sancho, "but I'm more hot-tempered. But leaving that aside, what is your worship going to eat while I'm away? Are you going to go out on the road like Cardenio and take it off the shepherds?"

"Do not let that trouble you," answered Don Quixote, "because even if I had food I should eat nothing but the herbs and fruits this meadow and these trees may give me; for the fine point of my business lies in not eating and in performing other equivalent austerities."

"Goodbye, then. But do you know what I'm afraid of, your worship? That I shan't manage to find my way back to this place where I'm leaving you now, it's so hidden away."

"Take your bearings carefully; I shall try not to move away from this district," said Don Quixote, "and I shall even take care to climb up on these higher crags to see whether I can make you out when you come back. What is more, the surest thing, so that you do not miss me and get lost, will be for you to cut some of the broom that grows plentifully about here and go on putting it down at intervals until you come out on the open ground; and it will serve you as landmarks and signs for finding me when you come back, in imitation of the thread in Theseus's labyrinth."

"I'll do that," answered Sancho Panza.

And cutting some, he asked his master for his blessing; and not without a great many tears on both sides, he took his leave of him. And getting up on Rocinante, whom Don Quixote earnestly commended to him, telling him to look after the horse as he would his own person, he set off on the road down to the plain, scattering the broom branches at intervals as his master had advised him. And so he went off, although Don Quixote still kept pressing him to watch him do at least two mad things. But he had not gone a hundred paces when he came back and said:

"I say, sir, your worship spoke very well: so that I can swear without any burden on my conscience that I've seen you do mad things, it'll be as well if I see at least one — although I've seen a very big one in your worship's staying behind."

"Did I not tell you so?" said Don Quixote. "Wait, Sancho; I shall do them in the time it takes to say a creed."

And stripping off his breeches in all haste, he was left in his skin and his shirt-tails; and then, without any more ado, he cut two capers in the air and turned two somersaults, head down and heels up, revealing things which, so as not to see them a second time, made Sancho turn Rocinante's rein and hold himself content and satisfied that he could swear his master was left mad. And so we shall leave him to go on his way until he comes back, which was soon.
