Chapter 26: In Which Are Continued the Refinements That Don Quixote Performed as a Lover in the Sierra Morena

Coming back to tell what the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance did once he found himself alone, the history says that as soon as Don Quixote had finished turning his somersaults, naked from the waist down and clothed from the waist up, and saw that Sancho had gone without choosing to wait and see any more idiocies, he climbed up onto the point of a high rock, and there went back to thinking about what he had thought about many times before without ever settling it. And this was which would be better and would suit his case more: to imitate Roland in the outrageous mad things he did, or Amadis in the melancholy ones. And talking to himself, he said:

"If Roland was as good a knight and as brave as they all say, what is there to wonder at? After all, he was enchanted and nobody could kill him except by sticking a farthing pin through the sole of his foot, and he always wore shoes with seven iron soles. Although the tricks did him no good against Bernardo del Carpio, who saw through them and choked him to death in his arms at Roncesvalles.

"But leaving the matter of his courage aside, let us come to his losing his wits — which he certainly did, because of the evidence he found at the spring and the news the shepherd gave him that Angelica had slept more than two siestas with Medoro, a curly-headed little Moor and page to Agramante. And if he understood this to be true and that his lady had done him a wrong, it was no great thing for him to go mad.

"But I — how can I imitate him in the mad things if I do not imitate him in the occasion for them? Because I would dare to swear that my Dulcinea of El Toboso has not seen a single Moor in the whole of her life, in his own dress and as he really is, and that she stands today as her mother bore her; and I should be doing her a plain injury if, imagining anything else about her, I went mad with that particular kind of madness of Roland the furious.

"On the other hand, I see that Amadis of Gaul, without losing his wits and without doing mad things, won as great a fame as a lover as the best of them; because what he did, according to his history, was no more than this: finding himself scorned by his lady Oriana, who had ordered him not to appear in her presence until it should be her will, he withdrew to the Poor Rock in the company of a hermit, and there he wept his fill and commended himself to God, until heaven came to his help in the middle of his greatest distress and need.

"And if this is true, as it is, why should I want to take the trouble now of stripping myself completely, or of upsetting these trees, which have done me no harm? Nor have I any reason to muddy the clear water of these streams, which are to give me drink when I am thirsty. Long live the memory of Amadis, and let him be imitated by Don Quixote of La Mancha in everything he can; of whom it shall be said what was said of the other, that if he did not achieve great things, he died attempting them. And if I am not cast off or scorned by Dulcinea of El Toboso, it is enough for me, as I have said already, to be absent from her.

"Come then, to work! Come into my memory, deeds of Amadis, and show me where I must begin to imitate you. But I know already that the most he did was to pray and commend himself to God. Yet what shall I do about a rosary, having none?"

At this it came into his mind how he would make one; and it was that he tore a great strip off the tail of his shirt, which was hanging loose, and put eleven knots in it, one of them fatter than the rest, and this served him as a rosary the whole time he was there, in which he said a million Hail Marys. And what wearied him a great deal was not finding another hermit thereabouts to hear his confession and be a comfort to him.

And so he entertained himself walking about the little meadow, writing and carving on the bark of the trees and in the fine sand a great many verses, all of them fitted to his sadness and some in praise of Dulcinea. But those that could be found entire and could still be read after they had found him there were no more than these that follow:

	Trees and grasses and plants
	that grow about this place,
	so tall, so green and so many,
	if you take no pleasure in my hurt,
	hear my holy complaints.

	Let my grief not upset you,
	however terrible it may be;
	for, to pay you his share of the reckoning,
	here Don Quixote wept
	for the absence of Dulcinea
	of El Toboso.

	This is the place where
	the most loyal lover there is
	hides himself from his lady,
	and has come to such a bad pass
	without knowing how or by which road.

	Love drags him about by the ears,
	being of a very bad breed;
	and so, till he has filled a cask,
	here Don Quixote wept
	for the absence of Dulcinea
	of El Toboso.

	Looking for adventures
	among the hard rocks,
	cursing hard hearts,
	for it is among crags and thickets
	that the sad man finds misfortunes,

	love struck him with his whip,
	not with his soft strap;
	and, catching him on the back of the neck,
	here Don Quixote wept
	for the absence of Dulcinea
	of El Toboso.

The addition of "of El Toboso" to Dulcinea's name caused no small amount of laughter in those who found the verses just given, because they supposed Don Quixote must have supposed that if, on naming Dulcinea, he did not also say "of El Toboso", the stanza could not be understood; and that was the truth of it, as he afterwards admitted. He wrote a great many others, but as has been said, no more than these three stanzas could be made out clearly or found entire.

With this, and with sighing and calling on the fauns and satyrs of those woods, on the nymphs of the rivers, on the sorrowful and moist Echo, to answer him and comfort him and hear him, he passed his time — and with looking for a few herbs to keep himself alive on until Sancho came back. And if Sancho had taken three weeks instead of the three days he did take, the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance would have been left so disfigured that the mother who bore him would not have known him.

And it will be as well to leave him wrapped up in his sighs and his verses, and tell what happened to Sancho Panza on his errand. Which was that on coming out on the high road he set off in search of El Toboso; and the next day he reached the inn where the misfortune of the blanket had happened to him. And he had hardly caught sight of it when it seemed to him that he was going through the air again, and he did not want to go inside — although he arrived at an hour when he could and should have done so, it being dinner time and his having a longing to taste something hot, since for days on end everything had been cold.

This necessity forced him to go up close to the inn, still uncertain whether he would go in or not. And while he was in this state, two people came out of the inn who recognised him at once; and one of them said to the other:

"Tell me, Señor Licentiate, that man on the horse — isn't that Sancho Panza, the one our adventurer's housekeeper said had gone off with his master as his squire?"

"So it is," said the licentiate; "and that is our Don Quixote's horse."

And they recognised him as well as they did because they were the curate and the barber of his own village, the very ones who had held the scrutiny and general trial of the books. As soon as they had finished recognising Sancho Panza and Rocinante, being eager for news of Don Quixote, they went up to him; and the curate called him by his name, saying:

"Friend Sancho Panza, where is your master?"

Sancho Panza recognised them at once, and made up his mind to conceal the place and the state in which and how he had left his master; and so he answered them that his master was busy in a certain place on a certain matter of great importance to him, which he could not reveal for the eyes in his head.

"No, no," said the barber, "Sancho Panza. If you don't tell us where he is, we shall imagine — as we are already imagining — that you have killed and robbed him, since you are riding on his horse. Upon my word, you must produce the owner of the hack, or it will be the worse for you."

"There's no call for threats with me; I'm not a man who robs or kills anybody. Let every man be killed by his own luck, or by God who made him. My master is doing penance in the middle of that mountain, entirely to his own satisfaction."

And then, all in a rush and without stopping, he told them the state he had left him in, the adventures that had happened to them, and how he was carrying the letter to the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, who was Lorenzo Corchuelo's daughter, and that his master was in love with her up to his liver.

The two of them were astonished at what Sancho Panza told them; and although they already knew about Don Quixote's madness and the kind it was, every time they heard about it they were astonished all over again. They asked Sancho Panza to show them the letter he was carrying to the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso. He said it was written in a pocket-book, and that his master's order was that he should have it copied onto paper at the first place he came to; to which the curate said he should show it him and he would copy it in a very good hand.

Sancho Panza put his hand into his shirt looking for the little book, but he did not find it, nor could he have found it if he had gone on looking until now, because Don Quixote had kept it and had not given it him, nor had Sancho remembered to ask him for it.

When Sancho saw he could not find the book, his face went the colour of death; and feeling all over his body again in a great hurry, he saw again that he could not find it. And without any more ado he put both fists to his beard and pulled half of it out, and then, quickly and without stopping, gave himself half a dozen punches on the face and on the nose, so that he bathed the whole of it in blood. Seeing which, the curate and the barber asked him what had happened to him, that he was in such a state.

"What should have happened to me," answered Sancho, "except that I have lost three donkeys from one hand to the other in a single moment, and every one of them was like a castle?"

"How is that?" asked the barber.

"I've lost the pocket-book," answered Sancho, "with the letter for Dulcinea in it and a warrant signed by my master, ordering his niece to give me three donkeys out of the four or five that were at home."

And with this he told them about the loss of the grey. The curate comforted him, and told him that when he found his master he would have him confirm the gift and make out the warrant again on paper, as was the use and custom, because warrants made out in pocket-books were never accepted or honoured.

Sancho was comforted at this, and said that if that was so, the loss of Dulcinea's letter did not trouble him much, because he knew it almost by heart, and it could be copied down from him wherever and whenever they liked.

"Say it, then, Sancho," said the barber, "and we'll copy it out afterwards."

Sancho Panza stopped and scratched his head to bring the letter back to mind, and stood now on one foot and now on the other; sometimes he looked at the ground, sometimes at the sky; and after he had gnawed away half the tip of one finger, keeping in suspense those who were waiting for him to say it at last, he said, after an enormously long while:

"By God, Señor Licentiate, the devil take the thing I can remember of the letter — although at the beginning it said: 'Lofty and sodden lady.'"

"It wouldn't have said sodden," said the barber, "but superhuman, or sovereign lady."

"That's it," said Sancho. "Then, if I don't remember it wrong, it went on — if I don't remember it wrong — 'the wounded by the pint of absence and the pierced in the tassels of the heart kisses your worship's hands, ungrateful and very unknown beauty'; and there was something I don't know about health and sickness that he was sending her; and then it went slipping along that way until it finished up with 'Yours until death, the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance.'"

The two of them were not a little pleased to see how good Sancho Panza's memory was, and praised it highly, and asked him to say the letter another two times so that they too could learn it by heart and copy it out in due course. Sancho said it another three times, and another three times said another three thousand absurdities.

After this he likewise told them his master's affairs, but did not say a word about the blanket-tossing that had happened to him at that inn, which he refused to go into. He also said that as soon as he brought his master a good dispatch from the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, he was to set off to see about becoming an emperor, or at the very least a monarch; for they had settled it so between the two of them, and it was a very easy thing to become one, considering the valour of his person and the strength of his arm. And that once he was one, he was to marry Sancho off, because by then he would be a widower — it could not be otherwise — and was to give him for a wife one of the empress's ladies, heiress to a rich, great estate on the mainland, with no isles or islets about it, for he did not want them any more.

Sancho said all this so composedly, wiping his nose every now and then, and with so little sense, that the two of them were astonished all over again, considering how violent Don Quixote's madness must have been, since it had carried this poor man's judgement away with it. They did not want to take the trouble of getting him out of the error he was in, since it seemed to them that as it did his conscience no harm it was better to leave him in it, and it would be more entertaining for them to listen to his foolishness. And so they told him to pray to God for his master's health, since it was a contingent and very achievable thing that in the course of time he should come to be an emperor as he said, or at the very least an archbishop, or hold some equivalent dignity. To which Sancho answered:

"Gentlemen, if fortune turned things about in such a way that my master took it into his head not to be an emperor but to be an archbishop, I'd like to know now what wandering archbishops generally give their squires."

"They generally give them," answered the curate, "some benefice, either a simple one or one with a cure of souls, or some post as sacristan, which brings them in a good settled income, besides the altar dues, which are generally reckoned at as much again."

"For that it will be necessary," replied Sancho, "for the squire not to be married and to know how to serve at Mass, at the very least. And if that's so, unlucky me, for I'm married and I don't know the first letter of the ABC! What will become of me if my master takes a fancy to being an archbishop and not an emperor, as is the use and custom of knights errant?"

"Don't distress yourself, friend Sancho," said the barber; "we'll beg your master here, and advise him, and even put it to him as a matter of conscience, that he should be an emperor and not an archbishop — because it will be easier for him, on the grounds that he's more of a fighter than a scholar."

"That's how it has seemed to me," answered Sancho, "although I can tell you he has the ability for everything. What I mean to do on my side is to pray to Our Lord to throw him into whichever line he can serve him best in and do me the most favours in."

"You say it like a man of sense," said the curate, "and you'll do it like a good Christian. But what has to be done now is to make arrangements for getting your master out of that useless penance you say he's doing. And to think of the way we're to go about it, and to have dinner, since it's time for it, we had better go into this inn."

Sancho told them to go in themselves, and that he would wait outside and afterwards tell them the reason why he was not going in and why it was not advisable for him to; but that he begged them to bring him something to eat out there that was hot, and likewise some barley for Rocinante. They went in and left him; and shortly afterwards the barber brought him something to eat.

Afterwards, having thought over carefully between them the way they were to go about getting what they wanted, the curate hit on an idea very well fitted to Don Quixote's taste and to their own purpose. And it was that he told the barber that what he had thought of was that he himself would dress up as a damsel errant, and that the barber should do his best to get himself up as a squire; and that they would go like that to where Don Quixote was, pretending that she was a distressed and needy damsel, and would ask him for a boon, which he could not refuse to grant her, being a valorous knight errant.

And the boon she meant to ask him for was that he should come with her wherever she took him, to undo a wrong that a wicked knight had done her; and that she likewise begged him not to order her to take off her veil, or ask her anything about her affairs, until he had got her justice against that wicked knight. And that he should be in no doubt that Don Quixote would agree to everything she asked him on those terms; and that in this way they would get him out of there and take him to his village, where they would see whether his strange madness had any remedy.
