Chapter 27: Of How the Curate and the Barber Carried Out Their Plan, with Other Things Worthy of Being Told in This Great History

The curate's idea did not strike the barber as a bad one — so far from it that they put it into practice at once. They asked the innkeeper's wife for a skirt and a headdress, leaving her a new cassock of the curate's as a pledge. The barber made a great beard out of a grey or reddish oxtail that the innkeeper kept his comb hanging on. The innkeeper's wife asked them what they wanted these things for. The curate told her in a few words about Don Quixote's madness, and how this disguise was needed for getting him down out of the mountain, where he was at that moment.

The innkeeper and his wife immediately realised that the madman was their guest, the one with the balm and the master of the blanketed squire, and they told the curate everything that had happened to them with him, not keeping quiet about the thing Sancho kept so quiet about.

In short, the innkeeper's wife dressed the curate up in a way that was a sight to see. She put on him a cloth skirt with bands of black velvet a hand's breadth wide all over it, all slashed, and a bodice of green velvet trimmed with edging of white satin, which — bodice and skirt alike — must have been made in the time of King Wamba. The curate would not let them put a headdress on him, but put on his head a little quilted linen cap that he wore for sleeping at night, and bound a garter of black taffeta round his forehead, and with another garter made a mask with which he covered his beard and face very thoroughly. He rammed his hat down on top, which was so big that it could have served him as a sunshade; and wrapping himself in his cloak, he got up sideways on his mule, and the barber on his, with his beard that came down to his waist, half red and half white — being made, as has been said, out of the tail of a reddish ox.

They took their leave of everybody, and of good Maritornes, who promised to say a rosary, sinner though she was, so that God should give them good success in so arduous and so Christian a business as the one they had undertaken.

But he had hardly got out of the inn when a thought came to the curate: that he was doing wrong to have got himself up like that, it being an unbecoming thing for a priest to dress that way however much depended on it. And telling this to the barber, he begged him to change clothes with him, since it was more proper that the barber should be the distressed damsel and he would play the squire, and in that way his own dignity would be less profaned; and that if the barber would not do it, he had made up his mind not to go any further, even if the devil carried Don Quixote off.

At this Sancho arrived, and at the sight of the two of them in that dress he could not hold in his laughter. In the end the barber agreed to everything the curate wanted; and changing the plan round, the curate went on instructing him in the manner he was to adopt and the words he was to say to Don Quixote to move and force him to come away with him and leave off his fondness for the place he had chosen for his empty penance. The barber answered that without being given any lesson he would manage it perfectly. He did not want to dress up just then, until they were near where Don Quixote was; and so he folded up his clothes, and the curate stowed his beard, and they went on their way, with Sancho Panza guiding them. And Sancho told them as they went about what had happened to them with the madman they had found in the sierra — keeping quiet, however, about the finding of the portmanteau and everything in it; because, dolt though he was, the lad was a little on the greedy side.

The next day they came to the place where Sancho had left the branches as signs to find the spot where he had left his master; and on recognising it he told them this was the way in, and that they might as well dress up if that really had anything to do with his master's deliverance. For they had told him beforehand that going in that way and dressing in that fashion was the whole essential thing for getting his master out of that bad life he had chosen; and they charged him earnestly not to tell his master who they were or that he knew them; and that if his master asked him — as he was bound to ask him — whether he had given the letter to Dulcinea, he was to say yes, and that as she could not read she had answered him by word of mouth, saying that she ordered him, on pain of her displeasure, to come and see her that very moment, because it was a matter of great importance to her. For with this, and with what they meant to say to him, they took it as certain that they would bring him round to a better life, and get him to set out at once to go and be an emperor or a monarch — for as far as being an archbishop went, there was nothing to fear.

Sancho listened to it all and took it very well into his memory, and thanked them warmly for their intention of advising his master to be an emperor and not an archbishop, because it was his own opinion that for doing favours to their squires, emperors could do more than wandering archbishops. He also told them that it would be as well if he went ahead to find him and give him his lady's answer, since that would be enough on its own to get him out of that place without their putting themselves to so much trouble. What Sancho Panza said seemed good to them, and so they decided to wait for him until he came back with news of finding his master.

Sancho went in among those ravines of the sierra, leaving the two of them in one along which ran a small, quiet stream, agreeably and coolly shaded by other rocks and some trees that stood about there. The heat, and the day they arrived there, was one of those of the month of August, when in those parts the burning heat is usually very great; the hour, three in the afternoon: all of which made the place more agreeable and made it an invitation to wait there for Sancho's return, which is what they did.

The two of them being there, then, at their ease and in the shade, there came to their ears a voice which, without the accompaniment of any instrument, sounded sweetly and delightfully — at which they were not a little astonished, since it seemed to them that this was no place where there could be anybody who sang so well. Because although it is often said that shepherds with extraordinary voices are to be found in the woods and fields, this is more the exaggeration of poets than the truth; and the more so when they noticed that what they heard being sung were verses, not of rustic herdsmen but of well-bred courtiers. And this truth was confirmed by the verses they heard, which were these:

	What is it wears my fortunes down?
		Disdain.
	And what is it swells my griefs?
		Jealousy.
	And what is it tries my patience?
		Absence.
	So in this sickness of mine
	no remedy is to be had,
	since my hope is killed outright
	by disdain, jealousy and absence.

	Who is it causes me this pain?
		Love.
	And who is it grudges me my glory?
		Fortune.
	And who consents to my grieving?
		Heaven.
	So I am afraid I shall die
	of this strange complaint of mine,
	since they combine to do me harm —
	love, fortune and heaven.

	Who will make my luck any better?
		Death.
	And the good of love, who reaches it?
		Change.
	And its ills, who cures them?
		Madness.
	So it is no sense at all
	to want to cure the passion
	when the remedies are
	death, change and madness.

The hour, the season, the loneliness, the voice and the skill of the singer caused astonishment and delight in the two who heard it, and they stayed still, waiting to hear whether anything more would come. But finding that the silence lasted some while, they decided to go out and look for the musician who sang with so good a voice. And just as they were about to do it, the same voice made them stay where they were, coming again to their ears singing this sonnet:

	Holy friendship, who on light wings,
	leaving your outward likeness here on earth,
	went up in gladness among the blessed souls
	to the halls of heaven,

	from up there, when you choose, you show us
	the just peace covered over with a veil,
	through which there sometimes shows the zeal
	for good works that are, in the end, bad.

	Leave heaven, O friendship, or else do not allow
	deceit to put on your livery,
	which it uses to destroy sincere intention;

	for if you do not take your appearance from it,
	the world will soon find itself in the struggle
	of that first discordant confusion.

The song ended with a deep sigh, and the two of them listened carefully and went back to waiting to hear whether any more would be sung. But finding that the music had turned into sobs and pitiful groans, they decided to find out who the sad man was, as remarkable in his voice as he was sorrowful in his groaning; and they had not gone far when, on turning the point of a rock, they saw a man of the same build and figure that Sancho Panza had described to them when he told them Cardenio's story. And this man, when he saw them, did not start, but stayed still with his head bent on his chest like a man deep in thought, without raising his eyes to look at them any more than the first time, when they came up unexpectedly.

The curate, who was a well-spoken man — being one who already knew about his misfortune, since he had recognised him by the description — went up to him, and in brief but very well-judged words begged and urged him to leave that wretched life, so that he should not lose it there, which would be the greatest misfortune of all misfortunes.

Cardenio was at that moment in his full senses, free of that furious fit that so often carried him out of himself; and so, seeing the two of them in a dress so unusual among people who went about those solitudes, he could not help being somewhat astonished — and the more so when he heard them speak about his business as about a thing already known, since the curate's words gave him to understand that. And so he answered in this way:

"I can see plainly, gentlemen, whoever you may be, that heaven, which takes care to help the good, and often the wicked too, is sending me, without my deserving it, in these remote places so far removed from the common dealings of men, certain people who, setting before my eyes with vivid and various arguments how unreasonable I am in living the life I live, have tried to get me out of it into a better condition. But since they do not know that I know that on coming out of this trouble I am bound to fall into a greater one, perhaps they must take me for a man of feeble reasoning — or, what would be worse, for a man of no judgement at all.

"And it would be no wonder if that were so, because I can see for myself that the force of my imagination of my misfortunes is so intense and has such power over my ruin that, without my being able to do anything to stop it, I end up like a stone, without any good sense or awareness. And I come to see the truth of this when some people tell me and show me evidence of the things I have done while that terrible fit has me in its power; and I can do no more than grieve to no purpose and curse my luck to no profit, and give as an excuse for my mad acts the telling of the cause of them to anybody who wants to hear it. Because when sane people see what the cause is, they will not be astonished at the effects; and if they cannot give me a remedy, at least they will not blame me, and their annoyance at my violence will turn into pity for my misfortunes.

"And if it is the case, gentlemen, that you come with the same intention that others have come with, before you go any further with your judicious persuasions I beg you to listen to the tale — which has no end — of my misfortunes; because perhaps, once you have understood it, you will save yourselves the trouble you would take in comforting a hurt that is incapable of any comfort."

The two of them, who wanted nothing else than to know the cause of his trouble from his own mouth, begged him to tell it, offering to do nothing but what he wanted himself, in the way of remedy or comfort. And with this the sad gentleman began his pitiful history, almost in the same words and following the same course as when he had told it to Don Quixote and the goatherd a few days before, when, on account of Master Elisabat and Don Quixote's exactness in keeping up the proprieties of chivalry, the tale had been left unfinished, as the history has related. But now good luck willed that the fit of madness held off and gave him room to tell it to the end.

And so, coming to the passage about the note Don Fernando had found in the copy of Amadis of Gaul, Cardenio said he had it well by heart, and that it went like this:

Luscinda to Cardenio

Every day I discover in you qualities that oblige and compel me to esteem you more highly; and so, if you wish to get me out of this debt without executing judgement on my honour, you may very well do it. I have a father who knows you and who is fond of me, and who, without forcing my will, will fall in with whatever it will be right for you to want, if you value me as you say and as I believe.

"It was this note that moved me to ask for Luscinda as my wife, as I have already told you; and it was on account of this that Luscinda was left in Don Fernando's opinion as one of the most sensible and quick-witted women of her time; and this note was what put into him the desire to destroy me before mine could be carried out.

"I told Don Fernando what Luscinda's father was insisting on, which was that my father should ask him for her, and that I did not dare tell my own father, being afraid he would not agree to it — not because he did not thoroughly know Luscinda's quality, goodness, virtue and beauty, and that she had qualities enough to ennoble any other line in Spain, but because I understood from him that he wanted me not to marry so soon, until he saw what Duke Ricardo would do for me. In short, I told him that I did not venture to say it to my father, both because of that obstacle and because of a great many others that made me afraid, without my knowing what they were, except that it seemed to me that what I wanted was never going to come about.

"To all this Don Fernando answered that he would undertake to speak to my father and get him to speak to Luscinda's. O ambitious Marius, O cruel Catiline, O criminal Sulla, O lying Ganelon, O treacherous Vellido, O vengeful Julian, O covetous Judas! Traitor, cruel, vengeful and lying — what disservice had this poor wretch done you, who with such openness revealed to you the secrets and the joys of his heart? What offence did I do you? What words did I say to you, or what advice did I give you, that was not all aimed at increasing your honour and your profit?

"But what am I complaining of, unlucky man that I am? Since it is a certain thing that when misfortunes are brought on by the current of the stars, coming as they do from high to low, hurling themselves down with fury and violence, there is no force on earth that can stop them and no human contrivance that can foresee them. Who could have imagined that Don Fernando — an illustrious, intelligent gentleman, under obligation to me for my services, and with power enough to get whatever his amorous desire asked for wherever it settled — should have grown so bitter, as they say, over taking from me one single ewe lamb that I did not even yet possess?

"But let these reflections be left aside as useless and unprofitable, and let us knot up the broken thread of my unhappy history.

"I say, then, that it seemed to Don Fernando that my presence was an obstacle to putting his false and wicked plan into effect, and so he decided to send me to his elder brother on the excuse of asking him for some money to pay for six horses which he had deliberately bought — and solely for this purpose of getting me out of the way, so that he could better succeed in his corrupt intention — on the very day he offered to speak to my father; and he wanted me to go for the money.

"Could I have foreseen this treachery? Could I, by any chance, have hit on imagining it? Certainly not; on the contrary, I offered with the greatest pleasure to set off at once, delighted with the good purchase that had been made. That night I spoke to Luscinda and told her what had been settled with Don Fernando, and that she should have firm hope that our good and just desires would come about. She, as unsuspecting as I was of Don Fernando's treachery, told me to try to come back soon, because she thought the fulfilment of our wishes would take no longer than my father took to speak to hers. I do not know what came over her, but on finishing saying this her eyes filled with tears and a knot came into her throat that would not let her say a word of the many others she seemed to me to be trying to say to me.

"I was astonished at this new turn, never before seen in her; because we always talked to each other, the times good fortune and my own diligence allowed it, with complete cheerfulness and pleasure, without mixing tears, sighs, jealousies, suspicions or fears into our conversation. It was all a matter of my magnifying my good luck at heaven's having given her to me as my lady: I exaggerated her beauty, I marvelled at her worth and understanding. She gave me back the exchange, praising in me whatever, being in love, seemed to her worth praising. With this we told each other a hundred thousand trifles and pieces of news about our neighbours and acquaintances, and the furthest my boldness ever went was to take, almost by force, one of her lovely white hands and raise it to my mouth, as far as the narrowness of a low grille that separated us allowed.

"But the night before the sad day of my departure, she wept and moaned and sighed, and went away and left me full of confusion and alarm, appalled at having seen such new and such sad signs of grief and feeling in Luscinda. But so as not to destroy my hopes, I put it all down to the strength of the love she had for me and to the pain that absence usually causes in those who love each other well.

"In the end I went away sad and thoughtful, my soul full of fancies and suspicions, without knowing what I suspected or fancied: clear signs showing me the sad event and the misfortune that was in store for me.

"I reached the place I was sent to. I gave the letters to Don Fernando's brother. I was well received, but not quickly dispatched, because he ordered me to wait — very much against my liking — for eight days, and in a place where the duke his father would not see me, because his brother wrote to him that he should send him a certain sum of money without his father's knowledge. And it was all the invention of that false Don Fernando, since his brother did not lack money to send me off at once. This was an order and a command that put me in a position to disobey it, since it seemed to me impossible to keep myself alive for so many days in Luscinda's absence — and the more so, having left her in the sadness I have told you of. But for all that I obeyed, like a good servant, although I could see that it was bound to be at the cost of my health.

"But four days after I got there, a man came looking for me with a letter, which he gave me and which I knew by the address to be from Luscinda, because the writing on it was hers. I opened it, afraid and alarmed, believing it must be something grave that had moved her to write to me while I was away, since even when I was there she seldom did it.

"Before reading it I asked the man who had given it him and how long he had taken on the road. He told me that as it happened, going along a street in the city at midday, a very beautiful lady had called him from a window with her eyes full of tears, and had said to him in a great hurry: 'Brother, if you are a Christian, as you look to be, for the love of God I beg you to get this letter at once, at once, to the place and the person named on the address, both of which are well known; and in doing it you will do a great service to our Lord. And so that you shall not lack the means to do it, take what is in this handkerchief.'

"'And saying this,' he said, 'she threw me a handkerchief out of the window, with a hundred reals tied up in it and this gold ring I have here, along with the letter I have given you. And then, without waiting for any answer from me, she left the window — though first she saw how I took the letter and the handkerchief, and I signed to her that I would do what she asked. And so, finding myself so well paid for the trouble I might take in bringing it to you, and knowing by the address that you were the man it was being sent to — because I know you very well, sir — and being moved besides by that beautiful lady's tears, I decided not to trust anybody else but to come myself and give it you; and in the sixteen hours since it was given me I have done the journey, which as you know is eighteen leagues.'

"While the grateful and newly-made courier was telling me this, I hung on his words, my legs trembling in such a way that I could hardly hold myself up. In the end I opened the letter and saw that it contained these words:

The word Don Fernando gave you, to speak to your father so that your father should speak to mine, he has kept more to his own pleasure than to your profit. Know, sir, that he has asked for me as his wife, and my father, carried away by the advantage he thinks Don Fernando has over you, has agreed to what he wants, and so much in earnest that the betrothal is to take place two days from now, so secretly and so privately that the only witnesses are to be the heavens and some of the household. Imagine the state I am in. Whether it is worth your coming, you must see; and whether I love you or not, the outcome of this business will give you to understand. Please God this may reach your hands before mine finds itself in a position to be joined with the hand of a man who knows so badly how to keep the faith he promises.

"These, in short, were the words the letter contained, and the ones that made me set off at once, without waiting for any other answer or any other money; for I saw plainly enough by then that it was not the buying of horses but the buying of his own pleasure that had moved Don Fernando to send me to his brother.

"The anger I conceived against Don Fernando, together with the fear of losing the treasure I had won with so many years of service and longing, put wings on me; for almost as though I flew, the next day I was in my own town, at exactly the point and hour that was right for going to speak to Luscinda. I went in secretly, and left the mule I had come on at the house of the good man who had brought me the letter; and luck willed that at that moment it should be so good to me that I found Luscinda standing at the grille, the witness of our love. Luscinda knew me at once, and I knew her; but not as she ought to have known me and I ought to have known her. But who is there in the world who can boast that he has penetrated and understood the confused thinking and changeable nature of a woman? Nobody, certainly.

"I say, then, that as soon as Luscinda saw me she said to me: 'Cardenio, I am dressed for a wedding. Don Fernando the traitor and my father the covetous man are already waiting for me in the hall with other witnesses, who will be witnesses of my death sooner than of my betrothal. Do not be alarmed, my friend, but try to be present at this sacrifice; and if it cannot be prevented by my words, I have a dagger hidden about me that can prevent more determined forces, putting an end to my life and a beginning to your knowing the love I have had for you and still have.'

"I answered her in alarm and haste, afraid I should have no time to answer her at all: 'Lady, may your deeds make your words come true; for if you are carrying a dagger to prove yourself with, here I am carrying a sword to defend you with, or to kill myself with if fortune goes against us.'

"I do not think she could hear all these words, because I heard that they were calling her in a hurry, because the bridegroom was waiting. With this the night of my sorrow closed in and the sun of my happiness went down: I was left without light in my eyes and without reasoning in my understanding. I could not manage to go into her house, nor could I move anywhere at all; but considering how much my presence mattered for whatever might happen in that case, I took as much courage as I could and went into the house. And as I already knew all its ways in and out very well, and the more so with the commotion that was secretly going on in it, nobody noticed me. So that, without being seen, I had a chance to place myself in the recess made by a window of that same hall, which was covered by the ends and fringes of two tapestries, between which I could see, without being seen, everything that was going on in the hall.

"Who could describe now the shocks that hit my heart while I was there, the thoughts that came to me, the reflections I made? They were so many and such that they cannot be told, and it is not even right that they should be. Enough that you should know that the bridegroom came into the hall with no other adornment than the same ordinary clothes he usually wore. He brought as his best man a first cousin of Luscinda's, and there was nobody from outside in the whole hall except the servants of the house.

"A little later Luscinda came out of a dressing room, accompanied by her mother and two of her maids, as well dressed and got up as her rank and beauty deserved, and as befitted one who was the perfection of courtly elegance and splendour. My suspense and rapture gave me no room to look at and note in detail what she had on; I could only take in the colours, which were flesh-pink and white, and the glints thrown out by the stones and jewels of her headdress and of the whole gown — all of which was surpassed by the singular beauty of her lovely fair hair, so that in competition with the precious stones and the light of four torches that were in the hall, hers offered more brilliance to the eye.

"O memory, mortal enemy of my rest! What is the use of representing to me now the incomparable beauty of that adored enemy of mine? Would it not be better, cruel memory, that you should remind me and represent to me what she did then, so that, moved by so plain a wrong, I might try — if not for revenge — at least to lose my life?"

"Do not grow tired, gentlemen, of hearing these digressions I make; for my suffering is not of the kind that can or should be told briefly and in passing, since every circumstance of it seems to me to deserve a long discourse."

To this the curate answered that not only were they not tired of hearing him, but that the small particulars he was telling gave them a great deal of pleasure, being such that they deserved not to be passed over in silence, and deserved the same attention as the main part of the tale.

"I say, then," Cardenio went on, "that everybody being in the hall, the parish priest came in; and taking the two of them by the hand to do what is required in such an act, at the words 'Do you, lady Luscinda, take the lord Don Fernando, here present, for your lawful husband, as Holy Mother Church commands?' I put my whole head and neck out from between the tapestries, and with the most attentive ears and a soul in turmoil I set myself to listen to what Luscinda would answer, expecting from her answer the sentence of my death or the confirmation of my life.

"Oh, if only I had dared to come out then, crying aloud: 'Ah, Luscinda, Luscinda, look what you are doing! Consider what you owe me! See that you are mine and cannot be another's! Be warned that your saying yes and the ending of my life must happen at one and the same instant. Ah, treacherous Don Fernando, robber of my glory, death of my life! What do you want? What are you after? Consider that you cannot as a Christian reach the end of your desires, because Luscinda is my wife and I am her husband.'

"Ah, madman that I am — now that I am absent and far from the danger, I say I ought to have done what I did not do! Now that I let my dear treasure be stolen, I curse the robber, on whom I could have taken revenge if I had had the heart for it as I have the heart for complaining! In short, since I was a coward and a fool then, it is no great matter that I should die now mortified, repentant and mad.

"The priest was waiting for Luscinda's answer, which she was a good while in giving; and when I thought she was pulling out the dagger to prove herself, or loosening her tongue to say some truth or undeceiving that would come out to my advantage, I hear her say in a faint, weak voice: 'I do.' And Don Fernando said the same; and giving her the ring, they were left bound in an indissoluble knot. The bridegroom came up to embrace his wife, and she, putting her hand over her heart, fell fainting into her mother's arms.

"It remains now to say the state I was left in, seeing in the yes I had heard my hopes mocked, Luscinda's words and promises false, and myself made incapable of ever recovering the good I had lost in that instant. I was left without counsel, abandoned — as it seemed to me — by all heaven, made an enemy of the earth that held me up, the air denying me breath for my sighs and the water moisture for my eyes; only fire increased, in such a way that I was all burning with rage and jealousy.

"Everybody was thrown into confusion by Luscinda's faint; and when her mother unfastened her bodice to let the air get to her, a folded paper was found in it, which Don Fernando took at once and set himself to read by the light of one of the torches. And on finishing reading it, he sat down in a chair and put his hand to his cheek, with every sign of a man deep in thought, without attending to the remedies that were being applied to his wife to bring her out of her faint.

"Seeing the whole household in an uproar, I ventured to come out, whether I was seen or not, with the resolve that if they did see me I would do such a wild thing that everybody would come to understand the just indignation of my breast in the punishment of the false Don Fernando, and even of the changeable heart of the fainting traitress. But my luck — which must be keeping me for greater evils, if it is possible that there are any — arranged that at that moment I should have more understanding than I have had ever since. And so, without wanting to take revenge on my greatest enemies, which would have been easy since they were so far from thinking about me, I chose to take it on myself and to carry out on myself the punishment they deserved — and perhaps with more severity than would have been used on them if I had killed them then, since a death that comes suddenly soon ends the pain, but one that is drawn out with torments is always killing without ever ending the life.

"In the end I left that house and came to the house of the man where I had left the mule. I had him saddle her, and without taking leave of him I mounted and rode out of the city, not daring, like another Lot, to turn my face and look at it. And when I found myself alone in the open country, and the darkness of the night hid me and its silence invited me to complain, without any respect or fear of being heard or recognised, I let out my voice and loosed my tongue in so many curses against Luscinda and Don Fernando, as though with them I were making good the wrong they had done me.

"I gave her the titles of cruel, of ungrateful, of false and thankless; but above all of covetous, since my enemy's wealth had closed the eyes of her affection, to take her from me and hand her to the man fortune had shown itself more generous and open-handed with. And in the middle of the flood of these curses and reproaches, I made excuses for her, saying that it was no great thing that a girl brought up quietly in her parents' house, made and used always to obey them, should have chosen to fall in with their wishes, since they were giving her for a husband a gentleman so distinguished, so rich and so well-bred that if she had refused to accept him it might be thought either that she had no sense or that her affections were somewhere else — a thing that would work so much to the harm of her good name and reputation.

"Then I would turn round and say that if she had said I was her husband, they would have seen that she had not made so bad a choice in choosing me that they could not have excused her; because before Don Fernando offered himself, they could not themselves have hit on wishing for a better husband for their daughter than me, if they had measured their wishes by reason. And that she could very well, before putting herself in the last and unavoidable pass of giving her hand, have said that I had already given her mine; for I would have come forward and agreed with everything she might have thought of inventing in the case.

"In the end I concluded that little love, little judgement, great ambition and a desire for grandeur had made her forget the words with which she had deceived me, kept me going and sustained me in my firm hopes and honourable desires.

"With these cries and this restlessness I travelled what was left of that night, and at dawn I came to one of the ways into these mountains, along which I travelled another three days, with no path or road, until I came to a stop at some meadows which lie I do not know which way from these mountains; and there I asked some herdsmen which way the wildest part of these sierras lay. They told me it was this way. I set off for it at once, with the intention of ending my life here; and on getting in among these wild places, my mule fell dead of weariness and hunger, or — what I am more inclined to believe — in order to shake off so useless a burden as she was carrying in me. I was left on foot, worn out by nature, pierced through with hunger, with nobody to help me and no thought of looking for anybody.

"In that state I lay stretched out on the ground for I do not know how long, at the end of which I got up without hunger, and found beside me some goatherds who must without doubt have been the ones who relieved my need, because they told me the state they had found me in, and how I was saying so many mad and absurd things that they were clear evidence of my having lost my wits. And I have felt in myself ever since that I do not have them whole all the time, but so damaged and feeble that I do a thousand mad things — tearing my clothes, shouting through these solitudes, cursing my luck and repeating in vain the beloved name of my enemy, with no other thought or purpose at those times than to try to end my life by shouting. And when I come to myself, I find myself so tired and pounded that I can hardly move.

"My most usual dwelling is in the hollow of a cork tree, big enough to cover this wretched body. The cowherds and goatherds who go about these mountains, moved by charity, keep me alive, putting food for me along the paths and on the rocks where they suppose I might chance to pass and find it. And so, even when my wits fail me at the time, natural need makes me recognise food and wakes in me the desire to want it and the will to take it. Other times they tell me, when they meet me in my senses, that I come out on the roads and take it by force, even when they give it me willingly, from the shepherds who are bringing it from the village to the sheepfolds.

"In this way I get through my wretched, extreme life, until heaven is pleased either to bring it to its final end or to put it into my memory to make me not remember Luscinda's beauty and treachery and Don Fernando's wrong; for if he does this without taking my life, I shall turn my thoughts to better reasoning. And if not, there is nothing for it but to beg him to have mercy on my soul outright, for I feel in myself neither courage nor strength to get my body out of the straits I have chosen to put it in of my own free will."

"This, gentlemen, is the bitter story of my misfortune. Tell me whether it is such that it can be attended with less feeling than what you have seen in me. And do not tire yourselves out persuading me or advising me what reason may tell you might be good for my remedy; because it will do as much good with me as a medicine prescribed by a famous doctor does for a sick man who will not take it. I do not want health without Luscinda; and since she chose to belong to another, being — or having been bound to be — mine, let me choose to belong to misfortune, when I might have belonged to good luck.

"She chose, by her change, to make my ruin permanent; I shall choose, by contriving to lose myself, to make her wish come true; and it will be an example to those to come that I alone lacked what all other unfortunate men have to spare. For to them the impossibility of comfort is usually a comfort, and in me it is the cause of greater sufferings and evils, because I believe that even death will not put an end to them."

Here Cardenio brought to an end his long speech and his history, as unhappy as it was full of love. And just as the curate was preparing to say a few words of comfort to him, he was stopped by a voice that came to his ears, saying in sorrowful tones what will be told in the fourth part of this narrative — for at this point the wise and cautious historian Cide Hamete Benengeli brought the third to an end.
