Chapter 28: Which Treats of the New and Agreeable Adventure That Befell the Curate and the Barber in the Same Sierra

Part Four of the Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha

Most happy and most fortunate were the times in which the boldest of knights, Don Quixote of La Mancha, was launched upon the world; for it is because he took so honourable a decision as wanting to bring back to life and restore to the world the already lost and almost dead order of knight-errantry that we now enjoy, in this age of ours which is so in want of cheerful entertainment, not only the sweetness of his true history but also the tales and episodes in it, which are in part no less agreeable, no less artfully made and no less true than the history itself.

Which history, going on with its carded, twisted and wound thread, relates that just as the curate was beginning to prepare himself to comfort Cardenio, he was prevented by a voice that came to his ears saying in sad tones:

"Oh God! Can it be possible that I have found at last a place that can serve as a hidden grave for the heavy burden of this body I keep going so much against my will? Yes, it can, if the solitude these mountains promise does not lie to me. Ah, wretched woman, and how much more agreeable company these crags and thickets will be to my purpose than any human being's — since they will give me room to communicate my misfortune to heaven in complaints! For there is nobody on earth from whom one can hope for counsel in doubts, relief in troubles or remedy in evils."

The curate and those with him heard and took in all these words; and as it seemed to them, as it was, that they were being said close by, they got up to look for the speaker. And they had not gone twenty paces when, behind a boulder, they saw sitting at the foot of an ash tree a young fellow dressed as a farm labourer, whose face they could not see for the moment because he had it bent down, being engaged in washing his feet in the stream that ran along there.

And they came up so silently that he did not notice them, nor was he attending to anything except washing his feet, which were such that they seemed nothing but two pieces of white crystal born among the other stones of the stream. The whiteness and beauty of the feet took them aback, since it seemed to them that they were not made for treading clods or for going about behind the plough and the oxen, as their owner's dress suggested. And so, seeing that they had not been noticed, the curate, who was in front, signed to the other two to crouch down or hide behind some pieces of rock that were there, and they all did so, watching attentively what the young man did.

He had on a short brown two-skirted jacket, belted close to the body with a white towel. He wore likewise breeches and gaiters of brown cloth, and on his head a brown cap. He had the gaiters pushed up to halfway up his leg, which without any doubt looked like white alabaster. He finished washing his beautiful feet, and then dried them with a head-cloth he pulled out from under the cap; and on going to take the cap off he raised his face, and those who were watching him had the chance to see an incomparable beauty — such that Cardenio said to the curate in a low voice:

"Since this is not Luscinda, this is no human being but a divine one."

The young man took off the cap, and shaking his head from side to side, there began to loosen and spread out a head of hair that the sun's rays might have envied. By this they knew that the one who seemed a labourer was a woman, and a delicate one, and even the most beautiful the eyes of the other two had seen up to then — and Cardenio's too, if he had not looked at and known Luscinda; for he afterwards declared that only Luscinda's beauty could compete with hers.

The long fair hair not only covered her shoulders but hid the whole of her under it all round; so that except for the feet, no other part of her body showed: so long and so much of it there was. And in this her hands served her as a comb; and if the feet in the water had looked like pieces of crystal, the hands in the hair seemed like pieces of packed snow — all of which put the three who were watching her into greater astonishment and a greater desire to know who she was.

For this reason they decided to show themselves; and at the movement they made in getting to their feet, the beautiful girl raised her head, and pushing the hair away from in front of her eyes with both hands, she looked at those who were making the noise. And she had hardly seen them when she got to her feet, and without waiting to put on her shoes or gather up her hair, she snatched up very quickly a bundle that looked like clothes which she had beside her, and tried to take to flight, full of alarm and fright. But she had not gone six steps when, her delicate feet being unable to bear the roughness of the stones, she came down on the ground.

Which the three of them seeing, they came out to her, and the curate was the first to say to her:

"Stop, madam, whoever you may be; the men you see here have no other intention than to serve you. There is no reason for you to put yourself to such unnecessary flight, because your feet will not be able to bear it and we will not allow it."

To all this she answered not a word, astonished and confused. So they came up to her, and the curate, taking her by the hand, went on to say:

"What your dress denies us, madam, your hair reveals to us: clear signs that the causes must be of no small moment which have disguised your beauty in dress as unworthy as this and brought you into a solitude as great as this — in which it has been good fortune to have found you, if not to give a remedy for your troubles, at least to give them counsel. For no trouble, so long as it does not end the life, can weary a person so much or come so near to the extreme of being one that the sufferer should refuse even to listen to advice that is given with good intentions. So, madam — or sir, or whatever you may choose to be — put off the alarm the sight of us has caused you and tell us your good or bad fortune; for in us together, or in each of us, you will find somebody to help you feel your misfortunes."

While the curate was saying all this, the disguised girl stood as though entranced, looking at them all without moving her lips or saying a single word, exactly like some country rustic who is suddenly shown rare things he has never seen before. But when the curate went back to saying other words directed to the same purpose, she gave a deep sigh and broke her silence and said:

"Since the solitude of these mountains has not been enough to hide me, and the loosening of my untidy hair has not allowed my tongue to be a liar, it would be useless for me to pretend all over again now what, if it were believed, would be believed more out of courtesy than for any other reason. This being granted, I say, gentlemen, that I thank you for the offer you have made me, which has put me under an obligation to satisfy you in everything you have asked — although I am afraid the account I give you of my misfortunes will cause you distress as much as pity, because you will find no remedy to remedy them and no comfort to lighten them.

"But for all that, so that my honour may not go on wavering in your minds, since you have already recognised me for a woman and see me young, alone and in this dress — all of them things together, and each one on its own, which can throw any honest reputation to the ground — I shall have to tell you what I would rather keep quiet if I could."

All this she said without stopping, this person who looked so beautiful a woman, with so ready a tongue and so soft a voice that her good sense astonished them no less than her beauty. And when they had made her new offers and new entreaties to keep her promise, she, without making them beg any further, put on her shoes with complete modesty and gathered up her hair, and settled herself on the seat of a stone; and with the three of them placed around her, forcing herself to hold back some tears that came into her eyes, she began the history of her life in a calm, clear voice, like this:

"In this Andalusia there is a place from which a duke takes his title, which makes him one of those they call grandees of Spain. This man has two sons: the elder, heir to his estate and, by the look of it, to his good habits; and the younger, I do not know what he is the heir of, unless it is of Vellido's treacheries and Ganelon's lies.

"My parents are this lord's vassals, humble in family but so rich that if the goods of their birth had matched the goods of their fortune, they would have had nothing more to wish for and I should not have had to fear finding myself in the misfortune I am in. Because perhaps my lack of good fortune comes from the lack of it they had in not being born distinguished. It is quite true that they are not so low that they need be ashamed of their condition, nor so high that they take away from me the notion I have that my misfortune comes from their humble station.

"They are, in short, farmers, plain people, with no admixture of any ill-sounding blood, and, as they say, Old Christians of the oldest vintage — but so rich that their wealth and handsome way of living is little by little winning them the name of gentlefolk, and even of gentry. Although the greatest wealth and nobility they prided themselves on was having me for their daughter; and so, both because they had no other daughter or son to inherit from them and because they were fond parents, I was one of the most indulged daughters that parents ever indulged.

"I was the mirror they looked at themselves in, the staff of their old age, and the object towards which — measuring them by heaven's will — they directed all their wishes; from which, they being so good, mine did not depart a hair's breadth. And in the same way that I was mistress of their hearts, so I was of their property. Through me the servants were taken on and dismissed; the reckoning and account of what was sown and gathered passed through my hands; the olive mills, the wine presses, the number of the large and small livestock, the number of the beehives — in short, of everything that so rich a farmer as my father can have and does have, I kept the account and was the steward and mistress, with so much care on my part and so much pleasure on theirs that I honestly cannot find words for it.

"The hours of the day I had left over, after giving out what was needed to the foremen, the overseers and the other day labourers, I spent on those occupations that are as proper as they are necessary for young women, such as the needle and the lace-cushion offer, and often the distaff. And if I sometimes left these occupations aside to refresh my spirits, I took refuge in the entertainment of reading some devotional book, or of playing a harp — because experience showed me that music settles unsettled minds and relieves the troubles that are born in the spirit.

"This, then, was the life I led in my parents' house; and if I have told it in such detail, it has not been out of ostentation or to make it understood that I am rich, but so that it may be noticed how blamelessly I have come from that good condition I have described to the unhappy one I now find myself in.

"The case, then, is this. Passing my life in so many occupations and in a seclusion that might have been compared to a convent's, being seen — as I thought — by no other person than the servants of the house, since on the days I went to Mass it was so early in the morning, and I was so much accompanied by my mother and other maidservants, and so veiled and so careful, that my eyes hardly saw more ground than the piece I set my feet on; and yet in spite of all this, the eyes of love — or of idleness rather, which the eyes of the lynx cannot match — saw me, in the shape of the attentions of Don Fernando, that being the name of the duke's younger son that I have told you about."

The woman who was telling the tale had hardly named Don Fernando when the colour changed in Cardenio's face and he began to sweat, with such a great disturbance that the curate and the barber, who noticed it, were afraid he was having that fit of madness they had heard came on him from time to time. But Cardenio did nothing except sweat and stay still, staring hard at the country girl, guessing who she was; and she, without noticing Cardenio's movements, went on with her history, saying:

"And they had hardly seen me when, according to what he said afterwards, he was as much taken captive by love of me as his behaviour gave everyone to understand. But to get quickly to the end of the tale of my misfortunes, which has none, I want to pass over in silence the efforts Don Fernando made to declare his intentions to me. He bribed the whole household; he gave and offered gifts and favours to my relatives. The days were all holidays and rejoicing in my street; at night the music let nobody sleep. The notes that came into my hands, I do not know how, were endless, full of loving words and offers, with fewer letters in them than promises and oaths.

"All of which not only did not soften me but hardened me, as though he had been my mortal enemy and everything he did to bring me round to his wishes had been done for the opposite effect. Not that Don Fernando's good looks displeased me, or that I thought his attentions excessive; because it gave me a certain something of pleasure to see myself so much loved and esteemed by so distinguished a gentleman, and it did not grieve me to see my own praises in his papers — for in this, however plain we women may be, it seems to me that we always take pleasure in being called beautiful.

"But against all this stood my sense of honour and the constant advice my parents gave me, who by now knew Don Fernando's intentions quite openly, because by then he did not care in the least that the whole world should know them. My parents told me that they left and deposited their honour and good name in my virtue and goodness alone, and that I should consider the inequality there was between me and Don Fernando, and that from this I should see that his thoughts, whatever he might say to the contrary, were aimed more at his own pleasure than at my good. And that if I wanted to put some kind of obstacle in the way so that he should give up his unjust pretensions, they would marry me at once to whoever I most liked, either from the most distinguished people of our own village or from all those round about — since everything could be hoped for from their great property and my good name.

"With these firm promises, and with the truth of what they told me, I fortified my integrity, and I never chose to answer Don Fernando with a word that could show him, even from a great way off, any hope of getting what he wanted.

"All this reserve of mine, which he must have taken for disdain, must have been what sharpened his lustful appetite further — for that is the name I want to give the affection he showed me; which, if it had been what it ought to have been, you would not be hearing about it now, because there would have been no occasion to tell you.

"In the end Don Fernando learnt that my parents were about to marry me off, in order to take away from him the hope of possessing me, or at least so that I should have more guards to guard me; and this news, or suspicion, was the cause of his doing what you shall now hear.

"And it was that one night, when I was in my room with only the company of a maid who served me, having the doors well shut for fear that through carelessness my honour should find itself in danger, without my knowing or imagining how, in the middle of all these precautions and preventions and in the loneliness of that silence and confinement, I found him in front of me. The sight of him confused me in such a way that it took away the sight of my eyes and struck my tongue dumb; and so I was not able to cry out, nor do I think he would have let me, because he came up to me at once, and taking me in his arms — for I, as I say, had no strength to defend myself, disturbed as I was — he began to say such things to me that I do not know how it is possible for a lie to have such skill that it can put them together in a way that makes them seem so true. The traitor made his tears give credit to his words and his sighs to his intentions. I, poor creature, alone among my own people and little practised in cases of the kind, began, I do not know how, to take so many falsehoods for truths — but not in such a way that his tears and sighs moved me to any more than a proper compassion.

"And so, that first shock passing off, I came somewhat to recover my lost spirits, and with more courage than I thought I could have, I said to him: 'If, sir, as I am in your arms, I were between the paws of a fierce lion, and freeing myself from them were assured me on condition that I did or said something to the harm of my honour, it would be as possible for me to do it or say it as it is possible for what has already happened not to have happened. So that if you have my body encircled with your arms, I have my soul bound with my good intentions, which are as different from yours as you will see if you try to go further with them by using force on me.

"'I am your vassal, but not your slave; nor has the nobility of your blood, nor ought it to have, any power to dishonour and think little of the humbleness of mine. And I value myself as much, peasant and countrywoman as I am, as you do yourself, lord and gentleman as you are. With me your force is to have no effect, nor are your riches to have any worth, nor are your words to be able to deceive me, nor your sighs and tears to soften me. If I saw any one of all these things I have mentioned in the man my parents gave me for a husband, my will would fall in with his and would not depart from his; so that, being left with my honour even if I were left without pleasure, I would give up willingly what you, sir, are now trying to get with so much force. I have said all this because there is no thinking that any man shall get anything at all from me who is not my lawful husband.'

"'If that is all you are troubled about, most beautiful Dorotea' — for that is this unfortunate woman's name — said the disloyal gentleman, 'see, here I give you my hand to be yours; and let the witnesses of this truth be the heavens, from whom nothing is hidden, and this image of Our Lady that you have here.'"

When Cardenio heard her say that her name was Dorotea, he went back to his agitation and finally confirmed his first opinion as true; but he did not want to interrupt the tale, so as to see how the thing he already almost knew would come out. He only said:

"So Dorotea is your name, madam? I have heard of another of the same name, who perhaps runs neck and neck with you in misfortunes. Go on, for a time will come when I can tell you things that will appal you to the same degree that they grieve you."

Dorotea took notice of Cardenio's words and of his strange, ruined dress, and begged him that if he knew anything about her affairs he would tell her at once; because if fortune had left her anything good, it was the courage she had to bear any disaster that might come on her, being certain that, as it seemed to her, none could come that would increase the one she had by a hair's breadth.

"I would not lose the chance, madam," answered Cardenio, "of telling you what I think, if what I imagine were true; and so far there is no opportunity lost, and it matters nothing to you to know it."

"Be it as it may," answered Dorotea. "What happened in my story was that Don Fernando took an image that was in that room and set it up as a witness to our betrothal. With the most forceful words and extraordinary oaths he gave me his word to be my husband — although before he had finished saying them I told him he should look carefully at what he was doing and consider the anger his father would feel at seeing him married to a peasant woman, one of his own vassals; that he should not be blinded by my beauty, such as it was, since it was not enough to find an excuse in it for his mistake; and that if he wanted to do me any good at all, for the love he bore me, it should be to let my luck run at the level my quality could reach, because marriages as unequal as that are never enjoyed and never last long in the pleasure they begin with.

"All these arguments I have set down here I said to him, and a great many others I do not remember; but they were not enough to make him give up his intention, exactly like a man who does not mean to pay and therefore, when the bargain is being struck, does not stick at difficulties.

"At this point I made a short argument with myself, and said to myself: 'Well, I shall not be the first who by way of marriage has risen from a humble to a great condition, nor will Don Fernando be the first whom beauty — or blind infatuation, which is more likely — has made take a partner unequal to his greatness. Since, then, I am not making a new world or a new custom, it is as well to accept this honour that luck is offering me, even if in this man the affection he shows me lasts no longer than the satisfaction of his desire; because in the end, in God's eyes, I shall be his wife. And if I try to send him away with disdain, I can see he is in such a state that, not using the means he ought to, he will use force, and I shall be left dishonoured and without any excuse for the blame that might be put on me by anyone who did not know how blamelessly I had come to this pass. Because what arguments would be enough to persuade my parents, and others, that this gentleman came into my room without my consent?'

"All these questions and answers I turned over in my imagination in an instant; and above all, what began to press on me and incline me to what was, without my thinking it, my ruin, were Don Fernando's oaths, the witnesses he called on, the tears he shed and, finally, his figure and good looks, which, accompanied by so many signs of true love, could have conquered any heart as free and as guarded as mine.

"I called my maid, so that she should join the witnesses of heaven on earth. Don Fernando went back to repeating and confirming his oaths; he added new saints as witnesses to the first ones; he called down on himself a thousand curses to come if he did not keep what he promised me; he moistened his eyes again and increased his sighs; he held me tighter in his arms, out of which he had never let me go. And with this, and with my maid going out of the room again, I ceased to be a maiden and he finished becoming a traitor and a false man.

"The day that followed the night of my ruin came, I think, not as quickly as Don Fernando wanted; because once the thing appetite asks for has been had, the greatest pleasure that can come is to get away from where it was got. I say this because Don Fernando was in a hurry to get away from me; and by the contrivance of my maid, who was the same one who had brought him there, he found himself in the street before daybreak.

"And on taking leave of me — although not with so much eagerness and vehemence as when he came — he told me to be assured of his faith and that his oaths were firm and true. And to confirm his word further, he took a rich ring off his finger and put it on mine.

"In short, he went and I was left, I do not know whether sad or glad. This I can say for certain: that I was left confused and thoughtful and almost out of myself with what had just happened, and I had not the spirit — or it did not occur to me — to scold my maid for the treachery she had committed in shutting Don Fernando into my own room, because I still could not decide whether what had happened to me was good or bad. On his going I told Don Fernando that by the same road as that night he could see me on other nights, since I was his already, until, whenever he chose, the thing should be made public.

"But he did not come on any other, except the next one; nor could I see him in the street or at church for more than a month. I wore myself out in vain trying to see him, although I knew he was in the town and that most days he went hunting, an exercise he was very fond of.

"Those days and those hours I know well were ill-starred and unlucky for me, and I know well that in them I began to doubt, and even to disbelieve, Don Fernando's good faith. And I know too that my maid heard then the words of reproof for her boldness that she had not heard before; and I know that I was obliged to keep an account of my tears and of the composure of my face, so as not to give my parents occasion to ask me what I was so unhappy about and force me to look for lies to tell them.

"But all this came to an end in a moment, when a moment came in which all considerations were trampled down and honourable reasoning was finished, and patience was lost and my secret thoughts came out into the open. And this was because, a few days later, it was said in the village that in a city near there Don Fernando had married a young lady altogether extremely beautiful and of very distinguished parents, although not so rich that on the strength of her dowry she could have aspired to so noble a marriage. It was said that she was called Luscinda, along with other things that had happened at the betrothal that were worth wondering at."

Cardenio heard the name Luscinda, and did nothing but hunch his shoulders, bite his lips, arch his eyebrows and, shortly afterwards, let two fountains of tears fall from his eyes. But Dorotea did not stop going on with her tale for that, and said:

"This sad news reached my ears; and instead of my heart freezing when I heard it, so much anger and rage caught fire in it that it was very little short of my going out into the streets shouting, publishing the treachery and betrayal that had been done to me. But this fury was calmed for the time being by the thought of putting into practice that same night what I did put into practice: which was to put on this dress that was given me by one of those they call farm-lads in a farmer's house, who was a servant of my father's, to whom I revealed my whole misfortune and begged him to go with me as far as the city where I understood my enemy was. He, after reproving my boldness and calling my decision an ugly one, seeing me settled in my opinion, offered to keep me company, as he put it, to the end of the world.

"Then, at once, I shut up in a linen pillowcase a woman's dress and some jewels and money, for whatever might happen. And in the silence of that night, without telling my treacherous maid, I left my house, accompanied by my servant and by a great many imaginings, and set out on the road to the city on foot, carried along in flight by the desire to arrive — if not to prevent what I took to be already done, at least to make Don Fernando tell me with what soul he had done it.

"I got where I wanted in two and a half days; and on going into the city I asked for the house of Luscinda's parents, and the first man I put the question to answered me with more than I would have wanted to hear. He told me the house and everything that had happened at his daughter's betrothal, a thing so public in the city that people gathered in knots all over it to tell it.

"He told me that on the night Don Fernando was betrothed to Luscinda, after she had given her yes to being his wife, she had been seized by a violent faint; and that when her husband came to unfasten her bodice to let the air get to her, he found in it a paper written in Luscinda's own hand, in which she said and declared that she could not be Don Fernando's wife, because she was Cardenio's — who, from what the man told me, was a very distinguished gentleman of that same city — and that if she had given her yes to Don Fernando, it was so as not to depart from obedience to her parents.

"In short, such things did he say the paper contained that it gave people to understand that she had meant to kill herself as soon as the betrothal was over, and gave there the reasons why she had taken her life. All of which they say was confirmed by a dagger they found on her in some part of her clothing.

"All of which Don Fernando seeing, and thinking that Luscinda had made a mock and a fool of him and thought little of him, he went for her before she came out of her faint, and with the same dagger they had found on her he tried to stab her; and he would have done it if her parents and those who were present had not stopped him.

"They said further that Don Fernando immediately went away, and that Luscinda did not come out of her fit until the next day, when she told her parents that she was the true wife of that Cardenio I have mentioned. I learnt more: that this Cardenio, so they said, had been present at the betrothal, and that on seeing her betrothed — a thing he had never expected — he left the city in despair, first writing her a letter in which he gave her to understand the wrong Luscinda had done him, and how he was going where people would not see him.

"All this was public and notorious in the whole city, and everybody was talking about it; and they talked more when they learnt that Luscinda had disappeared from her parents' house and from the city, since they could not find her anywhere in it — at which her parents were out of their wits and did not know what course to take to find her.

"What I learnt put my hopes back in play, and I thought it better not to have found Don Fernando than to find him married, since it seemed to me that the door to my remedy was not yet entirely shut. I gave myself to understand that it might be that heaven had put that obstacle in the way of the second marriage in order to bring him to recognise what he owed to the first, and to realise that he was a Christian and was more bound to his own soul than to human considerations. All these things I turned over in my fancy, and comforted myself without having any comfort, inventing long, faint hopes so as to keep going the life I now loathe.

"Being in the city, then, without knowing what to do with myself, since I could not find Don Fernando, there came to my ears a public proclamation offering a great reward to whoever should find me, giving a description of my age and of the very dress I was wearing. And I heard it said that people were saying that the young man who came with me had taken me from my parents' house — a thing that went to my very soul, seeing how far down my reputation had gone, since it was not enough to lose it by my coming away, but the question of who with had to be added, and he so low a person and so unworthy of my honourable intentions.

"The moment I heard the proclamation I left the city with my servant, who was by then beginning to show signs of wavering in the faithfulness he had promised me; and that night we went into the thick of this mountain, in fear of being found. But as they usually say that one evil calls up another, and that the end of one misfortune is generally the beginning of a greater, so it happened to me. Because my good servant, faithful and trustworthy until then, as soon as he saw me in this solitude, urged on by his own knavery rather than by my beauty, chose to take advantage of the opportunity that these wastes seemed to him to offer; and with little shame and less fear of God or respect for me, he made love to me. And seeing that I answered the shamelessness of his proposals with ugly and just words, he left aside the entreaties he had first meant to make use of and began to use force.

"But just heaven, which seldom or never fails to look at and favour just intentions, favoured mine in such a way that with my small strength and with little trouble I sent him over a precipice, where I left him, I do not know whether dead or alive. And then, with more speed than my fright and weariness called for, I went into these mountains, with no other thought or plan than to hide myself in them and to escape from my father and from those who were looking for me on his behalf.

"With this wish I came into them I do not know how many months ago, and there I found a stockman who took me as a servant to a place in the very bowels of this sierra, whom I have served as a shepherd boy all this time, trying always to be out in the fields so as to hide this hair which now, so unexpectedly, has revealed me.

"But all my industry and all my care was and has been of no use, since my master came to know that I was not a man, and the same wicked thought was born in him that had been born in my servant. And as fortune does not always give the remedy along with the trouble, I found no precipice or ravine to throw the master down and put him out of his pain, as I found for the servant; and so I thought it the lesser difficulty to leave him and hide myself all over again among these wild places, rather than try my strength or my arguments on him.

"I say, then, that I went back into hiding, and to looking for somewhere where without any hindrance I could beg heaven with sighs and tears to take pity on my misfortune and give me the means and the help to get out of it, or else to leave my life among these solitudes — with no memory left of this unhappy woman, who so blamelessly will have given people something to talk and gossip about in her own country and in other people's."
