Chapter 29: Which Treats of the Amusing Device and Method Used to Get Our Enamoured Knight Out of the Very Harsh Penance He Had Imposed on Himself

"This, gentlemen, is the true history of my tragedy. Look and judge now whether the sighs you heard, the words you listened to and the tears that came out of my eyes had cause enough to show themselves in greater abundance. And when you have considered the nature of my misfortune, you will see that comfort will be useless, since the remedy for it is impossible.

"I only beg you — a thing you can easily and ought to do — to advise me where I can spend my life without being finished off by the fear and alarm I have of being found by those who are looking for me. Because although I know that the great love my parents have for me assures me that I shall be well received by them, so much shame comes over me at the mere thought that I must appear before them not as they thought I would, that I count it better to exile myself for ever from being seen than to see their faces, thinking that they are looking at mine as one that has none of the modesty they must have promised themselves in me."

She fell silent on saying this, and her face was covered by a colour that showed very plainly the feeling and the shame in her soul. In their own souls those who had listened to her felt as much pity as astonishment at her misfortune; and although the curate wanted to comfort and advise her at once, Cardenio spoke first, saying:

"So, madam, you are the beautiful Dorotea, the only daughter of the rich Clenardo."

Dorotea was astonished when she heard her father's name, and at seeing how poor a creature it was who named him — for it has already been said what a bad state Cardenio's clothes were in. And so she said to him:

"And who are you, brother, that you know my father's name like this? Because up to now, if I do not remember wrong, in the whole course of the tale of my misfortune I have not named him."

"I am," answered Cardenio, "that luckless man who, as you have said, madam, Luscinda said was her husband. I am the unhappy Cardenio, whom the wicked conduct of the same man who has put you in the state you are in has brought to the state you see me in: ragged, half naked, without any human comfort and — what is worst of all — without my wits, since I only have them when heaven takes a fancy to give them me for some brief space.

"I, madam, am the man who was present at Don Fernando's outrages and who waited to hear the yes Luscinda pronounced to being his wife. I am the man who had not the courage to see what her faint came to, or what came of the paper that was found in her bosom, because my soul had not the endurance to see so many misfortunes at once. And so I left the house and my patience, and a letter which I left with a man I was staying with, whom I begged to put it into Luscinda's hands, and I came away to these solitudes with the intention of ending in them the life I have loathed from that moment as my mortal enemy.

"But fate has not chosen to take it from me, being content with taking my wits — perhaps to keep me for the good fortune I have had in finding you. For if what you have told here is true, as I believe it is, it might still be that heaven has kept a better outcome to our disasters in store for us both than we think. Because, granted that Luscinda cannot marry Don Fernando, being mine, nor Don Fernando marry her, being yours, and that she has declared it so plainly, we may well hope that heaven will give us back what is ours, since it still exists and has not been made over to anybody or destroyed.

"And since we have this comfort, born not of a very remote hope nor founded on wild imaginings, I beg you, madam, to take another resolution in your honourable thoughts, since I mean to take one in mine, adjusting yourself to expect better fortune. For I swear to you, on the faith of a gentleman and a Christian, not to abandon you until I see you in Don Fernando's power; and that when I cannot bring him by argument to recognise what he owes you, then to use the freedom that being a gentleman gives me, and to be able with just title to challenge him for the injustice he does you — without remembering my own wrongs, whose vengeance I shall leave to heaven so as to attend on earth to yours."

Dorotea was left utterly astonished by what Cardenio said; and not knowing what thanks to give for such great offers, she tried to take hold of his feet to kiss them. But Cardenio would not allow it, and the licentiate answered for them both, and approved Cardenio's good reasoning; and above all he begged, advised and urged them to go with him to his village, where they could make good the things they lacked, and that there they would arrange how to look for Don Fernando, or how to take Dorotea to her parents, or do whatever else should seem best to them.

Cardenio and Dorotea thanked him and accepted the kindness that was offered them. The barber, who had been all this time in suspense and silent, also made his own good speech, and offered himself with no less goodwill than the curate to everything that might be of service to them. He likewise told them briefly the reason that had brought them there, along with the strangeness of Don Quixote's madness, and how they were waiting for his squire, who had gone to look for him. There came into Cardenio's memory, as though in a dream, the quarrel he had had with Don Quixote, and he told the others about it — but he could not say what the reason for their argument had been.

At this they heard shouts, and knew that the man shouting was Sancho Panza, who, not having found them in the place where he had left them, was calling for them at the top of his voice. They went out to meet him; and asking him about Don Quixote, he told them how he had found him half naked in his shirt, thin, yellow and dying of hunger, and sighing for his lady Dulcinea; and that although he had told him she ordered him to leave that place and go to El Toboso, where she was waiting for him, he had answered that he was determined not to appear before her beauty until he had performed deeds that made him worthy of her favour. And that if this went on, he was in danger of not coming to be an emperor, as he was bound to be, or even an archbishop, which was the least he could be. And so they should consider what was to be done to get him out of there.

The licentiate answered that he should not distress himself, for they would get him out of there whether he liked it or not. He then told Cardenio and Dorotea what they had thought of as a remedy for Don Quixote, or at least for taking him home. To which Dorotea said that she would make a better distressed damsel than the barber, and what was more, that she had clothes there to do it to the life; and that they should leave it in her hands to know how to act out everything that was needed for carrying out their plan, because she had read a great many books of chivalry and knew well the style that distressed damsels used when they asked their boons of knights errant.

"Then nothing more is needed," said the curate, "except that it should be put into practice at once. Without any doubt good luck is showing itself in our favour, since so unexpectedly a door has begun to open for you, my friends, towards your remedy, and the one we needed has been made easy for us."

Dorotea then took out of her pillowcase a whole skirt of a certain rich stuff and a short cloak of another showy green material, and out of a little box a necklace and other jewels, with which in an instant she adorned herself in such a way that she looked like a rich, great lady. All this, and more, she said she had brought from home for whatever might come up, and that until then she had had no occasion to need it. Her great grace, charm and beauty pleased everybody extremely, and confirmed Don Fernando in their opinion as a man of little judgement, since he threw so much beauty aside.

But the one who marvelled most was Sancho Panza, because it seemed to him — as was indeed the truth — that in all the days of his life he had never seen so beautiful a creature. And so he asked the curate very earnestly to tell him who that beautiful lady was, and what she was looking for in those out-of-the-way parts.

"This beautiful lady, brother Sancho," answered the curate, "is — as though it were nothing at all — the heiress in the direct male line to the great kingdom of Micomicón, who comes looking for your master to ask him a boon, which is that he should undo a wrong or injury that a wicked giant has done her; and it is on the fame your master has as a good knight throughout the discovered world that this princess has come from Guinea to look for him."

"A lucky search and a lucky find," said Sancho Panza at this, "and more so if my master is fortunate enough to undo that injury and put that wrong right by killing that son of a bitch of a giant your worship speaks of — and kill him he will if he meets him, unless he happens to be a phantom, because against phantoms my master has no power at all.

"But one thing I want to beg your worship, among others, Señor Licentiate; and it's that, so that my master doesn't get the urge to be an archbishop, which is what I'm afraid of, your worship should advise him to marry this princess at once. And then he'll be made incapable of taking archbishop's orders and will easily come into his empire, and I to the end of my wishes. Because I've looked at it carefully and I find by my reckoning that it doesn't suit me for my master to be an archbishop, since I'm no use to the Church, being married; and to go about now getting dispensations so as to be able to hold a Church income, having a wife and children as I have, would be a never-ending business. So, sir, the whole point of it is that my master should marry this lady at once — whose name I don't know yet, and so I don't call her by it."

"She is called," answered the curate, "the Princess Micomicona; because her kingdom being called Micomicón, it is plain that she must be called that."

"There's no doubt about that," answered Sancho, "for I've seen a lot of people take their surname and family name from the place where they were born, calling themselves Pedro of Alcalá, Juan of Úbeda and Diego of Valladolid; and this same custom must be used over there in Guinea, the queens taking the names of their kingdoms."

"That must be it," said the curate; "and as for your master's marrying, I shall do everything in my power about it."

At which Sancho was as pleased as the curate was astonished at his simplicity, and at seeing how firmly the very same absurdities as his master's were fixed in his fancy, since without any doubt he gave himself to understand that his master would come to be an emperor.

By this time Dorotea had got up on the curate's mule and the barber had fitted the oxtail beard to his face, and they told Sancho to guide them to where Don Quixote was; and they warned him not to say that he knew the licentiate or the barber, because the whole point of his master's coming to be an emperor lay in his not knowing them. Neither the curate nor Cardenio chose to go with them — Cardenio so that Don Quixote should not remember the quarrel he had had with him, and the curate because his presence was not needed just then. And so they let them go ahead, and followed them on foot, little by little.

The curate did not fail to advise Dorotea what she had to do; to which she said that they need not worry, and that everything should be done without missing a point, exactly as the books of chivalry required and described it.

They must have gone three quarters of a league when they made out Don Quixote among some tangled rocks, dressed by now, though not in armour. And as soon as Dorotea saw him and was informed by Sancho that this was Don Quixote, she whipped up her palfrey, with the well-bearded barber following her. And on getting up to him, the squire threw himself off his mule and went to take Dorotea in his arms; and she, dismounting with great ease, went and knelt down before Don Quixote's feet. And although he struggled to raise her, she, without getting up, spoke to him in this manner:

"From here I shall not rise, O valorous and mighty knight, until your goodness and courtesy grant me a boon, which shall redound to the honour and glory of your person and to the good of the most disconsolate and injured maiden the sun has looked upon. And if it is so that the valour of your strong arm answers to the report of your immortal fame, you are bound to favour this unfortunate woman who comes from lands so far off, drawn by the scent of your famous name, seeking you as the remedy of her misfortunes."

"I shall not answer you a word, fair lady," answered Don Quixote, "nor hear anything more of your affairs, until you rise from the ground."

"I shall not rise, sir," answered the afflicted maiden, "unless first, by your courtesy, the boon I ask is granted me."

"I grant and concede it to you," answered Don Quixote, "provided that it need not be fulfilled to the harm or diminishment of my king, of my country, or of her who holds the key of my heart and my liberty."

"It shall not be to the harm or the diminishment of any of those you name, my good lord," replied the sorrowing maiden.

And while this was going on, Sancho Panza got close to his master's ear and said to him very quietly:

"Your worship can perfectly well grant her the boon she asks, sir, for it's nothing at all: it's only killing a great big giant; and the one who's asking it is the high princess Micomicona, queen of the great kingdom of Micomicón in Ethiopia."

"Let her be whoever she may," answered Don Quixote, "for I shall do what I am bound to do and what my conscience dictates to me, in accordance with what I have professed."

And turning to the maiden, he said:

"Let your great beauty rise, for I grant you the boon you may wish to ask of me."

"Then the one I ask," said the maiden, "is that your magnanimous person should come with me at once wherever I take you, and should promise me not to get involved in any other adventure or undertaking whatever until you have given me vengeance on a traitor who, against all divine and human law, has usurped my kingdom from me."

"I say that I grant it," answered Don Quixote, "and so, madam, you may from today on throw off the melancholy that is wearing you out and make your fainting hope take on new spirit and strength. For with God's help and my arm's, you shall soon see yourself restored to your kingdom and seated on the throne of your ancient and great estate, in spite and in defiance of the villains who may wish to gainsay it. And to work — for they say that danger generally lies in delay."

The distressed maiden struggled very insistently to kiss his hands, but Don Quixote, who was in everything a courteous and well-bred knight, would never allow it; instead he made her get up and embraced her with great courtesy and good breeding, and ordered Sancho to see to Rocinante's girths and arm him that very moment. Sancho took down the armour, which was hanging from a tree like a trophy, and, seeing to the girths, armed his master in a moment; and Don Quixote, finding himself armed, said:

"Let us go from here, in God's name, to favour this great lady."

The barber was still on his knees, taking great care to hide his laughter and to keep his beard from falling off — with whose falling everybody might perhaps have been left without achieving their good intention. And seeing that the boon had now been granted and how briskly Don Quixote was getting himself ready to go and fulfil it, he got up and took his lady by the other hand, and between the two of them they got her up on the mule. Then Don Quixote got up on Rocinante, and the barber settled himself on his mount, with Sancho left on foot — at which the loss of the grey came back to him afresh, with how much he wanted him now. But he bore it all cheerfully, since it seemed to him that his master was now on the road, and very near, to being an emperor; for he supposed without any doubt that he would marry that princess and be at the very least king of Micomicón.

The only thing that grieved him was the thought that that kingdom was in the land of the blacks, and that the people they would give him as his vassals would all be black. To which he at once found a good remedy in his imagination, and said to himself:

"What do I care if my vassals are black? Is there anything more to it than loading them up and bringing them to Spain, where I'll be able to sell them and where they'll pay me for them in cash, and with the money I'll be able to buy some title or some post to live comfortably on all the days of my life? Go on, then — go to sleep, and have no wit or ability for managing things and for selling thirty or ten thousand vassals in the time it takes to say knife! By God I'll shift the lot of them, small along with great, or however I can; and black as they may be, I'll turn them into white ones or yellow ones. Come along — do you think I suck my thumb?"

With this he went along so busy and so pleased that he forgot the trouble of walking on foot.

Cardenio and the curate were watching all this from among some thickets, and did not know what to do to join up with them. But the curate, who was a great contriver, immediately thought of what they should do to get what they wanted; and it was that with a pair of scissors he carried in a case he very smartly took off Cardenio's beard, and dressed him in a brown jacket of his own and gave him a black cloak, and he himself was left in his breeches and doublet. And Cardenio was left so different from what he had looked before that he would not have known himself, even if he had looked in a mirror.

This done — and although the others had gone on ahead while the two of them were disguising themselves — they easily came out on the high road before them, because the thickets and bad going of those places did not allow those on horseback to travel as fast as those on foot. In fact they placed themselves on the flat, at the way out of the sierra; and as soon as Don Quixote and his companions came out of it, the curate set himself to look at him very slowly, giving signs that he was gradually recognising him. And after he had been looking at him for a good while, he went up to him with open arms, saying at the top of his voice:

"Well met, mirror of chivalry, my good fellow-countryman Don Quixote of La Mancha, the flower and cream of gentility, the shelter and remedy of the needy, the quintessence of knights errant!"

And saying this, he had hold of Don Quixote round the knee of his left leg; and Don Quixote, appalled at what he was seeing and hearing this man say and do, set himself to look at him carefully, and finally recognised him and was left as though appalled at seeing him, and made a great effort to dismount. But the curate would not allow it, so that Don Quixote said:

"Let me be, your worship, Señor Licentiate; there is no reason why I should be on horseback and a person as reverend as your worship on foot."

"That I shall not allow on any account," said the curate. "Let your greatness stay on horseback, since it is on horseback that you perform the greatest exploits and adventures that have been seen in our age. As for me, unworthy priest that I am, it will be enough for me to get up behind on one of these gentlemen's mules who are travelling with your worship, if they do not take it amiss. And I shall even reckon that I am riding on the horse Pegasus, or on the zebra or mare that famous Moor Muzaraque rode, who to this day lies enchanted on the great hill of Zulema, not far from the great Compluto."

"I had not thought so far, my lord Licentiate," answered Don Quixote; "and I know that my lady the princess will be pleased, for love of me, to order her squire to give your worship the saddle of his mule, and he can settle himself behind, if the mule will stand it."

"She will stand it, I believe," answered the princess; "and I know too that there will be no need to order my lord the squire, for he is so courteous and so courtly that he will not allow a churchman to go on foot when he can go on horseback."

"That is so," answered the barber.

And dismounting in a moment, he invited the curate to take the saddle, and he took it without needing much asking. And the trouble was that when the barber was getting up behind, the mule — which was, after all, a hired one, and to say that it was a bad one that is enough — lifted its hindquarters a little and let fly two kicks in the air, which, if they had caught Master Nicolás in the chest or on the head, would have made him wish the devil had the whole expedition after Don Quixote. Even so, they startled him in such a way that he came down on the ground, with so little care for his beard that it fell off on the ground. And finding himself without it, he had no other remedy than to hurry to cover his face with both hands and to complain that they had knocked his teeth out.

Don Quixote, seeing that whole bundle of beard, with no jaws and no blood, a long way from the fallen squire's face, said:

"By the living God, this is a great miracle! It has knocked the beard off him and torn it off his face, as if it had been taken off on purpose!"

The curate, who saw the danger his invention ran of being discovered, ran at once for the beard and went with it to where Master Nicolás was lying, still shouting away; and with one movement, pulling his head against his own chest, he stuck it back on him, muttering over him some words which he said were a certain charm proper for sticking on beards, as they would see. And when he had it on him, he stood back, and the squire was left as well bearded and as sound as before — at which Don Quixote was extraordinarily astonished, and begged the curate to teach him that charm when he had a chance; for he understood that its power must extend to more than sticking on beards, since it was clear that where a beard was pulled off the flesh must be left raw and injured, and since it healed all that, it was good for more than beards.

"That is so," said the curate, and promised to teach it him at the first opportunity.

They arranged that for the moment the curate should ride, and that the three of them should change about at intervals until they reached the inn, which must be about two leagues from there. The three of them being mounted — that is to say, Don Quixote, the princess and the curate — and the three of them on foot — Cardenio, the barber and Sancho Panza — Don Quixote said to the maiden:

"Let your greatness, my lady, lead wherever it most pleases you."

And before she could answer, the licentiate said:

"Towards what kingdom does your ladyship mean to lead? Is it, by any chance, towards that of Micomicón? It must be, or I know little about kingdoms."

She, who was well up in everything, understood that she should answer yes; and so she said:

"Yes, sir, my road lies towards that kingdom."

"If that is so," said the curate, "we shall have to pass through the middle of my village, and from there your worship will take the route to Cartagena, where you can take ship with good luck. And if there is a favourable wind, a calm sea and no storms, in a little less than nine years you may be in sight of the great Lake Pissabed — I mean Maeotis — which is a little more than a hundred days' journey this side of your greatness's kingdom."

"Your worship is mistaken, my dear sir," she said, "because it is not two years since I left it; and truly I never had good weather, and in spite of that I have arrived at seeing what I so much wanted, which is my lord Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose fame reached my ears as soon as I set foot in Spain, and which moved me to look for him, so as to commend myself to his courtesy and trust my just cause to the valour of his unconquerable arm."

"No more: let my praises cease," said Don Quixote at this point, "because I am an enemy to every kind of flattery; and although this is not flattery, still such talk offends my chaste ears. What I can say, my lady, is that whether I have valour or not, whatever I have or have not is to be employed in your service to the point of losing my life. And so, leaving this for its own time, I beg the lord licentiate to tell me what the reason is that has brought him to these parts, so alone and with so few servants and so lightly equipped that it appals me."

"To that I shall answer briefly," answered the curate; "because your worship must know, Señor Don Quixote, that Master Nicolás, our friend and our barber, and I were going to Seville to collect a certain sum of money that a relative of mine who went over to the Indies many years ago had sent me — and not so few of them that they do not come to more than sixty thousand assayed pesos, which is something. And passing through these places yesterday, four highwaymen came out at us and took from us even the beards off our faces; and they took them in such a way that it was as well for the barber to put on false ones. And even this young man here" — pointing to Cardenio — "they left looking like a new man.

"And the good of it is that it is common report all over this district that the men who robbed us are some galley slaves who they say were set free, almost on this very spot, by a man so brave that in spite of the commissary and the guards he loosed the whole lot of them. And without any doubt he must have been out of his wits, or he must be as great a scoundrel as they are, or some man without a soul or a conscience, since he chose to loose the wolf among the sheep, the fox among the hens, the fly among the honey. He chose to defraud justice, to go against his king and natural lord, since he went against his just commands. He chose, I say, to take from the galleys their oarsmen, to throw the Holy Brotherhood into an uproar when it had been resting many years; he chose, in short, to do a deed by which his soul may be lost without his body's gaining anything."

Sancho had told the curate and the barber about the adventure of the galley slaves, which his master had brought off with so much glory to himself; and this was why the curate laid the colours on so thick in relating it, to see what Don Quixote would do or say. And Don Quixote's colour changed at every word, and he did not dare say that he had been the deliverer of those good people.

"These, then," said the curate, "were the men who robbed us; and God in his mercy pardon the man who kept them from being taken to the punishment they deserved."
