Chapter 30: Which Treats of the Good Sense of the Beautiful Dorotea, with Other Very Entertaining and Amusing Matters

The curate had hardly finished when Sancho said:

"Well, upon my faith, Señor Licentiate, the man who did that exploit was my master; and not for want of my telling him beforehand and warning him to look at what he was doing, and that it was a sin to give them their freedom, because every one of them was going along there for being an enormous scoundrel."

"You blockhead!" said Don Quixote at this. "It is no business or concern of knights errant to inquire whether the afflicted, chained and oppressed people they meet on the roads are going along in that fashion, or are in that distress, through their faults or through their merits. It is only their business to help them as people in need, setting their eyes on their sufferings and not on their villainies. I came upon a rosary and string of miserable and unfortunate people, and I did with them what my religion requires of me, and let the rest settle itself. And to whoever has thought ill of it — saving the holy dignity of the lord licentiate and his honourable person — I say that he knows little about the business of chivalry, and that he lies like a son of a bitch and a base-born man; and this I shall give him to understand with my sword, where it is set down at greater length."

And he said this while settling himself in his stirrups and pulling down his morion — because the barber's basin, which by his reckoning was Mambrino's helmet, he was carrying hung from the front of his saddle until he could get it mended from the bad treatment the galley slaves had given it.

Dorotea, who was quick-witted and full of humour, and who by now knew Don Quixote's deranged temper and that everybody was making fun of him except Sancho Panza, did not want to be behind the rest; and seeing him so angry, she said to him:

"Sir knight, may your worship remember the boon you have promised me, and that in accordance with it you cannot get involved in any other adventure, however urgent. Let your worship calm your breast, for if the lord licentiate had known that the galley slaves had been set free by that unconquered arm, he would have put three stitches in his mouth and even bitten his tongue three times over rather than have said a word that would work to your worship's displeasure."

"That I certainly swear to," said the curate, "and I would even have pulled out one of my moustaches."

"I shall be quiet, my lady," said Don Quixote, "and I shall hold back the just anger that had already risen in my breast, and shall go along quiet and peaceable until I have fulfilled the promised boon for you. But in payment for this good intention, I beg you to tell me, if it is not disagreeable to you, what your trouble is, and how many, who and what sort are the persons on whom I am to give you due, satisfying and complete vengeance."

"That I shall do gladly," answered Dorotea, "if it does not weary you to hear of griefs and misfortunes."

"It will not weary me, my lady," answered Don Quixote.

To which Dorotea answered:

"Then since that is so, let your worships give me your attention."

She had hardly said this when Cardenio and the barber placed themselves at her side, eager to see how the quick-witted Dorotea would invent her history; and Sancho did the same, being as much taken in by her as his master was. And she, after settling herself well in the saddle and preparing herself with a cough and other gestures, began very gracefully to speak in this way:

"First of all, I want your worships to know, my dear sirs, that I am called —"

And she stopped a little here, because she had forgotten the name the curate had given her. But he came to the rescue, because he understood what she was stuck on, and said:

"It is no wonder, my lady, that your greatness should be confused and embarrassed in telling your misfortunes; for they are generally such that they very often take away the memory of those they ill-treat, in such a way that they do not even remember their own names — as they have done with your great ladyship, who has forgotten that she is called the Princess Micomicona, lawful heiress to the great kingdom of Micomicón. And with this prompting your greatness can now easily bring back to your injured memory everything you wish to tell."

"That is the truth," answered the maiden, "and from now on I believe there will be no need to prompt me with anything, for I shall bring my true history into good harbour.

"Which is that the king my father, who is called Tinacrio the Knowing, was very learned in this thing they call the magic art, and found out by his science that my mother, whose name was Queen Jaramilla, was to die before him, and that shortly afterwards he too was to pass out of this life and I was to be left an orphan of father and mother.

"But he used to say that this did not weary him so much as what threw him into confusion, which was knowing for a very certain thing that a monstrous giant, lord of a great isle that almost borders on our kingdom, called Pandafilando of the Gloomy Eye — because it is an established fact that although he has his eyes in their place and straight, he always looks the wrong way as though he were cross-eyed, and he does this out of wickedness and to put fear and terror into those he looks at — I say that he learnt that this giant, on hearing that I was orphaned, was to come over my kingdom with a great force and take the whole of it from me, without leaving me one small village to take refuge in; but that I could avoid all this ruin and misfortune if I would marry him. But as far as he understood, he never expected that I should feel inclined to make so unequal a marriage; and in this he told the plain truth, because it has never crossed my mind to marry that giant — nor any other, however great and monstrous he might be.

"My father also said that after he was dead, and I saw Pandafilando beginning to come over my kingdom, I was not to wait to put myself in a state of defence, because that would be my destruction; but that I should freely leave the kingdom clear for him, if I wanted to avoid the death and total destruction of my good and loyal vassals, because it would not be possible to defend myself against the giant's devilish strength. But that I should at once set off with some of my people on the road to the Spains, where I should find the remedy of my troubles in finding a knight errant whose fame would by that time be spread throughout that whole kingdom, and who was to be called, if I do not remember wrong, Don Quickset or Don Kickshaw."

"Don Quixote she means, madam," said Sancho Panza at this point, "or, by another name, the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance."

"That is the truth," said Dorotea. "He said further that he was to be tall of body, dry in the face, and that on the right side, under the left shoulder, or somewhere about there, he was to have a dark mole with certain hairs on it like bristles."

Hearing this, Don Quixote said to his squire:

"Come here, Sancho my son, help me undress; I want to see whether I am the knight that wise king left prophesied."

"But what does your worship want to undress for?" said Dorotea.

"To see whether I have that mole your father spoke of," answered Don Quixote.

"There is no need to undress," said Sancho; "I know that your worship has a mole of that description in the middle of your backbone, which is a sign of being a strong man."

"That is enough," said Dorotea, "because among friends one is not to look at small matters; and whether it is on the shoulder or on the backbone matters little. It is enough that there should be a mole, and let it be where it likes, since it is all the same flesh. And without a doubt my good father was right in everything, and I have been right in commending myself to Señor Don Quixote, for he is the man my father spoke of, since the marks of his face agree with those of the great fame this knight has not only in Spain but in the whole of La Mancha. For I had hardly disembarked at Osuna when I heard so many of his exploits told that my soul told me at once that he was the very man I had come to look for."

"But how did your worship disembark at Osuna, my lady," asked Don Quixote, "when it is not a seaport?"

But before Dorotea could answer, the curate took the matter in hand and said:

"The lady princess must mean that after she disembarked at Málaga, the first place where she heard news of your worship was Osuna."

"That is what I meant to say," said Dorotea.

"And that makes sense," said the curate; "and let your majesty go on."

"There is nothing more to go on with," answered Dorotea, "except that in the end my luck has been so good in finding Señor Don Quixote that I already count and hold myself as queen and mistress of my whole kingdom, since he, out of his courtesy and magnanimity, has promised me the boon of going with me wherever I take him — which will be nowhere but to set him in front of Pandafilando of the Gloomy Eye, so that he may kill him and give me back what he has so unreasonably usurped from me. For all this is bound to happen exactly to order, since Tinacrio the Knowing, my good father, left it so prophesied. He also left it said and written in Chaldean, or Greek, letters — for I cannot read them — that if this knight of the prophecy, after having cut the giant's throat, should wish to marry me, I was to give myself over to him at once and without any argument as his lawful wife, and give him possession of my kingdom along with the possession of my person."

"What do you think of that, friend Sancho?" said Don Quixote at this point. "Do you hear what is going on? Did I not tell you so? See whether we have a kingdom to rule and a queen to marry."

"I'll swear to that!" said Sancho. "And damn the man who doesn't marry her the moment he's slit Señor Pandafiddle's little gullet! Why, it isn't as if the queen were a bad one! May the fleas in my bed turn out as good!"

And saying this, he cut two capers in the air with every sign of the greatest delight, and then went to take the reins of Dorotea's mule; and making her stop, he knelt down before her, begging her to give him her hands to kiss as a sign that he took her for his queen and mistress. Which of the bystanders could have kept from laughing, seeing the master's madness and the servant's simplicity? In fact Dorotea gave them to him, and promised to make him a great lord in her kingdom when heaven should do her so much good as to let her recover it and enjoy it. Sancho thanked her in such words that he set them all laughing again.

"This, gentlemen," Dorotea went on, "is my history. It only remains to tell you that of all the escort I brought out of my kingdom, nobody is left me but this good bearded squire, because all the rest were drowned in a great storm we had in sight of the port; and he and I came to land on two planks, as though by a miracle. And so the whole course of my life is miracle and mystery, as you will have noticed. And if in anything I have gone too far, or been less exact than I should, put the blame on what the lord licentiate said at the beginning of my tale: that constant and extraordinary hardships take away the memory of the one who suffers them."

"They shall not take away mine, O high and valorous lady," said Don Quixote, "however many I go through in serving you, and however great and unheard-of they may be. And so I confirm afresh the boon I have promised you, and swear to go with you to the end of the world until I face that fierce enemy of yours, whose arrogant head I mean, with God's help and my arm's, to cut off with the edge of this — I do not want to say good sword, thanks to Ginés de Pasamonte, who took mine."

This he said between his teeth, and he went on to say:

"And after I have cut it off and put you in peaceful possession of your estate, it will be left to your own will to do with your person whatever comes best to your liking; because as long as I have my memory occupied and my will held captive, and my understanding lost, to that — and I say no more — it is not possible that I should face, even in thought, the idea of marrying, even if it were the phoenix itself."

What his master said at the last about not wanting to marry struck Sancho so badly that in great anger he raised his voice and said:

"I swear by me, and vow by me, that your worship, Señor Don Quixote, has not got a whole set of wits. Why, how is it possible that your worship should have any doubt about marrying so high a princess as this one? Do you think fortune is going to offer you good luck like this behind every corner? Is my lady Dulcinea more beautiful, by any chance? No, she certainly is not, nor by half; and I'm even ready to say she doesn't come up to the shoe of the one who's standing in front of you. So bad luck to the earldom I'm hoping for, if your worship goes about asking for truffles in the middle of the sea. Marry her, marry her at once, in Satan's name, and take that kingdom that's dropping into your hands as a free gift; and once you're a king, make me a marquis or a governor, and after that the devil can carry off the lot for all I care."

Don Quixote, hearing such blasphemies spoken against his lady Dulcinea, could not bear it; and raising his pike, without saying a word to Sancho and without so much as opening his mouth, he gave him two such blows that he brought him down on the ground. And if Dorotea had not shouted to him not to give him any more, he would certainly have taken his life then and there.

"Do you think," he said to him after a while, "you low peasant, that there is always to be room for you to put your hand in my crotch, and that it is all to be your going wrong and my forgiving you? Do not think it, you excommunicated scoundrel — for excommunicated you certainly are, since you have set your tongue on the peerless Dulcinea. And do you not know, you clodhopper, you porter, you rogue, that if it were not for the valour she pours into my arm, I should not have enough of it to kill a flea? Tell me, you sly fellow with a viper's tongue: who do you think has won this kingdom and cut off this giant's head and made you a marquis — for I count all this as done already and as a thing settled beyond appeal — if it is not Dulcinea's valour, taking my arm as the instrument of her exploits? She fights in me and conquers in me, and I live and breathe in her, and have life and being. Oh, you son of a bitch and a scoundrel, how ungrateful you are: you see yourself raised from the dust of the earth to be a titled lord, and you answer so good a turn by speaking ill of the woman who did it for you!"

Sancho was not in so bad a state that he did not hear everything his master said to him; and getting up with a fair amount of speed, he went and put himself behind Dorotea's palfrey, and from there said to his master:

"Tell me, sir: if your worship has made up your mind not to marry this great princess, it's clear that the kingdom won't be yours; and it not being yours, what favours can you do me? That's what I'm complaining about. Marry this queen once and for all, your worship, now we've got her here as though she'd rained down out of the sky, and afterwards you can go back to my lady Dulcinea. There must have been kings in the world who kept a mistress. As for the beauty, I don't meddle in it; because in truth, if it must be said, they both seem good to me — though I've never seen the lady Dulcinea."

"What do you mean, you have never seen her, you blaspheming traitor?" said Don Quixote. "Have you not just this minute brought me a message from her?"

"I say I haven't seen her at leisure enough," said Sancho, "to have taken particular note of her beauty and her good points one by one; but taken all in a lump, she seems good to me."

"Now I excuse you," said Don Quixote, "and forgive me the anger I have given you, for a man's first impulses are not in his own hands."

"I can see that," answered Sancho; "and so with me the urge to talk is always a first impulse, and I can't help saying, at least once, whatever comes to my tongue."

"For all that," said Don Quixote, "look out what you say, Sancho, because the pitcher goes so often to the well — and I say no more."

"Very well then," answered Sancho, "God is in heaven and sees the tricks, and he will be the judge of which of us does more harm: me for not speaking well, or your worship for not acting well."

"Let there be no more of it," said Dorotea. "Run, Sancho, and kiss your master's hand and ask his pardon; and from now on be more careful in your praise and your blame, and do not speak ill of that lady of El Toboso, whom I do not know except to serve her. And have confidence in God, for you shall not go without an estate to live in like a prince."

Sancho went with his head down and asked his master for his hand, and he gave it him with a composed bearing; and after he had kissed it, he gave him his blessing, and told Sancho that they should go on a little way ahead, because he had things to ask him and matters of great importance to discuss with him. Sancho did so, and the two of them drew off somewhat ahead, and Don Quixote said to him:

"Since you came back I have had no time or room to ask you many things in particular about the embassy you carried and the answer you brought. And now, since fortune has granted us the time and the place, do not deny me the happiness you can give me with such good news."

"Let your worship ask what you like," answered Sancho, "for I'll get as well out of it all as I got into it. But I beg your worship, my dear sir, not to be so vengeful from now on."

"Why do you say that, Sancho?" said Don Quixote.

"I say it," he answered, "because these blows just now were more for the quarrel the devil stirred up between the two of us the other night than for what I said against my lady Dulcinea, whom I love and revere like a holy relic — although there's nothing of the kind about her — simply because she belongs to your worship."

"Do not go back to that sort of talk, Sancho, on your life," said Don Quixote, "for it distresses me. I forgave you then, and you know well what they usually say: for a new sin, a new penance."

While the two of them were in this conversation, the curate said to Dorotea that she had shown great skill both in the tale itself and in its shortness, and in the resemblance it had to those in the books of chivalry. She said she had often amused herself with reading them, but that she did not know where the provinces and seaports were, and so had said at random that she had disembarked at Osuna.

"I understood that," said the curate, "and that is why I hurried to say what I said, and everything was put right. But is it not a strange thing to see how easily this unfortunate gentleman believes all these inventions and lies, simply because they have the style and manner of the follies in his books?"

"It is," said Cardenio, "and so rare and unheard-of a thing that I do not know whether, if a man wanted to invent it and make it up out of his head, there would be a wit sharp enough to hit on it."

"Well, there is another thing about it," said the curate: "that apart from the simplicities this good gentleman says that touch on his madness, if you talk to him about other things he reasons with excellent good sense and shows he has a clear and equable understanding in everything. So that as long as you do not touch him on his chivalries, nobody would judge him to be anything but a man of very good understanding."

While they were in this conversation, Don Quixote went on with his own, and said to Sancho:

"Let us throw our quarrels into the sea, friend Panza, and tell me now, without any regard to anger or resentment: where, how and when did you find Dulcinea? What was she doing? What did you say to her? What did she answer you? What face did she make while she read my letter? Who copied it out for you? And everything else that you see is worth knowing, asking and answering in this case — without adding anything or lying to please me, and without cutting it short either so as not to take my pleasure away."

"Sir," answered Sancho, "if the truth is to be told, nobody copied the letter out for me, because I didn't carry any letter."

"It is exactly as you say," said Don Quixote, "because I found the little pocket-book I wrote it in still in my possession two days after you left, which caused me the greatest distress, since I did not know what you would do when you found yourself without the letter; and I always believed you would come back from the place where you missed it."

"So I would have," answered Sancho, "if I hadn't got it by heart when your worship read it to me — so that I said it over to a parish clerk, who copied it out of my head so exactly, point by point, that he said that in all the days of his life, although he had read a great many letters of excommunication, he had never seen or read so fine a letter as that one."

"And have you still got it by heart, Sancho?" said Don Quixote.

"No, sir," answered Sancho, "because after I'd given it, as I saw it was going to be no further use, I set about forgetting it. And if I remember anything, it's that bit about the sodden — I mean the sovereign lady — and the last bit: 'Yours until death, the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance.' And in between those two things I put in more than three hundred souls, and lives, and eyes of mine."
