Chapter 31: Of the Delightful Conversation That Passed Between Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, His Squire, with Other Incidents

"None of that displeases me; go on," said Don Quixote. "You arrived — and what was that queen of beauty doing? I am certain you found her threading pearls, or embroidering some device with gold thread for this captive knight of hers."

"I found her doing nothing of the kind," answered Sancho, "but winnowing two bushels of wheat in a yard at her house."

"Then reckon," said Don Quixote, "that the grains of that wheat were grains of pearl, since her hands had touched them. And did you notice, my friend, whether the wheat was white or spring wheat?"

"It was neither: it was red," answered Sancho.

"Then I assure you," said Don Quixote, "that winnowed by her hands it made white bread, beyond any doubt. But go on: when you gave her my letter, did she kiss it? Did she put it on top of her head? Did she perform any ceremony worthy of such a letter — or what did she do?"

"When I was going to give it her," answered Sancho, "she was in the full swing of shaking a good lot of wheat she had in the sieve, and she said to me: 'Put that letter down on that sack, my friend; I can't read it until I've finished sifting all that's here.'"

"Discerning lady!" said Don Quixote. "That must have been so as to read it at her leisure and take pleasure in it. Go on, Sancho: and while she was about her business, what conversation did she have with you? What did she ask you about me? And what did you answer her? Finish, tell me all of it; do not leave the smallest thing in the inkwell."

"She asked me nothing," said Sancho; "but I told her how your worship, for her sake, was doing penance, stripped from the waist up, buried among these mountains as though you were a savage, sleeping on the ground, not eating bread off a tablecloth or combing your beard, weeping and cursing your fortune."

"In saying that I cursed my fortune you spoke wrongly," said Don Quixote, "because on the contrary I bless it, and shall bless it all the days of my life, for having made me worthy to deserve to love so high a lady as Dulcinea of El Toboso."

"She's high, all right," answered Sancho: "upon my word she's a good six inches taller than me."

"But how is that, Sancho?" said Don Quixote. "Have you measured yourself against her?"

"I measured myself this way," answered Sancho: "going up to help her put a sack of wheat on a donkey, we got so close together that I could see she had a good hand's breadth on me."

"But is it not true," replied Don Quixote, "that she accompanies and adorns that height with a thousand millions of graces of the soul? But you will not deny me one thing, Sancho: when you got close to her, did you not smell a Sabaean scent, an aromatic fragrance, a certain something good that I cannot manage to give a name to? I mean, a savour or a breath as if you were in the shop of some elegant glove-maker?"

"What I can say," said Sancho, "is that I smelt a bit of a mannish smell; and it must have been because with all that exercise she was sweaty and a bit leathery."

"It cannot have been that," answered Don Quixote, "but you must have had a cold in the head, or you must have been smelling yourself; because I know well what that rose among thorns smells of, that lily of the field, that dissolved amber."

"It may all be so," answered Sancho, "for often enough that smell comes off me that seemed to me then to be coming off her worship the lady Dulcinea; but there's nothing to be surprised at in that, since one devil is like another."

"Well then," Don Quixote went on, "here she has finished cleaning her wheat and sending it to the mill. What did she do when she read the letter?"

"The letter," said Sancho, "she didn't read, because she said she couldn't read or write. Instead she tore it up and made small pieces of it, saying she didn't want to give it to anybody to read, so that her secrets shouldn't be known in the village; and that what I'd told her by word of mouth about the love your worship had for her and the extraordinary penance you were doing on her account was enough.

"And finally she told me to tell your worship that she kissed your hands, and that she was left there with more desire to see you than to write to you; and that so she begged and ordered you that, on sight of the present, you should come out of those thickets and leave off doing absurd things, and set out that very moment on the road to El Toboso, unless something more important came up — because she had a great desire to see your worship. She laughed a great deal when I told her that your worship called yourself the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance. I asked her whether the Basque from the other day had been there; she told me yes, and that he was a very decent man. I asked her about the galley slaves too, but she told me she hadn't seen any of them so far."

"So far everything goes well," said Don Quixote. "But tell me: what jewel was it she gave you on your leaving, for the news you carried her of me? Because it is an old and established custom among knights and ladies errant to give the squires, damsels or dwarfs who bring them news — of their ladies to them, and of their knights errant to the ladies — some rich jewel as a reward, in gratitude for their message."

"That may very well be so, and I hold it a good custom; but it must have been in times past, because now the custom must only be to give a piece of bread and cheese, which was what my lady Dulcinea gave me over the wall of a yard when I took my leave of her. And for a further mark of it, the cheese was sheep's cheese."

"She is generous in the extreme," said Don Quixote, "and if she did not give you a jewel of gold, it must without doubt have been because she did not have one there to hand to give you. But sleeves are welcome after Easter: I shall see her, and everything shall be put right.

"Do you know what I am amazed at, Sancho? That it seems to me you went and came back through the air, since you have taken little more than three days to go and come from here to El Toboso, there being more than thirty leagues from here to there. From which I give myself to understand that that wise necromancer who takes an interest in my affairs and is my friend — because there must be one, and there has to be one, on pain of my not being a good knight errant — I say that this person must have helped you along without your noticing it.

"For there are sages of this kind who take a knight errant sleeping in his bed and, without his knowing how or in what manner, he wakes next morning more than a thousand leagues from where he went to sleep. And if it were not for this, knights errant could not help one another in their dangers, as they do at every turn. For it happens that one of them is fighting in the mountains of Armenia with some dragon, or some fierce monster, or with another knight, and he is getting the worst of the battle and is already at the point of death — and when you least expect it, there appears over there, on top of a cloud or on a chariot of fire, another knight who is a friend of his, and who a little before was in England, and he helps him and saves him from death; and at night he is at home in his lodgings, having supper very comfortably. And it is often two or three thousand leagues from the one place to the other. And all this is done by the ingenuity and knowledge of these wise enchanters who look after these valorous knights.

"So, friend Sancho, I find no difficulty in believing that in so short a time you have gone and come back from this place to El Toboso, since, as I have said, some friendly sage must have carried you along without your noticing it."

"That must be it," said Sancho, "because upon my word Rocinante went along as if he had been a gypsy's donkey with quicksilver in his ears."

"Quicksilver, indeed!" said Don Quixote. "And a legion of devils besides, who are a people who travel and make others travel, without getting tired, as far as they take a fancy to.

"But leaving this aside: what do you think I ought to do now about my lady's ordering me to go and see her? Because although I see that I am obliged to carry out her command, I also see that I am prevented by the boon I have promised the princess who is travelling with us; and the law of chivalry forces me to keep my word before my own pleasure. On the one hand the desire to see my lady harries and wearies me; on the other, my pledged word and the glory I am to win in this enterprise urge and call me.

"But what I mean to do is to travel fast and get quickly to where this giant is; and on arriving I shall cut off his head and settle the princess peacefully in her estate, and at that very moment I shall turn back to see the light that lights my senses — to whom I shall make such excuses that she will come to think well of my delay, since she will see that it all works to the increase of her glory and fame. For all that I have won, win and shall win by arms in this life comes to me from the favour she gives me and from my being hers."

"Oh dear," said Sancho, "how damaged your worship is in the brainpan! Why, tell me, sir: does your worship mean to travel this whole road for nothing, and to let pass and lose so rich and distinguished a marriage as this, where they give you a kingdom for a dowry — a kingdom which upon my word I've heard is more than twenty thousand leagues round, and abounds in every one of the things that are needed to keep human life going, and is bigger than Portugal and Castile put together?

"Be quiet, for the love of God, and be ashamed of what you've said; and take my advice, and forgive me, and marry at once in the first place where there's a priest. And if not, there's our licentiate here, who'd do it beautifully. And note that I'm old enough now to give advice, and that this advice I'm giving fits your case like a mould; and that a bird in the hand is worth a vulture on the wing, because whoever has a good thing and chooses badly may be as angry as he likes but he'll get no satisfaction."

"Look, Sancho," answered Don Quixote: "if the advice you are giving me to marry is so that I shall be a king at once on killing the giant, and have the means to do you favours and give you what I promised, I would have you know that without marrying I shall be able to satisfy your wish very easily. Because before going into battle I shall stipulate, as a bonus, that if I come out the winner, then even if I do not marry they are to give me a part of the kingdom so that I can give it to whoever I like; and when they give it me, who do you want me to give it to except you?"

"That's clear enough," answered Sancho, "but let your worship take care to choose it towards the sea, because if the living doesn't suit me I can ship my black vassals off and do with them what I've said already. And your worship needn't trouble to go and see my lady Dulcinea for the present, but go and kill the giant and let's get this business finished; for by God, it's settled in my mind that it's going to be a very honourable and a very profitable one."

"I tell you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that you are right, and that I shall have to take your advice as far as going with the princess before going to see Dulcinea. And I warn you not to say anything to anybody, nor to those who are travelling with us, of what we have discussed and settled here; for since Dulcinea is so reserved that she does not want her thoughts known, it will not be right for me, or anybody else on my behalf, to reveal them."

"Well, if that's so," said Sancho, "how is it that your worship makes everybody he beats with his arm go and present themselves before my lady Dulcinea, which is as good as your signature that you love her and are in love with her? And since those who go are bound to go and kneel down in her presence and say they come on your worship's behalf to give her their obedience, how can the thoughts of the pair of you be kept hidden?"

"Oh, what a fool and what a simpleton you are!" said Don Quixote. "Do you not see, Sancho, that all that works to her greater exaltation? Because you must know that in this style of chivalry of ours it is a great honour for a lady to have many knights errant serving her, without their thoughts going any further than to serve her, simply because she is who she is, and expecting no other reward for their many good desires than that she should be content to accept them as her knights."

"With that kind of love," said Sancho, "I've heard it preached that we're to love Our Lord — for himself alone, without being moved by hope of glory or fear of punishment. Though I'd rather love and serve him for what I could get out of it."

"The devil take you for a peasant," said Don Quixote, "and what shrewd things you say sometimes! Anybody would think you had studied."

"Well, upon my word I can't read," answered Sancho.

At this Master Nicolás shouted to them to wait a little, as they wanted to stop and drink at a little spring that was there. Don Quixote stopped, to Sancho's no small pleasure, since he was tired by now of telling so many lies and was afraid his master would catch him out in his words; because although he knew that Dulcinea was a country girl of El Toboso, he had never seen her in his life.

Cardenio had by this time put on the clothes Dorotea had been wearing when they found her, which, although not very good, were a great improvement on the ones he was leaving off. They dismounted beside the spring, and with what the curate had provided himself with at the inn they satisfied — though only a little — the great hunger they were all carrying.

While they were doing this, a boy who was travelling that way happened to pass; and stopping to look very attentively at the people who were at the spring, a little later he rushed at Don Quixote and, throwing his arms round his legs, began to cry in good earnest, saying:

"Oh, my dear sir! Doesn't your worship know me? Look at me properly — I'm that boy Andrés that your worship untied from the oak tree where I was tied up."

Don Quixote recognised him, and taking him by the hand, he turned to those who were there and said:

"So that your worships may see how important it is to have knights errant in the world to undo the wrongs and injuries done in it by the insolent and wicked men who live in it, your worships must know that some days ago, passing through a wood, I heard some cries and some very pitiful shouts, as of an afflicted and needy person. I hurried at once, carried by my duty, towards the quarter where it seemed to me the lamentable voices were sounding, and I found tied to an oak tree this boy who is now standing here — at which I am delighted in my soul, because he will be a witness who will not let me lie in anything.

"I say he was tied to the oak, stripped from the waist up, and a peasant, who I afterwards learnt was his master, was flaying him with lashes from a mare's reins. And as soon as I saw him I asked the reason for so brutal a beating. The lout answered that he was whipping him because he was his servant, and that certain acts of carelessness he was guilty of came more from thieving than from stupidity. At which this child said: 'Sir, he's only whipping me because I ask him for my wages.' The master answered with I do not know what harangues and excuses, which although they were heard by me were not accepted. In short, I made him untie the boy, and took an oath from the peasant that he would take him along with him and pay him one real on top of another, and perfumed into the bargain.

"Is not all this true, Andrés my son? Did you not notice with what authority I ordered it, and with what humility he promised to do everything I laid on him and stated and required? Answer; do not be shy or hesitate over anything: tell these gentlemen what happened, so that it may be seen and considered how useful it is, as I say, to have knights errant on the roads."

"Everything your worship has said is perfectly true," answered the boy, "but the end of the business turned out completely the opposite of what your worship imagines."

"What do you mean, the opposite?" replied Don Quixote. "So the peasant did not pay you?"

"Not only did he not pay me," answered the boy, "but as soon as your worship had got out of the wood and we were left alone, he tied me up to the same oak again and gave me so many more lashes that I was left like Saint Bartholomew flayed. And at every lash he gave me he made some witty crack about your worship that would have made me laugh if I hadn't been in so much pain. In fact he left me in such a state that up to now I've been getting cured in a hospital of the harm the wicked peasant did me then.

"And your worship is to blame for the whole of it; because if you'd gone on your way and not come where nobody called you, and hadn't meddled in other people's business, my master would have been satisfied with giving me a dozen or two lashes and would then have let me go and paid me what he owed me. But as your worship dishonoured him so pointlessly and said so many insulting things to him, his temper caught fire; and as he couldn't take it out on your worship, when he found himself alone the storm burst on me, in such a way that I don't think I'll ever be a man again as long as I live."

"The trouble," said Don Quixote, "lay in my going away; for I should not have gone until I had left you paid, because I ought to have known well by long experience that there is no peasant who keeps the word he has given, if he sees that keeping it does not suit him. But you remember, Andrés, that I swore that if he did not pay you I would go and look for him, and that I would find him even if he hid himself in the belly of the whale."

"That's the truth," said Andrés, "but it was no use at all."

"Now you shall see whether it is any use," said Don Quixote.

And saying this, he got up in a great hurry and ordered Sancho to bridle Rocinante, who was grazing while they ate.

Dorotea asked him what it was he meant to do. He answered that he meant to go and look for the peasant and punish him for such wicked conduct, and get Andrés paid to the last maravedi, in spite and to the annoyance of every peasant in the world. To which she answered that he should note that, in accordance with the promised boon, he could not get involved in any undertaking until he had finished hers; and that since he knew this better than anybody, he should calm his breast until he came back from her kingdom.

"That is true," answered Don Quixote, "and Andrés must have patience until the return, as you say, madam. And I swear and promise him again afresh not to stop until I have him avenged and paid."

"I don't believe in those oaths," said Andrés. "I'd rather have something now to get me to Seville than all the vengeances in the world. Give me, if you've got any there, something to eat and take with me — and God be with your worship and with all knights errant, and may they go as well errant for themselves as they've gone for me."

Sancho took a piece of bread and another of cheese out of his store and, giving it to the lad, said to him:

"Here you are, brother Andrés, for a share of your misfortune falls on all of us."

"And what share falls on you?" asked Andrés.

"This share of bread and cheese I'm giving you," answered Sancho, "and God knows whether I'll be short of it or not; because I'd have you know, my friend, that we squires of knights errant are subject to a great deal of hunger and bad luck, and to other things besides that are better felt than told."

Andrés took hold of his bread and cheese, and seeing that nobody was giving him anything else, he bent his head and took the road in his hands, as they say. But it is quite true that on leaving he said to Don Quixote:

"For the love of God, sir knight errant, if you ever meet me again, even if you see them tearing me to pieces, don't help me or come to my rescue, but leave me to my misfortune; because it won't be so great that it isn't smaller than what will come to me from your worship's help — and God curse you, and all the knights errant that were ever born into the world."

Don Quixote was getting up to punish him, but the boy set off running in such a way that nobody dared follow him. Don Quixote was left utterly mortified by Andrés's story, and it was necessary for the others to take great care not to laugh, so as not to mortify him completely.
