Chapter 32: Which Treats of What Happened to All Don Quixote's Party at the Inn

Their good meal being over, they saddled at once; and without anything happening to them worth telling, they reached the inn the next day — the terror and dread of Sancho Panza; and although he would have liked not to go into it, there was no escaping it.

The innkeeper's wife, the innkeeper, his daughter and Maritornes, who saw Don Quixote and Sancho coming, came out to receive them with every sign of great delight; and he received them with a grave bearing and approval, and told them to get him ready a better bed than the last time. To which their hostess answered that if he paid better than the other time, she would give him one fit for a prince. Don Quixote said he would; and so they got him a reasonable one ready in the same garret as before, and he lay down at once, because he came in very much battered and short of wits.

He had hardly shut himself in when the hostess flew at the barber and, seizing him by the beard, said:

"By all that's holy, you shan't make any more use of my tail for your beard, and you'll give me my tail back; because my husband's thing is going about all over the floor, which is a shame — I mean the comb, that I used to hang from my good tail."

The barber would not give it her, however hard she pulled, until the licentiate told him to give it her, because there was no longer any need to make use of that device but he should uncover himself and show himself in his own shape, and tell Don Quixote that when the thieving galley slaves had stripped them they had come to that inn in flight; and that if he asked about the princess's squire, they would tell him that she had sent him on ahead to give notice to the people of her kingdom that she was coming and was bringing with her the deliverer of them all. With this the barber willingly gave the tail back to the innkeeper's wife, and they likewise returned all the other accessories she had lent for Don Quixote's deliverance.

Everybody at the inn was amazed at Dorotea's beauty, and even at the fine build of the shepherd lad Cardenio. The curate had them prepare a meal for them from whatever there was in the inn, and the host, in hopes of better payment, promptly prepared them a reasonable dinner. And all this while Don Quixote slept, and they were of the opinion that he should not be woken, because sleeping would do him more good just then than eating.

Over dinner, with the innkeeper, his wife, his daughter, Maritornes and all the travellers there, they discussed Don Quixote's strange madness and the state they had found him in. The hostess told them what had happened to her and to the carrier with him, and looking round in case Sancho happened to be there and not seeing him, she told them the whole story of his blanketing — at which they got no small amount of pleasure. And when the curate said that the books of chivalry Don Quixote had read had turned his brain, the innkeeper said:

"I don't know how that can be; because in truth, as far as I understand, there's no better reading in the world. I've got two or three of them there myself, along with some other papers, and they've genuinely given me new life — not only me but a lot of other people. Because at harvest time a lot of reapers gather here on holidays, and there are always some who can read; and one of them picks up one of these books, and more than thirty of us gather round him, and we listen to him with such pleasure that it takes a thousand grey hairs off us. At least I can say for myself that when I hear about those furious, terrible blows the knights lay on, it makes me want to do the same, and I could go on listening to them night and day."

"And I'm no different," said the innkeeper's wife, "because I never have a good moment in my house except the one when you're listening to the reading — you're so besotted then that you forget to quarrel."

"That's the truth," said Maritornes; "and upon my word I greatly enjoy hearing those things too, they're very lovely. Especially when they tell how one lady or another is under some orange trees with her arms round her knight, and a duenna is standing guard for them, dying of envy and in a great fright. I say the whole of it is like honey."

"And what do you think, mistress?" said the curate, speaking to the innkeeper's daughter.

"I don't know, sir, upon my soul," she answered. "I listen to it as well, and in truth, although I don't understand it, I get pleasure from hearing it. But I don't take pleasure in the blows my father takes pleasure in, but in the laments the knights make when they're away from their ladies — for in truth they sometimes make me cry out of the pity I feel for them."

"So you would have given them relief, mistress," said Dorotea, "if they had wept for you?"

"I don't know what I'd have done," answered the girl; "I only know that some of those ladies are so cruel that their knights call them tigers and lions and a thousand other filthy things. And, Jesus! I don't know what sort of people they are, so heartless and so unfeeling, that rather than look at an honourable man they let him die or go mad. I don't know what all that prudishness is for: if they do it out of respectability, let them marry the men, for that's the very thing the men want."

"Be quiet, child," said the innkeeper's wife, "for you seem to know a great deal about these things, and it isn't right for young girls to know or say so much."

"As this gentleman asked me," she answered, "I couldn't help answering him."

"Very well then," said the curate; "bring me those books, my good host, for I want to see them."

"With pleasure," he answered.

And going into his room, he brought out of it an old little portmanteau fastened with a little chain; and opening it, he found in it three large books and some papers in a very good hand, written by hand. The first book he opened he saw was Don Cirongilio of Thrace, and the second Felixmarte of Hircania, and the other the History of the Great Captain Gonzalo Hernández de Córdoba, with the Life of Diego García de Paredes. As soon as the curate read the first two titles, he turned his face to the barber and said:

"What we need here now is my friend's housekeeper and his niece."

"We don't," answered the barber; "I know how to carry them off to the yard or the chimney myself — and upon my word there's a very good fire in it."

"So your worship wants to burn more books?" said the innkeeper.

"No more," said the curate, "than these two: the Don Cirongilio and the Felixmarte."

"But are my books heretics or phlegmatics, by any chance," said the innkeeper, "that you want to burn them?"

"Schismatics you mean, my friend," said the barber, "not phlegmatics."

"That's it," replied the innkeeper; "but if you want to burn one, let it be that one about the Great Captain and that Diego García; because I'd sooner let them burn a child of mine than let them burn either of the others."

"My dear brother," said the curate, "these two books are lying books and are full of absurdities and ravings; and this one about the Great Captain is true history, and contains the deeds of Gonzalo Hernández de Córdoba, who for his many great exploits deserved to be called by the whole world the Great Captain — a famous and glorious name, and deserved by him alone. And this Diego García de Paredes was a distinguished gentleman, a native of the city of Trujillo in Extremadura, a most valiant soldier, and of such natural strength that he stopped a millwheel with one finger in the middle of its spin; and, standing with a two-handed sword at the entrance to a bridge, he held back a whole innumerable army from crossing it; and he did other such things that — since he tells them and writes them himself, with the modesty of a gentleman writing his own chronicle — if somebody else, free and unbiased, had written them, they would have consigned to oblivion those of your Hectors, Achilleses and Rolands."

"Get along with you!" said the said innkeeper. "Look what he's astonished at — stopping a millwheel! By God, your worship ought to read now what Felixmarte of Hircania did, who with one back-handed stroke split five giants through the middle as if they'd been made of beans, like the little friars children make. And another time he charged an enormous and most powerful army, where he had more than a million six hundred thousand soldiers against him, all armed from foot to head, and he scattered the whole lot of them as if they'd been flocks of sheep.

"And what will they tell me about the excellent Don Cirongilio of Thrace, who was so brave and spirited, as will be seen in the book, where it tells how, sailing along a river, a fiery serpent came out at him from the middle of the water; and he, as soon as he saw it, threw himself on it and got astride its scaly back and gripped its throat with both hands so hard that, the serpent seeing that he was strangling it, it had no other way out but to let itself sink to the bottom of the river, carrying the knight with it, because he would never let go? And when they got down there he found himself in palaces and gardens so lovely that it was a marvel; and then the serpent turned into an ancient old man, who told him so many things that there's nothing more to hear. Be quiet, sir; if you heard this you'd go mad with pleasure. Two figs for the Great Captain and for that Diego García you talk about!"

Hearing this, Dorotea said quietly to Cardenio:

"Our host is not far off making a second part to Don Quixote."

"So it seems to me," answered Cardenio; "because, by the signs he gives, he takes it for certain that everything these books tell happened exactly as they write it, and barefoot friars would not make him believe anything else."

"Look, my friend," the curate said again, "there never was in the world a Felixmarte of Hircania, or a Don Cirongilio of Thrace, or other such knights as the books of chivalry tell of; because the whole thing is the invention and fiction of idle wits, who composed them for the purpose you speak of, of passing the time, as your reapers pass it reading them. Because I genuinely swear to you that such knights never existed in the world, and that such exploits and absurdities never happened in it."

"Tell that to another dog with that bone!" answered the innkeeper. "As if I didn't know how many make five and where my shoe pinches! Don't imagine your worship can feed me pap, because by God I'm not so green. It's a fine thing that your worship should want to give me to understand that everything these good books say is absurdity and lies — printed as they are with the licence of the gentlemen of the Royal Council, as though they were the sort of people who'd let so many lies be printed all together, and so many battles and so many enchantments that they take your wits away!"

"I have told you already, my friend," replied the curate, "that this is done to entertain our idle thoughts. And just as in well-ordered states it is allowed that there should be games of chess, ball and billiards to entertain those who have no work and ought not and cannot work, so it is allowed to print and to have such books, in the belief — as is the truth — that there could be nobody so ignorant as to take any of these books for true history.

"And if it were permitted me now, and the company required it, I would say some things about what books of chivalry ought to have in them if they are to be good ones, which would perhaps be of profit and even of pleasure to some people. But I hope a time will come when I can communicate it to somebody who can put it right; and in the meantime believe what I have told you, master innkeeper, and take your books, and settle it with their truths or their lies for yourself, and much good may they do you — and God grant that you may not come to limp on the same foot your guest Don Quixote limps on."

"Not I," answered the innkeeper. "I shan't be so mad as to make myself a knight errant; for I can see plainly that what was the custom in that time, when they say those famous knights went about the world, isn't the custom now."

Halfway through this conversation Sancho arrived, and he was left very confused and thoughtful at having heard it said that knights errant were not the custom nowadays, and that all the books of chivalry were foolishness and lies. And he resolved in his heart to wait and see what his master's journey came to; and that if it did not turn out with the happiness he expected, he was determined to leave him and go back to his wife and children and his usual work.

The innkeeper was carrying off the portmanteau and the books, but the curate said to him:

"Wait; I want to see what those papers are that are written in such a good hand."

The host took them out, and giving them to him to read, he saw some eight sheets of manuscript, and at the beginning they had a large title that said: The Tale of Reckless Curiosity. The curate read three or four lines to himself and said:

"Certainly the title of this tale does not strike me badly, and it makes me want to read the whole of it."

To which the innkeeper answered:

"Then your reverence may well read it; because I can tell you that some guests who have read it here have been very much pleased with it and have asked me for it very insistently. But I haven't wanted to give it them, meaning to give it back to whoever left this portmanteau forgotten here with these books and those papers; for it may well be that its owner will come back this way some time. And although I know I shall miss the books, upon my word I mean to give them back to him: for innkeeper though I am, I am still a Christian."

"You are quite right, my friend," said the curate; "but for all that, if the tale pleases me, you must let me copy it out."

"Very willingly," answered the innkeeper.

While the two of them were saying this, Cardenio had taken up the tale and begun to read in it; and thinking the same as the curate, he begged him to read it in a way that everybody could hear.

"I would read it," said the curate, "if it were not better to spend this time in sleeping than in reading."

"It will be rest enough for me," said Dorotea, "to pass the time hearing some tale, since my spirit is not yet so quiet that it lets me sleep when I ought to."

"Well then," said the curate, "I shall read it, if only out of curiosity; perhaps there will be something enjoyable in it."

Master Nicolás hurried to beg him the same, and Sancho too; which the curate seeing, and understanding that he would give everybody pleasure and would get some himself, he said:

"Then since that is so, let everybody give me their attention, for the tale begins like this."
