Chapter 33: In Which Is Told the Tale of Reckless Curiosity

In Florence, a rich and famous city of Italy in the province they call Tuscany, there lived Anselmo and Lotario, two rich and distinguished gentlemen, and such friends that by way of pre-eminence and by antonomasia they were called the two friends by everybody who knew them. They were unmarried, young men of the same age and the same habits — all of which was cause enough for the two of them to answer each other with a reciprocal friendship.

It is quite true that Anselmo was rather more inclined to the pastimes of love than Lotario, whose taste ran to hunting; but when the occasion came, Anselmo would give up going after his own pleasures to follow Lotario's, and Lotario would leave his to attend on Anselmo's. And in this way their wills went so exactly together that no well-regulated clock kept time with them.

Anselmo was head over ears in love with a distinguished and beautiful young lady of the same city, the daughter of such good parents and so good in herself that he decided — with the approval of his friend Lotario, without which he did nothing — to ask her parents for her as his wife; and so he put it into effect. And the man who carried the message was Lotario, and the man who concluded the business so much to his friend's liking that in a short time he found himself put in possession of what he wanted; and Camila was so pleased at having got Anselmo for a husband that she never stopped giving thanks to heaven, and to Lotario, by whose means so great a good had come to her.

The first few days — as all wedding days are usually cheerful — Lotario went on frequenting his friend Anselmo's house as he used to, doing his best to honour him, entertain him and give him pleasure in every way he could. But once the wedding was over and the frequency of visits and congratulations had settled down, Lotario began carefully to be careless about going to Anselmo's house, since it seemed to him — as it is reasonable that it should seem to all people of judgement — that a man ought not to visit and frequent the houses of his married friends in the same way as when they were single. Because although good and true friendship neither can nor ought to be suspect in anything, still, a married man's honour is so delicate a thing that it seems it can be offended even by his own brothers, let alone by his friends.

Anselmo noticed Lotario's slackness and complained bitterly about it, telling him that if he had known that getting married was going to prevent him from associating with him as he used to, he would never have done it; and that if, by the good understanding the two of them had while he was single, they had earned so sweet a name as being called the two friends, he should not allow so famous and so agreeable a name to be lost simply for the sake of playing the man of discretion, with no other occasion at all. And so he begged him — if it was permissible for such a way of speaking to be used between them — to be master of his house again and to come in and out of it as before, assuring him that his wife Camila had no other pleasure and no other wish than the one he wanted her to have, and that having learnt how truly the two of them loved each other, she was puzzled to see so much aloofness in him.

To all these and a great many other arguments that Anselmo made to Lotario to persuade him to come back to his house as he used to, Lotario answered with so much prudence, judgement and good sense that Anselmo was satisfied of his friend's good intentions; and they agreed together that on two days a week and on holidays Lotario should come and eat with him. And although this was settled between them, Lotario resolved to do no more than what he saw was best suited to his friend's honour, whose good name he valued more than his own.

He used to say, and said rightly, that a married man whom heaven had granted a beautiful wife should take as much care about what men friends he brought into his house as about seeing what women friends his wife associated with; because what is not done and arranged in the squares, in the churches, at public festivals or on pilgrimages — things husbands cannot always refuse their wives — is arranged and made easy in the house of the woman friend or relative who is most trusted.

Lotario also used to say that married men needed to have some friend each who would warn them of the mistakes in their conduct; because it often happens that, with the great love a husband has for his wife, he either does not warn her or does not tell her, so as not to annoy her, that she should do or leave off doing certain things which, done or not done, would work to his honour or his discredit. And being warned of this by his friend, he could easily put everything right.

But where is a friend to be found as judicious and as loyal and true as Lotario asks for here? I certainly do not know: only Lotario was such a man, who with all diligence and care looked after his friend's honour and contrived to trim, shave and shorten the days of the agreement about going to his house, so that the coming and going of a rich young man, well-bred and well-born, and with the good qualities he believed he had, into the house of so beautiful a woman as Camila, should not look bad to the idle common people and to wandering, malicious eyes. Because although her goodness and worth could put a bridle on any slandering tongue, still he did not want to put her good name or his friend's in any doubt; and for this reason he spent and occupied most of the agreed days on other things, which he gave out were unavoidable. And so, in complaints from the one and excuses from the other, a great many hours and parts of the day were passed.

It happened, then, that one day when the two of them were walking about a meadow outside the city, Anselmo said to Lotario something like this:

"You supposed, friend Lotario, that for the favours God has done me in making me the son of such parents as mine were, and in giving me, with no sparing hand, the goods both of nature and of fortune, I cannot answer with a gratitude that comes up to the good I have received — and above all to the good he did me in giving me you for a friend and Camila for my own wife: two treasures which I value, if not to the degree I ought, at least to the degree I can.

"Well, with all these things, which are generally the whole of what men live contented with and can live contented with, I live the most distressed and the most miserable man in the whole universe. Because for I do not know how many days a desire has been wearying and pressing on me so strange and so far outside the common way of other men that I am astonished at myself, and blame myself and scold myself when I am alone, and try to keep quiet about it and hide it even from my own thoughts. And it has been about as possible for me to come out with this secret as if I had deliberately tried to tell it to the whole world. And since in fact it has to come out into the open, I want it to be into the open of the archive of your secrecy; trusting that with it, and with the effort you will make, as my true friend, to put me right, I shall soon find myself free of the distress it causes me, and my happiness through your care will come up to the level my unhappiness has reached through my own madness."

Anselmo's words held Lotario in suspense, and he did not know what such a long preparation or preamble would come to; and although he kept turning over in his imagination what that desire could be that was wearying his friend so much, he always fell a long way wide of the mark of the truth. And to get quickly out of the agony that suspense caused him, he told him that he was doing a plain injury to their great friendship by going about looking for roundabout ways to tell him his most hidden thoughts, since he could certainly count on getting from him either advice for keeping them in check or help for carrying them out.

"That is the truth," answered Anselmo, "and with that confidence I let you know, friend Lotario, that the desire that wearies me is wondering whether Camila, my wife, is as good and as perfect as I think she is; and I cannot be certain of this truth except by testing her in such a way that the test shows the carats of her goodness, as fire shows those of gold.

"Because it is my opinion, my friend, that a woman is no better than she is or is not solicited, and that only that woman is strong who does not bend to the promises, the gifts, the tears and the constant importunities of eager lovers. For what is there to be thankful for," he said, "in a woman's being good, if nobody tells her to be bad? What is so great about a woman's being quiet and modest when she is given no opportunity to break out, and when she knows that she has a husband who, catching her in her first indiscretion, will take her life? So the woman who is good out of fear or for want of opportunity, I am not prepared to hold in the esteem in which I shall hold the woman who is solicited and pursued and comes out with the crown of victory.

"So that for these reasons, and for a great many others I could tell you to give credit and strength to the opinion I hold, I want Camila my wife to pass through these difficulties and be refined and assayed in the fire of finding herself courted and solicited — and by a man of enough worth to set his desires on her. And if she comes out of this battle, as I believe she will, with the palm, I shall count my good fortune unequalled; I shall be able to say that the emptiness of my desires is filled; I shall say that the strong woman fell to my lot, of whom the Wise Man says: who shall find her? And if this turns out the opposite of what I expect, then with the pleasure of seeing that I was right in my opinion I shall bear without pain the pain that my very costly experiment may reasonably cause me.

"And granted that nothing you may say to me against my wish is to be of any use in making me give up carrying it out, I want you, friend Lotario, to make yourself ready to be the instrument that works this piece of business I want; and I shall give you the opportunity to do it, and shall not fail to give you everything I see is needed for soliciting a modest, honourable, retiring and disinterested woman.

"And what moves me, among other things, to entrust so hard an enterprise to you is seeing that if Camila is conquered by you, the conquest is not to be pushed to the last extremity, but only to counting as done what is to be done, out of proper respect. And so I shall not be injured except in intention, and my injury will stay hidden in the virtue of your silence, which I know very well will be as everlasting as death's in anything that touches me. So that if you want me to have a life I can call one, you must from this moment enter this battle of love, not lukewarmly or lazily but with the eagerness and diligence my desire requires, and with the confidence our friendship assures me of."

These were the words Anselmo said to Lotario, to all of which he listened so attentively that except for the ones already written that he said to him, he did not open his lips until Anselmo had finished. And seeing that he was saying no more, after he had looked at him for a good while, as though he were looking at some other thing he had never seen before that caused him astonishment and dread, he said to him:

"I cannot persuade myself, friend Anselmo, that the things you have said to me are not a joke; for if I had thought you were saying them in earnest, I would not have let you get so far, since by refusing to listen to you I would have prevented your long harangue. Without a doubt I imagine either that you do not know me or that I do not know you. But no: I know very well that you are Anselmo, and you know that I am Lotario. The trouble is that I think you are not the Anselmo you used to be, and you must have thought that I am not the Lotario I ought to be either. Because the things you have said to me are not the things of that Anselmo my friend, nor are the things you ask of me to be asked of that Lotario you know.

"For good friends are to test their friends and make use of them, as a poet said, usque ad aras — which meant that they were not to make use of their friendship in things that were against God. Well, if a heathen felt this about friendship, how much better ought a Christian to feel it, who knows that for no human friendship is he to lose the divine one? And when a friend throws the bar so far as to set aside the claims of heaven in order to attend to his friend's, it ought not to be for light matters of small moment but for those on which his friend's honour and life depend.

"Then tell me now, Anselmo: which of these two things of yours is in danger, that I should venture to gratify you and do a thing as detestable as the one you are asking? Neither of them, certainly; on the contrary, you are asking me, as I understand it, to try and set about taking away your honour and your life, and taking away mine along with them. Because if I am to try to take away your honour, it is clear that I am taking away your life, since a man without honour is worse than a dead man; and I, being the instrument — as you want me to be — of so much harm to you, do I not come to be left dishonoured and, by the same reasoning, without a life?

"Listen, friend Anselmo, and have the patience not to answer me until I have finished telling you what occurs to me about what your desire has asked of you; for there will be time enough for you to reply and for me to listen."

"With pleasure," said Anselmo. "Say what you like."

And Lotario went on to say:

"It seems to me, Anselmo, that you have your wits at this moment in the state the Moors are always in, who cannot be given to understand the error of their sect by quotations from Holy Scripture, or by arguments that consist in the speculation of the understanding, or that are founded on articles of faith; but they must be brought palpable, easy, intelligible, demonstrative, indubitable examples, with mathematical demonstrations that cannot be denied — as when they say, 'If from two equal parts we take away equal parts, those that are left are equal too.' And when they do not understand this in words, as in fact they do not, it has to be shown them with the hands and put in front of their eyes; and even then nobody is able to persuade them of the truths of my sacred religion.

"And I shall have to use this same procedure and method with you; because the desire that has been born in you goes so far astray and so far outside anything that has a shadow of reason in it that it seems to me the time I spend giving you to understand your simplicity — for at present I do not want to give it another name — will be time wasted. And I am even inclined to leave you in your folly, as a punishment for your wicked wish; but the friendship I have for you does not let me use such severity, and does not allow me to leave you standing in such an obvious danger of ruining yourself.

"And so that you may see it clearly, tell me, Anselmo: have you not told me that I am to solicit a woman who keeps herself to herself, to persuade a modest woman, to make offers to a disinterested woman, to court a prudent woman? Yes, you have told me so. Well, if you know that you have a wife who keeps to herself, who is modest, disinterested and prudent, what are you looking for? And if you think that she is bound to come out the winner from all my assaults, as she will without a doubt, what better titles do you think you can give her afterwards than the ones she has now, or what will she be afterwards more than she is now? Either you do not hold her to be what you say, or you do not know what you are asking.

"If you do not hold her to be what you say, then why do you want to test her, instead of doing with her whatever comes best to your liking, as with a bad woman? But if she is as good as you believe, it will be an impertinent thing to make an experiment on the truth itself, since once it is made it will be left with the same estimation it had before.

"So that it is a conclusive argument that attempting things from which harm can come to us sooner than profit is the mark of unreasoning and reckless judgements — and the more so when people want to attempt things they are neither forced nor compelled to, and which show from a long way off that attempting them is plain madness.

"Difficult things are attempted for God, or for the world, or for both together. Those attempted for God are the ones the saints attempted, attempting to live the life of angels in human bodies. Those attempted out of respect for the world are those of the men who cross such an infinity of water, such a diversity of climates, such strangeness of peoples, in order to get these things they call the goods of fortune. And those attempted for God and for the world together are those of brave soldiers, who have hardly seen a gap opened in the enemy's wall as wide as a round cannonball could make when, putting aside all fear and without reasoning or noticing the plain danger that threatens them, carried on the wings of the desire to stand up for their faith, their nation and their king, they throw themselves fearlessly into the middle of a thousand opposing deaths that are waiting for them.

"These are the things that are usually attempted, and it is honour, glory and profit to attempt them, however full they may be of drawbacks and dangers. But the thing you say you want to attempt and put into practice will get you neither glory from God, nor goods of fortune, nor fame among men. Because supposing you come out of it as you want, you will be left no prouder, no richer and no more honoured than you are now; and if you do not come out of it, you will find yourself in the greatest misery that can be imagined. For it will be no use to you then to think that nobody knows the disaster that has happened to you, because it will be enough to afflict you and undo you that you know it yourself.

"And to confirm this truth I want to tell you a stanza that the famous poet Luigi Tansillo made at the end of the first part of his Tears of Saint Peter, which goes like this:

	The grief grows, and the shame grows too,
	in Peter, when the day has shown itself;
	and although he sees nobody there, he is ashamed
	of himself, at seeing that he had sinned.
	For a great heart needs more than being looked at
	to move it to feel shame:
	it is ashamed of itself when it goes wrong,
	even if it sees nobody but heaven and earth.

"So that you will not escape your pain by secrecy; on the contrary, you will have to weep continually — if not tears from your eyes, then tears of blood from your heart, as that simple-minded doctor wept whom our poet tells us made the test of the cup, which the prudent Rinaldo, reasoning better, excused himself from making. And granted that that is a poetical fiction, it has shut up inside it moral secrets worth noting and understanding and imitating.

"What is more, with what I mean to tell you now you will finally come to recognise the great mistake you want to make. Tell me, Anselmo: if heaven or good luck had made you the lord and lawful possessor of a most perfect diamond, of whose quality and carats every jeweller who saw it was satisfied, and if they all with one voice and by common opinion said that in carats, quality and fineness it came up to everything the nature of such a stone could reach, and if you yourself believed it so, knowing nothing to the contrary — would it be right for you to take it into your head to take that diamond and put it between an anvil and a hammer, and there, by sheer force of blows and arms, test whether it is as hard and as fine as they say? And still more so if you actually did it? For supposing the stone resisted so foolish a test, it would not get any more value or any more fame from it; and if it broke, which it might well do, would not everything be lost? Certainly it would, leaving its owner in everybody's opinion as a simpleton.

"Then reckon, friend Anselmo, that Camila is a most perfect diamond, both in your estimation and in other people's, and that it is not right to put her in a position where she may be broken; since even if she is left whole, she cannot rise to any greater value than she has now, and if she failed and did not resist, consider from now on what state you would be left in without her, and how rightly you could blame yourself for having been the cause of her ruin and of your own.

"See that there is no jewel in the world worth as much as a chaste and honourable woman, and that the whole honour of women consists in the good opinion people have of them; and since your wife's is such that it reaches the extreme of goodness you know, why do you want to put this truth in doubt?

"Look, my friend, woman is an imperfect animal, and one ought not to put obstacles in her way to trip her up and make her fall, but to take them out and clear her road of every hindrance, so that without difficulty she may run lightly to attain the perfection she lacks, which consists in being virtuous.

"The naturalists tell us that the ermine is a little animal with an extremely white coat, and that when they want to hunt it, the hunters use this device: knowing the places it usually passes and comes to, they block them off with mud; and then, driving it, they head it towards that place; and as soon as the ermine reaches the mud it stands still and lets itself be taken and caught, rather than pass through the mire and lose and dirty its whiteness, which it values more than liberty and life.

"The modest and chaste woman is an ermine, and the virtue of modesty is whiter and cleaner than snow; and whoever wants her not to lose it, but rather to keep and preserve it, must use a different method from the one used with the ermine — because they are not to put in front of her the mire of the gifts and attentions of importunate lovers; since perhaps, and even without the perhaps, she has not enough virtue and natural strength to trample and pass through those obstacles by herself, and it is necessary to take them away and to put in front of her the cleanness of virtue and the beauty that a good name contains in itself.

"The good woman is likewise like a mirror of bright, clear glass; but it is liable to be misted over and darkened by any breath that touches it. With the modest woman one must use the method one uses with holy relics: worship them and do not touch them. A good woman is to be guarded and prized as a beautiful garden full of flowers and roses is guarded and prized, whose owner allows nobody to walk in it or handle it; it is enough that from a distance, and through the iron railings, people should enjoy its fragrance and its beauty.

"Finally, I want to tell you some verses that have come into my memory, which I heard in a modern play and which seem to me to be to the purpose of what we are discussing. A prudent old man was advising another, the father of a young girl, to keep her in, guard her and shut her up; and among other arguments he said this to him:"
