Chapter 33: In Which Is Told the Tale of Reckless Curiosity
(Part 2 of 2)

	Woman is made of glass;
	but one is not to test
	whether she can break or not,
	because anything might be.

	And breaking is the easier thing,
	and it is no sense to put
	at risk of being broken
	what cannot be soldered again.

	And let everybody hold
	this opinion, and I found it on reason:
	that if there are Danaës in the world,
	there are showers of gold as well.

"Everything I have said to you so far, Anselmo, has been about what concerns you; and now it is right that something should be heard about what concerns me. And if it is long, forgive me, for the labyrinth you have got into and want me to get you out of requires all of it.

"You take me for your friend and want to take away my honour, a thing that is against all friendship; and you not only aim at this but try to get me to take yours away from you. That you want to take mine away from me is clear, since when Camila sees that I am soliciting her, as you ask, it is certain that she must take me for a man without honour and without decency, seeing that I am attempting and doing a thing so far outside what being who I am and your friendship oblige me to. That you want me to take yours away from you there is no doubt, because Camila, seeing that I am soliciting her, is bound to think that I have seen in her some lightness that gave me the boldness to reveal my wicked desire to her; and her holding herself dishonoured, her dishonour touches you, as a thing belonging to you.

"And from this arises what is commonly discussed: that the husband of an adulterous wife, even though he does not know it and has given no occasion for his wife not to be what she ought, and even though it has not been in his hands, or through his carelessness and want of caution, to prevent his misfortune — for all that, they call him and name him by a name of reproach and contempt; and in a certain way those who know his wife's wickedness look at him with eyes of scorn, instead of looking at him with eyes of pity, seeing that it is not through his own fault but through the pleasure of his wicked partner that he is in that misfortune.

"But I want to tell you the reason why the husband of a bad wife is with just cause dishonoured, even though he does not know she is bad, and is not at fault, and has had no part in it and given no occasion for her being so. And do not grow tired of hearing me, for it will all work to your profit.

"When God created our first father in the earthly Paradise, Holy Scripture says that God poured sleep on Adam, and that while he was sleeping he took a rib out of his left side, from which he formed our mother Eve; and as soon as Adam woke and looked at her, he said: 'This is flesh of my flesh and bone of my bones.' And God said: 'For this shall a man leave his father and mother, and they shall be two in one same flesh.' And then the divine sacrament of matrimony was instituted, with such bonds that death alone can untie them. And this miraculous sacrament has such force and virtue that it makes two different persons one same flesh; and it does more still in good married couples, who, although they have two souls, have no more than one will.

"And from this it comes about that, the wife's flesh being one and the same with the husband's, the stains that fall on it, or the defects she brings on herself, work back on the husband's flesh, even though he has not, as has been said, given occasion for that harm. Because just as the pain of the foot, or of any limb of the human body, is felt by the whole body, since it is all of one same flesh, and the head feels the injury to the ankle although it did not cause it, so the husband shares in his wife's dishonour, being one same thing with her. And since the honours and dishonours of the world all are and are born of flesh and blood, and those of the bad wife are of that kind, it necessarily follows that the husband gets a share of them and is held dishonoured without knowing it.

"See, then, Anselmo, what danger you are putting yourself in by wanting to disturb the peace your good wife lives in. See out of what an empty and impertinent curiosity you want to stir up the humours that are now settled in your chaste wife's breast. Notice that what you are risking to gain is little, and that what you will lose will be so much that I shall leave it where it is, because I have no words to describe it.

"But if everything I have said is not enough to move you from your wicked purpose, you may well look for another instrument of your dishonour and misfortune, for I do not mean to be it, even if I lose your friendship for it — which is the greatest loss I can imagine."

Having said this, the virtuous and prudent Lotario fell silent; and Anselmo was left so confused and thoughtful that for a good while he could not answer him a word. But at last he said to him:

"With the attention you have seen, friend Lotario, I have listened to everything you wanted to say to me; and in your arguments, examples and comparisons I have seen the great good sense you have and the height of true friendship you have reached. And likewise I see and confess that if I do not follow your opinion and go after my own, I am running away from good and running after evil.

"This granted, you must consider that I am now suffering from the illness some women have, who take a fancy to eat earth, plaster, charcoal and other things that are worse — disgusting even to look at, let alone to eat. So that it is necessary to use some artifice for me to be cured; and this could easily be done, simply by your beginning, however lukewarmly and pretendingly, to solicit Camila. She will not be so soft as to lay her modesty on the ground at the first encounters; and with this beginning alone I shall be content, and you will have done what you owe to our friendship — not only giving me my life but persuading me that I am not without honour.

"And you are obliged to do this for one reason alone; and it is that, since I am, as I am, determined to put this test into practice, you are not to allow me to give an account of my folly to any other person, by which I would put in jeopardy the honour you are trying to keep me from losing. And if your own is not at the point it ought to be in Camila's opinion while you are soliciting her, it matters little or nothing, since shortly, seeing in her the integrity we expect, you will be able to tell her the plain truth of our device, and your reputation will go back to what it was.

"And since you are risking so little and can give me so much satisfaction by taking the risk, do not fail to do it, however many objections may be put in front of you; since, as I have said already, simply by your beginning I shall count the case as closed."

Lotario, seeing Anselmo's settled will, and not knowing what further examples to bring him or what further arguments to show him so that he should not follow it, and seeing that he was threatening to give an account of his wicked desire to somebody else, decided, to avoid a greater evil, to satisfy him and do what he asked — with the purpose and intention of steering the business in such a way that, without disturbing Camila's mind, Anselmo should be satisfied. And so he answered him that he should not communicate his idea to anybody else, and that he took that enterprise upon himself and would begin it whenever it best pleased Anselmo.

Anselmo embraced him tenderly and affectionately and thanked him for his offer as though he had done him some great favour; and it was agreed between the two of them that the work should begin the very next day. Anselmo said he would give him place and time to speak to Camila alone, and would likewise give him money and jewels to give her and to offer her. He advised him to give her music and to write verses in her praise; and that if he did not want to take the trouble of making them, he would make them himself. Lotario offered to do it all — with a very different intention from the one Anselmo supposed.

And with this arrangement they went back to Anselmo's house, where they found Camila anxious and worried, waiting for her husband, because that day he was later than usual in coming.

Lotario went off to his own house, and Anselmo stayed in his, as pleased as Lotario was thoughtful, not knowing what plan to lay so as to come well out of that impertinent business. But that night he thought of the way he would take to deceive Anselmo without offending Camila; and the next day he came to eat with his friend, and was well received by Camila, who received him and made much of him very willingly, understanding the goodwill her husband had for him.

They finished eating, the cloth was cleared, and Anselmo told Lotario to stay there with Camila while he went to see about a necessary piece of business, and that he would be back within an hour and a half. Camila begged him not to go, and Lotario offered to keep him company; but nothing was any use with Anselmo. On the contrary, he pressed Lotario to stay and wait for him, because he had a matter of great importance to discuss with him. He also told Camila not to leave Lotario alone until he came back. In fact he knew so well how to feign the necessity — or the foolishness — of his going away that nobody could have understood it was feigned.

Anselmo went, and Camila and Lotario were left alone at the table, because the rest of the household had all gone off to eat. Lotario saw himself put into the lists his friend had wanted, and with the enemy in front of him who could have conquered a squadron of armed knights with her beauty alone: consider whether it was reasonable that Lotario should be afraid of her.

But what he did was to put his elbow on the arm of his chair and his open hand against his cheek, and, begging Camila's pardon for the discourtesy, said that he wanted to rest a little until Anselmo came back. Camila answered that he would rest better on the sofa than in the chair, and so begged him to come and sleep on it. Lotario would not, and stayed there asleep until Anselmo came back; who, finding Camila in her own room and Lotario asleep, believed that as he had been away so long the two of them had by now had time to talk, and even to sleep, and could not wait for the hour when Lotario should wake so as to go out with him again and ask him about his fortunes.

Everything turned out as he wanted: Lotario woke, and the two of them left the house at once, and so he asked him what he wanted to know. And Lotario answered him that it had not seemed to him a good idea to reveal himself completely the first time; and so he had done nothing but praise Camila for her beauty, telling her that in the whole city there was no other subject of talk than her beauty and good sense; and that this had seemed to him a good beginning for making a start on winning her goodwill, and disposing her to listen to him another time with pleasure — using in this the device the devil uses when he wants to deceive somebody who is standing on the watchtower looking out for himself: he transforms himself into an angel of light, being an angel of darkness, and putting good appearances in front of him, at the end reveals who he is and gets his way, if his trick is not found out at the beginning.

All this pleased Anselmo greatly, and he said he would give him the same opportunity every day, even without going out of the house, because he would occupy himself in it with things that would keep Camila from finding out about their device.

It happened, then, that a great many days went by in which, without Lotario's saying a word to Camila, he answered Anselmo that he was speaking to her and could never get out of her the smallest sign of agreeing to anything that was wrong, or even give a sign of the shadow of hope; on the contrary, he said, she threatened him that if he did not get rid of that wicked thought, she would tell her husband.

"Very good," said Anselmo. "So far Camila has resisted words; we must see how she resists deeds. Tomorrow I shall give you two thousand gold crowns to offer her, and even to give her, and as many again to buy jewels to bait her with. For women are usually fond — and the more so if they are beautiful, however chaste they may be — of this business of turning themselves out well and going about elegantly. And if she resists this temptation, I shall be satisfied and shall trouble you no further."

Lotario answered that since he had begun, he would carry that enterprise through to the end, although he expected to come out of it worn out and beaten. The next day he received the four thousand crowns, and with them four thousand confusions, because he did not know what to say by way of a new lie. But in the end he decided to tell him that Camila stood as firm against gifts and promises as against words, and that there was no reason to weary himself any further, because all the time was being spent for nothing.

But fortune, which was steering things another way, arranged that, having left Lotario and Camila alone as he used to do at other times, Anselmo shut himself in a room and through the keyhole watched and listened to what the two of them were doing. And he saw that in more than half an hour Lotario did not say a word to Camila, and would not have said one if he had been there for a century; and he realised that everything his friend had told him about Camila's answers was fiction and lies.

And to see whether this was so, he came out of the room and, calling Lotario aside, asked him what news there was and what temper Camila was in. Lotario answered him that he did not mean to take another stitch in that business, because she answered so harshly and coldly that he had not the courage to say anything more to her.

"Ah, Lotario, Lotario!" said Anselmo. "How badly you answer what you owe me and the great trust I put in you! I have just been watching you through the opening this keyhole gives, and I have seen that you have not said a word to Camila — from which I give myself to understand that you have still to say her the first ones. And if this is so, as it certainly is, why do you deceive me, or why do you want to take away by your contrivance the means I might find of getting what I want?"

Anselmo said no more, but what he had said was enough to leave Lotario mortified and confused; who, almost as though taking it as a point of honour to have been caught out in a lie, swore to Anselmo that from that moment he took it so much upon himself to satisfy him and not to lie to him that he would see it for himself if he spied on him carefully — and what was more, that there would be no need to take any such trouble, because the trouble he meant to take to satisfy him would put him beyond all suspicion.

Anselmo believed him; and to give him a safer and less alarming opportunity, he decided to be away from his house for eight days, going to that of a friend of his who lived in a village not far from the city; with which friend he arranged that he should send for him very urgently, so as to have an excuse to give Camila for his going.

Unhappy and ill-advised Anselmo! What is it you are doing? What is it you are contriving? What is it you are arranging? See that you are working against yourself, contriving your own dishonour and arranging your own ruin. Your wife Camila is good; you possess her quietly and peacefully; nobody troubles your pleasure; her thoughts do not go beyond the walls of her house; you are her heaven on earth, the target of her desires, the fulfilment of her pleasures and the measure by which she measures her will, fitting it in everything to yours and to heaven's.

Well, if the mine of her honour, beauty, modesty and reserve gives you without any labour all the wealth it holds and all you could desire, why do you want to dig into the ground and look for new veins of new and never-before-seen treasure, putting yourself in danger that the whole thing may come down — since, after all, it rests on the weak supports of her frail nature? Consider that whoever looks for the impossible deserves to be denied the possible, as a poet said better, saying:

	I look for life in death,
	for health in sickness,
	for liberty in prison,
	for a way out of what is shut,
	and for loyalty in the traitor.

	But my luck, from which
	I never hope for any good,
	has laid it down with heaven
	that since I ask for the impossible,
	they shall not give me even the possible.

The next day Anselmo went off to the village, leaving word with Camila that during the time he was away Lotario would come to look after his house and to eat with her, and that she should take care to treat him as she would his own person. Camila, being a sensible and honourable woman, was distressed at the orders her husband was leaving her, and told him that he should note that it was not right for anybody, in his absence, to occupy the chair at his table; and that if he was doing it because he had no confidence that she could manage his house, he should try her this once and would see by experience that she was equal to greater responsibilities. Anselmo replied that this was his pleasure, and that she had nothing more to do than bow her head and obey him. Camila said she would do so, though against her will.

Anselmo left, and the next day Lotario came to the house, where he was received by Camila with a loving and modest welcome. She never put herself in a place where Lotario could see her alone, because she always went about surrounded by her menservants and maids — especially by a maid of hers called Leonela, whom she was very fond of, the two of them having been brought up together from childhood in Camila's parents' house, and when she married Anselmo she had brought her with her.

For the first three days Lotario never said anything to her, although he could have done, when the cloth was cleared and the household went off to eat in a great hurry, because Camila had ordered it so. And Leonela even had orders to eat before Camila did and never to move from her side. But she, having her thoughts set on other matters that pleased her, and needing those hours and that room to occupy them with her own satisfactions, did not always carry out her mistress's command; on the contrary, she left them alone as though that had been what she was ordered. But Camila's modest presence, the gravity of her face and the composure of her person was such that it put a bridle on Lotario's tongue.

But the good that Camila's many virtues did, in putting silence on Lotario's tongue, worked out more to the harm of them both. Because if his tongue was silent, his thoughts ran on and had room to contemplate, point by point, all the extremes of goodness and beauty that Camila had, which were enough to make a marble statue fall in love, let alone a heart of flesh.

Lotario looked at her in the room and the space where he ought to have been speaking to her, and considered how worthy she was of being loved; and this consideration began little by little to make assaults on the respect he had for Anselmo. And a thousand times he wanted to leave the city and go where Anselmo would never see him nor he see Camila; but the pleasure he found in looking at her got in the way and held him back. He forced himself and fought with himself to throw off and not to feel the pleasure that drew him to look at Camila. When he was alone he blamed himself for his folly, called himself a bad friend and even a bad Christian; he made arguments and comparisons between himself and Anselmo, and they all stopped at saying that Anselmo's madness and misplaced confidence had been greater than his own want of loyalty, and that if he had as good an excuse before God as before men for what he meant to do, he would not fear any punishment for his fault.

In the end Camila's beauty and goodness, together with the opportunity the ignorant husband had put into his hands, laid Lotario's loyalty on the ground. And without looking at anything except what his own pleasure inclined him to, at the end of three days of Anselmo's absence — during which he was in a continual battle to resist his desires — he began to make love to Camila, with so much agitation and with such loving words that Camila was taken aback, and did nothing except get up from where she was and go into her own room without answering him a word.

But Lotario's hope was not dismayed by this coldness — hope, which is always born together with love; on the contrary, he thought the more of Camila. And she, having seen in Lotario what she had never expected, did not know what to do with herself. And thinking it neither a safe nor a proper thing to give him occasion or opportunity to speak to her again, she decided to send that same night — as she did — a servant of hers with a note to Anselmo, in which she wrote these words:
