Chapter 34: In Which the Tale of Reckless Curiosity Is Continued
(Part 1 of 2)

Just as they say that an army looks wrong without its general and a castle without its governor, so I say that a young married woman looks far more wrong without her husband, when the justest of reasons do not prevent it. I find myself so badly off without you, and so incapable of putting up with this absence, that if you do not come soon I shall have to go and stay at my parents' house, even if I leave yours without a guard; because the one you left me, if he was left with that title, seems to me to be looking after his own pleasure more than after what concerns you. And since you are a man of sense, I have no more to say to you — nor is it right that I should say more.

Anselmo received this letter, and understood from it that Lotario had already begun the enterprise and that Camila must have answered as he wanted. And, extremely pleased at such news, he sent back word to Camila by mouth that she should on no account move out of his house, because he would be back very shortly.

Camila was astonished at Anselmo's answer, which put her into more confusion than before, because she neither dared to stay in her house nor to go to her parents'; for by staying her modesty ran into danger, and by going she went against her husband's command.

In the end she settled on what was worst for her, which was staying, and resolved not to run away from Lotario's presence, so as not to give her servants anything to talk about. And by now she was sorry she had written what she wrote to her husband, afraid he would think Lotario had seen some looseness in her that had moved him not to keep up the respect he owed her. But, relying on her own goodness, she trusted in God and in her own good intentions, with which she meant to resist in silence everything Lotario might want to say to her, without giving any further account to her husband, so as not to put him to some quarrel and trouble. And she was even looking for some way to excuse Lotario to Anselmo when he should ask her what had moved her to write him that note.

With these thoughts, more honourable than sound or useful, she spent another day listening to Lotario; who pressed so hard that Camila's firmness began to waver, and her modesty had a great deal of work to do to keep to her eyes so that they should not show some sign of the loving compassion that Lotario's tears and words had woken in her breast. All this Lotario noticed, and all of it inflamed him.

Finally it seemed to him that it was necessary, in the room and the time Anselmo's absence gave him, to tighten the siege round that fortress. And so he attacked her self-esteem with praises of her beauty, because there is nothing that more quickly brings down and levels the embattled towers of a beautiful woman's vanity than that same vanity, set on the tongue of flattery. In fact, with all diligence, he mined the rock of her integrity with such engines that even if Camila had been made entirely of bronze, she would have come to the ground. He wept, he begged, he offered, he flattered, he insisted and he pretended with so much feeling and with such signs of being in earnest that he broke through Camila's guard and came to triumph over what he had least expected and most desired.

Camila surrendered; Camila surrendered. But what wonder, if Lotario's friendship did not stay standing? A clear example that shows us that the passion of love is only conquered by running away from it, and that nobody should come to grips with so powerful an enemy, because divine strength is needed to conquer his human strength.

Only Leonela knew her mistress's weakness, because the two bad friends and new lovers could not hide it from her. Lotario did not want to tell Camila about Anselmo's plan, or that Anselmo had given him the opportunity to reach that point, so that she should not think less of his love and suppose that he had solicited her like that, by chance and without meaning it, and not on purpose.

A few days later Anselmo came back to his house, and did not notice what was missing in it, which was the thing he valued least and prized most. He went at once to see Lotario, and found him at home. They embraced each other, and the one asked for the news of his life or his death.

"The news I can give you, friend Anselmo," said Lotario, "is that you have a wife who can deservedly be the example and the crown of all good women. The words I have said to her the wind has carried off; my offers have been thought little of; my gifts have not been accepted; some pretended tears of mine have been notably laughed at. In short, just as Camila is the sum of all beauty, she is the storehouse where modesty resides and where good breeding and reserve live, along with every virtue that can make an honourable woman praiseworthy and fortunate.

"Take back your money, my friend, for I have it here without having had any need to touch it; Camila's integrity does not surrender to things as low as gifts and promises. Be content, Anselmo, and do not want to make any more tests than the ones you have made. And since you have crossed dry-shod the sea of the difficulties and suspicions men may and do have about women, do not choose to go into the deep ocean of new troubles all over again, or to make trial with another pilot of the soundness and strength of the ship heaven gave you as your lot to cross the sea of this world in. Instead, reckon that you are already in a safe harbour, and grapple yourself with the anchors of good sense, and let yourself lie there until they come to ask you for the debt that no human nobility excuses a man from paying."

Anselmo was extremely pleased with Lotario's words, and believed them exactly as though they had been spoken by some oracle. But for all that, he begged him not to give up the enterprise, even if it were only out of curiosity and for entertainment, and even if he did not from then on employ such urgent efforts as he had until then. And he said he only wanted him to write some verses in her praise under the name of Chloris, because he would give Camila to understand that he was in love with a lady to whom he had given that name so as to be able to celebrate her with the propriety her modesty deserved; and that if Lotario did not want to take the trouble of writing the verses, he would write them himself.

"That will not be necessary," said Lotario, "since the Muses are not such enemies of mine that they do not visit me for some hours in the year. Tell Camila what you have said about my pretended love affair; the verses I shall make, and if they are not as good as the subject deserves, they will at least be the best I can do."

On this the impertinent man and the treacherous friend agreed. And Anselmo, going back to his house, asked Camila the thing she was already surprised he had not asked her: which was to tell him the reason why she had written him the note she sent. Camila answered that it had seemed to her that Lotario looked at her a little more freely than when he was at home; but that she had been undeceived now and believed it had been her own imagination, because by now Lotario avoided seeing her and being alone with her.

Anselmo told her she could be perfectly easy about that suspicion, because he knew that Lotario was in love with a distinguished young lady of the city, whom he celebrated under the name of Chloris; and that even if he were not, there was nothing to fear from Lotario's honesty and from the great friendship between the two of them. And if Camila had not been warned by Lotario that that love affair with Chloris was a pretence, and that he had told Anselmo so in order to spend a few hours on Camila's own praises, she would without any doubt have fallen into the despairing net of jealousy; but being forewarned, she got through that alarm without distress.

The next day, the three of them being at table, Anselmo begged Lotario to say something of what he had composed to his beloved Chloris; since Camila did not know her, he could safely say whatever he liked.

"Even if she did know her," answered Lotario, "I would hide nothing; because when a lover praises his lady for being beautiful and reproaches her for being cruel, he does no discredit to her good name. But be that as it may, what I can say is that yesterday I made a sonnet on this Chloris's ingratitude, which goes like this:

	In the silence of the night, when
	sweet sleep takes possession of mortals,
	I am giving to heaven and to my Chloris
	the poor account of my rich sufferings.

	And at the time when the sun begins to show
	through the rosy gates of the east,
	with sighs and broken-off words
	I go over the old complaint again.

	And when the sun, from its starred seat,
	sends its rays straight down to the earth,
	the weeping grows and I double my groans.

	Night comes back, and I go back to the sad tale,
	and always I find, in this mortal struggle of mine,
	heaven deaf, and Chloris without ears."

Camila thought well of the sonnet, but Anselmo better, since he praised it and said that the lady who did not answer such plain truths was excessively cruel. To which Camila said:

"So everything that lovesick poets say is true?"

"As poets, they do not speak the truth," answered Lotario; "but as lovers, they always fall as short as they are truthful."

"There is no doubt of that," replied Anselmo — all of it to back up and give credit to Lotario's ideas with Camila, who was as unaware of Anselmo's contrivance as she was by now in love with Lotario.

And so, with the pleasure she took in anything of his, and the more so since she understood that his desires and his writings were aimed at her, and that she was the real Chloris, she begged him that if he knew another sonnet or other verses, he should say them.

"I do know one," answered Lotario, "but I do not think it is as good as the first — or, to put it better, less bad. And you can judge for yourselves, for here it is:

	I know that I am dying; and if I am not believed,
	dying is the more certain, as it is more certain
	that I shall be seen dead at your feet, beautiful ingrate,
	sooner than repenting of adoring you.

	I may find myself in the country of oblivion,
	stripped of life and glory and favour,
	and there it will be possible to see, in my opened breast,
	how your lovely face is carved there.

	For I keep this relic for the hard
	passage my own persistence threatens me with,
	which draws its strength from your very severity.

	Pity the man who sails, with the sky dark,
	over an unknown sea and a dangerous course,
	where neither pole star nor harbour offers itself."

Anselmo praised this second sonnet too, as he had done the first; and in this way he went on adding link after link to the chain with which his dishonour was being fastened and bound. For the more Lotario dishonoured him, the more he told him he was being honoured; and with this, every step Camila went down towards the centre of her disgrace, she went up, in her husband's opinion, towards the summit of virtue and of her good name.

It happened at this time that Camila, finding herself once — among other times — alone with her maid, said to her:

"I am mortified, Leonela my friend, to see how little I have known how to value myself, since I did not even make Lotario buy with time the complete possession of my will that I gave him so quickly. I am afraid he will think of my quickness, or my lightness, without noticing the force he used on me so that I could not resist him."

"Do not let that trouble you, my lady," answered Leonela, "for it is no argument, and no reason for the value to go down, that a thing should be given quickly — if what is given is good and worth valuing in itself. And it is even a common saying that whoever gives at once gives twice."

"They also say," said Camila, "that what costs little is valued at less."

"That argument does not apply to you," answered Leonela; "because love, as I have heard tell, sometimes flies and sometimes walks, runs with this man and goes slowly with that one, cools some and burns up others, wounds some and kills others; at one and the same moment it begins the race of its desires and at that same moment it finishes and concludes it; in the morning it will lay siege to a fortress and by night it has it surrendered, because there is no strength that resists it.

"And this being so, what are you frightened at, or what are you afraid of, if the same thing must have happened to Lotario, since love took my master's absence as the instrument for conquering us? And it necessarily followed that within that absence what love had determined should be brought to a conclusion, without giving time to time for Anselmo to have any of it to come back in, and for the work to be left unfinished by his presence. Because love has no better minister for carrying out what it wants than opportunity: it makes use of opportunity in all its doings, and chiefly at the beginnings. I know all this very well, more from experience than from hearsay; and one day I shall tell you about it, my lady, for I too am flesh and young blood.

"What is more, my lady Camila, you did not give yourself up or surrender so quickly that you had not first seen in Lotario's eyes, in his sighs, in his words and in his promises and gifts, the whole of his soul, seeing in it and in his virtues how worthy Lotario was of being loved. So if this is so, do not let those scrupulous and squeamish thoughts assault your imagination, but be assured that Lotario values you as you value him, and live contented and satisfied that, since you have fallen into love's snare, the man who has you tight is a man of worth and value.

"And that he not only has the four S's that they say good lovers must have, but a whole ABC from beginning to end. If you do not believe me, listen and you will see how I say it to you by heart. He is, from what I see and as it seems to me, appreciative, blameless, chivalrous, devoted, enamoured, firm, gallant, honourable, illustrious, just, kind, loyal, manly, noble, open-hearted, princely, quick-witted, rich, and the S's they talk about; and then tactful, and veracious. The X does not fit him, because it is a harsh letter; the Y I have said already with the I; and the Z — zealous guardian of your honour."

Camila laughed at her maid's ABC, and thought her better practised in the affairs of love than she said; and Leonela admitted it, revealing to Camila that she was carrying on a love affair with a well-born young man of the same city. At which Camila was disturbed, fearing that this was the road along which her own honour might run into danger. She pressed her to say whether their conversations went further than being conversations. Leonela, with little shame and a great deal of freedom, answered her that they did; because it is a certain thing by now that the carelessness of mistresses takes away the shame of their maids, who, when they see their mistresses stumble, think nothing of limping themselves, or of its being known.

Camila could do nothing but beg Leonela to say nothing about her own doings to the man she said was her lover, and to conduct her affairs in secret, so that they should not come to the knowledge of Anselmo or of Lotario. Leonela answered that she would do so, but she kept her word in such a way that she made good Camila's fear that she would lose her reputation through her. Because the immodest and impudent Leonela, once she saw that her mistress's conduct was not what it used to be, made bold to bring her lover into the house and lodge him there, confident that even if her mistress saw him she would not dare to expose him. For this is one of the harms, among others, that the sins of mistresses bring: that they make themselves slaves of their own maids and are obliged to cover up their immodesties and vile behaviour, as happened with Camila. For although she saw once and many times that her Leonela was with her gallant in a room of her house, not only did she not dare scold her, but she gave her the chance to shut him in there, and took away all the obstacles so that he should not be seen by her husband.

But she could not take them away enough to keep Lotario from seeing him come out once, at the break of dawn; who, not knowing who it was, thought at first that it must be some phantom. But when he saw him walk off, muffle himself up and cover himself with care and caution, he came down from his simple idea and fell into another, which would have been the ruin of everybody if Camila had not put it right.

Lotario thought that this man he had seen come out of Anselmo's house at such an hour had not gone into it on Leonela's account; he did not even remember that Leonela existed in the world. He only believed that Camila, in the same way as she had been easy and light with him, was so for somebody else. For these are the additions that a bad woman's wickedness brings with it: that she loses the credit of her honour with the very man she gave herself up to after being begged and persuaded, and he believes she gives herself up to others still more easily, and gives infallible credit to any suspicion that comes to him about it.

And it looks as though at this point Lotario's whole good understanding failed him, and every one of his prudent arguments went out of his memory; since without making a single one that was good, or even reasonable, without any more ado, before Anselmo got up, impatient and blinded by the jealous rage that was gnawing at his entrails, and dying to take revenge on Camila, who had offended him in nothing at all, he went to Anselmo and said to him:

"Know, Anselmo, that for many days I have been fighting with myself, forcing myself not to tell you what it is no longer possible or right for me to hide from you any longer. Know that Camila's fortress is now surrendered and subject to anything I may want to do with it.

"And if I have been slow to reveal this truth to you, it has been to see whether it was some light fancy of hers, or whether she was doing it to test me and see whether the love-making I began with her, with your leave, was carried on with a settled purpose. I likewise believed that if she had been what she ought to be, and what we both took her for, she would already have given you an account of my soliciting her; but having seen that she is slow about it, I recognise that the promises she has given me are true — that when you next go away from your house she will talk with me in the storeroom where your valuables are kept." And it was true that Camila used to talk with him there. "And I do not want you to run headlong to take some revenge, since the sin has not yet been committed except in thought, and it might be that between now and the time for putting it into practice Camila's thought would change and repentance be born in its place.

"And so, since you have always followed my advice in whole or in part, follow and keep one piece of advice I shall give you now, so that without any deception and with cautious forethought you may satisfy yourself of whatever you see best suits you. Pretend to go away for two or three days, as you do at other times, and arrange to stay hidden in your storeroom — since the tapestries that are there and other things you can hide behind offer you a great deal of convenience. And then you will see with your own eyes, and I with mine, what Camila wants; and if it is the wickedness that is more to be feared than hoped for, then with silence, shrewdness and discretion you may be the executioner of your own injury."

Anselmo was left absorbed, taken aback and astonished by Lotario's words, because they caught him at a time when he least expected to hear them; for he already took Camila to be the conqueror of Lotario's pretended assaults, and was beginning to enjoy the glory of the victory. He stayed silent for a good while, looking at the ground without moving an eyelash, and at last he said:

"You have done it, Lotario, as I expected of your friendship. In everything I shall follow your advice: do as you like and keep that secrecy you see is proper in a case as unexpected as this."

Lotario promised it him; and on leaving him, he repented entirely of everything he had told him, seeing how foolishly he had behaved, since he could have taken revenge on Camila, and not by so cruel and so dishonourable a road. He cursed his own understanding, called his hasty decision ugly, and did not know what course to take to undo what was done, or to find some reasonable way out of it. In the end he decided to give Camila a full account of it all; and as there was no lack of opportunity for doing so, he found her alone that same day, and she, as soon as she saw she could speak to him, said:

"Know, friend Lotario, that I have a grief in my heart which presses on it in such a way that it seems it wants to burst in my breast — and it will be a wonder if it does not. For Leonela's shamelessness has come to such a pitch that every night she shuts a gallant of hers into this house and stays with him until daylight, so much at the cost of my reputation that whoever sees him come out of my house at such extraordinary hours will be left an open field for judging it. And what wearies me is that I cannot punish her or scold her: her being the secretary of our own dealings has put a bridle on my mouth to keep quiet about hers, and I am afraid that some bad business will come of it."
