Chapter 34: In Which the Tale of Reckless Curiosity Is Continued
(Part 2 of 2)

When Camila first said this, Lotario believed it was a device to mislead him into thinking that the man he had seen come out was Leonela's and not hers; but seeing her weep and grieve, and beg him for a remedy, he came to believe the truth, and believing it, he was left completely confused and repentant. But for all that, he answered Camila that she should not distress herself, for he would arrange a remedy to put a stop to Leonela's insolence.

He also told her what, urged on by the furious rage of jealousy, he had said to Anselmo, and how it was arranged that he should hide in the storeroom to see plainly from there how little loyalty she kept for him. He begged her pardon for this madness, and asked her advice about how to remedy it and get well out of so tangled a labyrinth as his bad reasoning had put him into.

Camila was appalled to hear what Lotario told her, and with great anger and with many well-judged arguments she scolded him and called his wicked thought and the foolish, wicked decision he had taken ugly. But since a woman naturally has a quicker wit than a man both for good and for evil — although it begins to fail her when she deliberately sets herself to reason things out — Camila at that very instant found the way to remedy a business that seemed so past remedy. And she told Lotario to arrange that Anselmo should hide the next day where he had said, because she meant to make his hiding into a convenience by which from then on the two of them could enjoy each other without any alarm. And without declaring her whole plan to him, she warned him to be careful that once Anselmo was hidden he should come when Leonela called him, and that to everything she said to him he should answer as he would have answered if he had not known that Anselmo was listening. Lotario insisted that she should finish declaring her intention to him, so that he could keep to everything he saw was necessary with more safety and forethought.

"I say," said Camila, "that there is nothing more to keep to, except to answer me as I shall ask you." Camila did not want to give him a prior account of what she meant to do, being afraid that he would not want to follow the plan that seemed so good to her, and would follow or look for others that could not be as good.

With this Lotario went off; and Anselmo, the next day, with the excuse of going to that village of his friend's, left and came back to hide himself — which he was able to do conveniently, because Camila and Leonela deliberately gave him the opportunity.

Anselmo being hidden, then, with the sort of alarm one may imagine in a man who was expecting to see with his own eyes an anatomy made of the entrails of his honour, he was on the point of losing the highest good he thought he possessed in his beloved Camila. Camila and Leonela, being by now safe and certain that Anselmo was hidden, came into the storeroom; and Camila had hardly set foot in it when, giving a great sigh, she said:

"Ah, Leonela my friend! Would it not be better, before I come to carry out the thing I do not want you to know about — so that you may not try to prevent it — that you should take Anselmo's dagger, which I have asked you for, and run it through this shameful breast of mine? But do not do such a thing, for it will not be right that I should bear the penalty of another's fault. First I want to know what it was that Lotario's bold and immodest eyes saw in me that was the cause of giving him the boldness to reveal to me a desire as wicked as the one he has revealed, in contempt of his friend and to my dishonour. Go to that window, Leonela, and call him, for beyond any doubt he must be in the street waiting to put his wicked intention into effect. But my own intention shall be put into effect first, cruel as it is honourable."

"Ah, my lady!" answered the shrewd and forewarned Leonela. "What is it you want to do with this dagger? Do you by any chance want to take your own life, or to take Lotario's? For either of these things you may want must work out to the loss of your reputation and good name. It is better for you to hide the injury done you, and not to let this wicked man come into this house now and find us alone. Look, my lady, we are weak women and he is a man, and a determined one; and coming as he does with that wicked purpose, blind and full of passion, perhaps before you carry out yours he will do the thing that would be worse for you than taking your life. A curse on my lord Anselmo, for having given this shameless creature so much run of his house! And supposing, my lady, that you kill him, as I think you mean to do — what are we to do with him afterwards, once he is dead?"

"What, my friend?" answered Camila. "We shall leave him for Anselmo to bury; for it will be only right that he should count as a rest the labour he takes in putting his own infamy underground. Call him, and be quick; for all the time I delay in taking due vengeance for my injury, it seems to me that I am offending against the loyalty I owe my husband."

Anselmo was listening to all this, and at every word Camila said his thoughts changed. But when he understood that she was resolved to kill Lotario, he wanted to come out and reveal himself so that such a thing should not be done; but he was held back by the desire to see what all this gallantry and honourable resolution would come to, meaning to come out in time to prevent it.

At this Camila was taken by a violent faint, and throwing herself down on a bed that was there, Leonela began to weep very bitterly and to say:

"Ah, unlucky woman that I am, if I were unfortunate enough to have dying here in my arms the flower of the world's modesty, the crown of good women, the example of chastity —!"

And other things like these, so that nobody who heard her would not have taken her for the most grief-stricken and loyal maid in the world, and her mistress for another new and persecuted Penelope. Camila was not long in coming out of her faint; and on coming to herself, she said:

"Why do you not go, Leonela, and call the most loyal friend to a friend that ever the sun looked on or the night covered? Be quick, run, hurry, go — do not let the fire of the anger I have blow itself out with delay, and the just vengeance I am waiting for turn into threats and curses."

"I am going to call him now, my lady," said Leonela; "but you must first give me that dagger, so that while I am away you shall not do something with it that will leave everybody who loves you with cause to weep all their lives."

"Go without any fear, Leonela my friend, for I shall not," answered Camila. "Because although I may be bold and simple in your opinion in standing up for my honour, I shall not be as much so as that Lucretia they say killed herself without having committed any fault at all, and without first having killed the man who was the cause of her misfortune. I shall die, if I die, but it must be avenged and satisfied on the man who has given me cause to come to this pass and weep over his boldness, which was born so blamelessly on my side."

Leonela had to be begged a great deal before she would go out and call Lotario; but at last she went. And while she was away, Camila was left saying, as though she were talking to herself:

"God help me! Would it not have been more sensible to have sent Lotario away, as I have done many other times, instead of putting him in the position I have now put him in, of taking me for immodest and wicked, at least for the time I shall take to undeceive him? It would certainly have been better; but then I would not be avenged, nor my husband's honour satisfied, if he could get out again with clean hands and at an easy walk from where his wicked thoughts got him in.

"Let the traitor pay with his life for what he attempted with so lustful a desire. Let the world know, if it ever comes to know it, that Camila not only kept her loyalty to her husband but gave him vengeance on the man who dared to offend him.

"But for all that, I believe it would have been better to give an account of this to Anselmo. Yet I did point it out to him in the letter I wrote him at the village; and I believe that his not coming to remedy the harm I indicated to him there must have been because, out of pure goodness and trustfulness, he neither would nor could believe that in the breast of so firm a friend of his there could be room for any kind of thought against his honour. Nor did I believe it myself afterwards, for many days, nor would I ever have believed it if his insolence had not gone so far that the open gifts and the lavish promises and the constant tears made it plain to me.

"But why am I making these speeches now? Does a gallant resolution have any need of advice, by any chance? Certainly not. Away, then, with traitors — here, vengeance! Let the false man come in; let him come, let him arrive, let him die and be finished, and let what happens happen. I came clean into the power of the man heaven gave me for my own; clean I mean to come out of it — and at the most I shall come out bathed in my own chaste blood, and in the impure blood of the falsest friend that friendship ever saw in the world."

And saying this, she walked about the room with the dagger drawn, taking such wild and extravagant steps and making such gestures that she looked for all the world as if she had lost her wits, and were no delicate woman but some bravo in despair.

Anselmo was watching all of it, covered by some tapestries where he had hidden himself, and was astonished at all of it; and it already seemed to him that what he had seen and heard was satisfaction enough for greater suspicions than his, and by now he could have wished the test of Lotario's coming might not happen, being afraid of some sudden bad turn. And when he was just about to reveal himself and come out, to embrace his wife and undeceive her, he stopped, because he saw that Leonela was coming back leading Lotario by the hand.

And as soon as Camila saw him, she drew a great line on the floor in front of her with the dagger and said:

"Lotario, take note of what I say to you: if by any chance you dare to cross this line you see, or even to come up to it, at the moment I see you attempting it I shall run this dagger I have in my hands through my own breast. And before you answer me a word to this, I want you to listen to some others of mine; afterwards you shall answer whatever pleases you best.

"First, Lotario, I want you to tell me whether you know Anselmo my husband, and in what opinion you hold him; and secondly, I want to know as well whether you know me. Answer me this, and do not be alarmed, and do not think much about what you have to answer, for they are no difficult questions I am asking you."

Lotario was not so slow-witted that from the first moment Camila told him to have Anselmo hidden he had not realised what she meant to do; and so he fell in with her intention so cleverly and so promptly that between the two of them they would have made that lie pass for more than certain truth. And so he answered Camila in this way:

"I did not think, beautiful Camila, that you were calling me to ask me things so far outside the purpose I have come here with. If you are doing it to put off the favour you promised me, you could have kept it at a distance from further off; because the good we desire torments us more the nearer hope is to possessing it. But so that you may not say I do not answer your questions, I say that I know your husband Anselmo, and that the two of us have known each other since our earliest years; and I do not want to speak of what you know so well about our friendship, so as not to make myself a witness of the wrong love is making me do him — a powerful excuse for greater errors than this. You I know, and hold in the same possession that he holds you in; for if it were not so, for lesser charms than yours I would not have gone against what I owe to being who I am and against the sacred laws of true friendship, now broken and violated by me for so powerful an enemy as love."

"If you confess that," answered Camila, "mortal enemy of everything that justly deserves to be loved, with what face do you dare appear before one who you know is the mirror in which the man you ought to be looking at looks at himself — so that you might see with how little cause you injure him? But now, ah, unhappy woman that I am, I realise who it is that has made you take so little care of what you owe to yourself: it must have been some freedom of mine, which I will not call immodesty, since it will not have come from any deliberate decision but from one of those pieces of carelessness that women who think they have nobody to be on their guard against are apt to commit without noticing.

"If not, tell me: when, you traitor, did I answer your entreaties with any word or sign that could wake in you the shadow of a hope of fulfilling your shameful desires? When were your loving words not undone and rebuked by mine with severity and harshness? When were your many promises and your greater gifts believed by me, or accepted?

"But since it seems to me that nobody can persevere a long time in a purpose of love unless he is kept up by some hope, I choose to lay on myself the blame for your impertinence — since without a doubt some carelessness of mine has kept your attentions going so long. And so I mean to punish myself and give myself the penalty your fault deserves.

"And so that you might see that, being so inhuman to myself, it was not possible that I should be otherwise to you, I chose to bring you here to be a witness of the sacrifice I mean to make to the offended honour of my so honourable husband — wronged by you with the greatest care you were capable of, and by me as well, with the little caution I have kept about avoiding the occasion, if I gave you any, to favour and canonise your wicked intentions.

"I say again that the suspicion I have that some carelessness of mine bred such deranged thoughts in you is what wearies me most, and what I most want to punish with my own hands; because if another executioner punished me, perhaps my fault would be more public. But before I do this, I mean to kill as I die, and to take with me the man who will finally satisfy the desire for vengeance I hope for and have — seeing there, wherever I may go, the penalty imposed by that justice which is disinterested and does not bend for the man who has put me in such desperate straits."

And saying these words, with an incredible force and quickness she rushed at Lotario with the drawn dagger, with such signs of wanting to drive it into his breast that he was almost in doubt whether those demonstrations were false or true; for he was obliged to use both his ingenuity and his strength to prevent Camila from striking him. And she acted that strange deceit and villainy so vividly that, to give it the colour of truth, she chose to tint it with her own blood. For seeing that she could not get at Lotario — or pretending that she could not — she said:

"Since fortune will not satisfy my so just desire completely, at least it will not be powerful enough to keep me from satisfying it in part."

And forcing her dagger hand free, which Lotario had hold of, she pulled it out; and guiding its point to a place where it could not wound deeply, she drove it in and buried it above the hollow of her left side, close to the shoulder, and then let herself fall to the ground as though in a faint.

Leonela and Lotario were left taken aback and astonished at such an event, and still doubted the truth of the thing, seeing Camila stretched on the ground and bathed in her own blood. Lotario ran very quickly, terrified and out of breath, to pull out the dagger; and on seeing how small the wound was, he came out of the fear he had been in until then, and marvelled all over again at the shrewdness, prudence and great cleverness of the beautiful Camila. And to play his own part, he began to make a long, sad lamentation over Camila's body, as though she were dead, calling down a great many curses not only on himself but on the man who had been the cause of putting him in that position. And as he knew his friend Anselmo was listening to him, he said things that would have made anybody who heard him feel far more pity for him than for Camila, even judging her to be dead.

Leonela took her in her arms and put her on the bed, begging Lotario to go and look for somebody who would treat Camila secretly. She also asked his advice and opinion about what they should tell Anselmo about her mistress's wound if he happened to come before she was better. He answered that they should say whatever they liked, since he was in no state to give advice that would be of any use. He only told her to try to stop the bleeding, because he was going off where people would not see him. And with every sign of great grief and feeling, he left the house.

And when he found himself alone and in a place where nobody could see him, he never stopped crossing himself, marvelling at Camila's ingenuity and at Leonela's so entirely convincing gestures. He thought how thoroughly convinced Anselmo would now be that he had a second Portia for a wife, and he wanted to be with him so that the two of them could celebrate the most artfully hidden lie and truth that could ever have been imagined.

Leonela stopped her mistress's blood, as has been said, which was no more than was enough to give credit to their deceit; and washing the wound with a little wine, she bound it up as best she knew how, saying such things while she was dressing it that even if there had been nothing else before them, they would have been enough to make Anselmo believe he had in Camila an image of modesty itself.

To Leonela's words were joined others of Camila's, calling herself a coward and a poor-spirited creature, since courage had failed her at the moment when it was most needed for taking the life she so much loathed. She asked her maid's advice on whether or not she should tell her beloved husband about the whole affair; and Leonela told her not to tell him, because it would put him under an obligation to take revenge on Lotario, which could not happen without a great deal of risk to himself; and that a good wife was bound not to give her husband any occasion to quarrel, but to take away from him all those she possibly could.

Camila answered that his advice seemed very good to her and that she would follow it, but that in any case they would have to find something to tell Anselmo about the cause of that wound, which he could not fail to see. To which Leonela answered that she did not know how to tell a lie, even in fun.

"And what am I to know, my dear," replied Camila, "when I would not dare to forge or keep up a lie if my life depended on it? And if we cannot manage to find a way out of this, it will be better to tell him the naked truth than to have him catch us out in a lying account."

"Do not distress yourself, my lady," answered Leonela. "Between now and tomorrow I shall think what we are to tell him; and perhaps, the wound being where it is, you will be able to hide it without his seeing it, and heaven will be pleased to favour our so just and so honourable intentions. Calm yourself, my lady, and try to calm your agitation, so that my master shall not find you in a fright; and leave the rest to me and to God, who always comes to the help of good intentions."

Anselmo had been listening most attentively, and watching them act out the tragedy of the death of his honour — which the characters in it acted with such strange and effective feeling that it seemed they had been transformed into the very truth of what they were pretending. He was longing for night, and for the chance to get out of his house and go to see his good friend Lotario, so as to congratulate himself with him on the precious pearl he had found in the undeceiving proof of his wife's goodness. The two women took care to give him room and opportunity to get out, and he, not losing it, went out and then went to look for Lotario.

And when he had found him, it is not easy to tell the embraces he gave him, the things he said to him about his own happiness, the praises he gave Camila. All of which Lotario listened to without being able to show any sign of gladness, because it came into his memory how deceived his friend was and how unjustly he was wronging him. And although Anselmo could see that Lotario was not glad, he believed the cause was his having left Camila wounded and having been the cause of it himself; and so, among other things, he told him not to distress himself about what had happened to Camila, because without doubt the wound was slight, since the two of them had agreed to hide it from him. And that, this being so, there was nothing to fear, but that from then on he should take pleasure and be glad with him, since by Lotario's ingenuity and by his means he found himself raised to the highest happiness that could be wished for; and that he wanted their only entertainment to be making verses in praise of Camila, to make her eternal in the memory of the ages to come. Lotario praised his good resolution and said that for his part he would help to raise so illustrious a building.

With this Anselmo was left the most deliciously deceived man there could be in the world. He himself led home by the hand, believing he was leading the instrument of his glory, the whole ruin of his good name. Camila received him with a face that seemed put out, though with a soul that was laughing. This deception lasted some days, until, at the end of a few months, Fortune turned her wheel and the wickedness that had been covered up until then with so much artifice came out into the open, and Anselmo's reckless curiosity cost him his life.
