Chapter 35: In Which Is Brought to an End the Tale of Reckless Curiosity, and Which Treats of the Fierce and Monstrous Battle Don Quixote Had with Some Skins of Red Wine

There was not much left of the tale to read when out of the garret where Don Quixote was resting came Sancho Panza in a great commotion, shouting:

"Come, gentlemen, quickly, and help my master, who is in the middle of the hardest-fought and closest battle my eyes have ever seen! By the living God, he has dealt such a slash at the giant, the lady Princess Micomicona's enemy, that he has cut his head clean off, as though it had been a turnip!"

"What are you saying, brother?" said the curate, leaving off reading what was left of the tale. "Are you in your senses, Sancho? How the devil can what you say be so, when the giant is two thousand leagues from here?"

At this they heard a great noise in the room, and Don Quixote shouting:

"Hold, thief, villain, scoundrel! I have you here, and your scimitar shall not save you!"

And it seemed he was dealing great slashes at the walls. And Sancho said:

"There's no call to stop and listen: go in and separate the fight, or help my master — though there won't be any need now, because beyond a doubt the giant is dead by this time and giving God an account of his past and wicked life. I saw the blood running along the floor, and the head cut off and fallen to one side, and it's as big as a great wineskin."

"Strike me dead," said the innkeeper at this, "if Don Quixote — or Don Devil — hasn't dealt a slash at one of the skins of red wine that were standing full at the head of his bed, and the spilt wine must be what looks like blood to this good fellow."

And with this he went into the room, and everybody after him, and they found Don Quixote in the strangest costume in the world. He was in his shirt, which was not long enough to finish covering his thighs in front, and behind it was six fingers shorter. His legs were very long and thin, covered with hair and not in the least clean. On his head he had a little red cap, greasy, which belonged to the innkeeper. Round his left arm he had wound the bed-blanket, which Sancho had a grudge against — and he knew very well why. And in his right hand he had his drawn sword, with which he was dealing slashes in every direction, saying things as though he were genuinely fighting some giant.

And the best of it is that he did not have his eyes open, because he was asleep and dreaming that he was in battle with the giant; for so intense was his imagination of the adventure he was going to bring to an end that it made him dream he had already arrived in the kingdom of Micomicón and was already in the fight with his enemy. And he had dealt so many slashes at the wineskins, believing he was dealing them at the giant, that the whole room was full of wine.

Which the innkeeper seeing, he took such offence that he flew at Don Quixote and with his closed fist began to give him so many blows that if Cardenio and the curate had not pulled him off him, he would have finished the war of the giant himself. And in spite of all that, the poor knight did not wake up, until the barber brought a great cauldron of cold water from the well and threw it all over his body at one go, with which Don Quixote woke — but not with enough awareness to notice the state he was in.

Dorotea, who saw how short and thin his clothing was, would not come in to watch the battle of her champion and her enemy.

Sancho was going about looking for the giant's head all over the floor; and as he could not find it, he said:

"I know already that everything in this house is enchantment; because the other time, in this same place where I am standing now, they gave me a great many cuffs and blows without my knowing who was giving them me, and I could never see anybody. And now this head doesn't turn up that I saw cut off with my very own eyes, and the blood was running out of the body like out of a fountain."

"What blood and what fountain are you talking about, enemy of God and of his saints?" said the innkeeper. "Don't you see, you thief, that the blood and the fountain are nothing but these wineskins here that have been punctured and the red wine that's swimming about this room? — and may I see the soul of whoever punctured them swimming in hell!"

"I know nothing about it," answered Sancho. "All I know is that I'm going to be so unlucky that, for not finding this head, my earldom will melt away like salt in water."

And Sancho awake was in a worse state than his master asleep, so much had his master's promises done for him. The innkeeper was in despair at the squire's stolidity and the master's mischief, and swore it should not be like the last time, when they got away without paying; and that this time the privileges of his chivalry should not be any good to him for getting out of paying for the one thing and the other — down to the cost of the patches that would have to be put on the burst skins.

The curate had hold of Don Quixote's hands; and he, believing that the adventure was over now and that he was in the presence of the Princess Micomicona, knelt down in front of the curate, saying:

"Your greatness, high and famous lady, may well live from today on secure against any harm this base-born creature can do you; and I too, from today on, am released from the word I gave you, since with the help of God on high and with the favour of her for whom I live and breathe, I have kept it so well."

"Didn't I say so?" said Sancho, hearing this. "So I wasn't drunk after all! Just look whether my master hasn't got the giant salted down already! The bulls are as good as in the ring — my earldom is cast and moulded!"

Who could have kept from laughing at the absurdities of the two of them, master and man? Everybody laughed except the innkeeper, who was giving himself to Satan. But at last the barber, Cardenio and the curate did so much that with no small trouble they got Don Quixote into bed, and he fell asleep with every sign of enormous exhaustion.

They let him sleep, and went out into the porch of the inn to comfort Sancho Panza for not having found the giant's head; although they had more to do in calming the innkeeper, who was in despair at the sudden death of his wineskins. And the innkeeper's wife was saying at the top of her voice:

"In an evil moment and at an unlucky hour this knight errant came into my house — I wish my eyes had never seen him, for he costs me dear enough. The last time he went off with the reckoning for one night, for supper, bed, straw and barley for himself and his squire and a hack and a donkey, saying he was a knight adventurer — and may God give bad adventures to him and to every adventurer in the world — and that for this reason he was not obliged to pay anything, because that was how it stood written in the tariffs of knight-errantry.

"And now, on his account, this other gentleman came and carried off my tail, and has given it me back with more than two farthings' worth of damage, all bare, so that it can't serve for what my husband wants it for. And to finish and crown it all, bursting my wineskins and spilling my wine — and may I see his blood spilt! Well, don't let him imagine anything: by my father's bones and by my mother's memory, if they don't pay me for it farthing by farthing, my name isn't what my name is and I'm not my own father's daughter!"

These and other such speeches the innkeeper's wife made in great anger, and her good servant Maritornes helped her. The daughter said nothing, and smiled from time to time. The curate settled it all, promising to make good their loss as best he could, both of the wineskins and of the wine, and above all of the damage to the tail, which they made so much account of.

Dorotea comforted Sancho Panza by telling him that whenever it should appear to have been true that his master had beheaded the giant, she promised him, as soon as she found herself peacefully settled in her kingdom, to give him the best earldom in it. Sancho was comforted at this, and assured the princess that she could take it for certain that he had seen the giant's head, and that for a further mark of it, it had a beard that came down to its waist; and that if it did not turn up, it was because everything that happened in that house went by way of enchantment, as he had proved another time when he had lodged in it. Dorotea said she believed it, and that he should not distress himself, for everything would come out well and would turn out exactly to order.

Everybody being settled, the curate wanted to finish reading the tale, because he saw that there was not much of it left. Cardenio, Dorotea and all the rest begged him to finish it. He, wanting to give everybody pleasure — and because of the pleasure he took in it himself — went on with the tale, which went like this:

It happened, then, that through the satisfaction Anselmo felt about Camila's goodness, he lived a contented and carefree life; and Camila deliberately put on a cold face for Lotario, so that Anselmo should take the opposite view of the affection she had for him. And to confirm the thing further, Lotario asked leave not to come to the house any more, since the annoyance Camila got from the sight of him was so plainly shown; but the deceived Anselmo told him on no account to do such a thing. And in this way, in a thousand ways, Anselmo was the manufacturer of his own dishonour, believing he was the manufacturer of his own happiness.

At this point Leonela's own pleasure at finding herself given a free hand in her love affair went so far that, without looking at anything else, she went after it at full gallop, trusting that her mistress would cover for her — and would even advise her how she could go about it with little risk. In the end, one night Anselmo heard footsteps in Leonela's room, and wanting to go in and see who was making them, he found that the door was being held against him — a thing that gave him more determination to open it. And he forced it so hard that he opened it and got inside just in time to see a man jumping out of the window into the street; and hurrying to catch him or recognise him, he could do neither the one nor the other, because Leonela threw her arms round him, saying:

"Calm yourself, my dear master, and do not make a disturbance or go after the man who jumped out of here. It is my own affair, and so much so that he is my husband."

Anselmo would not believe it; on the contrary, blind with anger, he pulled out his dagger and tried to stab Leonela, telling her to tell him the truth or he would kill her. She, in her fright, not knowing what she was saying, said to him:

"Do not kill me, sir, for I shall tell you things of more importance than you can imagine."

"Tell them at once," said Anselmo; "if not, you are a dead woman."

"For the moment it will be impossible," said Leonela, "the state of confusion I am in. Leave me until tomorrow, and then you shall learn from me what will astonish you; and be assured that the man who jumped out of this window is a young man of this city who has given me his hand to be my husband."

Anselmo was calmed at this and was willing to wait the time he was asked for, because he did not expect to hear anything that was against Camila, being so satisfied and so sure of her goodness. And so he went out of the room and left Leonela shut up in it, telling her that she would not come out of there until she had told him what she had to tell him.

He then went to see Camila and to tell her, as he did tell her, everything that had passed between him and her maid, and the promise she had given him to tell him great and important things. Whether Camila was disturbed or not there is no need to say; because such fear came over her, genuinely believing — and it was to be believed — that Leonela was bound to tell Anselmo everything she knew about her want of good faith, that she had not the courage to wait and see whether her suspicion turned out false or not.

And that same night, when it seemed to her that Anselmo was asleep, she gathered together the best jewels she had and some money, and without being noticed by anybody she left the house and went to Lotario's, and told him what was happening and begged him to put her somewhere safe, or that the two of them should go off together where they could be safe from Anselmo. The confusion Camila put Lotario into was such that he could not answer her a word, nor could he settle what to do.

In the end he decided to take Camila to a convent where a sister of his was prioress. Camila consented to it; and with the speed the case demanded, Lotario took her and left her at the convent, and he likewise went away from the city at once, without telling anybody about his going.

When day broke, without noticing that Camila was missing from his side, in his eagerness to know what Leonela wanted to tell him, Anselmo got up and went to where he had left her shut in. He opened the door and went into the room, but did not find Leonela in it: he only found some sheets knotted together and tied to the window, a sign and mark that she had let herself down that way and gone.

He came back at once, very sad, to tell Camila about it; and not finding her in bed or anywhere in the house, he was appalled. He asked the servants of the house about her, but nobody could give him an account of what he asked for.

It happened by chance, as he was going about looking for Camila, that he saw her chests open and most of her jewels missing from them; and with this he finally realised his misfortune, and that Leonela was not the cause of his ruin. And exactly as he was, without finishing dressing, sad and thoughtful, he went to give an account of his misery to his friend Lotario. But when he did not find him, and his servants told him that he had been missing from the house that night and had taken with him all the money he had, he thought he would go out of his mind. And to finish and conclude it all, going back to his own house, he found in it not one of all the menservants and maidservants he had, but the house deserted and empty.

He did not know what to think, what to say or what to do, and little by little his wits were leaving him. He looked at himself and saw himself in an instant without a wife, without a friend and without servants; abandoned, as it seemed to him, by the sky that covered him; and above all without honour, because in Camila's absence he saw his own ruin.

He resolved at last, after a long while, to go to the village of his friend where he had been when he gave the opportunity for the whole of that misfortune to be contrived. He shut the doors of his house, got on his horse, and with fainting spirits set off. And he had hardly gone halfway when, harried by his own thoughts, he was obliged to dismount and tie his horse to a tree, at whose trunk he let himself drop, giving tender, sorrowful sighs; and there he stayed until it was almost dark.

And at that hour he saw a man coming on horseback from the city, and after greeting him he asked him what news there was in Florence. The citizen answered:

"The strangest that has been heard in it for many a day; because it is publicly said that Lotario, that great friend of Anselmo the rich man who lived by St John's, carried off Camila, Anselmo's wife, last night — and Anselmo has disappeared too. All this has been told by a maid of Camila's, whom the governor found last night letting herself down by a sheet from the windows of Anselmo's house. In fact I do not know exactly how the business went; I only know that the whole city is astonished at it, because such a thing was not to be expected from the great and familiar friendship of the two of them, which they say was so great that people used to call them the two friends."

"Is it known, by any chance," said Anselmo, "which road Lotario and Camila have taken?"

"Not in the least," said the citizen, "although the governor has been very diligent in looking for them."

"God go with you, sir," said Anselmo.

"And stay with you," answered the citizen, and went off.

With such disastrous news, Anselmo came very nearly to the point not only of losing his wits but of ending his life. He got up as best he could and reached his friend's house, who did not yet know his misfortune. But when he saw him arrive yellow, wasted and dried up, he understood that he was suffering under some grave trouble. Anselmo at once asked to be put to bed and to be given writing materials. It was done so, and they left him lying down and alone, because he wanted it so, and even asked them to shut the door.

Finding himself alone, then, he began to load his imagination so heavily with his misfortune that he plainly recognised that his life was coming to an end; and so he arranged to leave a record of the cause of his strange death. And beginning to write, before he had finished setting down everything he wanted to say, his breath failed him and he left his life in the hands of the grief his reckless curiosity had caused him.

The master of the house, seeing that it was late and that Anselmo did not call, decided to go in and find out whether his indisposition was getting worse; and he found him stretched out face downwards, half his body on the bed and the other half on the writing table, on which lay the paper written and open, and he still had the pen in his hand. The host went up to him, having called him first; and taking him by the hand, seeing that he did not answer and finding him cold, he saw that he was dead.

He was astonished and greatly distressed, and called the household to see the misfortune that had happened to Anselmo; and finally he read the paper, which he recognised as being written in Anselmo's own hand, and which contained these words:

A foolish and reckless desire has taken away my life. If the news of my death should reach Camila's ears, let her know that I forgive her, because she was not obliged to work miracles, nor did I have any need to want her to work them; and since I was the manufacturer of my own dishonour, there is no reason why —

This far Anselmo wrote, by which it could be seen that at that point, without being able to finish the sentence, his life finished.

The next day his friend gave notice of his death to Anselmo's relatives, who already knew of his misfortune, and to the convent where Camila was — who was almost at the point of keeping her husband company on that unavoidable journey, not because of the news of her dead husband but because of what she learnt about the absent friend. It is said that although she found herself a widow, she would not leave the convent, nor take her vows as a nun either, until, not many days later, news came to her that Lotario had died in a battle which at that time Monsieur de Lautrec fought against the Great Captain Gonzalo Fernández de Córdoba in the kingdom of Naples, where the too late repentant friend had gone. Which Camila learning, she took her vows, and within a few days ended her life at the harsh hands of sorrow and melancholy. This was the end they all came to, born of so senseless a beginning.

"This tale," said the curate, "seems good to me; but I cannot persuade myself that it is true. And if it is invented, the author invented it badly, because it cannot be imagined that there is a husband so foolish as to want to make so costly an experiment as Anselmo's. If this case had been put between a gallant and a lady, it might have passed; but between husband and wife it has something of the impossible about it. And as far as the way of telling it goes, that does not displease me."
