Chapter 36: Which Treats of Other Rare Events That Happened at the Inn

While they were at this, the innkeeper, who was standing at the door of the inn, said:

"This lot coming is a fine troop of guests: if they stop here, we shall have a gaudeamus."

"What sort of people are they?" said Cardenio.

"Four men," answered the innkeeper, "come riding short-stirruped in the Moorish fashion, with lances and shields, and all of them with black masks on. And along with them comes a woman dressed in white, on a side-saddle, with her face covered too, and two more lads on foot."

"Are they very close?" asked the curate.

"So close," answered the innkeeper, "that they are here now."

Hearing this, Dorotea covered her face and Cardenio went into Don Quixote's room; and they had hardly had time for this when there came into the inn everybody the innkeeper had described. The four on horseback, who were of very fine build and bearing, dismounted and went to help down the woman who was riding on the side-saddle; and one of them, taking her in his arms, set her down in a chair that stood at the door of the room where Cardenio had hidden himself.

In all this time neither she nor they had taken off their masks or said a single word — only that, on sitting down in the chair, the woman gave a deep sigh and let her arms fall, like a person ill and fainting. The lads on foot took the horses to the stable.

Seeing this, the curate, eager to know who these people were who went about in such dress and such silence, went to where the lads were and asked one of them what he wanted to know; who answered him:

"By God, sir, I couldn't tell you who these people are. All I know is that they look very distinguished, especially the one who went and took that lady you've seen in his arms; and I say this because all the rest treat him with respect, and nothing is done except what he orders and commands."

"And the lady — who is she?" asked the curate.

"I couldn't tell you that either," answered the lad, "because in the whole of the journey I haven't seen her face. Sigh I have heard her many times, and give such groans that with every one of them she seems to want to give up her soul. And it's no wonder we know no more than we've said, because my companion and I have only been with them two days; for having met them on the road, they begged us and persuaded us to come with them as far as Andalusia, offering to pay us very well for it."

"And have you heard any of them named?" asked the curate.

"Certainly not," answered the lad, "because they all travel with such silence that it's a marvel; there's nothing to be heard among them but the sighs and sobs of the poor lady, which move us to pity. And without a doubt we're convinced that she's being taken by force wherever she's going; and, from what you can gather from her dress, she's a nun, or is going to be one, which is the likelier; and perhaps because the convent must not be coming to her of her own will, she goes along sad, as she seems to be."

"It might all be so," said the curate.

And leaving them, he went back to where Dorotea was, who, having heard the muffled woman sigh, and moved by natural compassion, went up to her and said:

"What are you suffering from, my lady? See whether it is one of the things women generally have practice and experience in curing; for on my side I offer you a good will to serve you."

To all this the grief-stricken lady said nothing; and although Dorotea came back with greater offers, she still kept her silence, until the masked gentleman came up — the one the lad said the others obeyed — and said to Dorotea:

"Do not weary yourself, madam, in offering anything to that woman, because it is her custom not to be grateful for anything that is done for her; and do not try to get her to answer you, unless you want to hear some lie from her mouth."

"I have never told one," said the woman who until then had been silent. "On the contrary, it is because I am so truthful and so incapable of lying devices that I find myself now in such misfortune. And of this I want you yourself to be the witness, since my pure truth is what makes you false and a liar."

Cardenio heard these words very plainly and distinctly, being so close to the one who was saying them that only the door of Don Quixote's room stood between them; and as soon as he heard them, giving a great cry, he said:

"God help me! What is this I am hearing? What voice is this that has reached my ears?"

That lady turned her head at these shouts, thoroughly startled; and not seeing who was giving them, she stood up and went to go into the room. Which the gentleman seeing, he held her back without letting her move a step. In her agitation and distress the taffeta with which she had her face covered fell off, and revealed an incomparable beauty and a miraculous face — although colourless and terrified, because she was going about with her eyes searching every place her sight could reach, so eagerly that she looked like a person out of her senses; and these signs, without anybody's knowing why she made them, put great pity into Dorotea and into everybody who was looking at her.

The gentleman held her strongly by the shoulders; and being so busy holding her, he could not put a hand to lift the mask that was slipping down, as in fact it slipped off altogether. And raising her eyes, Dorotea, who was holding the lady in her arms, saw that the man who was also holding her was her own husband, Don Fernando; and she had hardly recognised him when, hurling out from the depths of her being a long and most sorrowful "Ah!" she let herself fall backwards in a faint; and if the barber had not been standing right there, who caught her in his arms, she would have come down on the ground.

The curate ran at once to take her mask off so as to throw water on her face; and as soon as he uncovered her, Don Fernando recognised her — for he was the one who was holding the other woman — and he was left as though dead at the sight of her. But not that he let go for all that of Luscinda, who was the one trying to get free of his arms; and she had recognised Cardenio by his cry, and he had recognised her. Cardenio likewise heard the "Ah!" that Dorotea gave when she fell fainting; and believing it was his Luscinda, he came out of the room in terror, and the first thing he saw was Don Fernando, holding Luscinda in his arms. Don Fernando also recognised Cardenio at once; and all three of them, Luscinda, Cardenio and Dorotea, were left dumb and taken aback, hardly knowing what had happened to them.

They were all silent and they all looked at each other: Dorotea at Don Fernando, Don Fernando at Cardenio, Cardenio at Luscinda and Luscinda at Cardenio. But the first to break the silence was Luscinda, speaking to Don Fernando in this way:

"Let me go, Señor Don Fernando, by what you owe to being who you are, since you will not do it for any other consideration. Let me get to the wall I am the ivy of, to the support they have not been able to part me from — not your importunities, or your threats, or your promises, or your gifts. Notice how heaven, by unusual roads and roads hidden from us, has put my true husband in front of me. And you know well, by a thousand costly experiences, that death alone would have been enough to rub him out of my memory. Let such plain undeceiving, then, be enough to make you turn — since you can do nothing else — your love into rage, your affection into resentment, and end my life with it; for if I give it up in front of my good husband I shall count it well spent. Perhaps by my death he will be satisfied of the faith I kept for him until the last extremity of my life."

Dorotea had meanwhile come to herself, and had been listening to all the words Luscinda said, by which she came to know who she was; and seeing that Don Fernando still did not let her out of his arms and did not answer her words, she forced herself as much as she could, got up and went and knelt at his feet; and shedding a great quantity of lovely and pitiable tears, she began to say to him:

"Unless it is, my lord, that the rays of this sun you hold eclipsed in your arms take away and dazzle those of your eyes, you will have seen by now that the woman kneeling at your feet is the luckless — until you choose otherwise — and unfortunate Dorotea.

"I am that humble country girl whom you, out of your goodness or your pleasure, chose to raise to the height of being able to call herself yours. I am the one who, shut inside the limits of modesty, lived a contented life until, at the sound of your importunities and your apparently just and loving protestations, she opened the doors of her reserve and handed you the keys of her liberty — a gift so ill repaid by you, as it plainly shows that I have been obliged to find myself in the place where you find me, and to see you in the state in which I see you.

"But for all this, I would not have it fall into your imagination to think that I have come here by the roads of my own dishonour, when I have been brought here only by those of the pain and grief of finding myself forgotten by you. You wanted me to be yours, and you wanted it in such a way that, although you may now want me not to be, it will not be possible for you to stop being mine.

"Consider, my lord, that the incomparable love I bear you may be some recompense for the beauty and nobility for which you are leaving me. You cannot belong to the beautiful Luscinda, because you are mine; nor can she be yours, because she is Cardenio's. And it will be easier for you, if you look at it, to bring your affections round to loving one who adores you than to bring one who loathes you round to loving you well.

"You solicited my carelessness; you begged my integrity; you were not ignorant of my rank; you know very well how I gave myself up to your whole will. You are left no room or refuge to call yourself deceived. And if this is so, as it is, and you are as much a Christian as you are a gentleman, why do you delay by so many roundabout ways to make me happy at the end, as you made me happy at the beginning?

"And if you will not have me for what I am, which is your true and lawful wife, have me at least and take me as your slave; for as long as I am in your power I shall count myself fortunate and well off. Do not allow, by leaving and abandoning me, that people should gather in knots over my dishonour; do not give my parents so bad an old age, since the loyal services they have always done yours as good vassals do not deserve it.

"And if it seems to you that you will be ruining your blood by mixing it with mine, consider that there is little or no nobility in the world that has not gone along that road, and that the blood taken from women is not what counts in illustrious descents; the more so as true nobility consists in virtue, and if that is lacking in you by denying me what you so justly owe me, then I shall be left with a better claim to nobility than the one you have.

"In the end, my lord, the last thing I say to you is that whether you will or not, I am your wife. Witnesses are your own words, which neither are nor ought to be lies, if it is the case that you pride yourself on the very thing you despise me for. A witness will be the signature you made, and a witness heaven, which you yourself called on as witness of what you promised me. And if all this fails, your own conscience will not fail to cry out silently in the middle of your happiness, standing up for this truth I have told you and disturbing your best pleasures and satisfactions."

These and other words the grief-stricken Dorotea said, with so much feeling and so many tears that the very men who came with Don Fernando, and all the rest who were present, joined her in them. Don Fernando listened to her without answering her a word, until she made an end of hers and a beginning of so many sobs and sighs that it would have had to be a heart of bronze that was not softened by such signs of grief.

Luscinda was looking at her, no less grieved by her suffering than astonished at her great good sense and beauty; and although she wanted to go to her and say some words of comfort to her, Don Fernando's arms would not let her, holding her tight. And he, full of confusion and dread, after a good while spent looking attentively at Dorotea, opened his arms and, setting Luscinda free, said:

"You have conquered, beautiful Dorotea, you have conquered; for it is not possible to have the heart to deny so many truths together."

With the faint Luscinda had had, as soon as Don Fernando let her go she was about to fall to the ground; but Cardenio being right there — who had placed himself behind Don Fernando's back so as not to be recognised — putting all fear aside and risking everything, ran to hold Luscinda up; and taking her in his arms, he said to her:

"If merciful heaven is pleased and willing that you should have some rest at last, my loyal, faithful and beautiful lady, nowhere do I believe you will have it more safely than in these arms that now receive you, and that received you once before, when fortune was willing that I could call you mine."

At these words Luscinda set her eyes on Cardenio; and having begun to recognise him, first by his voice, and making sure it was he by the sight of him, almost out of her senses and without regard for any decorum at all, she threw her arms round his neck, and putting her face against Cardenio's, said to him:

"You indeed, my lord, are the true master of this captive of yours, however much contrary fortune may prevent it, and however many threats are made against this life that is kept alive by yours."

This was a strange spectacle for Don Fernando and for all the bystanders, who marvelled at so unheard-of an event. It seemed to Dorotea that Don Fernando's face had lost its colour and that he was making as though to take revenge on Cardenio, because she saw him move his hand to put it on his sword; and as soon as she thought it, with unheard-of quickness she clasped him round the knees, kissing them and holding him so tight that she would not let him move; and without stopping her tears for a moment, she said to him:

"What is it you mean to do, my only refuge, in this so unexpected pass? At your feet you have your wife, and the woman you want to be your wife is in her husband's arms. Consider whether it will be right for you, or whether it will even be possible for you, to undo what heaven has done; or whether it will suit you to want to raise up and set level with yourself the woman who, setting aside every obstacle, confirmed in her truth and her constancy, has her own eyes before your eyes, and her face and breast bathed in the moisture of her love for her true husband.

"By the God who is, I beg you, and by who you yourself are I entreat you, that this so plain undeceiving should not only not increase your anger but diminish it in such a way that with quiet and calm you allow these two lovers to have theirs, without any hindrance from you, for all the time heaven may be pleased to grant it them. And in this you will show the generosity of your illustrious and noble breast, and the world will see that with you reason has more force than appetite."

While Dorotea was saying this, although Cardenio held Luscinda in his arms he did not take his eyes off Don Fernando, resolved that if he saw him make any movement to his disadvantage, he would try to defend himself and to set about, as best he could, everybody who showed themselves against him, even if it cost him his life.

But at this point Don Fernando's friends came up, and the curate and the barber, who had been present at all of it — and good Sancho Panza was not missing either. And they all surrounded Don Fernando, begging him to be good enough to look at Dorotea's tears; and that, what she had said in her speech being true — as they without doubt believed it was — he should not allow her to be cheated of such just hopes. That he should consider that it was not by chance, as it seemed, but by the particular providence of heaven that they had all come together in a place where none of them had least expected it.

And he should note, said the curate, that death alone could part Luscinda from Cardenio; and even if they were divided by the edge of some sword, they would count their death as the greatest happiness. And that in knots that cannot be undone it was the height of good sense, by forcing and conquering oneself, to show a generous spirit, allowing the two of them by his own will alone to enjoy the good that heaven had already granted them.

That he should likewise set his eyes on Dorotea's beauty, and would see that few or none could equal her, let alone have any advantage over her; and that to her beauty he should add her humility and the extreme of the love she bore him. And above all, that he should note that if he prided himself on being a gentleman and a Christian, he could do nothing else but keep the word he had given; and that by keeping it he would fulfil his duty to God and satisfy sensible people, who know and recognise that it is the prerogative of beauty, even in a humble subject, provided it goes with modesty, to be able to raise itself and be made equal to any height, without any note of degradation to the man who raises it and makes it equal to himself; and that when the strong laws of desire are obeyed, so long as no sin comes into it, the man who follows them ought not to be blamed.

In short, to these arguments they all added others, such and so many that Don Fernando's valiant breast — being, after all, nourished with illustrious blood — was softened and let itself be conquered by the truth, which he could not have denied even if he had wanted to. And the sign he gave of having surrendered and given himself over to the good opinion that had been put to him was to bend down and embrace Dorotea, saying to her:

"Get up, my lady; it is not right that the woman I hold in my soul should be kneeling at my feet. And if until now I have given no signs of what I say, perhaps it has been by heaven's arrangement, so that, seeing in you the faith with which you love me, I might know how to value you as you deserve. What I beg of you is that you should not reproach me with my bad conduct and my great carelessness; for the same occasion and force that moved me to accept you as mine was the very thing that drove me to try not to be yours. And that this is true, turn and look at the eyes of the now contented Luscinda, and in them you will find an excuse for all my errors. And since she has found and got what she wanted, and I have found in you everything I need, let her live safe and contented long and happy years with her Cardenio; for I shall pray to heaven to let me live them with my Dorotea."

And saying this, he embraced her again and put his face against hers with so tender a feeling that he had to take great care that the tears should not go on to give unmistakable signs of his love and his repentance. Luscinda's and Cardenio's did not do the same, nor did those of almost everybody who was there present; because they began to shed so many, some out of their own happiness and others out of other people's, that it seemed for all the world as if some grave and dreadful case had befallen the lot of them. Even Sancho Panza wept — although he afterwards said that he was only weeping because he saw that Dorotea was not, as he had thought, the queen Micomicona, from whom he was expecting so many favours.

The astonishment, along with the weeping, lasted some while in all of them; and then Cardenio and Luscinda went and knelt down before Don Fernando, thanking him for the kindness he had done them in such courteous words that Don Fernando did not know how to answer them; and so he raised them up and embraced them with signs of great love and great courtesy.

He then asked Dorotea to tell him how she had come to that place so far from her own. She, in short and well-judged words, told everything she had told Cardenio before; which Don Fernando and those who came with him enjoyed so much that they could have wished the tale had lasted longer — such was the charm with which Dorotea told her misfortunes.

And as soon as she had finished, Don Fernando told what had happened to him in the city after he found the paper in Luscinda's bosom, in which she declared that she was Cardenio's wife and could not be his. He said he had wanted to kill her, and would have done it if he had not been prevented by her parents; and that he had left her house in that state, furious and mortified, resolved to take revenge more conveniently. And that the next day he learnt that Luscinda had gone from her parents' house, without anybody's being able to say where she had gone; and that in the end, at the end of some months, he came to learn that she was in a convent, meaning to stay in it all her life if she could not spend it with Cardenio.

And that as soon as he learnt it, choosing those three gentlemen to go with him, he came to the place where she was; and that he had not wanted to speak to her, being afraid that once it was known he was there, the convent would be more closely guarded. And so, waiting for a day when the gate was open, he left the two of them to guard the door, and he with the other had gone into the convent looking for Luscinda, whom they found in the cloister talking to a nun; and snatching her up, without giving her room to do anything else, they had come away with her to a place where they got what they needed for bringing her along. All of which they had been able to do in complete safety, because the convent was out in the country, a good way outside the town.

He said that as soon as Luscinda saw herself in his power, she lost all her senses; and that after coming to herself she had done nothing but weep and sigh, without saying a word; and that in this way, accompanied by silence and tears, they had come to that inn — which for him was like having come to heaven, where all the misfortunes of earth are cancelled and come to an end.
