Chapter 37: In Which Is Continued the Story of the Famous Princess Micomicona, with Other Amusing Adventures

Sancho was listening to all this with no small grief in his soul, seeing that his hopes of a title were disappearing and going up in smoke, and that the lovely Princess Micomicona had turned into Dorotea and the giant into Don Fernando, while his master was sleeping soundly away, quite unaware of everything that had happened.

Dorotea could not be sure that the good fortune she now had was not a dream. Cardenio was in the same state of mind, and Luscinda's ran on the same account. Don Fernando gave thanks to heaven for the favour he had received and for having brought him out of that tangled labyrinth where he had been so near to losing his good name and his soul. And in the end, everybody in the inn was contented and delighted at the good outcome of such knotted and desperate affairs.

The curate, being a man of judgement, set it all in order and congratulated each of them on the good they had got. But the one who most rejoiced and was most contented was the innkeeper's wife, because of the promise Cardenio and the curate had made her to pay her for all the damages and expenses that had come to her on Don Quixote's account.

Only Sancho, as has been said, was the afflicted, the unlucky and the sad one; and so, with a melancholy face, he went in to his master, who had just woken up, and said to him:

"Your worship, Sir Sorrowful Countenance, may perfectly well sleep as much as you like, without troubling to kill any giant or to give the princess back her kingdom, for it is all done and finished."

"That I well believe," answered Don Quixote, "because I have had with the giant the most monstrous and enormous battle I expect to have in all the days of my life; and with one backhand stroke — smack! — I brought his head down on the ground, and so much blood came out of him that the streams of it ran along the ground as though they had been water."

"As though they had been red wine, your worship might better have said," answered Sancho; "because I want your worship to know, if you don't know it already, that the dead giant is a punctured wineskin, and the blood is six gallons of red wine that it was carrying in its belly, and the cut-off head is the whore that bore me — and Satan take the lot of it."

"And what is this you are saying, madman?" replied Don Quixote. "Are you in your senses?"

"Get up, your worship," said Sancho, "and you'll see the fine job you've done and what we've got to pay; and you'll see the queen turned into a private lady called Dorotea, along with other events that will astonish you if you take them in."

"I should not be surprised at any of that," replied Don Quixote; "because, if you remember rightly, the last time we were here I told you that everything that happened here was a matter of enchantment, and it would be no great thing if it were the same now."

"I'd believe all of it," answered Sancho, "if my blanketing had been a thing of the same kind; but it wasn't, it was real and true. And I saw that the innkeeper who's here today had hold of one corner of the blanket and was pushing me up towards the sky with a great deal of charm and energy, and with as much laughing as strength; and where it comes to recognising people, it's my belief, simpleton and sinner though I am, that there's no enchantment at all in it, but a great deal of pounding and a great deal of bad luck."

"Very well, God will put it right," said Don Quixote. "Give me my clothes and let me go out there, for I want to see the events and transformations you speak of."

Sancho gave him his clothes; and while he was dressing, the curate told Don Fernando and the rest about Don Quixote's madness, and about the device they had used to get him off the Poor Rock, where he imagined he was on account of his lady's scorn. He likewise told them almost all the adventures Sancho had told, at which they were not a little astonished and amused, since it seemed to them what it seemed to everybody: that it was the strangest kind of madness that could enter a deranged mind.

The curate said further that, since the lady Dorotea's good fortune now prevented their going on with their plan, it was necessary to invent and find another for being able to get him back to his own country. Cardenio offered to carry on with what they had begun, and said that Luscinda would take and act Dorotea's part.

"No," said Don Fernando, "it shall not be so; I want Dorotea to go on with her own invention. As long as this good gentleman's village is not very far from here, I shall be glad to have his cure seen to."

"It is not more than two days' journey from here."

"Well, even if it were more, I should be pleased to travel them for the sake of doing so good a work."

At this point Don Quixote came out, armed at all points, with Mambrino's helmet — battered as it was — on his head, his buckler braced on his arm and leaning on his trunk of a pike. Don Fernando and the rest were taken aback by Don Quixote's strange appearance: seeing his face half a league long, dry and yellow, the mismatched pieces of his armour, and his solemn bearing, they stayed silent until they should see what he would say. And he, with great gravity and calm, setting his eyes on the beautiful Dorotea, said:

"I am informed, beautiful lady, by this squire of mine that your greatness has been annihilated and your being undone, since from the queen and great lady you used to be you have turned into a private young woman. If this has been by order of the necromancer king your father, out of fear that I would not give you the necessary and proper help, I say that he did not know and does not know the half of the Mass, and that he was little versed in the histories of chivalry; because if he had read them and gone through them as attentively and as thoroughly as I have gone through and read them, he would have found at every step how other knights of less fame than mine have brought off harder things — since it is no great matter to kill a little giant, however arrogant he may be. Because it is not many hours since I was face to face with him, and — I will say no more, so that they may not tell me I am lying; but time, the revealer of all things, will tell it when we least expect it."

"It was two wineskins you were face to face with, and no giant," said the innkeeper at this point.

Don Fernando ordered him to be quiet and on no account to interrupt Don Quixote's talk; and Don Quixote went on to say:

"I say, in short, high and disinherited lady, that if for the reason I have given your father has worked this metamorphosis on your person, you should give it no credit at all; because there is no danger on earth through which my sword will not open a road — with which, by laying your enemy's head on the ground, I shall put the crown of your own kingdom on your head within a few days."

Don Quixote said no more, and waited for the princess to answer him; and she, since she already knew Don Fernando's decision that the deception should be carried on until Don Quixote was taken back to his own country, answered him with a great deal of charm and gravity:

"Whoever told you, valorous Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, that I had changed and altered my being did not tell you the truth; because I am today the same woman I was yesterday. It is true that certain fortunate events have made some change in me, and have given me the best fortune I could have wished myself; but I have not for that reason stopped being what I was before, or stopped having the same intention I have always had of making use of the valour of your valiant and invincible arm.

"So, my lord, let your goodness give back his honour to the father who begot me, and hold him for a wise and prudent man, since with his science he found so easy and so true a road for remedying my misfortune. For I believe that if it had not been for you, sir, I should never have managed to have the good fortune I have; and in this I speak as much truth as most of these gentlemen who are present are good witnesses of. What remains is that tomorrow we should set out, because today not much of a journey could be made; and for the rest of the good outcome I hope for, I shall leave it to God and to the valour of your breast."

This the quick-witted Dorotea said; and on hearing it, Don Quixote turned to Sancho and, with every sign of great anger, said to him:

"Now I tell you, little Sancho, that you are the biggest little scoundrel there is in Spain. Tell me, you vagabond thief: did you not just now finish telling me that this princess had turned into a girl called Dorotea, and that the head which I know I cut off a giant was the whore that bore you, along with other absurdities that put me in the greatest confusion I have ever been in in all the days of my life? I swear —" and he looked up at the sky and clenched his teeth "— that I am ready to make such havoc of you as will put salt in the brainpan of every lying squire of knights errant there may be in the world from this day on!"

"Let your worship calm down, my dear sir," answered Sancho. "It might well be that I was mistaken as far as the change of the lady Princess Micomicona goes; but as far as the giant's head goes — or at least the puncturing of the wineskins and the blood's being red wine — I am not mistaken, by the living God! Because the wineskins are there wounded, at the head of your worship's bed, and the red wine has made a lake of the room. And if not, you'll see it when the eggs are frying — I mean you'll see it when his worship the innkeeper here asks you for the damage on the lot of it. As for the rest, that the lady queen is as she was, I rejoice in my soul, because my share is in it, like everybody else's."

"Now I tell you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that you are an idiot; and forgive me, and enough of it."

"Enough," said Don Fernando, "and let no more be said about it. And since the lady princess says we are to travel tomorrow, because today it is late, let it be so; and tonight we can spend in good conversation until the coming day, when we shall all accompany Señor Don Quixote, because we want to be witnesses of the valorous and unheard-of exploits he is to perform in the course of this great enterprise he has taken on."

"It is I who am to serve you and go with you," answered Don Quixote; "and I am very grateful for the kindness done me and for the good opinion held of me, which I shall try to make come true, or it will cost me my life — and even more, if more can cost me."

Many words of politeness and many offers passed between Don Quixote and Don Fernando; but silence was put on all of it by a traveller who came into the inn at that moment, whose dress showed him to be a Christian newly come from the land of the Moors. For he came dressed in a short-skirted coat of blue cloth, with half sleeves and no collar; his breeches were likewise of blue linen, with a cap of the same colour; he wore date-coloured buskins and a Moorish scimitar hung from a baldric that crossed his chest.

Behind him came in, on a donkey, a woman dressed in the Moorish fashion, her face covered with a veil on her head; she wore a little brocade cap, and was dressed in a robe that covered her from her shoulders to her feet. The man was of a strong, well-favoured build, a little over forty years old, somewhat dark in the face, with long moustaches and a very well kept beard. In short, his bearing showed that if he had been well dressed people would have judged him to be a person of quality and well born.

On coming in he asked for a room; and when they told him there was none in the inn, he showed himself put out; and going up to the woman who by her dress appeared to be a Moor, he lifted her down in his arms. Luscinda, Dorotea, the innkeeper's wife, her daughter and Maritornes, drawn by the new dress they had never seen before, gathered round the Moorish woman; and Dorotea, who was always charming, polite and quick-witted, thinking that both she and the man who had brought her were distressed at the lack of a room, said to her:

"Do not let the lack of comfort here trouble you too much, my lady, for it is the nature of inns not to have any; but for all that, if you would like to come in with us" — pointing to Luscinda — "perhaps in the course of this journey you have found other welcomes not as good."

The veiled woman answered nothing to this, and did nothing but get up from where she had sat down; and putting both hands crossed on her breast and bending her head, she bowed her body as a sign that she was grateful. By her silence they supposed that without any doubt she must be a Moor and could not speak Christian.

At this the captive came up, having been busy with something else until then; and seeing that they had all gathered round the woman who came with him, and that she was silent at everything they said to her, he said:

"My ladies, this young woman hardly understands my language, and does not know how to speak any except the one of her own country; and that is why she must not have answered, and does not answer, what she is asked."

"She is asked nothing at all," answered Luscinda, "except to be offered our company for tonight and a share of the place where we shall settle ourselves, where she will be made as comfortable as the accommodation allows, with the goodwill that obliges us to serve all strangers who have need of it — especially when it is a woman one serves."

"On her behalf and my own," answered the captive, "I kiss your hands, my lady, and value very highly, and as it deserves, the kindness you offer; for on such an occasion, and from people of the sort your looks show you to be, it is easy to see that it must be very great."

"Tell me, sir," said Dorotea, "is this lady a Christian or a Moor? Because her dress and her silence make us think she is what we would not wish her to be."

"A Moor she is in her dress and in her body, but in her soul she is very much a Christian, because she has the greatest desire to be one."

"So she is not baptised?" asked Luscinda.

"There has been no opportunity for it," answered the captive, "since she left Algiers, her country and her home; and up to now she has not found herself in such immediate danger of death as to make it necessary to baptise her before she knew all the ceremonies our Mother the Holy Church requires. But God will be pleased that she shall soon be baptised with the propriety her quality deserves, which is more than her dress and mine show."

With these words he put a longing into everybody who was listening to know who the Moorish woman and the captive were; but nobody wanted to ask them just then, seeing that this was more a moment for getting them some rest than for asking them about their lives.

Dorotea took her by the hand and led her to sit down beside her, and asked her to take off her veil. She looked at the captive, as though asking him to tell her what they were saying and what she should do. He told her in Arabic that they were asking her to take off her veil, and that she should do it. And so she took it off, and revealed a face so beautiful that Dorotea thought her more beautiful than Luscinda, and Luscinda thought her more beautiful than Dorotea; and all the bystanders recognised that if any face could be set level with those two, it was the Moorish woman's, and there were even some who gave hers the advantage in something. And as beauty has the prerogative and grace of reconciling minds and drawing wills to itself, they all at once surrendered to the desire to serve and make much of the beautiful Moor.

Don Fernando asked the captive what the Moorish woman was called, and he answered Lela Zoraida; and as soon as she heard this she understood what they had asked the Christian, and said in a great hurry, full of distress and charm:

"No, no Zoraida: María, María!" — giving them to understand that she was called María and not Zoraida.

These words, and the great feeling with which the Moorish woman said them, made more than one tear fall from some of those who heard her, especially from the women, who by their nature are tender and compassionate. Luscinda embraced her very lovingly, saying to her:

"Yes, yes: María, María."

To which the Moorish woman answered:

"Yes, yes: María; Zoraida macange!" — which means no.

By now night was coming on, and by order of those who had come with Don Fernando the innkeeper had been busy and careful in getting them the best supper he possibly could. The hour arriving, then, they all sat down at a long table like a servants' hall table, because there was no round or square one in the inn; and they gave the head and chief place — although he refused it — to Don Quixote, who wanted the lady Micomicona to be at his side, since he was her protector. Then Luscinda and Zoraida sat down, and opposite them Don Fernando and Cardenio, and then the captive and the other gentlemen, and beside the ladies the curate and the barber.

And so they had supper very contentedly, and their contentment was increased when they saw that Don Quixote, leaving off eating and moved by the same sort of spirit that had moved him to talk as much as he did when he had supper with the goatherds, began to say:

"Truly, gentlemen, if it is properly considered, those who profess the order of knight-errantry see great and unheard-of things. If not — which of the living in the world, coming in now through the gate of this castle and seeing us in the state we are in, would judge and believe that we are who we are? Who could say that this lady at my side is the great queen we all know her to be, and that I am that Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance who goes about in the mouth of fame? There is no doubting it now: this art and calling exceeds all those that men have invented, and it is to be held in the greater esteem the more dangers it is subject to.

"Let them get out of my sight who say that letters have the advantage of arms; for I shall tell them, whoever they may be, that they do not know what they are saying. Because the reason such people generally give, and the one they chiefly rely on, is that the labours of the spirit exceed those of the body, and that arms are exercised with the body alone — as if it were a porter's trade, for which nothing is needed but good strength; or as if in this thing we call arms there were not shut up, for those of us who profess it, the acts of fortitude, which demand a great deal of understanding to carry out; or as if the spirit of the warrior who has charge of an army, or of the defence of a besieged city, did not work as hard with the spirit as with the body.

"If not, let it be seen whether by bodily strength a man can find out and guess the enemy's intention, his designs, his stratagems, his difficulties, or how to forestall the harm that is feared — for all these things are actions of the understanding, in which the body has no part at all.

"This being so, then, that arms require the spirit as much as letters do, let us see now which of the two spirits, the scholar's or the warrior's, works harder. And this will come to be known by the end and purpose each one is directed to, because that intention is to be valued higher which has the nobler end for its object.

"The end and purpose of letters — and I am not speaking now of divine letters, whose aim is to carry and guide souls to heaven, for no other can be set level with an end as endless as that; I speak of human letters — their end is to set distributive justice at its proper point and to give each man what is his, to understand and to see that good laws are kept. An end, certainly, generous and lofty and worthy of great praise, but not of so much as the one arms attend to, which have for their object and end peace, which is the greatest good men can desire in this life.

"And so the first good news the world had and men had were the news the angels gave on the night that was our day, when they sang in the air: 'Glory be in the highest, and peace on earth to men of good will.' And the salutation that the best master of earth and heaven taught his intimates and his favoured ones was to tell them that when they went into any house they should say: 'Peace be on this house.' And many other times he told them: 'My peace I give you, my peace I leave you; peace be with you' — like a jewel and a pledge given and left by such a hand; a jewel without which there can be no good at all, on earth or in heaven.

"This peace is the true end of war, for to say arms is the same thing as to say war. Granting this truth, then, that the end of war is peace, and that in this it has the advantage of the end of letters, let us come now to the bodily labours of the scholar and to those of the professor of arms, and let it be seen which are the greater."

Don Quixote went on with his talk in such a way, and in such good terms, that he obliged none of those who were listening to him to take him for a madman just then. On the contrary, as most of them were gentlemen, to whom arms belong, they listened to him very willingly; and he went on to say:

"I say, then, that the student's labours are these: chiefly poverty — not because they are all poor, but so as to put the case in the extremest terms it can have. And having said that he suffers poverty, it seems to me there was nothing more to say about his bad luck, because whoever is poor has nothing good. This poverty he suffers in all its parts, now in hunger, now in cold, now in nakedness, now in all of them together; but with all that, it is not so great that he does not eat, even if it is a little later than the usual hour, even if it is off the leavings of the rich — for the greatest wretchedness of the student is what they call among themselves going for the soup. And they do not lack somebody else's brazier or fireside, which if it does not warm them at least takes the edge off their cold, and in the end they sleep the night under a roof.

"I do not want to come to other small matters — that is, the lack of shirts and the shortage of shoes, the thinness and threadbareness of the coat, or that stuffing themselves with so much pleasure when good luck sends them some feast. By this road I have described, rough and difficult, tripping here, falling there, getting up further on, falling again here, they arrive at the rank they want. And having reached it, we have seen many of them who, having passed through these Syrtes and these Scyllas and Charybdises, as though carried on the wings of favourable fortune — I say we have seen them ruling and governing the world from a chair, their hunger changed into fullness, their cold into comfort, their nakedness into fine clothes, and their sleeping on a rush mat into resting between Holland sheets and damask: a reward justly deserved by their virtue.

"But set against and compared with the labours of the soldier, theirs are left a long way behind in everything, as I shall now say."
