Chapter 39: In Which the Captive Tells His Life and Adventures

"My family had its beginning in a place in the mountains of León, with whom nature was more grateful and generous than fortune — although, in the narrow circumstances of those villages, my father still had the reputation of being rich, and he would genuinely have been so if he had been as clever at keeping his property as he was at spending it. And this disposition of his, of being open-handed and a spender, came from having been a soldier in the years of his youth; for soldiering is a school where the mean man becomes generous and the generous man a spendthrift. And if a few miserly soldiers are to be found, they are like monsters, seldom seen.

"My father went past the limits of generosity and came close to those of being a spendthrift — a thing that is of no use at all to a married man who has children to succeed him in his name and his condition. The ones my father had were three, all sons and all old enough to choose their walk in life.

"Seeing, then, that he could not, as he put it, hold his own hand back against his own disposition, my father chose to deprive himself of the instrument and cause that made him a spender and a giver — which was to deprive himself of his property, without which Alexander himself would have looked close-fisted.

"And so, calling the three of us alone into a room one day, he said something like what I shall now say: 'My sons, to tell you that I love you well, it is enough to know and to say that you are my sons; and to understand that I love you badly, it is enough to know that I do not hold my hand back where keeping your property is concerned. So that you may understand from now on that I love you as a father, and that I do not want to destroy you like a stepfather, I want to do a thing with you that I have had in mind for a long time and have arranged after mature consideration.

"'You are now of an age to take up a condition in life, or at least to choose a calling such that, when you are older, it will bring you honour and profit. And what I have thought of is to make four parts of my property: three of them I shall give you, to each what falls to him, without exceeding in anything; and the other I shall keep for myself, to live and keep myself the days heaven is pleased to give me of life.

"'But I should like each one of you, once he has in his own hands the part of the property that falls to him, to follow one of the roads I shall name. There is a proverb in our Spain which is, in my opinion, a very true one, as they all are, being brief maxims drawn from long and judicious experience; and the one I mean says: "The Church, or the sea, or the king's house" — as if it said more plainly: "Whoever wants to get on and be rich, let him either follow the Church, or go to sea and practise the art of trade, or go and serve kings in their households"; because they say: "A crumb from a king is worth more than a favour from a lord."

"'I say this because I should like — and it is my will — that one of you should follow letters, another trade, and the other serve the king in war, since it is hard to get into his service in his household; for although war does not give a man much wealth, it usually gives him a great deal of worth and a great deal of fame. Within eight days I shall give you the whole of your share in money, without cheating you of a farthing, as you will see by the fact. Tell me now whether you mean to follow my opinion and my advice in what I have put to you.'

"And ordering me, as the eldest, to answer, after telling him not to get rid of his property but to spend as much as he chose, since we were young enough to know how to earn it, I ended by concluding that I would fall in with what he wanted, and that mine was to follow the calling of arms, serving God and my king in it. The second brother made the same offers, and chose to go to the Indies, taking the property that fell to him invested in goods. The youngest, and, I believe, the wisest, said he wanted to follow the Church, or to go and finish the studies he had begun at Salamanca.

"As soon as we had finished agreeing and choosing our callings, my father embraced us all; and with the promptness he had promised, he carried out everything he had promised us. And giving each one his share, which as far as I remember was three thousand ducats each in money — because an uncle of ours bought the whole property and paid for it in cash, so that it should not go out of the family stock — on one and the same day the three of us took our leave of our good father.

"And on that same day, since it seemed to me an inhumanity that my father should be left old and with so little property, I got him to take two thousand ducats out of my three thousand, because the rest was enough for me to fit myself out with what a soldier needs. My two brothers, moved by my example, each gave him a thousand ducats: so that my father was left with four thousand in money, and three thousand more, which was apparently the value of the property that fell to him, which he would not sell but chose to keep as land.

"I say, in short, that we took our leave of him and of that uncle of ours I have mentioned, not without a great deal of feeling and tears from everybody; charging us to let them know, every time there was a chance of doing it, how we fared, well or badly. We promised it; and embracing us and giving us his blessing, one of us took the road to Salamanca, the other to Seville and I to Alicante, where I had news that there was a Genoese ship taking on a cargo of wool for Genoa.

"It will be twenty-two years this year since I left my father's house, and in all of them, although I have written some letters, I have had no news of him or of my brothers. And what I have gone through in this stretch of time I shall tell briefly.

"I took ship at Alicante, arrived at Genoa on a prosperous voyage, went from there to Milan, where I fitted myself out with arms and with some soldierly finery, and from there I meant to go and enlist in Piedmont; and being already on the road to Alessandria della Paglia, I had news that the great Duke of Alba was going over to Flanders. I changed my plan, went with him and served him in the campaigns he made; I was present at the deaths of the Counts of Egmont and Horn; I got to be ensign to a famous captain from Guadalajara called Diego de Urbina.

"And some time after I arrived in Flanders, news came of the league which His Holiness Pope Pius the Fifth, of happy memory, had made with Venice and with Spain against the common enemy, which is the Turk — who at that same time had won with his fleet the famous island of Cyprus, which was under Venetian rule: a lamentable and unfortunate loss. It was known for certain that the most serene Don John of Austria, natural brother of our good King Philip, was coming as general of this league. The enormous preparation for war that was being made was published abroad. All of which stirred me and moved my spirit and my desire to see myself in the campaign that was expected; and although I had hints, and almost certain promises, that at the first opportunity that offered I should be promoted to captain, I chose to leave it all and come, as I did come, to Italy.

"And my good luck willed that my lord Don John of Austria had just arrived at Genoa, on his way to Naples to join up with the Venetian fleet, as he afterwards did at Messina.

"I say, in short, that I found myself in that most fortunate campaign, made a captain of infantry by then, to which honourable rank my good luck raised me rather than my deserts. And on that day, which was so happy a one for Christendom — because on it the world and all the nations were undeceived of the error they were in, believing that the Turks were unbeatable at sea — on that day, I say, on which Ottoman pride and arrogance was broken, among all the fortunate men who were there (for the Christians who died there had more good fortune than those who were left alive and victorious), I alone was the unlucky one; since instead of being able to expect, if it had been in Roman times, some naval crown, I found myself on the night that followed so famous a day with chains on my feet and manacles on my hands.

"And it happened like this. Uchalí, king of Algiers, a bold and successful corsair, having attacked and taken the Maltese flagship — only three knights being left alive on her, and those badly wounded — Gian Andrea's flagship came up to help her, and I was on board with my company. And doing what I ought to on such an occasion, I leapt onto the enemy galley, which, sheering off from the one that had run against her, prevented my soldiers from following me; and so I found myself alone among my enemies, whom I could not resist because there were so many of them. In the end they overpowered me, covered with wounds. And as you gentlemen will have heard that Uchalí got away with his whole squadron, I came to be left a captive in his power, and I alone was the sad man among so many glad ones and the captive among so many free ones; for fifteen thousand Christians got the liberty they had longed for that day, all of whom had been at the oar in the Turkish fleet.

"They took me to Constantinople, where the Grand Turk Selim made my master general of the sea, because he had done his duty in the battle, having carried off the standard of the Order of Malta as a token of his valour.

"The second year, which was the year seventy-two, I found myself at Navarino, rowing in the flagship with the three lanterns. I saw and noted the opportunity that was lost there of catching the whole Turkish fleet in the harbour; because all the levantines and janissaries who were in it took it for certain that they would be attacked inside the harbour itself, and had their kit and their pasamaques — which are their shoes — ready to run away overland at once without waiting to be fought: such was the fear they had come to have of our fleet. But heaven ordered it otherwise — not through the fault or carelessness of the general who commanded our men, but through the sins of Christendom, and because God wills and allows that we should always have executioners to punish us.

"In fact Uchalí withdrew to Modon, which is an island next to Navarino; and putting his men ashore, he fortified the mouth of the harbour and stayed quiet until my lord Don John went back.

"On this voyage the galley called The Prize was taken, whose captain was a son of that famous corsair Barbarossa. She was taken by the flagship of Naples, called The She-Wolf, commanded by that thunderbolt of war, that father of soldiers, that fortunate and never-conquered captain Don Álvaro de Bazán, Marquis of Santa Cruz.

"And I do not want to leave out what happened at the taking of The Prize. Barbarossa's son was so cruel, and treated his captives so badly, that as soon as the men at the oar saw that the galley She-Wolf was coming up on them and overhauling them, they all let go of the oars at the same moment and seized their captain, who was standing on the gangway shouting to them to row faster; and passing him from bench to bench, from stern to bow, they gave him such bites that a little past the mast his soul had already passed to hell: such was, as I have said, the cruelty with which he treated them and the hatred they had for him.

"We went back to Constantinople; and the next year, which was seventy-three, it was learnt there how my lord Don John had taken Tunis and had taken that kingdom from the Turks and put Muley Hamet in possession of it, cutting off the hopes Muley Hamida had of reigning in it again — the cruellest and the bravest Moor the world ever had.

"The Grand Turk felt this loss deeply; and using the shrewdness they all have in his house, he made peace with the Venetians, who wanted it a great deal more than he did. And the next year, seventy-four, he attacked the Goletta and the fort which my lord Don John had left half built beside Tunis. In all these passages I was at the oar, without any hope of liberty — at least I did not hope to have it by ransom, because I had made up my mind not to write the news of my misfortune to my father.

"The Goletta was lost, in the end, and the fort was lost; against which two places there were seventy-five thousand paid Turkish soldiers, and of Moors and Arabs from all Africa more than four hundred thousand — this enormous number of men accompanied by so much ammunition and so many engines of war, and by so many pioneers, that with their hands and by handfuls of earth they could have buried the Goletta and the fort.

"The Goletta was lost first, held until then to be impregnable; and it was not lost through the fault of its defenders, who did in its defence everything they ought and could, but because experience showed how easily trenches could be raised in that desert sand — since at two hand-breadths water was found, and the Turks did not find it at two yards. And so with a great many sacks of sand they raised the trenches so high that they overtopped the walls of the fort; and firing down on it from above, nobody could stand there or attend to the defence.

"It was the general opinion that our men should not have shut themselves into the Goletta but should have waited for the landing out in the open; and those who say this speak from a distance and with little experience of such cases. Because if in the Goletta and the fort there were hardly seven thousand soldiers, how could so small a number, however brave they might be, come out into the open and hold the fortifications at the same time against so great a number as the enemy's? And how is it possible for a fortress not to be lost when it is not relieved, and the more so when it is besieged by enemies who are many and obstinate, and in their own country?

"But to many it seemed, and so it seemed to me, that it was a particular grace and favour that heaven did Spain in allowing that workshop and cloak of wickedness to be razed — that glutton or sponge and moth of the endless sums of money that were spent there to no purpose, serving no other end than to keep alive the memory of its having been won by the most fortunate and unconquered Charles the Fifth; as though it were necessary, to make that memory eternal — as it is and will be — that those stones should hold it up.

"The fort was lost too; but the Turks won it foot by foot, because the soldiers who defended it fought so valiantly and so strongly that they killed more than twenty-five thousand of the enemy in twenty-two general assaults they made on them. Of the three hundred who were left alive, not one was taken prisoner unwounded — a certain and clear sign of their effort and valour, and of how well they had defended and held their positions.

"A small fort or tower in the middle of the lagoon surrendered on terms, in the charge of Don Juan Zanoguera, a Valencian gentleman and a famous soldier. They took prisoner Don Pedro Puertocarrero, general of the Goletta, who did everything possible to defend his fortress; and he felt the loss of it so much that he died of grief on the road to Constantinople, where they were taking him captive.

"They likewise took prisoner the general of the fort, who was called Gabrio Cervellón, a Milanese gentleman, a great engineer and a most valiant soldier. Many people of note died in these two fortresses, one of whom was Pagán de Oria, a knight of the habit of St John, of a generous disposition, as was shown by the extreme liberality he used towards his brother, the famous Gian Andrea de Oria. And what made his death more pitiful was his having died at the hands of some Arabs he trusted, seeing the fort already lost, who offered to take him in Moorish dress to Tabarca, which is a little port or station the Genoese who work at coral-fishing have on those shores. These Arabs cut off his head and brought it to the general of the Turkish fleet, who fulfilled on them our Castilian proverb, 'Though the treason pleases, the traitor is loathed'; for they say the general ordered the men who brought him the present to be hanged, because they had not brought the man alive.

"Among the Christians who were lost in the fort was one called Don Pedro de Aguilar, a native of I do not know what place in Andalusia, who had been an ensign in the fort, a soldier of great account and of rare understanding: he had a particular gift in what they call poetry. I say this because his luck brought him to my galley and to my bench, and to being a slave of my own master. And before we left that harbour, this gentleman made two sonnets by way of epitaphs, one to the Goletta and the other to the fort. And truly I must say them, because I know them by heart and I think they will cause pleasure rather than distress."

The moment the captive named Don Pedro de Aguilar, Don Fernando looked at his companions, and all three of them smiled; and when he came to speak of the sonnets, one of them said:

"Before your worship goes any further, I beg you to tell me what became of this Don Pedro de Aguilar you have mentioned."

"What I know," answered the captive, "is that at the end of two years he spent in Constantinople he escaped in Albanian dress with a Greek spy; and I do not know whether he got to freedom, although I believe he did, because a year later I saw the Greek in Constantinople, and I could not ask him how that journey turned out."

"Well, he did," answered the gentleman; "because that Don Pedro is my brother, and he is now at home in our village, well and rich, married and with three children."

"Thanks be to God," said the captive, "for so many favours as he did him; because there is no happiness on earth, to my mind, that comes up to gaining a lost liberty."

"And what is more," replied the gentleman, "I know the sonnets my brother made."

"Then say them, your worship," said the captive, "for you will know how to say them better than I do."

"With pleasure," answered the gentleman; "and the one about the Goletta went like this."
