Chapter 40: In Which the Captive's Story Is Continued

	Blessed souls, who from the mortal veil
	free and released, by the good you did,
	rose up from the low earth
	to the highest and best part of heaven,

	and, burning with anger and with honourable zeal,
	exercised the strength of your bodies,
	so that with your own blood and other men's you coloured
	the neighbouring sea and the sandy ground:

	life failed before courage did
	in your weary arms, which, dying,
	carry the victory in being defeated.

	And this mortal, sad fall of yours
	between the wall and the sword is winning you
	fame that the world gives you, and heaven glory.

"That is exactly the way I know it," said the captive.

"Then the one about the fort, if I do not remember it wrong," said the gentleman, "goes like this:

	Out of this barren, ruined ground,
	out of these clods thrown down on the floor,
	the holy souls of three thousand soldiers
	rose living to a better dwelling,

	the strength of their sturdy arms
	having first been exercised in vain,
	until at last, being few and weary,
	they gave up their lives to the edge of the sword.

	And this is the ground that has continually
	been full of a thousand lamentable memories
	in the ages past and present.

	But no juster souls than these
	will ever have risen from its hard bosom to the clear sky,
	nor did it ever hold up bodies as brave."

The sonnets were thought well of, and the captive was glad at the news they gave him of his comrade; and going on with his tale, he said:

"The Goletta and the fort having surrendered, then, the Turks gave orders for the Goletta to be dismantled — because the fort was left in such a state that there was nothing to level. And to do it more quickly and with less labour, they mined it in three places; but with none of them could they blow up what seemed the weakest part, which were the old walls; while everything that was left standing of the new fortification the Fratín had built came down very easily.

"In short, the fleet went back to Constantinople triumphant and victorious; and a few months later my master Uchalí died — the man they called Uchalí Fartax, which means, in the Turkish language, the scabby renegade, because that is what he was. And it is the custom among the Turks to take names from some defect they have or some good quality they possess. And this is because there are among them only four surnames of families, which descend from the Ottoman house, and the rest, as I have said, take their name and surname either from the blemishes of the body or the virtues of the mind.

"And this Scabby Man rowed at the oar as a slave of the Grand Signor for fourteen years, and at more than thirty-four years of age he turned renegade, out of spite because a Turk, while he was at the oar, gave him a slap in the face; and to be able to revenge himself he gave up his faith. And his ability was so great that, without rising by the disgusting means and roads by which most of the Grand Turk's favourites rise, he came to be king of Algiers and afterwards general of the sea, which is the third highest office in that dominion.

"He was a Calabrian by nation, and morally he was a decent man, and treated his captives with a great deal of humanity; he came to have three thousand of them, who after his death were shared out, as he left it in his will, between the Grand Signor — who is also the inheriting son of everybody who dies, and comes in for a share along with the rest of the children the dead man leaves — and his own renegades.

"And I fell to a Venetian renegade whom Uchalí, when he was a ship's boy on a vessel, had taken prisoner, and had loved so much that he was one of his most indulged favourites; and he came to be the cruellest renegade that has ever been seen. He was called Hassan Aga, and came to be very rich and to be king of Algiers; and it was with him that I came from Constantinople, somewhat pleased at being so near Spain — not because I meant to write to anybody about my unfortunate case, but to see whether luck was more favourable to me in Algiers than in Constantinople, where I had already tried a thousand ways of escaping and none of them had come off or come out well. And I meant in Algiers to look for other means of getting what I so much wanted; because hope never abandoned me of having my liberty, and when what I contrived and planned and put into practice did not have an outcome that answered to the intention, then, without abandoning myself, I would invent and look for another hope to keep me going, however weak and feeble it might be.

"With this I kept life going, shut up in a prison or house that the Turks call a bagnio, where they shut up the Christian captives — both the king's and those belonging to private persons; and those they call the store captives, which is like saying captives of the town council, who serve the city in the public works it carries out and in other jobs. And these particular captives have very great difficulty in getting their liberty; for as they belong to the community and have no particular master, there is nobody with whom to arrange their ransom, even if they have one.

"To these bagnios, as I have said, some private people of the town generally bring their captives, chiefly when they are for ransom, because there they keep them at their ease and in safety until their ransom comes. The king's captives who are for ransom likewise do not go out to work with the rest of the gang, except when their ransom is slow in coming; and then, to make them write for it more urgently, they make them work and go for firewood with the others, which is no small labour.

"I, then, was one of the ransom men; because as soon as it was known that I was a captain, although I stated my small means and my lack of property, it was of no use in keeping them from putting me in the number of the gentlemen and the ransom people. They put a chain on me, more as a mark of ransom than to keep me by it; and so I passed my life in that bagnio with a great many other gentlemen and people of standing, marked and held to be for ransom.

"And although hunger and nakedness might weary us at times, and indeed almost always, nothing wearied us so much as hearing and seeing, at every turn, the never-before-seen or heard-of cruelties my master practised on the Christians. Every day he hanged his man, impaled that one, cut off this one's ears; and this on so little occasion, and with so little of any, that the Turks recognised he did it for no other reason than to do it, and because it was his natural disposition to be the murderer of the whole human race.

"The only man who came off well with him was a Spanish soldier called something de Saavedra; who, although he had done things that will stay in the memory of those people for many years, and all of them to get his liberty, was never given a blow by him, or ordered to be given one, or spoken a bad word to. And for the least of the many things he did, we were all afraid he would be impaled, and he was afraid of it himself more than once. And if time allowed it, I would say something now of what this soldier did, which would be enough to entertain you and astonish you a great deal better than the tale of my own history.

"I say, then, that over the courtyard of our prison came the windows of the house of a rich and distinguished Moor; which, as the Moors' windows generally are, were more holes than windows, and even these were covered with very thick, tight lattices.

"It happened, then, that one day, being on a terrace of our prison with three other companions, having jumping matches in our chains to pass the time, and being alone, because all the other Christians had gone out to work, I happened to raise my eyes and saw that out of those closed little windows I have mentioned there appeared a cane, and at the end of it a cloth tied on; and the cane was swaying and moving about, almost as though it were making signs for us to come and take it.

"We looked at it, and one of the men who were with me went and put himself under the cane, to see whether they would let it go, or what they would do; but as soon as he arrived they raised the cane and moved it from side to side, as though they were saying no with the head. The Christian came back, and they lowered it again and made the same movements as before. Another of my companions went, and the same thing happened to him as to the first. Finally the third went, and it went with him as with the first and the second.

"Seeing this, I did not want to leave off trying my luck; and as soon as I came and put myself under the cane, they let it drop, and it fell at my feet inside the bagnio. I hurried to untie the cloth, in which I saw a knot, and inside it came ten cianíis, which are coins of low-grade gold the Moors use, each one worth ten of our reals. Whether I was pleased with the find there is no need to say, since my delight was as great as my astonishment at thinking where that good could come to us from — especially to me, since the signs of their not having wanted to let the cane go except to me plainly said that the favour was being done to me.

"I took my good money, broke the cane, went back to the little terrace, looked at the window, and saw that out of it there came a very white hand, which they opened and shut very quickly. From this we understood, or imagined, that some woman who lived in that house must have done us that kindness; and as a sign that we were grateful for it, we made salaams in the Moorish fashion, bending the head, bowing the body and putting our arms on our breasts.

"A little later they put out of the same window a small cross made of canes, and then took it in again. This sign confirmed us in the belief that some Christian woman must be a captive in that house, and that she was the one who was doing us this kindness; but the whiteness of the hand and the bracelets we saw on it undid this idea, although we supposed she must be a Christian turned renegade, whom their own masters generally take as their lawful wives, and even count it good luck, because they value them more highly than the women of their own nation.

"In all our reasoning we fell a long way wide of the truth of the case; and so all our entertainment from then on was watching and taking our bearings from the window where the star of the cane had appeared to us. But a good fortnight went by in which we did not see it, or the hand either, or any other sign.

"And although in this time we tried with all diligence to find out who lived in that house, and whether there was any Christian renegade woman in it, there was never anybody who could tell us anything except that a distinguished, rich Moor lived there called Hadji Morato, who had been governor of La Pata, which is an office of high standing among them.

"But when we were least expecting any more cianíis to rain from that quarter, we suddenly saw the cane appear, and another cloth on it with a bigger knot; and this was at a time when the bagnio, as the last time, was empty and without people. We made the usual test, each of the same three of us going before I did; but the cane surrendered to nobody but me, for on my arriving they let it fall.

"I untied the knot and found forty Spanish gold crowns and a paper written in Arabic, and at the end of the writing a great cross drawn. I kissed the cross, took the crowns, went back to the terrace, we all made our salaams, the hand appeared again, I made signs that I would read the paper, they shut the window.

"We were all left confused and delighted with what had happened; and as none of us understood Arabic, our desire to understand what the paper contained was great, and greater still was the difficulty of finding somebody to read it.

"In the end I made up my mind to trust a renegade, a native of Murcia, who had declared himself a great friend of mine, and had given pledges between the two of us that obliged him to keep any secret I entrusted to him. Because some renegades, when they mean to go back to Christian country, are apt to bring with them signed papers from important captives, in which they certify, in the form they can, that such-and-such a renegade is a decent man, and that he has always done good to Christians, and that he means to escape at the first opportunity that offers.

"Some men get these certificates with a good intention, others make use of them by chance and by design: for on coming to raid the Christian country, if by any chance they are wrecked or taken prisoner, they pull out their signed papers and say that by those papers it will be seen with what purpose they were coming, which was to stay in the Christian country, and that this was why they had come out privateering with the rest of the Turks. With this they escape that first onslaught and are reconciled to the Church without any harm being done them; and when they see their chance they go back to Barbary to be what they were before. Others there are who use these papers, and get them, with a good intention and do stay in Christian country.

"Well, one of the renegades I have described was this friend of mine, who had certificates from all our companions in which we vouched for him as much as we possibly could; and if the Moors had found these papers on him they would have burnt him alive.

"I learnt that he knew Arabic very well, and not only how to speak it but how to write it; but before revealing myself to him completely, I told him to read me that paper, which I had happened to find in a hole in my quarters. He opened it and stayed a good while looking at it and construing it, muttering between his teeth. I asked him whether he understood it; he told me very well, and that if I wanted him to give it me word for word, I should give him ink and pen so that he could do it better. We at once gave him what he asked for, and he translated it little by little; and on finishing, he said: 'Everything that is here in Spanish, without a letter missing, is what this Moorish paper contains; and it must be noted that where it says Lela Marién it means Our Lady the Virgin Mary.'

"We read the paper, and it went like this:

When I was a little girl, my father had a slave woman who taught me the Christian prayer in my own language, and told me many things about Lela Marién. The Christian woman died, and I know she did not go to the fire but to Allah, because afterwards I saw her twice, and she told me to go to the country of the Christians to see Lela Marién, who loved me very much. I do not know how to go: many Christians have I seen through this window, and none of them has seemed to me a gentleman but you. I am very beautiful and young, and I have a great deal of money to take with me: see whether you can arrange how we may go, and you shall be my husband there if you like; and if you do not like, it will not matter to me, for Lela Marién will give me somebody to marry. I wrote this: look who you give it to to read; do not trust any Moor, because they are all treacherous. This grieves me a great deal: I could wish you would not reveal yourself to anybody, because if my father knows it he will throw me at once into a well and cover me with stones. On the cane I shall put a thread: tie the answer there; and if you have nobody to write Arabic for you, tell me by signs, for Lela Marién will make me understand you. May she and Allah keep you, and that cross which I kiss many times, for so the captive woman told me to do.

"Consider, gentlemen, whether it was reasonable that the words of this paper should astonish us and delight us. And they did so, both of them, in such a way that the renegade realised that this paper had not been found by chance but had really been written to one of us; and so he begged us that, if what he suspected was true, we should trust him and tell him, and he would risk his life for our liberty.

"And saying this, he pulled out of his breast a metal crucifix and with many tears swore by the God that image represented — in whom he, sinner and wicked man though he was, believed well and faithfully — to keep loyalty and secrecy with us in everything we might want to reveal to him. Because it seemed to him, and he almost prophesied, that by means of the woman who had written that paper, he and all of us were to have our liberty, and he was to see himself in the state he so much desired, which was to be brought back into the bosom of Holy Church, his mother, from whom he was cut off and separated like a rotten limb through his ignorance and his sin.

"The renegade said this with so many tears and with signs of so much repentance that we all agreed, and came round to declaring the truth of the case to him; and so we gave him an account of everything, hiding nothing from him. We showed him the little window where the cane appeared, and he marked the house from there, and undertook to take particular and great care to find out who lived in it.

"We agreed likewise that it would be well to answer the Moorish girl's note; and as we had somebody who knew how to do it, the renegade immediately wrote down the words I dictated to him, which were exactly the ones I shall say — because of all the substantial points that happened to me in this affair, not one has gone out of my memory, nor will it go while I have life.

"In fact, what was answered to the Moorish girl was this:

May the true Allah keep you, my lady, and that blessed Marién, who is the true mother of God and is the one who has put it into your heart to go to the Christian country, because she loves you well. Pray to her to be pleased to give you to understand how you may put into practice what she commands you, for she is so good that she will do it. On my part and on the part of all these Christians who are with me, I offer to do everything we can for you, to the death. Do not fail to write to me and let me know what you mean to do, for I shall always answer you; because the great Allah has given us a Christian captive who can speak and write your language as well as you will see by this paper. So that without any fear you may let us know everything you wish. As for what you say, that if you go to the Christian country you are to be my wife, I promise it you as a good Christian; and know that the Christians keep what they promise better than the Moors do. May Allah and Marién his mother be in your keeping, my lady.

"This paper being written and closed, I waited two days for the bagnio to be empty as it usually was, and then went out to the usual place on the little terrace to see whether the cane appeared, which was not long in showing itself. As soon as I saw it, although I could not see who was putting it out, I showed the paper, as though giving them to understand that they should put out the thread; but it was already put on the cane, and I tied the paper to it. And a little later our star appeared again, with the white flag of peace of the little bundle. They let it drop, and I picked it up, and found in the cloth, in coin of every kind of silver and gold, more than fifty crowns — which fifty times over doubled our delight and confirmed our hope of getting our liberty.

"That same night our renegade came back and told us he had learnt that in that house lived the very Moor we had been told was called Hadji Morato, extremely rich in every way, who had one daughter only, heiress to the whole of his property; and that it was the general opinion throughout the city that she was the most beautiful woman in Barbary. And that many of the viceroys who came there had asked for her as a wife, and she had never wanted to marry. And he also learnt that she had had a Christian slave woman, who was already dead. All of which agreed with what came in the paper.

"We at once went into council with the renegade about what plan should be adopted for getting the Moorish girl away and coming, all of us, to Christian country; and in the end it was agreed for the time being that we should wait for Zoraida's next word — for that was the name of the woman who now wants to be called María — because we saw plainly that she, and nobody else, was the one who was to find a way through all those difficulties. When we had settled this, the renegade said we should not be distressed, for he would either lose his life or set us at liberty.

"For four days the bagnio was full of people, which was why the cane was four days in appearing; at the end of which, in the usual emptiness of the bagnio, it appeared with the cloth so pregnant that it promised a most fortunate delivery. The cane and the cloth bent down to me, and I found in it another paper and a hundred gold crowns, with no other money at all. The renegade was there; we gave him the paper to read inside our quarters, and he said it went like this:

I do not know, my lord, how to arrange for us to go to Spain, nor has Lela Marién told me, although I have asked her. What can be done is that I shall give you through this window a great deal of gold money: ransom yourself with it, and your friends, and let one of you go to Christian country and buy a boat there and come back for the rest. And I shall be found in my father's garden, which is at the Bab Azoun gate, near the shore, where I am to be all this summer with my father and my servants. From there, by night, you can get me out without any fear and take me to the boat. And remember that you are to be my husband, because if not I shall ask Marién to punish you. If you trust nobody to go for the boat, ransom yourself and go, for I know that you will come back better than another, since you are a gentleman and a Christian. Try to find out where the garden is; and when you walk that way I shall know that the bagnio is empty, and I shall give you a great deal of money. Allah keep you, my lord.

"This is what the second paper said and contained. Which everybody seeing, each one offered to be the one who was ransomed, and promised to go and come back with complete punctuality; and I offered to do the same. To all of which the renegade objected, saying that on no account would he consent to any one of them going free until they all went together, because experience had shown him how badly free men kept the promises they made in captivity.

"For a great many times some important captives had used that remedy, ransoming one man to go to Valencia or Majorca with money to be able to fit out a boat and come back for the men who had ransomed him, and they had never come back; because the liberty they had got and the fear of losing it again rubbed out of their memories every obligation in the world. And in confirmation of the truth he was telling us, he told us briefly a case that had happened at almost that same time to some Christian gentlemen, the strangest that ever happened in those parts, where at every turn things of great terror and astonishment happen.

"In fact he came round to saying that what could and ought to be done was that the money that was to be given for ransoming the Christian should be given to him to buy a boat there in Algiers, on the pretext of setting up as a merchant and trader at Tetuan and on that coast; and that once he was master of the boat, a plan would easily be found for getting them out of the bagnio and putting them all aboard.

"The more so as, if the Moorish girl gave money to ransom them all, as she said, then once they were free it would be the easiest thing in the world to take ship even in the middle of the day. And that the greatest difficulty that presented itself was that the Moors do not allow any renegade to buy or own a boat, unless it is a big vessel for going privateering, because they are afraid that a man who buys a boat — especially if he is a Spaniard — only wants it to go to the Christian country. But that he would smooth over this obstacle by getting a Tagarin Moor to go partners with him in the ownership of the boat and in the profits of the merchandise; and under this cover he would come to be master of the boat, with which he counted everything else as done.

"And although it had seemed better to me and my companions to send for the boat to Majorca, as the Moorish girl said, we did not dare contradict him, being afraid that if we did not do what he said he would give us away and put us in danger of losing our lives if he revealed Zoraida's dealings — for whose life we would all have given our own.

"And so we decided to put ourselves in God's hands and in the renegade's; and at that same moment an answer was sent to Zoraida, telling her that we would do everything she advised, because she had thought it out as well as if Lela Marién had told her, and that it lay with her alone to put the business off or to put it into practice at once. I offered myself afresh to be her husband. And with this, another day when the bagnio happened to be empty, at different times, with the cane and the cloth, she gave us two thousand gold crowns and a paper in which she said that on the first jumá — which is Friday — she was going to her father's garden, and that before she went she would give us more money; and that if that was not enough we should let her know, and she would give us as much as we asked for, because her father had so much that he would not miss it — the more so as she had the keys of everything.

"We at once gave five hundred crowns to the renegade to buy the boat. With eight hundred I ransomed myself, giving the money to a Valencian merchant who happened to be in Algiers at the time, who ransomed me from the king by taking me on his word, giving his own word that with the first vessel that came from Valencia he would pay my ransom. Because if he had handed over the money at once, it would have given the king grounds for suspecting that my ransom had been in Algiers for a long time and that the merchant had kept quiet about it for his own profit. In fact my master was so full of quibbles that on no account did I dare have the money paid out at once.

"On the Thursday before the Friday when the beautiful Zoraida was to go to the garden, she gave us another thousand crowns and let us know she was going, begging me that if I was ransomed I should find out at once where her father's garden was, and that in any case I should look for an occasion to go there and see her. I answered her in a few words that I would do so, and that she should take care to commend us to Lela Marién with all those prayers the captive woman had taught her.

"This done, they arranged for our three companions to be ransomed, so as to make it easier to get out of the bagnio, and because, seeing me ransomed and themselves not, when there was money, they might be upset and the devil might persuade them to do something to Zoraida's harm. For although their being who they were might have made me safe from this fear, still I did not want to put the business at risk; and so I had them ransomed by the same arrangement as I ransomed myself, handing all the money to the merchant so that he could stand surety with certainty and safety — to whom we never revealed our dealings and our secret, because of the danger there was."
