Chapter 41: In Which the Captive Still Continues His Story
(Part 1 of 2)

"Not a fortnight went by before our renegade had bought a very good boat, big enough for more than thirty people; and to make his business safe and give it a colour, he decided to make — as he did make — a voyage to a place called Sargel, which is thirty leagues from Algiers towards Oran, where there is a great trade in dried figs. Two or three times he made this voyage in the company of the Tagarin I have mentioned. Tagarins is what they call in Barbary the Moors of Aragon, and the ones from Granada they call Mudéjares; and in the kingdom of Fez they call the Mudéjares elches, who are the people that king most makes use of in war.

"I say, then, that every time he passed with his boat he anchored in a little cove that was not two crossbow shots from the garden where Zoraida was waiting; and there the renegade would station himself very deliberately with the young Moors who pulled at the oar, either to say his prayers or as though rehearsing in play what he meant to do in earnest. And so he would go to Zoraida's garden and ask her father for fruit, and her father would give it him without knowing him.

"And although he would have liked to speak to Zoraida, as he afterwards told me, and to tell her that he was the man who by my orders was to take her to the Christian country, and that she should be contented and easy in her mind, it was never possible for him — because Moorish women do not let themselves be seen by any Moor or Turk unless their husband or their father orders it. With Christian captives they let themselves be dealt with and talked to, even more than would be reasonable; and I should have been sorry if he had spoken to her, for perhaps he would have alarmed her by letting her see that her business was in the mouths of renegades.

"But God, who was ordering it another way, gave no opportunity for our renegade's good intention. And he, seeing how safely he came and went to Sargel, and that he anchored when and how and where he liked, and that the Tagarin his companion had no will but what his own ordered, and that I was already ransomed, and that all that was lacking was to find some Christians to pull at the oar, told me to look out which men I wanted to bring with me apart from the ransomed ones, and to have them spoken to for the coming Friday, which he had settled on for our departure.

"Seeing this, I spoke to twelve Spaniards, all of them strong men at the oar, and of the sort who could get out of the city most freely; and it was no small matter to find so many at that juncture, because there were twenty vessels out privateering and they had taken all the oar-men away — and these would not have been found either if their master had not stayed that summer without going out privateering, to finish a galliot he had on the stocks.

"To these men I said nothing except that on the coming Friday afternoon they should go out one by one, without being noticed, and make their way towards Hadji Morato's garden, and wait there for me until I came. I gave this instruction to each of them separately, with orders that even if they saw other Christians there, they should tell them nothing except that I had ordered them to wait in that place.

"This done, I had another thing to do, which was the one that mattered most to me: and that was to let Zoraida know the point the business had reached, so that she should be forewarned and on her guard, and should not be startled if we came on her suddenly before the time when she could imagine the Christians' boat could be back. And so I decided to go to the garden and see whether I could speak to her; and on the pretext of gathering some herbs, one day before my departure I went there.

"And the first person I met was her father, who said to me, in a language which throughout Barbary, and even in Constantinople, is found between captives and Moors — which is neither Moorish nor Castilian nor of any other nation, but a mixture of all the languages, with which we all understand each other — I say, then, that in this manner of speech he asked me what I was looking for in that garden of his, and whose man I was. I answered him that I was a slave of Arnaute Mamí — and this because I knew very well that he was a great friend of his — and that I was looking for all sorts of herbs to make a salad. He asked me next whether I was a man for ransom or not, and how much my master was asking for me.

"While we were in all these questions and answers, the beautiful Zoraida came out of the garden house, who had seen me a long while before; and as Moorish women make no scruple at all about showing themselves to Christians, nor do they avoid them, as I have said, she thought nothing of coming to where her father was with me. Indeed, as soon as her father saw her coming, and coming slowly, he called her and told her to come up.

"It would be too much for me to describe now the great beauty, the elegance, the splendid and rich adornment with which my beloved Zoraida showed herself to my eyes. I shall only say that more pearls hung from her lovely neck, ears and hair than she had hairs on her head. On her ankles, which she wore bare in their fashion, she wore two carcajes — for that is what the bangles or anklets are called in Moorish — of the purest gold, with so many diamonds set in them that she afterwards told me her father valued them at ten thousand doubloons; and the ones she wore on her wrists were worth as much again.

"The pearls were in great quantity and very fine, because the greatest finery and splendour of Moorish women is to adorn themselves with rich pearls and seed-pearl; and so there are more pearls and seed-pearl among the Moors than among all the other nations. And Zoraida's father had the reputation of having a great many, and the best in Algiers, and of likewise having more than two hundred thousand Spanish crowns — of all of which she was mistress who is now mistress of me.

"Whether with all this adornment she could then look beautiful or not may be guessed from what is left of her after so many hardships, and what she must have been in her prosperity. Because it is well known that some women's beauty has its days and its seasons, and requires circumstances to lessen it or increase it; and it is a natural thing that the passions of the mind should raise it or lower it, though most often they destroy it.

"I say, in short, that she came then dressed to the height and beautiful to the height — or at least she seemed to me the most beautiful I had seen until then. And with this, seeing the obligations she had put me under, it seemed to me that I had before me a deity from heaven, come down to earth for my delight and my rescue.

"As soon as she came up, her father told her in their language that I was a captive of his friend Arnaute Mamí and had come to look for salad herbs. She took it up, and in that mixture of languages I have described she asked me whether I was a gentleman and what the reason was that I did not ransom myself. I answered her that I was already ransomed, and that from the price she could see what my master valued me at, since he had been given fifteen hundred zoltanís for me.

"To which she answered: 'Truly, if you had belonged to my father, I would have made him refuse twice that for you; because you Christians always lie in everything you say, and make yourselves out poor in order to cheat the Moors.'

"'That may well be, my lady,' I answered her, 'but truly I have dealt honestly with my master, and I deal honestly, and shall deal honestly, with everybody in the world.'

"'And when do you go?' said Zoraida.

"'Tomorrow, I think,' I said, 'because there is a French vessel here that sails tomorrow, and I mean to go in her.'

"'Would it not be better,' replied Zoraida, 'to wait until ships come from Spain, and go with them instead of with the French, who are no friends of yours?'

"'No,' I answered; 'although if it is true, as there is news, that a Spanish ship is on its way, I would still wait for her, except that it is more certain I shall be leaving tomorrow. Because the desire I have to see myself in my own country, and with the people I love, is so great that it will not let me wait for another opportunity, however much better, if it is slow in coming.'

"'You must without doubt be married in your own country,' said Zoraida, 'and that is why you want to go and be with your wife.'

"'I am not married,' I answered, 'but I have given my word to marry as soon as I get there.'

"'And is the lady beautiful to whom you gave it?' said Zoraida.

"'So beautiful,' I answered, 'that to describe her and tell you the truth, she is very like you.'

"At this her father laughed heartily and said: 'By Allah, Christian, she must be very beautiful indeed if she is like my daughter, who is the most beautiful woman in this whole kingdom. If you do not believe it, look at her carefully and you will see that I am telling you the truth.'

"Zoraida's father served us as interpreter for most of these words and speeches, being the better linguist; because although she spoke the bastard language which, as I have said, is used there, she made her meaning clearer by signs than by words.

"While we were in these and a great many other exchanges, a Moor came running up and said at the top of his voice that four Turks had jumped over the hedges or walls of the garden and were picking the fruit, although it was not ripe. The old man was startled, and so was Zoraida; because the fear the Moors have of the Turks is common and almost natural, especially of the soldiers, who are so insolent and have so much power over the Moors who are subject to them that they treat them worse than if they were their own slaves.

"I say, then, that her father said to Zoraida: 'Daughter, get back to the house and shut yourself in, while I go and speak to these dogs; and you, Christian, look for your herbs and go, and good luck to you, and may Allah take you safely to your own country.'

"I bowed, and he went off to look for the Turks, leaving me alone with Zoraida, who began to make as though to go where her father had ordered her. But her father had hardly been hidden by the trees of the garden when she turned to me with her eyes full of tears and said: 'Ámexi, Christian, ámexi?' — which means: 'Are you going, Christian, are you going?'

"I answered her: 'Yes, my lady, but on no account without you. Expect me on the first jumá, and do not be alarmed when you see us; for beyond any doubt we shall go to the Christian country.'

"I said this to her in such a way that she understood very well all the words that passed between us; and putting one arm round my neck, she began to walk towards the house with fainting steps. And luck willed — and it might have been very bad luck if heaven had not ordered it otherwise — that as the two of us were going along in the manner and posture I have described, with one arm round my neck, her father, who was already coming back from sending off the Turks, saw us in the state and manner we were going in, and we saw that he had seen us.

"But Zoraida, being alert and quick-witted, would not take her arm off my neck; on the contrary, she came closer to me and put her head on my breast, bending her knees a little, giving clear signs and appearances of fainting; and I likewise gave it to be understood that I was holding her up against my will.

"Her father came running to where we were, and seeing his daughter in that state, asked her what was the matter; but as she did not answer him, her father said: 'Without any doubt she has fainted with the shock of these dogs coming in.' And taking her from mine, he leaned her against his own breast; and she, giving a sigh and with her eyes not yet dry of tears, said again: 'Ámexi, Christian, ámexi' — 'Go, Christian, go.'

"To which her father answered: 'It does not matter, daughter, that the Christian should go; he has done you no harm, and the Turks have gone now. Let nothing alarm you, for there is nothing that can distress you, since, as I have told you, the Turks went back the way they came at my request.'

"'They alarmed her, sir, as you say,' I said to her father; 'but since she says I am to go, I do not want to distress her. Stay in peace, and with your leave I shall come back, if it should be necessary, for herbs to this garden; for according to my master there are none better for salad anywhere than here.'

"'You may come back for as many as you like,' answered Hadji Morato; 'for my daughter does not say this because you or any of the Christians annoyed her, but because in meaning to say that the Turks should go, she said that you should go — or because it was time for you to look for your herbs.'

"With this I took my leave of the two of them at once; and she, her soul being torn out of her by the look of it, went off with her father. And I, on the pretext of looking for herbs, went thoroughly and at my leisure round the whole garden: I looked carefully at the ways in and out, and at the strength of the house, and at the conveniences that might offer for making the whole of our business easier. This done, I came away and gave the renegade and my companions an account of everything that had happened; and by now I could not wait for the hour of seeing myself enjoying without alarm the good fortune that luck was offering me in the beautiful and lovely Zoraida.

"In the end the time passed and the day and hour we so much wanted came; and all of us following the order and plan we had many times settled on with careful consideration and long discussion, we had the good outcome we wanted. Because on the Friday that followed the day I talked with Zoraida in the garden, our renegade at nightfall anchored the boat almost opposite where the most beautiful Zoraida was.

"The Christians who were to pull at the oar were already prepared and hidden in various places all round about there. They were all in suspense and excitement, waiting for me, eager by now to attack the vessel they had in front of their eyes; because they did not know about the renegade's arrangement, but thought that they had to get and win their liberty by strength of arm, taking the lives of the Moors who were in the boat.

"It happened, then, that as soon as I showed myself, and my companions, all the rest who were hidden and saw us came up to us. This was at an hour when the city was already shut and nobody appeared anywhere in that whole stretch of country.

"When we were together, we were in doubt whether it would be better to go first for Zoraida or to overpower first the Moorish rowers who pulled at the oar in the boat. And while we were in this doubt, our renegade came up to us asking what we were waiting for, since it was time now and all his Moors were off their guard and most of them asleep. We told him what we were hesitating over, and he said that the thing that mattered most was to take the vessel first, which could be done with the greatest ease and without any danger, and that then we could go for Zoraida.

"What he said seemed good to all of us; and so, without delaying any further, with him leading, we came to the vessel; and jumping in first, he put his hand to a scimitar and said in Moorish: 'Let none of you move from here unless he wants it to cost him his life.' By this time almost all the Christians had got in. The Moors, who were of little spirit, hearing their captain speak in that fashion, were appalled; and without a single one of them putting a hand to his weapons — for they had few or almost none — they let themselves be tied hand and foot by the Christians without saying a word; which the Christians did very quickly, threatening the Moors that if they raised their voices in any way whatever, they would put the whole lot of them to the sword on the spot.

"This being done, half of our men staying behind to guard them, the rest of us, with the renegade again leading the way, went to Hadji Morato's garden; and good luck willed that on getting there to open the gate, it opened as easily as if it had not been shut. And so, with great quietness and silence, we got to the house without being heard by anybody.

"The most beautiful Zoraida was waiting for us at a window; and as soon as she heard people, she asked in a low voice whether we were nizarani — as much as to say or to ask whether we were Christians. I answered her that we were, and that she should come down. When she recognised me she did not hesitate a moment, but without answering me a word came down in an instant, opened the door and showed herself to us all, so beautiful and so richly dressed that I cannot manage to describe it.

"As soon as I saw her I took one of her hands and began to kiss it, and the renegade did the same, and my two comrades; and the rest, who did not know the case, did what they saw us do, so that it looked for all the world as if we were thanking her and acknowledging her as the mistress of our liberty.

"The renegade asked her in the Moorish language whether her father was in the garden. She answered that he was, and that he was asleep.

"'Then it will be necessary to wake him,' replied the renegade, 'and to take him with us, and everything of value there is in this beautiful garden.'

"'No,' she said. 'My father is not to be touched on any account, and there is nothing else in this house except what I am taking, which is so much that there will be plenty for you all to be left rich and contented; and wait a little and you shall see.'

"And saying this she went in again, saying she would be back very soon and that we should stay still without making any noise. I asked the renegade what had passed between them, and he told me; and I told him that in nothing was more to be done than what Zoraida wanted.

"And just as she was coming back loaded with a little chest full of gold crowns — so many that she could hardly hold it up — bad luck would have it that her father woke in the meantime and heard the noise going on in the garden. And leaning out of the window, he immediately recognised that all the people in it were Christians; and giving a great many loud, wild shouts, he began to cry in Arabic: 'Christians, Christians! Thieves, thieves!' At which shouts we were all thrown into the greatest and most fearful confusion.

"But the renegade, seeing the danger we were in and how much it mattered to him to succeed in that enterprise before we were heard, went up very quickly to where Hadji Morato was, and some of us went up along with him; for I did not dare to leave Zoraida, who had let herself fall into my arms as though in a faint.

"In short, those who went up managed so well that in a moment they came down with Hadji Morato, bringing him with his hands tied and a handkerchief put in his mouth, which did not let him say a word, threatening him that speaking would cost him his life. When his daughter saw him she covered her eyes so as not to see him, and her father was appalled, not knowing how willingly she had put herself into our hands. But feet being what was most needed then, with diligence and speed we got into the boat, where those who had stayed in her were waiting for us, afraid of some bad turn happening to us.

"Hardly two hours of the night could have gone by when we were all in the boat, in which the tying was taken off Zoraida's father's hands and the cloth out of his mouth; but the renegade told him again not to say a word, or they would take his life. He, seeing his daughter there, began to sigh most tenderly, and more so when he saw that I was holding her tightly in my arms and that she, without defending herself or complaining or drawing away, stayed still. But for all that he kept quiet, so that they should not carry out the many threats the renegade was making him.

"Seeing herself in the boat, then, and that we were about to put the oars in the water, and seeing her father there and the other Moors who were tied up, Zoraida told the renegade to ask me to do her the kindness of loosing those Moors and giving her father his liberty, because she would throw herself into the sea sooner than see before her eyes, and on her account, a father who had loved her so much taken away captive.

"The renegade told me; and I answered that I was very willing. But he answered that it was not advisable, because if they were left there they would raise the alarm in the countryside at once and rouse the city, and would be the cause of light frigates coming out to look for them and cutting them off by land and sea, so that we should not be able to escape; and that what could be done was to give them their liberty on reaching the first Christian land. We were all of this opinion; and Zoraida, who was given an account of it with the reasons that moved us not to do at once what she wanted, was also satisfied.

"And then, with joyful silence and glad diligence, each of our brave rowers took his oar, and we began, commending ourselves to God with all our hearts, to steer for the islands of Majorca, which is the nearest Christian land.

"But because of the north wind blowing a little and the sea being somewhat rough, it was not possible to hold the course for Majorca, and we were obliged to let ourselves go along the coast towards Oran, not without a great deal of distress on our part, for fear of being spotted from the town of Sargel, which lies on that coast sixty miles from Algiers. And we were likewise afraid of meeting in that stretch one of the galliots that ordinarily come with merchandise from Tetuan — although each of us on his own, and all of us together, presumed that if we met a merchant galliot, so long as it was not one of those that go privateering, not only should we not be lost but we should take a vessel in which we could finish our voyage more safely.

"While we were sailing, Zoraida kept her head between my hands so as not to see her father, and I felt that she was calling on Lela Marién to help us.

"We must have sailed a good thirty miles when day broke on us, about three musket shots off the land, all of which we saw was deserted and with nobody to spot us. But for all that, by strength of arm we worked our way a little further out to sea, which was somewhat calmer by now; and having got out almost two leagues, orders were given for the men to row in watches while we ate something, for the boat was well provisioned. But the rowers said this was no time to take any rest, and that those who were not rowing should give them something to eat, since they would not let go of the oars on any account.

"It was done so; and at this a steady wind began to blow, which obliged us to make sail at once and leave the oar and head for Oran, it being impossible to make any other voyage. It was all done with the greatest speed; and so, under sail, we ran more than eight miles an hour, with no other fear at all except that of meeting a vessel that was out privateering."
