Chapter 41: In Which the Captive Still Continues His Story
(Part 2 of 2)

"We gave the Moorish rowers something to eat, and the renegade comforted them by telling them that they were not being taken away as captives, and that at the first opportunity they would be given their liberty. The same was said to Zoraida's father, who answered:

"'Any other thing I might expect and believe of your generosity and good conduct, Christians; but as for giving me my liberty, do not take me for so simple as to imagine it. For you never put yourselves in danger to take it from me in order to give it back so generously — especially knowing who I am, and the profit that can come to you from giving it me. Which profit, if you will name it, I offer you here and now whatever you may want for me and for that unfortunate daughter of mine; or, if not, for her alone, who is the greatest and the better part of my soul.'

"On saying this he began to weep so bitterly that he moved us all to compassion and forced Zoraida to look at him; and she, seeing him weep, was so softened that she got up from my feet and went to embrace her father; and putting her face against his, the two of them began such tender weeping that a great many of us who were there joined them in it.

"But when her father saw her dressed as if for a feast and with so many jewels on her, he said to her in their language: 'What is this, daughter? Yesterday at nightfall, before this terrible misfortune we are in came upon us, I saw you in your ordinary house clothes; and now, without your having had time to dress, and without any glad news having been given you to celebrate by adorning and beautifying yourself, I see you turned out in the best clothes I knew how and was able to give you when fortune was more favourable to us. Answer me this, for it holds me more in suspense and astonishment than the very misfortune I find myself in.'

"Everything the Moor said to his daughter the renegade translated for us, and she answered him not a word. But when he saw at one side of the boat the little chest where she used to keep her jewels — which he well knew he had left in Algiers and had not brought to the garden — he was still more bewildered, and asked her how that chest had come into our hands and what was inside it.

"To which the renegade, without waiting for Zoraida to answer him, answered: 'Do not weary yourself, sir, in asking Zoraida your daughter so many things, because with one answer of mine I shall satisfy you on all of them. And so I want you to know that she is a Christian, and that she has been the file for our chains and the liberty of our captivity. She is here of her own free will, as glad — as far as I can imagine — to see herself in this state as a man who comes out of darkness into light, out of death into life, and out of pain into glory.'

"'Is what this man says true, daughter?' said the Moor.

"'It is,' answered Zoraida.

"'So in fact,' replied the old man, 'you are a Christian, and the one who has put her father into the power of his enemies?'

"To which Zoraida answered: 'The one who is a Christian I am; but not the one who has put you in this position, because my wish never went so far as to leave you or to do you harm, but to do myself good.'

"'And what good is it that you have done yourself, daughter?'

"'That,' she answered, 'you must ask of Lela Marién, for she will be able to tell you better than I can.'

"The Moor had hardly heard this when with incredible speed he threw himself headfirst into the sea, where without any doubt he would have drowned if the long, encumbering robe he was wearing had not held him up a little on the water. Zoraida cried out for them to get him out, and so we all hurried up; and taking hold of him by his robe, we pulled him out half drowned and unconscious — at which Zoraida was so distressed that, as though he were already dead, she made a tender and sorrowful lament over him.

"We turned him face downwards, he brought up a great deal of water, and he came to himself at the end of two hours; during which, the wind having changed, it suited us to turn back towards land and to pull hard at the oars so as not to run aground on it. But our good luck willed that we came to a cove that lies beside a little promontory or cape which the Moors call La Cava Rumía, which in our language means the wicked Christian woman; and it is a tradition among the Moors that the Cava, through whom Spain was lost, is buried in that place, because cava in their language means wicked woman and rumía Christian. And they even count it a bad omen to come and anchor there when necessity forces them to it, because they never anchor there without it — although for us it was no shelter of a wicked woman but a safe harbour of rescue, the sea being as rough as it was.

"We put our sentries ashore and never let go of the oars; we ate some of what the renegade had provided, and prayed to God and to Our Lady with all our hearts to help us and favour us so that we might come happily to the end of so fortunate a beginning. Orders were given, at Zoraida's entreaty, that we should put her father ashore and all the other Moors who came tied up there, because she had not the heart, and her tender feelings could not bear, to see her father tied up before her eyes and those people of her own country prisoners. We promised her to do so at the time of our leaving, since there was no danger in leaving them in that place, which was uninhabited.

"Our prayers were not so empty that they were not heard by heaven; for in our favour the wind then changed, the sea grew calm, and invited us to go back cheerfully to going on with the voyage we had begun.

"Seeing this, we untied the Moors and put them ashore one by one, at which they were astonished. But on coming to put Zoraida's father ashore, who was by now fully in his senses, he said:

"'Why do you think, Christians, that this wicked female is glad that you should give me my liberty? Do you think it is out of pity for me? Certainly not, but she does it because of the obstacle my presence will be to her when she wants to put her wicked desires into practice. And do not think that what has moved her to change her religion is her understanding that yours has the advantage of ours, but her knowing that in your country immodesty is practised more freely than in ours.'

"And turning to Zoraida — while I and another Christian held him fast by both arms, so that he should not do something wild — he said to her: 'Oh, shameless girl and ill-advised child! Where are you going, blind and out of your wits, in the power of these dogs, our natural enemies? Cursed be the hour in which I begot you, and cursed be the indulgences and pleasures I have brought you up in!'

"But seeing that he looked like not finishing so quickly, I hurried to put him ashore; and from there he went on at the top of his voice with his curses and laments, praying to Mohammed to pray to Allah to destroy us, confound us and finish us. And when, having made sail, we could no longer hear his words, we saw his actions, which were tearing at his beard, pulling out his hair and rolling on the ground. But once he raised his voice in such a way that we could make out that he was saying: 'Come back, beloved daughter, come back to land, for I forgive you everything. Hand those men that money, which is theirs now, and come back and comfort this poor sad father of yours, who will leave his life on this deserted sand if you leave him!'

"All of which Zoraida heard, and felt all of it, and wept over it; and she could not manage to say or answer him a word except: 'May it please Allah, my father, that Lela Marién, who has been the cause of my being a Christian, may comfort you in your sorrow. Allah knows well that I could not do anything other than what I have done, and that these Christians owe nothing to my will; for even if I had wanted not to come with them and to stay at home, it would have been impossible for me, so hard did my soul press me to carry out this thing which seems to me as good as you, beloved father, judge it wicked.'

"This she said at a time when her father could not hear her, and we could not see him any more. And so, comforting Zoraida, we all attended to our voyage, which the wind itself made so easy for us that we took it as certain that at daybreak the next day we should see ourselves on the shores of Spain.

"But as good fortune seldom or never comes pure and simple, without being accompanied or followed by some evil that disturbs it or startles it, our luck willed — or perhaps the curses the Moor had thrown at his daughter, which are always to be feared, whatever father they come from — our luck willed, I say, that when we were well out to sea, and almost three hours of the night had gone by, going along with the sail spread from top to bottom and the oars lashed, because the favourable wind saved us the labour of needing them, by the light of the moon, which was shining clearly, we saw close to us a round ship which, with all her sails spread and her helm a little to windward, was crossing in front of us — and this so close that we were obliged to strike sail so as not to run into her, and they likewise put their helm hard over to give us room to pass.

"They had come to the ship's side to ask us who we were and where we were sailing and where we came from. But because they asked us this in French, our renegade said: 'Let nobody answer; for these are certainly French corsairs, who prey on everything.'

"Because of this warning, nobody answered a word; and having gone a little way ahead, so that the ship was now to leeward, they suddenly let off two pieces of artillery, and by the look of it both of them were loaded with chain-shot, because with one they cut our mast through the middle and brought it down along with the sail into the sea; and immediately, firing off another piece, the ball came and struck the middle of our boat, so that it opened her right up, without doing any other harm. But as we saw ourselves going to the bottom, we all began to shout for help and to beg the men in the ship to take us in, because we were sinking.

"They then struck sail; and putting the skiff or boat into the sea, as many as twelve Frenchmen got into it, well armed with their muskets and their matches lit, and so came alongside ours. And seeing how few we were and how the boat was sinking, they took us in, saying that this had happened to us for having used the discourtesy of not answering them. Our renegade took the chest with Zoraida's riches and dropped it into the sea, without anybody's noticing what he did.

"In short, we all went over to the French, who, after informing themselves of everything they wanted to know about us, as though they had been our chief enemies, stripped us of everything we had; and from Zoraida they took even the anklets she wore on her feet. But what they did to Zoraida did not distress me as much as the fear I had that they would pass from taking her most rich and precious jewels to taking the jewel that was worth most and that she prized most. But the desires of those people do not extend beyond money, and their greed never sees itself satisfied with that; which then went so far that they would even have taken the captives' clothes off us if they had been of any use to them.

"And there was an opinion among them that we should all be thrown into the sea wrapped in a sail, because they meant to trade at some ports in Spain under the name of Bretons, and if they took us alive they would be punished when their theft was discovered. But the captain, who was the one who had stripped my beloved Zoraida, said he was satisfied with the prize he had, and that he did not want to touch at any Spanish port but to pass the straits of Gibraltar by night, or as best he could, and to go to La Rochelle, which he had sailed from. And so they agreed to give us the skiff of their ship, and everything needed for the short voyage we had left — which they did the next day, in sight of the land of Spain; at which sight all our distresses and poverties were completely forgotten, as though they had never happened to us: such is the pleasure of getting back a lost liberty.

"It could have been about midday when they put us into the boat, giving us two barrels of water and some ship's biscuit. And the captain, moved by I do not know what compassion, as the most beautiful Zoraida was getting in, gave her as much as forty gold crowns, and would not let his soldiers take from her these same clothes she now has on.

"We got into the boat; we thanked them for the kindness they were doing us, showing ourselves more grateful than aggrieved. They stood out to sea, holding their course for the straits; and we, without looking to any other pole star than the land that showed in front of us, rowed so hard that at sunset we were so close that we could easily, as it seemed to us, have got there before it was quite dark. But as the moon did not appear that night and the sky showed dark, and as we did not know the district we were in, it did not seem to us a safe thing to run ashore, as many of us thought we should — saying that we ought to make for it even if it was among rocks and far from any town, because in that way we should settle the fear it was reasonable to have that corsair vessels from Tetuan might be about in those parts: men who spend the night in Barbary and the dawn on the coasts of Spain, and generally take a prize and go home to sleep again. But of the conflicting opinions, the one adopted was that we should approach little by little and, if the calmness of the sea allowed it, land wherever we could.

"So it was done; and it must have been a little before midnight when we came to the foot of an enormous, high mountain, not so close to the sea that it did not leave a little space for landing comfortably. We ran onto the sand, went ashore, kissed the ground, and with tears of the gladdest happiness we all gave thanks to God, our Lord, for the incomparable good he had done us.

"We got the provisions out of the boat, hauled her up on land and went a great way up the mountain; because even there we were still, and we still could not settle our hearts, nor could we quite believe that it was Christian land that was now holding us up.

"Day broke later, in my opinion, than we would have wished. We finished climbing the whole mountain to see whether any settlement could be made out from up there, or any shepherds' huts; but however far we stretched our eyes, we made out neither settlement nor person nor path nor road. For all that, we decided to go inland, since it could not fail to happen that we should soon find somebody to give us news of the country.

"But what wearied me most was seeing Zoraida going on foot over those rough places; for although I once put her on my shoulders, my weariness tired her more than her rest rested her; and so she would never again let me take that labour on. And with a great deal of patience and signs of cheerfulness, I always leading her by the hand, we must have gone a little less than a quarter of a league when there came to our ears the sound of a small bell — a clear sign that there was a flock somewhere near.

"And all of us looking carefully to see whether anybody appeared, we saw at the foot of a cork tree a young shepherd, who with great calm and unconcern was carving a stick with a knife. We shouted; and he, raising his head, sprang lightly to his feet; and, as we afterwards learnt, the first people who came into his view were the renegade and Zoraida. And as he saw them in Moorish dress, he thought that the whole of Barbary was down on him; and diving into the wood ahead with extraordinary speed, he began to give the loudest shouts in the world, saying: 'Moors, there are Moors in the country! Moors, Moors! To arms, to arms!'

"At these shouts we were all left in confusion, and did not know what to do with ourselves. But considering that the shepherd's shouts were bound to raise the countryside, and that the coastguard cavalry were bound to come at once to see what it was, we decided that the renegade should take off his Turkish clothes and put on a captive's jacket that one of us gave him at once, although he was left in his shirt. And so, commending ourselves to God, we went by the same road we had seen the shepherd take, expecting all the time that the coastguard cavalry would come down on us.

"And our expectation did not deceive us; because two hours had not gone by when, having come out of those thickets onto a plain, we made out as many as fifty horsemen coming towards us at great speed at a half-gallop. And as soon as we saw them we stood still waiting for them. But when they came up and saw, instead of the Moors they were looking for, so many poor Christians, they were bewildered; and one of them asked us whether we were by any chance the reason why a shepherd had called to arms.

"'Yes,' I said; and I was about to begin telling him my story, and where we came from and who we were, when one of the Christians who came with us recognised the horseman who had asked us the question, and said, without letting me say another word: 'Thanks be to God, gentlemen, who has brought us to so good a place! Because if I am not mistaken, the ground we are treading is that of Vélez Málaga — unless the years of my captivity have taken from my memory the recollection that you, sir, who are asking us who we are, are Pedro de Bustamante, my uncle.'

"The Christian captive had hardly said this when the horseman threw himself off his horse and came to embrace the young man, saying: 'Nephew of my soul and my life, I know you now; and I have wept for you as dead, I and my sister your mother and all your family, who are still alive; and God has been pleased to give them life so that they may enjoy the pleasure of seeing you. We knew already that you were in Algiers, and by the signs and appearance of your clothes and those of everybody in this company, I understand that you have had a miraculous deliverance.'

"'So it is,' answered the young man, 'and there will be time left for us to tell you all about it.'

"As soon as the horsemen understood that we were Christian captives, they got down off their horses, and each of them offered us his own to take us to the city of Vélez Málaga, which was a league and a half from there. Some of them went back to fetch the boat to the city, when we told them where we had left it; others took us up behind them, and Zoraida rode behind the Christian's uncle.

"The whole town came out to receive us, having already heard the news of our coming from somebody who had gone on ahead. They were not astonished at seeing freed captives or captive Moors, because all the people of that coast are used to seeing both the one and the other; but they were astonished at Zoraida's beauty, which at that instant and season was at its height, both with the weariness of the journey and with the gladness of finding herself at last in Christian country without the alarm of being lost. And this had brought such colour into her face that, unless my love was deceiving me then, I shall dare to say that there was no lovelier creature in the world — at least that I had ever seen.

"We went straight to the church to give thanks to God for the favour we had received; and as soon as Zoraida came into it, she said that there were faces there that looked like Lela Marién's. We told her they were images of her, and as best he could the renegade gave her to understand what they meant, so that she might worship them as if each one of them were really the same Lela Marién who had spoken to her. She, who has a good understanding and a quick, clear nature, at once understood everything that was said to her about the images.

"From there they took us and shared us out in different houses of the town; but the renegade, Zoraida and I were taken by the Christian who had come with us to his parents' house, who were moderately well off in the goods of fortune, and they made much of us with as much love as of their own son.

"Six days we stayed at Vélez, at the end of which the renegade, having made whatever declaration he needed, went off to the city of Granada to be brought back by means of the Holy Inquisition into the most holy bosom of the Church. The other freed Christians each went wherever seemed best to them, and Zoraida and I were left alone, with nothing but the crowns the Frenchman's courtesy gave Zoraida — with which I bought this animal she rides on. And I, serving her up to now as a father and a squire and not as a husband, we go with the intention of seeing whether my father is alive, or whether either of my brothers has had more prosperous luck than mine — although, since heaven has made me Zoraida's companion, it seems to me that no other lot could come to me, however good, that I should value more highly.

"The patience with which Zoraida bears the discomforts poverty brings with it, and the desire she shows to see herself a Christian at last, is so great and such that it astonishes me and moves me to serve her all the time of my life — although the pleasure I have in seeing myself hers and in her being mine is disturbed and undone by not knowing whether I shall find in my own country some corner to shelter her in, and whether time and death may have made such a change in the property and lives of my father and my brothers that I shall hardly find anybody who knows me, if they are gone.

"I have no more, gentlemen, to tell you of my history; whether it is agreeable and out of the ordinary, let your own good judgements decide. For my own part I can say that I could have wished to tell it you more briefly — although the fear of boring you has taken more than four circumstances off my tongue."
