Chapter 42: Which Treats of What Further Happened at the Inn, and of Many Other Things Worth Knowing

The captive fell silent on saying this, and Don Fernando said to him:

"Certainly, captain, the manner in which you have told this strange affair has been such that it matches the novelty and strangeness of the case itself. The whole of it is out of the ordinary and rare, and full of incidents that astonish and hold in suspense whoever hears them. And the pleasure we have got in listening to it is such that even if tomorrow's daylight found us still entertained with the same tale, we should be glad to have it begun all over again."

And on saying this, Don Fernando and all the rest offered him everything in their power for his service, in words and terms so affectionate and so genuine that the captain thought himself very well repaid by their goodwill. In particular Don Fernando offered him that if he would go back with him, he would get the marquis his brother to be godfather at Zoraida's baptism, and that for his own part he would fit him out in such a way that he could enter his own country with the standing and the comfort that were due to his person. For all of which the captive thanked him most courteously, but he would not accept any of his generous offers.

At this point night was coming on; and as it closed in, a coach arrived at the inn with some men on horseback. They asked for lodging; to whom the innkeeper's wife answered that there was not a hand's breadth free in the whole inn.

"Well, even if that is so," said one of the men on horseback who had come in, "there is bound to be room for his lordship the judge who is here."

At this title the hostess was flustered, and said:

"Sir, the fact of the matter is that I have no beds; if his worship the judge brings one, as he must do, let him come in and welcome, and my husband and I will get out of our own room to make his worship comfortable."

"Very well then," said the squire.

But by this time a man had got out of the coach whose dress at once showed the office and rank he held; because the long gown with the ruffled sleeves he was wearing showed that he was a judge, as his servant had said. He was leading by the hand a young girl of about sixteen, dressed for travelling, so smart, so beautiful and so graceful that the sight of her put everybody into admiration — so much so that if they had not seen Dorotea and Luscinda and Zoraida, who were at the inn, they would have believed that another beauty like this girl's could hardly be found.

Don Quixote was present when the judge and the girl came in, and as soon as he saw him he said:

"Your worship may safely come in and take your ease in this castle; for although it is narrow and badly furnished, there is no narrowness and no discomfort in the world that does not make room for arms and letters — and the more so if arms and letters bring beauty as their guide and leader, as your worship's letters bring in this fair maiden, before whom not only should castles be opened and thrown wide, but crags should divide and mountains split and bow down to make her welcome. Come in, your worship, I say, to this paradise, for here you will find stars and suns to keep company with the heaven your worship brings with you. Here you will find arms at their height and beauty at its extreme."

The judge was astonished at Don Quixote's speech, and set himself to look at him very deliberately, and his figure astonished him no less than his words. And without finding any words to answer him with, he was astonished all over again when he saw before him Luscinda, Dorotea and Zoraida, who at the news of the new guests, and at what the innkeeper's wife had told them of the girl's beauty, had come to see her and welcome her. But Don Fernando, Cardenio and the curate made him plainer and more courtly offers. In fact his lordship the judge came in bewildered, both at what he saw and at what he heard, and the beauties of the inn gave the beautiful girl their welcome.

In short, the judge saw plainly that all the people who were there were people of standing; but Don Quixote's figure, face and bearing baffled him. And courteous offers having passed among them all, and the accommodation of the inn having been reckoned up, what had already been arranged was arranged: that all the women should go into the garret already mentioned and that the men should stay outside, as though on guard over them. And so the judge was content that his daughter — for that was who the girl was — should go with those ladies, which she did very willingly. And with part of the innkeeper's narrow bed and half of the one the judge had brought, they settled themselves that night better than they had expected.

The captive, whose heart had been leaping from the moment he saw the judge with a suspicion that this was his brother, asked one of the servants who came with him what his name was and whether he knew what part of the country he came from. The servant answered him that he was called Licentiate Juan Pérez de Viedma, and that he had heard he came from a place in the mountains of León. With this account, and with what he had seen, he was finally confirmed in the belief that this was his brother, who had followed letters on their father's advice. And in excitement and delight, calling Don Fernando, Cardenio and the curate aside, he told them what was happening, assuring them that this judge was his brother.

The servant had also told him that he was going out as a judge to the Indies, to the High Court of Mexico. He learnt too that the girl was his daughter, at whose birth her mother had died, and that he had been left very rich by the dowry which stayed in the house with the daughter. He asked their advice as to how he should reveal himself, or how to find out first whether, once he had revealed himself, his brother would be ashamed at seeing him poor or would receive him warmly.

"Leave the making of that trial to me," said the curate; "the more so as there is no thinking otherwise than that you, captain, will be very well received. Because the worth and prudence that your brother's good face reveals give no signs of his being arrogant or ungracious, or of his not knowing how to set the accidents of fortune at their proper value."

"For all that," said the captain, "I would like to make myself known to him not suddenly but by roundabout ways."

"I tell you again," answered the curate, "that I shall manage it in a way that will leave us all satisfied."

By this time supper was ready, and they all sat down at the table except the captive and the ladies, who had supper by themselves in their room. In the middle of supper the curate said:

"Of your worship's very name, my lord judge, I had a comrade in Constantinople, where I was a captive for some years; which comrade was one of the bravest soldiers and captains in the whole Spanish infantry — but as much as he had of courage and worth, so much he had of bad luck."

"And what was this captain called, my dear sir?" asked the judge.

"He was called," answered the curate, "Ruy Pérez de Viedma, and he was a native of a place in the mountains of León; and he told me a thing that had happened to his father with his brothers which, if it had not been told me by a man as truthful as he was, I should have taken for one of those tales old women tell by the fire in winter.

"Because he told me that his father had divided his property among the three sons he had, and had given them certain pieces of advice, better than Cato's. And I can tell you that the choice he made of coming to the wars had turned out so well for him that in a few years, by his own worth and effort, with no arm to help him but his own great virtue, he rose to be a captain of infantry and to see himself in the way and in the standing to be soon a colonel. But fortune was against him; for where he might have expected to find it good, there he lost it, along with his liberty, in that most fortunate day when so many recovered theirs — which was the battle of Lepanto. I lost mine at the Goletta, and afterwards, by different turns, we found ourselves comrades in Constantinople. From there he went to Algiers, where I know that one of the strangest cases that have ever happened in the world happened to him."

From here the curate went on, and with brief compression told what had happened to his brother with Zoraida; to all of which the judge listened so attentively that never had he been so much of a hearer — which is what his title of oidor means — as he was then. The curate only went as far as the point when the French stripped the Christians who were in the boat, and the poverty and want in which his comrade and the beautiful Moorish woman had been left; of whom he had not learnt what had become of them, nor whether they had reached Spain or whether the French had carried them off to France.

The captain was listening to everything the curate said, standing a little way off, and was noting every movement his brother made. And seeing that the curate had now come to the end of his tale, he gave a great sigh, and with his eyes filling with water, said:

"Oh, sir, if you knew what news it is you have told me, and how nearly it touches me — so nearly that I am forced to give signs of it with these tears which, against all my discretion and reserve, are coming out of my eyes! That valorous captain you speak of is my elder brother, who, being stronger and of loftier thoughts than I or another younger brother of mine, chose the honourable and worthy calling of war, which was one of the three roads our father put to us, as your comrade told you in the tale you thought you heard from him.

"I followed letters, in which God and my own diligence have put me in the position you see. My youngest brother is in Peru, so rich that with what he has sent my father and me he has fully made good the share he took, and has even put into my father's hands the means to satisfy his natural generosity; and I likewise have been able to keep myself with more decency and standing in my studies and to reach the post you see me in.

"My father is still alive, dying with the longing to hear of his eldest son, and asking God with continual prayers that death may not close his eyes until he sees his son's alive. About whom I am amazed that, being so sensible a man, in so many hardships and afflictions, or in prosperous turns, he should have neglected to send his father news of himself; because if he or any of us had known, he would have had no need to wait for the miracle of the cane to get his ransom.

"But what I am afraid of now is wondering whether those Frenchmen may have given him his liberty, or may have killed him to cover up their theft. All this will mean that I shall go on with my journey, not with the pleasure I began it with but with nothing but melancholy and sadness.

"Oh, my good brother, if only I knew now where you were! For I would go and look for you and free you from your hardships, even if it were at the cost of my own. Oh, if only somebody would take news to our old father that you were alive, even if you were in the most hidden dungeons of Barbary — for his riches, and my brother's and mine, would get you out of them! Oh Zoraida, beautiful and generous, if only somebody could repay the good you did a brother of mine! If only somebody could be present at the new birth of your soul, and at the wedding, which would give us all so much happiness!"

These and other such words the judge said, so full of compassion at the news he had been given of his brother that everybody who heard him joined him in showing the feeling they had for his grief.

The curate, then, seeing how well he had come out with his plan and with what the captain wanted, did not want to keep them all sad any longer; and so he got up from the table and went into where Zoraida was, and took her by the hand, and after her came Luscinda, Dorotea and the judge's daughter. The captain was waiting to see what the curate meant to do, which was that, taking him too by the other hand, he went with the two of them to where the judge and the other gentlemen were, and said:

"Let your tears cease, my lord judge, and let your wish be filled with all the good that could be wished for; since you have before you your good brother and your good sister-in-law. This man you see here is Captain Viedma, and this is the beautiful Moorish woman who did him so much good. The Frenchmen I told you of put them in the straits you see, so that you might show the generosity of your good heart."

The captain ran to embrace his brother, and his brother put both hands on his chest so as to look at him a little further off; but when he had finished recognising him, he embraced him so tightly, shedding such tender tears of happiness, that most of those who were present had to join him in them. The words the two brothers said to each other, the feelings they showed, I hardly think can be imagined, let alone written down.

There, in a few words, they gave each other an account of their fortunes; there the good friendship of two brothers was shown at its height; there the judge embraced Zoraida; there he offered her his property; there he made his daughter embrace her; there the beautiful Christian girl and the most beautiful Moorish girl set everybody's tears going again.

There Don Quixote stood attentive, without saying a word, considering these very strange events and putting them all down to the chimeras of knight-errantry.

There it was arranged that the captain and Zoraida should go back with his brother to Seville and let their father know of his being found and of his freedom, so that he might come as best he could to be present at Zoraida's wedding and baptism — since it was not possible for the judge to leave the journey he was on, because he had news that in a month's time the fleet would sail from Seville to New Spain, and it would be a great inconvenience to him to lose the passage.

In short, everybody was contented and glad at the captive's good fortune; and as the night had now gone almost two thirds of its journey, they agreed to go to bed and rest for what was left of it. Don Quixote offered to keep watch over the castle, so that they should not be attacked by some giant or other wandering scoundrel, greedy for the great treasure of beauty that castle held. Those who knew him thanked him for it, and gave the judge an account of Don Quixote's strange humour, which he found not a little entertaining.

Only Sancho Panza was in despair at how long they were taking to go to bed; and he alone settled himself better than any of them, lying down on his donkey's harness, which was to cost him as dear as will be told further on.

The ladies having gone to their room, then, and the rest having settled themselves as best they could, Don Quixote went out of the inn to stand sentry over the castle, as he had promised.

It happened, then, that a little before dawn came, there reached the ladies' ears a voice so tuneful and so good that it obliged them all to give it their attention — especially Dorotea, who was awake, and at whose side slept Doña Clara de Viedma, for that was the name of the judge's daughter. Nobody could imagine who the person was who sang so well; and it was a single voice, without any instrument to accompany it. Sometimes it seemed to them that the singing was in the yard, sometimes that it was in the stable; and while they were in this confusion, listening very attentively, Cardenio came to the door of the room and said:

"Whoever is not asleep, listen; you will hear the voice of a muleteer's boy who sings in such a way that he enchants."

"We are already listening to it, sir," answered Dorotea.

And with this Cardenio went away; and Dorotea, giving it all the attention she could, made out that what was being sung was this.
