Chapter 43: In Which Is Related the Agreeable Story of the Muleteer's Boy, with Other Strange Events That Happened at the Inn

	A sailor of love am I,
	and on his deep ocean
	I sail without any hope
	of reaching any harbour.

	I go on following a star
	that I make out from far off,
	lovelier and more shining
	than any Palinurus saw.

	I do not know where it guides me,
	and so I sail in confusion,
	my soul intent on watching it,
	careful and careless at once.

	Impertinent reserves,
	a modesty beyond the custom,
	are clouds that hide her from me
	when I most try to see her.

	O clear and shining star,
	in whose light I burn myself away:
	the moment you hide from me
	will be the moment of my death.

The singer having got to this point, it seemed to Dorotea that it would not be right for Clara to miss hearing so good a voice; and so, shaking her one way and the other, she woke her, saying:

"Forgive me, child, for waking you, since I do it so that you may have the pleasure of hearing the best voice you will perhaps have heard in the whole of your life."

Clara woke up thoroughly drowsy, and the first time did not understand what Dorotea was saying to her; and asking her again, Dorotea told her again, at which Clara paid attention. But she had hardly heard two lines that the singer was going on with when such a strange trembling took her, as though she were ill with some grave attack of the ague; and hugging Dorotea tightly, she said to her:

"Oh, lady of my soul and my life, why did you wake me? For the greatest good fortune that could come to me just now was to have my eyes and my ears shut, so as not to see or hear that unhappy musician."

"What is this you say, child? They tell me the man who is singing is a muleteer's boy."

"He is nothing of the kind: he is the lord of villages," answered Clara, "and of the place he holds in my soul so securely that if he does not choose to leave it, it will not be taken from him for ever."

Dorotea was astonished at the girl's feeling words, thinking that they went a long way beyond the good sense her few years promised; and so she said to her:

"You speak in such a way, Señora Clara, that I cannot understand you: explain yourself more, and tell me what you mean about a soul and villages and this musician, whose voice has left you in such distress. But do not tell me anything just now, for I do not want to lose, by attending to your alarm, the pleasure I get from listening to the singer; for it seems to me that he is going back to his song with new verses and a new tune."

"Very well," answered Clara.

And so as not to hear him she stopped up both her ears with her hands, at which Dorotea was astonished too; and Dorotea, listening to what was being sung, found that it went on in this way:

	Sweet hope of mine,
	who, breaking through impossibilities and thickets,
	go steadily on the road
	that you yourself invent and prepare:
	do not lose heart at seeing yourself
	at every step beside the step of your own death.

	Lazy men do not attain
	honourable triumphs or any victory,
	nor can those be happy
	who, not standing up against fortune,
	surrender, helpless,
	all their senses to soft idleness.

	That love should sell his glories
	dear is very reasonable, and is fair dealing;
	for there is no richer treasure
	than the one that is assayed by his own pleasure,
	and it is a plain thing
	that what costs little is not valued.

	Persistence in love
	sometimes attains impossible things;
	and so, although with mine
	I follow the hardest roads of love,
	I do not for that reason despair
	of reaching heaven from the earth.

Here the voice came to an end, and Clara made a beginning of fresh sobs. All of which inflamed Dorotea's desire to know the cause of such sweet singing and such sad weeping. And so she asked her again what it was she had meant to tell her before. Then Clara, afraid that Luscinda might hear her, hugging Dorotea tightly, put her mouth so close to Dorotea's ear that she could safely speak without being heard by anybody else, and said to her:

"This man who is singing, my lady, is the son of a gentleman, a native of the kingdom of Aragon, the lord of two villages, who lived opposite my father's house at Court. And although my father had the windows of his house covered with cloths in winter and lattices in summer, I do not know how it was or was not, but this gentleman, who was at his studies, saw me — and I do not know whether it was at church or somewhere else.

"In the end he fell in love with me, and gave me to understand it from the windows of his house with so many signs and so many tears that I had to believe him, and even love him, without knowing what it was he wanted of me. Among the signs he made me was one of putting his two hands together, giving me to understand that he would marry me; and although I should have been very glad if it had been so, being alone and without a mother I did not know who to talk it over with, and so I let it be without giving him any other favour except that, when my father was out of the house and his was too, I would raise the cloth or the lattice a little and let myself be seen at full length — at which he made such a festival that he gave signs of going out of his mind.

"At this the time of my father's departure came on, which he learnt about, and not from me, since I could never tell him. He fell ill, as I understand it, of grief; and so on the day we left I could never see him to say goodbye to him, even with my eyes.

"But after two days of travelling, on going into an inn at a place a day's journey from here, I saw him at the door of the inn, dressed as a muleteer's boy, so to the life that if I had not carried him so well painted in my soul it would have been impossible to recognise him. I recognised him, I was astonished and I was glad. He looked at me by stealth from my father, whom he always hides from when he crosses in front of me on the roads and at the inns we come to. And as I know who he is, and consider that for love of me he comes on foot and with so much hardship, I am dying of distress; and where he puts his feet I put my eyes.

"I do not know with what intention he comes, or how he has been able to escape from his father, who loves him extraordinarily, because he has no other heir and because he deserves it, as your worship will see when you see him. And I can tell you more: that everything he sings he gets out of his own head, for I have heard it said that he is a very great scholar and poet. And there is more: that every time I see him or hear him sing, I tremble all over and start with fright, afraid my father will recognise him and come to know of what we want.

"In my life I have never spoken a word to him, and for all that I love him in such a way that I shall not be able to live without him. This, my lady, is all I can tell you about this musician whose voice has pleased you so much; from which alone you may see plainly that he is no muleteer's boy, as you say, but the lord of souls and villages, as I have told you."

"Say no more, Señora Doña Clara," said Dorotea at this point, and this while kissing her a thousand times; "say no more, I say, and wait for the new day to come, for I hope in God so to direct your affairs that they may have the happy end so honourable a beginning deserves."

"Oh, my lady," said Doña Clara, "what end can be hoped for, if his father is so distinguished and so rich that he will think I cannot even be his son's servant, much less his wife? And as for marrying without my father's knowledge, I would not do it for anything in the world. All I could wish is that this young man would go back and leave me; perhaps by not seeing him, and with the great distance of the road we are going, the pain I feel now would be eased — although I can tell you that this remedy I am imagining will do me very little good.

"I do not know what the devil this has been, or how this love I have for him got in, seeing that I am such a girl and he such a boy; for truly I believe we are of the very same age, and I am not sixteen yet — for my father says I shall be sixteen on Saint Michael's day coming."

Dorotea could not help laughing to hear how like a child Doña Clara talked, and said to her:

"Let us rest, madam, for what little I think is left of the night, and God will send the morning and we shall prosper — or my hands will serve me badly."

With this they settled down, and a great silence was kept throughout the inn. The only people who were not asleep were the innkeeper's daughter and Maritornes her servant; who, since they already knew the humour Don Quixote sinned by, and that he was outside the inn armed and on horseback keeping watch, decided between them to play some joke on him, or at least to pass a little time listening to his absurdities.

Now the fact is that in the whole inn there was no window that looked out onto the fields except a hole in a hayloft, through which they threw the straw out. To this hole the two half-maidens came, and saw that Don Quixote was on horseback, leaning on his pike, giving from time to time such sorrowful, deep sighs that with each one his soul seemed to be torn out of him. And they likewise heard him say in a soft, delicate, loving voice:

"O my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, extreme of all beauty, end and completion of good sense, storehouse of the best charm, treasury of modesty, and finally the very idea of everything profitable, honourable and delightful there is in the world! And what may your grace be doing now? Have you by any chance your thoughts on your captive knight, who has of his own will chosen to expose himself to so many dangers simply to serve you?

"Give me news of her, O luminary of the three faces! Perhaps out of envy of hers you are looking at her now; either walking about some gallery of her sumptuous palaces, or leaning on some balcony, considering how, without loss to her modesty and her greatness, she is to calm the storm this troubled heart of mine suffers for her sake; what glory she is to give my pains, what quiet to my anxiety and, in the end, what life to my death and what reward to my services.

"And you, sun, who must by now be saddling your horses in haste so as to get up early and go out to see my lady — as soon as you see her, I beg you to greet her on my behalf; but take care that on seeing her and greeting her you do not give her the kiss of peace on her face, for I shall be more jealous of you than you were of that swift ingrate who made you sweat and run so hard over the plains of Thessaly, or along the banks of the Peneus — for I do not properly remember where you ran that time, jealous and in love."

Don Quixote had got to this point in his sorrowful speech when the innkeeper's daughter began to hiss at him and to say:

"My dear sir, will your worship please come over here?"

At which signs and voice Don Quixote turned his head, and saw by the light of the moon — which was then at its full brightness — that he was being called from the hole which seemed to him a window, and one with gilded bars at that, as befits the windows of such rich castles as he imagined that inn to be. And at that instant it presented itself to his mad imagination that once again, as the last time, the fair maiden, daughter of the lady of that castle, conquered by her love for him, was coming back to solicit him. And with this thought, so as not to show himself discourteous and ungrateful, he turned Rocinante's reins and came up to the hole; and as soon as he saw the two girls, he said:

"I pity you, fair lady, for having set your loving thoughts in a quarter where it is not possible to answer you as your great worth and gentility deserve; for which you must not blame this wretched knight errant, whom love has made incapable of surrendering his affections to any woman but the one who, at the moment his eyes saw her, made her the absolute mistress of his soul.

"Forgive me, good lady, and get you back to your room, and do not, by declaring your desires to me any further, oblige me to show myself more ungrateful. And if out of the love you bear me you find in me anything else with which to satisfy you, so long as it is not that same love, ask it of me; for I swear to you, by that absent sweet enemy of mine, to give it you on the spot, even if you asked me for a lock of Medusa's hair, which was all snakes, or for the very rays of the sun shut up in a phial."

"My lady has need of nothing of the sort, sir knight," said Maritornes at this point.

"Then what has your lady need of, discerning duenna?" answered Don Quixote.

"Only one of your beautiful hands," said Maritornes, "so as to relieve with it the great longing that has brought her to this hole, so much at the risk of her honour that if her lord father had heard her, the smallest slice of her would have been her ear."

"I should have liked to see that!" answered Don Quixote. "But he will take good care not to, unless he wants to make the most disastrous end that any father in the world ever made, for having laid hands on the delicate limbs of his lovesick daughter."

It seemed to Maritornes that Don Quixote would certainly give the hand they had asked for; and settling in her mind what she was going to do, she got down from the hole and went to the stable, where she took the halter of Sancho Panza's donkey and came back to her hole very quickly, just as Don Quixote had got to his feet on Rocinante's saddle so as to reach the barred window where he imagined the wounded maiden to be. And on giving her his hand, he said:

"Take, madam, this hand — or rather, this executioner of the world's evildoers; take this hand, I say, which no other woman's has touched, not even hers who has complete possession of the whole of my body. I do not give it you to kiss, but so that you may look at the fabric of its sinews, the linking of its muscles, the width and roominess of its veins; from which you may gather what the strength must be of the arm that has such a hand."

"Now we shall see," said Maritornes.

And making a running noose in the halter, she threw it round his wrist; and getting down from the hole, she tied what was left very tightly to the bolt of the hayloft door. Don Quixote, feeling the roughness of the cord on his wrist, said:

"It seems more as though your worship were grating my hand than caressing it; do not treat it so badly, for it is not to blame for the harm my will does you; nor is it right that you should take out the whole of your annoyance on so small a part of me. Consider that whoever loves well does not revenge herself so ill."

But nobody was listening to any of these speeches of Don Quixote's by now, because as soon as Maritornes had tied him, she and the other girl went off dying of laughter, and left him held in such a way that it was impossible for him to get free.

He was, then, as has been said, standing on his feet on Rocinante, with his whole arm through the hole and tied by the wrist to the bolt of the door, in the greatest fear and anxiety — for if Rocinante moved to one side or the other, he would be left hanging by the arm. And so he did not dare make any movement at all, although from Rocinante's patience and quietness one might well expect that he would stay without moving for a whole century.

In short, seeing himself tied and that the ladies had gone away, Don Quixote set himself to imagine that all this was being done by way of enchantment, as the last time, when in that same castle that enchanted Moor of a carrier had pounded him. And he cursed to himself his own want of judgement and reasoning; since, having come out of that castle so badly the first time, he had ventured to go into it a second, it being an established maxim among knights errant that when they have tried an adventure and not succeeded in it, it is a sign that it is not reserved for them but for others, and so they have no need to try it a second time.

For all that, he pulled at his arm to see whether he could get free; but he was so well tied that all his attempts were in vain. It is quite true that he pulled cautiously, so that Rocinante should not move; and although he would have liked to sit down and settle himself in the saddle, he could do nothing but stand up, or tear his hand off.

There was the wishing for Amadis's sword, against which no enchantment had any power; there was the cursing of his fortune; there was the exaggerating of the loss the world would suffer by his absence for as long as he stayed there enchanted — for he had beyond any doubt come to believe that he was; there was the remembering all over again of his beloved Dulcinea of El Toboso; there was the calling for his good squire Sancho Panza, who, buried in sleep and stretched out on his donkey's pack-saddle, at that moment did not remember the mother that bore him; there he called on the sages Lirgandeo and Alquife to help him; there he invoked his good friend Urganda to come to his rescue; and finally, there the morning caught him, so desperate and bewildered that he bellowed like a bull. Because he did not expect that daylight would put his trouble right, since he took it to be everlasting, believing himself to be enchanted. And what made him believe it was seeing that Rocinante moved neither much nor little; and he believed that in that fashion, without eating or drinking or sleeping, he and his horse would have to stay until that evil influence of the stars was past, or until some wiser enchanter disenchanted him.

But he was very much deceived in his belief; because dawn had hardly begun to break when four men on horseback arrived at the inn, very well turned out and equipped, with their muskets across their saddlebows. They knocked with great blows at the inn door, which was still shut; which Don Quixote seeing from where he still did not leave off keeping sentry, he said in an arrogant, loud voice:

"Knights, or squires, or whoever you may be: you have no reason to knock at the gates of this castle; for it is plain enough that at such an hour either those within are asleep, or it is not the custom of fortresses to be opened until the sun is spread over the whole ground. Draw off outside, and wait for the day to grow light, and then we shall see whether it is right or not that they should open to you."

"What the devil sort of fortress or castle is this," said one of them, "to oblige us to keep such ceremonies? If you are the innkeeper, order them to open to us; for we are travellers who want no more than to give our mounts some barley and go on, because we are in a hurry."

"Do I look to you, gentlemen, as if I had the build of an innkeeper?" answered Don Quixote.

"I do not know what you have the build of," answered the other, "but I know that you talk nonsense in calling this inn a castle."

"A castle it is," replied Don Quixote, "and one of the best in this whole province; and it has people inside it who have had a sceptre in their hand and a crown on their head."

"It would be better the other way round," said the traveller: "the sceptre on the head and the crown in the hand. And it will be, if it comes to it, that there must be some company of players inside, who often have those crowns and sceptres you speak of; because in an inn as small as this, and where such silence is kept, I do not believe people worthy of a crown and sceptre are lodged."

"You know little of the world," replied Don Quixote, "since you are ignorant of the things that generally happen in knight-errantry."

The companions who came with the questioner were getting tired of the conversation he was having with Don Quixote, and so they went back to knocking with great fury; and it was in such a way that the innkeeper woke up, and everybody else in the inn as well; and so he got up to ask who was knocking.

It happened at this time that one of the mounts the four men who were knocking had come on came up to smell Rocinante, who, melancholy and sad, with his ears drooping, was holding up his stretched-out master without moving. And as after all he was made of flesh, although he looked as if he were made of wood, he could not help responding and turning to smell the one who was coming to caress him. And so he had hardly moved at all when Don Quixote's joined feet slipped apart, and, sliding off the saddle, he would have come down on the ground if he had not been left hanging by the arm — a thing that caused him so much pain that he believed either that they were cutting off his wrist or that his arm was being torn off. Because he was left so close to the ground that with the very tips of his toes he kissed the earth; which was to his own harm, because, feeling how little he lacked to put the soles of his feet on the ground, he wore himself out and stretched as far as he could to reach it: exactly like men who are given the torture of the pulley, hung at just-touching and not-touching, who are themselves the cause of increasing their own pain by the eagerness they put into stretching, deceived by the hope that presents itself to them that with a very little more stretching they will reach the ground.
