Chapter 44: In Which Are Continued the Unheard-Of Events at the Inn

In fact Don Quixote gave so many shouts that the innkeeper, quickly opening the inn doors, came out in a fright to see who was giving such cries, and those who were outside did the same. Maritornes, who had already woken at the same shouts, imagining what it might be, went to the hayloft and untied, without anybody's seeing her, the halter that was holding Don Quixote up; and he immediately came down on the ground in sight of the innkeeper and the travellers, who, coming up to him, asked him what was the matter with him that he was giving such shouts. He, without answering a word, took the cord off his wrist and, getting to his feet, mounted Rocinante, braced his shield, levelled his pike, and, taking a good stretch of ground, came back at a half gallop, saying:

"Whoever shall say that I have been enchanted with any just title — provided my lady the Princess Micomicona gives me leave for it — I give him the lie, I challenge him and defy him to single combat."

The new travellers were astonished at Don Quixote's words, but the innkeeper took them out of that astonishment by telling them that this was Don Quixote and that there was no need to take any notice of him, because he was out of his mind.

They asked the innkeeper whether by any chance a boy of about fifteen had come to that inn, dressed as a muleteer's lad, with such-and-such a description — giving exactly the description of Doña Clara's lover. The innkeeper answered that there were so many people at the inn that he had not noticed the one they were asking about. But one of them, having seen the coach the judge had come in, said:

"He must certainly be here, because this is the coach they say he is following. Let one of us stay at the door and the rest go in and look for him; and it would be as well too if one of us went right round the inn, so that he does not get away over the yard walls."

"That is what we will do," answered one of them.

And two of them going inside, one stayed at the door and the other went off to go round the inn — all of which the innkeeper watched, and could not make out what all these measures were being taken for, although he well believed they were looking for the lad whose description they had given him.

By this time day was breaking; and for that reason as well as because of the noise Don Quixote had made, everybody was awake and getting up — especially Doña Clara and Dorotea, who, the one in alarm at having her lover so close and the other in her eagerness to see him, had been able to sleep very badly that night.

Don Quixote, who saw that none of the four travellers took any notice of him or answered his challenge, was dying and raging with vexation and fury. And if he had found in the ordinances of his chivalry that a knight errant might lawfully take on and undertake another enterprise when he had given his word and faith not to enter on any until he had finished the one he had promised, he would have attacked the lot of them and made them answer him whether they liked it or not. But since it seemed to him neither proper nor becoming to begin a new enterprise until he had put Micomicona in her kingdom, he had to keep quiet and stay still, waiting to see what those travellers' measures would come to.

One of them found the young man he was looking for asleep beside a muleteer's boy, quite unaware that anybody was looking for him, let alone that anybody would find him. The man took him by the arm and said to him:

"Certainly, Señor Don Luis, the clothes you have on answer well to who you are, and the bed I find you in speaks well of the indulgence your mother brought you up with."

The young man rubbed his sleepy eyes and looked slowly at the man who had hold of him, and then recognised that he was a servant of his father's, at which he got such a shock that he could not manage, or was not able, to say a word to him for a good while. And the servant went on to say:

"There is nothing else to be done here, Señor Don Luis, but to be patient and go back home — unless your worship would like your father and my master to go to the other world; because nothing else is to be expected from the grief he is left in through your being away."

"But how did my father know," said Don Luis, "that I was coming this road and in this dress?"

"A student," answered the servant, "whom you told about your plans was the one who revealed it, moved by pity at what he saw your father doing the moment he missed you. And so he sent off four of his servants to look for you, and we are all here at your service, more delighted than can be imagined at the good errand we shall go back on, taking you to the eyes that love you so much."

"That will be as I choose, or as heaven ordains," answered Don Luis.

"What can you choose, or what can heaven ordain, except to agree to your going back? For nothing else is going to be possible."

All these words that passed between the two of them were heard by the muleteer's boy beside whom Don Luis had been lying; and getting up from there, he went to tell Don Fernando and Cardenio and the rest — who had dressed by now — what was going on. He told them how that man called this boy "Don", and what words were passing, and how he wanted to take him back to his father's house and the boy did not want to go. And with this, and with what they knew of him from the fine voice heaven had given him, they were all seized with a great desire to know more particularly who he was, and even to help him if anybody tried to use force on him. And so they went towards the quarter where he was still talking and arguing with his servant.

At this Dorotea came out of her room, and behind her Doña Clara in great distress; and Dorotea, calling Cardenio aside, told him in a few words the story of the musician and Doña Clara. And he told her too what was happening about his father's servants coming to look for him, and he did not say it so quietly that Clara failed to hear it; at which she was so far out of herself that if Dorotea had not come to hold her, she would have come down on the floor. Cardenio told Dorotea that they should go back to their room, and that he would try to put everything right; and they did so.

By now all four of the men who had come looking for Don Luis were inside the inn and gathered round him, urging him to go back at once, without a moment's delay, to comfort his father. He answered that he could on no account do it until he had finished a business in which his life, his honour and his soul were at stake. The servants then pressed him, saying that on no account would they go back without him, and that they would take him whether he liked it or not.

"That you will not do," replied Don Luis, "unless you take me dead — although whatever way you take me, it will be taking me without my life."

By this time everybody else in the inn had come up to the argument, especially Cardenio, Don Fernando, his companions, the judge, the curate, the barber and Don Quixote, who by now thought there was no further need to guard the castle. Cardenio, who already knew the young man's story, asked those who wanted to take him what moved them to want to take that boy away against his will.

"What moves us," answered one of the four, "is to give his father back his life, which through this gentleman's absence is in danger of being lost."

To this Don Luis said:

"There is no need to give an account of my affairs here: I am free, and I shall go back if I choose to, and if not, none of you is going to force me."

"Reason will force your worship," answered the man; "and when reason is not enough with your worship, it will be enough with us to do what we came for and what we are bound to do."

"Let us know what all this is at bottom," said the judge at this point.

But the man, who knew him as a neighbour of his house, answered:

"Does your worship not know, my lord judge, this gentleman, who is your neighbour's son, and who has got away from his father's house in dress as unbecoming to his rank as your worship can see?"

The judge then looked at him more attentively and recognised him; and embracing him, he said:

"What childishness is this, Señor Don Luis, or what causes so powerful that they have moved you to come in this way, and in this dress, which so ill becomes your quality?"

Tears came into the young man's eyes, and he could not answer a word. The judge told the four men to calm down, for it would all be settled properly; and taking Don Luis by the hand, he drew him aside and asked him what this coming had been about.

And while he was asking him this and other questions, they heard great shouts at the door of the inn; and the cause of them was that two guests who had lodged there that night, seeing everybody busy finding out what the four men were after, had tried to go without paying what they owed. But the innkeeper, who attended more to his own business than to other people's, caught them as they came out of the door and asked for his money, and reproached them for their bad intentions in such words that he moved them to answer him with their fists; and so they began to lay into him in such a way that the poor innkeeper had to shout and call for help.

The innkeeper's wife and daughter could see nobody less occupied and able to help him than Don Quixote, to whom the innkeeper's daughter said:

"Help my poor father, sir knight, by the power God gave you; for two wicked men are pounding him like grain."

To which Don Quixote answered very slowly and with great composure:

"Fair maiden, there is no place for your petition at present, because I am prevented from getting involved in another adventure while I have not brought to a head one that my word has committed me to. But what I can do to serve you is this, as I shall now tell you: run and tell your father to keep up that battle as best he can and on no account to let himself be beaten, while I ask the Princess Micomicona's leave to be able to help him in his distress; for if she gives it me, take it as certain that I shall get him out of it."

"Sinner that I am!" said Maritornes, who was standing there. "Before your worship gets that leave you speak of, my master will already be in the other world."

"Only let me get the leave I speak of, madam," answered Don Quixote; "for once I have it, it will make very little difference that he should be in the other world, for I shall get him out of there in spite of the whole world's gainsaying it — or at the very least I shall give you such revenge on those who have sent him there that you will be more than moderately satisfied."

And without saying any more he went and knelt down before Dorotea, asking her in knightly and errant words that her greatness might be pleased to give him leave to succour and help the governor of that castle, who was in grave straits. The princess gave it him with a good will, and he at once, bracing his shield and putting his hand to his sword, hurried to the door of the inn, where the two guests were still handling the innkeeper roughly. But as soon as he arrived he stopped short and stayed still, although Maritornes and the innkeeper's wife kept asking him what he was waiting for, and telling him to help their master and husband.

"I hold back," said Don Quixote, "because it is not lawful for me to put my hand to my sword against people of squirely rank; but call my squire Sancho here to me, for this defence and vengeance is his affair and concern."

This was going on at the door of the inn, and there the punches and cuffs were flying in fine style, all to the harm of the innkeeper and to the fury of Maritornes, the innkeeper's wife and her daughter, who were in despair at seeing Don Quixote's cowardice and at how badly things were going for their husband, master and father.

But let us leave him here, for there will be no lack of somebody to help him; and if not, let the man who takes on more than his strength promises suffer and hold his tongue. And let us go back fifty paces to see what Don Luis answered the judge, whom we left aside asking him the reason for his coming on foot and dressed in such vile clothes. To which the young man, taking hold of his hands tightly, as a sign that some great grief was pressing on his heart, and shedding tears in great abundance, said to him:

"My dear sir, I can tell you nothing else except that from the moment heaven willed it and our being neighbours made it easy for me to see my lady Doña Clara, your daughter and my mistress, from that instant I made her the mistress of my will. And if yours, my true lord and father, does not prevent it, this very day she is to be my wife.

"For her I left my father's house, and for her I put on this dress, so as to follow her wherever she went, like the arrow to its target or the sailor to the pole star. She knows no more of my feelings than what she has been able to gather from the times she has seen my eyes weeping from a distance. You know already, sir, my parents' wealth and nobility, and that I am their only heir: if it seems to you that these are qualities enough for you to venture to make me happy in everything, receive me at once as your son. For if my father, carried away by other designs of his own, should not approve of this good fortune I have managed to find for myself, time has more power to undo and change things than human wills have."

The lovesick young man fell silent on saying this; and the judge was left, on hearing him, taken aback, bewildered and astonished, both at having heard the manner and the good sense with which Don Luis had revealed his feelings, and at finding himself at a point where he did not know what course to take in so sudden and unexpected a business. And so he answered nothing except that he should be easy for the present and keep his servants occupied so that they should not take him back that day, so that there might be time to consider what would be best for everybody. Don Luis kissed his hands by force, and even bathed them in tears — a thing that might have softened a heart of marble, let alone the judge's, who, being a man of sense, had already recognised how good that marriage was for his daughter, although, if it were possible, he would have wanted to bring it about with the consent of Don Luis's father, who he knew meant to get his son a title.

By this time the guests had made peace with the innkeeper, having paid him everything he asked, more through Don Quixote's persuasion and good arguments than through threats; and Don Luis's servants were waiting for the end of the judge's talk and their master's decision, when the devil, who never sleeps, arranged that at that very moment there came into the inn the barber from whom Don Quixote had taken Mambrino's helmet and Sancho Panza the ass's harness, which he had exchanged for his own. And this barber, taking his donkey to the stable, saw Sancho Panza mending something or other on the pack-saddle; and as soon as he saw it he recognised it, and made bold to rush at Sancho, saying:

"Ah, you thief, I have you here! Give me back my basin and my pack-saddle, along with all the harness you stole from me!"

Sancho, seeing himself attacked so suddenly and hearing the abuse being flung at him, with one hand took hold of the pack-saddle and with the other gave the barber such a cuff that he bathed his teeth in blood; but the barber did not for that let go of the hold he had on the pack-saddle. On the contrary, he raised his voice in such a way that everybody in the inn came running at the noise and the quarrel, and he was saying:

"Help, in the name of the king and the law! On top of my getting my own property back, this thieving highwayman wants to kill me!"

"You lie," answered Sancho, "for I am no highwayman: my master Don Quixote won these spoils in fair war."

Don Quixote was there by now, very pleased at seeing how well his squire both defended and attacked; and from then on he counted him a man of worth, and resolved in his heart to dub him a knight at the first chance that offered, thinking that the order of chivalry would be well bestowed on him.

Among other things the barber said in the course of the quarrel, he came to say:

"Gentlemen, this pack-saddle is as much mine as the death I owe to God, and I know it as well as if I had given birth to it; and there is my ass in the stable, who will not let me lie. If not, try it on him, and if it does not fit him to a hair I shall stand as a liar. And there is more: that the same day it was taken from me, they also took from me a new brass basin that had never been used, which was worth a crown of anybody's money."

Here Don Quixote could not hold himself in without answering; and putting himself between the two of them and separating them, and depositing the pack-saddle on the ground so that it should stay in plain sight until the truth came out, he said:

"So that your worships may see clearly and plainly the error this good squire is in, since he calls a basin what was, is and shall be Mambrino's helmet, which I took from him in fair war and made myself lord of by lawful and legitimate possession! As for the pack-saddle, I do not meddle in it; all I can say about it is that my squire Sancho asked my leave to take the trappings off this defeated coward's horse and adorn his own with them. I gave it him and he took them; and as for their having turned from trappings into a pack-saddle, I can give no other explanation than the ordinary one: that transformations of that sort are seen in the events of chivalry. In confirmation of which, run, Sancho my son, and bring out here the helmet this good man says is a basin."

"By God, sir," said Sancho, "if we have no other proof of our case than the one your worship gives, that Malbrino helmet is as much a basin as this good man's trappings are a pack-saddle!"

"Do as I tell you," replied Don Quixote; "for not everything in this castle is to be guided by enchantment."

Sancho went to where the basin was and brought it; and as soon as Don Quixote saw it, he took it in his hands and said:

"Let your worships look with what face this squire could say that this is a basin and not the helmet I have described. And I swear by the order of chivalry I profess that this is the same helmet I took from him, without anything having been added to it or taken away."

"There is no doubt about that," said Sancho at this, "because from the time my master won it until now he has only fought one battle with it, when he set free those unlucky men in chains; and if it hadn't been for this basinhelm, he wouldn't have come off very well that time either, because there was a great deal of stone-throwing in that engagement."
