Chapter 45: In Which the Doubt About Mambrino's Helmet and the Pack-Saddle Is Finally Cleared Up, with Other Adventures That Genuinely Happened

"What do your worships think, gentlemen," said the barber, "of what these fine gentlemen maintain, since they still insist that this is not a basin but a helmet?"

"And whoever says the contrary," said Don Quixote, "I shall make him see that he lies, if he is a knight; and if a squire, that he lies a thousand times over."

Our own barber, who was present at all of it, knowing Don Quixote's humour so well, chose to encourage his nonsense and carry the joke further so that everybody should laugh; and he said, speaking to the other barber:

"Master barber, or whoever you are, know that I too am of your trade, and have had my certificate of examination these twenty years and more, and I know very well every one of the instruments of barbering, without missing one. And neither more nor less, I was for a time in my youth a soldier, and I know too what a helmet is, and what a morion, and a close casque, and other things belonging to soldiering — I mean to the kinds of arms soldiers carry. And I say, saving a better opinion, and always deferring to a better understanding, that this piece which is here in front of us and which this good gentleman has in his hands is not only not a barber's basin, but is as far from being one as white is from black and truth from lies. I also say that this, although it is a helmet, is not a whole helmet."

"Certainly not," said Don Quixote, "because it is missing half of it, which is the beaver."

"That is so," said the curate, who had already understood his friend the barber's intention.

And Cardenio confirmed the same, and Don Fernando and his companions; and even the judge would have helped on the joke for his part if he had not been so preoccupied with Don Luis's business; but the earnest of what he was thinking about held him so much in suspense that he attended little or not at all to those pleasantries.

"God help me!" said the outwitted barber at this. "Is it possible that so many honourable people should say that this is not a basin but a helmet? This looks like a thing that could astonish a whole university, however learned it is. Enough: if this basin is a helmet, then this pack-saddle must be a horse's trappings too, as this gentleman has said."

"It looks like a pack-saddle to me," said Don Quixote, "but I have already said that I do not meddle in that."

"Whether it is a pack-saddle or trappings," said the curate, "depends on nothing more than Señor Don Quixote's saying so; for in these matters of chivalry all these gentlemen and I give him the advantage."

"By God, my dear sirs," said Don Quixote, "the things that have happened to me in this castle, in the two times I have lodged in it, are so many and so strange that I do not dare to say anything positively about whatever may be asked concerning what is contained in it, because I imagine that everything that goes on here goes by way of enchantment. The first time an enchanted Moor who is in it wearied me a great deal, and it went not much better for Sancho with certain followers of his. And last night I hung by this arm for nearly two hours, without knowing how or why I came to fall into that misfortune. So that for me now to put myself into a thing of so much confusion and give my opinion would be falling into rash judgement.

"As for what they say, that this is a basin and not a helmet, I have already answered; but as for declaring whether that is a pack-saddle or trappings, I do not dare to give a definitive sentence: I simply leave it to your worships' good judgement. Perhaps, since you are not dubbed knights as I am, the enchantments of this place will have nothing to do with your worships, and your understandings will be free, and you will be able to judge the things of this castle as they really and truly are, and not as they seemed to me."

"There is no doubt," Don Fernando answered to this, "that Señor Don Quixote has spoken very well today in saying that the settling of this case belongs to us. And so that it may go on a better footing, I shall take these gentlemen's votes in secret, and shall give full and clear notice of the result."

For those who knew about Don Quixote's humour, all this was matter for the greatest laughter; but to those who did not know about it, it seemed the greatest absurdity in the world — especially to Don Luis's four servants, and to Don Luis neither more nor less, and to three other travellers who had happened to come to the inn and who looked as if they were officers of the Holy Brotherhood, as in fact they were.

But the one who was most in despair was the barber, whose basin, there in front of his eyes, had turned into Mambrino's helmet, and whose pack-saddle he had no doubt at all was about to turn into a rich horse's trappings. And both sides laughed to see how Don Fernando went about taking the votes of one man after another, speaking to them in the ear so that they might declare in secret whether that jewel they had fought so much over was a pack-saddle or trappings. And after he had taken the votes of those who knew Don Quixote, he said aloud:

"The case is, my good man, that I am tired by now of taking so many opinions; because I see that there is nobody I ask what I want to know who does not tell me that it is nonsense to say this is a donkey's pack-saddle, and that it is a horse's trappings, and of a thoroughbred horse at that. And so you will have to be patient; because in spite of you and of your ass, this is trappings and not a pack-saddle, and you have argued and proved your side very badly."

"May I have no share in heaven," said the out-barbered barber, "if all your worships are not mistaken; and may my soul appear before God as this appears to me to be a pack-saddle and not trappings. But there, laws go where kings will — and so on; and I say no more. And truly I am not drunk, for I have not broken my fast — unless it is with sinning."

The foolish things the barber said caused no less laughter than Don Quixote's absurdities; and Don Quixote at this point said:

"There is nothing more to do here but that each man should take what is his own; and whom God gave it to, may Saint Peter bless it for him."

One of the four servants said:

"Unless this is a heavy joke, I cannot persuade myself that men of as good an understanding as all these people here are, or seem to be, would dare to say and maintain that this is not a basin and that not a pack-saddle. But since I see that they maintain it and say it, I give myself to understand that there is some mystery in insisting on a thing so contrary to what truth itself and experience itself show us. Because I swear by all that's holy" — and he hurled out a round oath — "that everybody alive in the world today shall not persuade me otherwise than that this is a barber's basin and that a donkey's pack-saddle."

"It might well be a she-donkey's," said the curate.

"It comes to the same," said the servant, "for the case does not turn on that, but on whether it is or is not a pack-saddle, as your worships say."

Hearing this, one of the officers who had come in, who had heard the quarrel and dispute, full of anger and annoyance said:

"It is as much a pack-saddle as my father is; and whoever has said or shall say anything else must be drunk as a grape."

"You lie like a base-born scoundrel," answered Don Quixote.

And raising his pike, which he never let out of his hands, he was going to bring it down on his head with such a blow that if the officer had not got out of the way he would have left him stretched out there. The pike went to pieces on the ground, and the other officers, who saw their companion badly used, raised their voices calling for help in the name of the Holy Brotherhood.

The innkeeper, who was of the company, ran at once for his staff of office and his sword and placed himself at his companions' side. Don Luis's servants gathered round Don Luis so that he should not get away from them in the uproar. The barber, seeing the house in confusion, took hold of his pack-saddle again, and Sancho did the same. Don Quixote put his hand to his sword and charged the officers. Don Luis shouted to his servants to leave him and go to the help of Don Quixote, and of Cardenio and Don Fernando, who were all supporting Don Quixote.

The curate shouted, the innkeeper's wife screamed, her daughter was distressed, Maritornes wept, Dorotea was bewildered, Luscinda taken aback and Doña Clara in a faint. The barber pounded Sancho, Sancho ground the barber. Don Luis, when one of his servants dared to take him by the arm so that he should not get away, gave him a punch that bathed his teeth in blood; the judge defended him; Don Fernando had an officer under his feet and was measuring his body with them entirely to his own satisfaction. The innkeeper raised his voice again, calling for help in the name of the Holy Brotherhood — so that the whole inn was wailing, shouting, screaming, confusion, fears, alarms, disasters, sword-strokes, cuffs, blows, kicks and effusion of blood.

And in the middle of this chaos, machine and labyrinth of things, it presented itself to Don Quixote's memory that he saw himself plunged head and heels into the discord of Agramante's camp; and so he said in a voice that made the inn thunder:

"Hold, all of you! Let everybody sheathe his sword! Let everybody be calm! Let everybody listen to me, if everybody wants to be left alive!"

At which great shout everybody stopped, and he went on to say:

"Did I not tell you, gentlemen, that this castle was enchanted, and that some region of devils must live in it? In confirmation of which, I want you to see with your own eyes how the discord of Agramante's camp has been transferred and moved here among us. See how over there they fight for the sword, here for the horse, over yonder for the eagle, over here for the helmet; and we are all fighting, and none of us understands one another. Come, then, your worship, my lord judge, and your worship, master curate, and let one of you act as King Agramante and the other as King Sobrino, and make peace among us; because by God Almighty it is great knavery that so many people of standing as we are here should kill one another for such trifling causes."

The officers, who did not understand Don Quixote's phrases and saw themselves badly handled by Don Fernando, Cardenio and their companions, would not calm down; the barber would, because in the quarrel he had had both his beard and his pack-saddle undone. Sancho, at his master's slightest word, obeyed like a good servant. Don Luis's four servants also stayed still, seeing how little they gained by not doing so. Only the innkeeper insisted that the insolences of that madman must be punished, who at every turn threw his inn into an uproar.

In the end the noise was quieted for the time being, the pack-saddle stayed trappings till the day of judgement, and the basin stayed a helmet and the inn a castle in Don Quixote's imagination.

Everybody being quiet, then, and made friends at the urging of the judge and the curate, Don Luis's servants went back to insisting that he should come away with them that moment. And while he was dealing with them, the judge consulted with Don Fernando, Cardenio and the curate about what he ought to do in that case, telling them the arguments Don Luis had put to him. In the end it was agreed that Don Fernando should tell Don Luis's servants who he was, and that it was his wish that Don Luis should go with him to Andalusia, where he would be valued by his brother the marquis as Don Luis's worth deserved; because in this way it was known from Don Luis's own intention that he would not for the present go back to his father's eyes if they tore him to pieces. So the four of them, understanding Don Fernando's rank and Don Luis's intention, decided between them that three of them should go back to tell his father what was happening, and that the other should stay to serve Don Luis and not to leave him until they came back for him, or until he saw what his father ordered.

In this way that whole machine of quarrels was quieted by Agramante's authority and King Sobrino's prudence. But the enemy of concord and the rival of peace, seeing himself despised and made a fool of, and how little fruit he had got out of putting them all into so confused a labyrinth, decided to try his hand again, raising up new quarrels and disturbances.

The fact is that the officers had quieted down, having overheard the rank of the men they had been fighting, and had withdrawn from the quarrel, since it seemed to them that whatever way it turned out they were bound to get the worst of the battle. But one of them — the one who had been pounded and trampled by Don Fernando — remembered that among some warrants he carried for arresting certain criminals, he carried one against Don Quixote, whom the Holy Brotherhood had ordered to be arrested for the freedom he had given the galley slaves, and as Sancho had very reasonably feared.

Thinking of this, then, he wanted to make certain whether the description he carried of Don Quixote fitted; and pulling a parchment out of his shirt, he came upon the one he was looking for. And setting himself to read it slowly, because he was not a good reader, at every word he read he set his eyes on Don Quixote and went on comparing the description in the warrant with Don Quixote's face; and he found that beyond any doubt this was the man the warrant spoke of. And he had hardly made certain when, gathering up his parchment, he took the warrant in his left hand and with his right seized Don Quixote by the neck so tightly that he did not let him breathe, and said at the top of his voice:

"Help, in the name of the Holy Brotherhood! And so that it may be seen that I ask it in earnest, let this warrant be read, in which it is set down that this highwayman is to be arrested."

The curate took the warrant and saw that everything the officer said was true, and how it agreed with Don Quixote's description; and Don Quixote, seeing himself badly treated by that villainous scoundrel, with his temper at its height and the very bones of his body cracking, as best he could seized the officer by the throat with both hands — so that if he had not been rescued by his companions, he would have left his life there before Don Quixote let go his hold.

The innkeeper, who was bound to support men of his own office, ran at once to help him. The innkeeper's wife, seeing her husband in a quarrel again, raised her voice again, whose note was taken up at once by Maritornes and her daughter, calling for help from heaven and from those who were there. Sancho, seeing what was going on, said:

"By the living Lord, everything my master says about the enchantments of this castle is true, since it is not possible to live one hour in it in peace!"

Don Fernando separated the officer and Don Quixote, and, to the satisfaction of both, unlocked their hands, which had the one a firm hold on the collar of the other's coat and the other on the other's throat. But the officers did not for this stop demanding their prisoner, and that people should help them to hand him over tied up and delivered entirely to their will, because that was what the service of the king and of the Holy Brotherhood required; on whose behalf they again asked for help and support in making that arrest of that robber and highwayman of paths and highways.

Don Quixote laughed to hear these words; and with great calm he said:

"Come here, you low and base-born people: do you call it robbery on the highway to give liberty to men in chains, to loose prisoners, to help the wretched, to raise up the fallen, to relieve the needy? Ah, infamous people, deserving by your low and vile understanding that heaven should not communicate to you the worth that is shut up in knight-errantry, nor give you to understand the sin and ignorance you are in in not reverencing the shadow, let alone the presence, of any knight errant!

"Come here, you gang of thieves and not officers of the gang, highway robbers with the licence of the Holy Brotherhood; tell me: who was the ignorant man who signed a warrant of arrest against such a knight as I am? Who was the man who did not know that knights errant are exempt from every court of law, and that their law is their sword, their statutes their courage, their ordinances their own will?

"Who was the idiot, I say again, who does not know that there is no patent of gentility with as many privileges and exemptions as the one a knight errant acquires on the day he is dubbed a knight and gives himself up to the hard exercise of chivalry? What knight errant ever paid poll tax, sales tax, the queen's shoe-money, the royal levy, road toll or ferry? What tailor ever charged him for making a suit of clothes? What governor of a castle took him in and made him pay his share of the reckoning? What king did not seat him at his table? What maiden did not take a fancy to him and surrender herself to him, at his whole liking and pleasure? And, in the end, what knight errant has there been, is there, or ever shall be in the world, who has not the spirit to give, single-handed, four hundred blows to four hundred officers who set themselves in front of him?"
