Chapter 46: Of the Notable Adventure of the Officers of the Holy Brotherhood, and of the Great Ferocity of Our Good Knight Don Quixote

While Don Quixote was saying this, the curate was persuading the officers that Don Quixote was out of his wits, as they could see by his deeds and his words, and that there was no reason to carry the business further, since even if they arrested him and took him away, they would have to let him go again as a madman. To which the man with the warrant answered that it was not his business to judge Don Quixote's madness but to do what his superior had ordered him; and that once he was arrested, they could let him go three hundred times for all he cared.

"For all that," said the curate, "this time you are not to take him — nor will he let himself be taken, as far as I can see."

In fact the curate knew so much to say to them, and Don Quixote knew how to do so many mad things, that the officers would have been madder than he was if they had not recognised Don Quixote's failing; and so they thought it best to calm down, and even to act as mediators in making peace between the barber and Sancho Panza, who were still keeping up their quarrel with great bitterness.

Finally, as officers of the law, they mediated the case and were arbitrators in it, in such a way that both parties were left, if not completely contented, at least somewhat satisfied — because the pack-saddles were exchanged but not the girths and headstalls. And as for the business of Mambrino's helmet, the curate, on the sly and without Don Quixote's knowing about it, gave him eight reals for the basin, and the barber made out a receipt for it and an undertaking not to claim he had been cheated, then or for ever after, amen.

These two quarrels being quieted, then, which were the chief and weightiest ones, it remained for Don Luis's servants to agree that three should go back and one should stay to go with him where Don Fernando wanted to take him. And as good luck and better fortune had already begun to break lances and smooth away difficulties in favour of the lovers at the inn and the brave men in it, it chose to carry it through and give everything a happy outcome; for the servants agreed to everything Don Luis wanted. At which Doña Clara was so delighted that nobody who looked at her face at that moment could have failed to see the joy of her soul.

Zoraida, although she did not properly understand all the things she had seen, grew sad and glad by guesswork, according to what she saw and noted in each person's face — especially her Spaniard's, on whom she always had her eyes fixed and her soul hanging.

The innkeeper, who had not failed to notice the gift and payment the curate had made the barber, asked for Don Quixote's reckoning, together with the damage to his wineskins and the loss of his wine, swearing that neither Rocinante nor Sancho's donkey should leave the inn until he was paid to the last farthing. The curate quieted it all and Don Fernando paid it — although the judge had also very willingly offered the payment. And they were all left in such peace and quiet that the inn no longer seemed the discord of Agramante's camp, as Don Quixote had called it, but the very peace and quiet of the time of Octavian; for all of which it was the general opinion that thanks were due to the good intentions and great eloquence of the curate and to Don Fernando's incomparable generosity.

Finding himself free and clear, then, of so many quarrels, his squire's as well as his own, it seemed to Don Quixote that it would be as well to go on with the journey he had begun and put an end to that great adventure he had been called and chosen for. And so with settled determination he went and knelt down before Dorotea, who would not let him say a word until he got up; and he, to obey her, got to his feet and said to her:

"It is a common proverb, fair lady, that diligence is the mother of good fortune, and in many and grave matters experience has shown that the promptness of the man of business brings a doubtful suit to a good end. But in nothing is this truth better shown than in matters of war, where speed and quickness forestall the enemy's plans and win the victory before the opponent puts himself on his guard.

"All this I say, high and precious lady, because it seems to me that our staying in this castle is by now without profit, and might do us so much harm that we should see it one day. For who knows whether by hidden and diligent spies your enemy the giant may already have learnt that I am going to destroy him, and, time allowing him, may fortify himself in some impregnable castle or fortress against which my efforts and the strength of my untiring arm would be of little use? So, my lady, let us forestall his designs, as I have said, with our own diligence, and let us set off at once and good fortune go with us; for your greatness's having your fortune as you wish it depends on nothing more than my not being slow in coming face to face with your opponent."

Don Quixote fell silent and said no more, and waited with great composure for the fair princess's answer; who, with a lordly manner suited to Don Quixote's style, answered him in this way:

"I thank you, sir knight, for the desire you show to favour me in my great distress, exactly as befits a knight, whose business and concern it is to favour orphans and the needy; and may heaven grant that your desire and mine be fulfilled, so that you may see that there are grateful women in the world. And as for my departure, let it be at once; for I have no will but yours: dispose of me entirely as you like and please, for she who once handed you the defence of her person and put in your hands the restoring of her dominions is not going to want to go against whatever your prudence may ordain."

"In God's hands be it," said Don Quixote. "Since it is so that a lady humbles herself before me, I do not want to lose the chance of raising her up and setting her on her inherited throne. Let the departure be at once, because what they usually say — that danger lies in delay — is putting spurs to my desire and to the road. And since heaven has not created, nor hell seen, anybody who could frighten me or make me a coward, saddle Rocinante, Sancho, and get your donkey ready and the queen's palfrey; and let us take our leave of the governor and of these gentlemen and go from here this very moment."

Sancho, who was present at all of it, said, shaking his head from side to side:

"Ah, sir, sir, there's more mischief in the little village than is talked about — saving the respect due to the honourable ladies present."

"What mischief can there be in any village, or in all the cities in the world, that can be talked about to my discredit, peasant?"

"If your worship gets angry," answered Sancho, "I'll be quiet, and leave off saying what I'm bound to say as a good squire, and as a good servant ought to say to his master."

"Say what you like," replied Don Quixote, "so long as your words are not aimed at making me afraid; for if you are afraid, you are behaving as who you are, and if I am not, I am behaving as who I am."

"It isn't that — sinner that I was before God!" answered Sancho. "It's that I take it as certain and settled that this lady who says she is queen of the great kingdom of Micomicón is no more so than my mother; because if she were what she says, she wouldn't go about nuzzling with one of the people in this company at every turn of the head and every time our backs are turned."

Dorotea turned red at Sancho's words, because it was true that her husband Don Fernando had once or twice, by stealth from other eyes, gathered with his lips part of the reward his desires deserved; which Sancho had seen, and it had seemed to him that such freedom was more the mark of a court lady than of the queen of so great a kingdom. And she neither could nor would answer Sancho a word, but let him go on with his talk; and he went on to say:

"I say this, sir, because if, after we have travelled roads and highways and gone through bad nights and worse days, the man who is enjoying himself at this inn is to come and pick the fruit of our labours, there is no reason for me to hurry and saddle Rocinante and put the pack-saddle on the donkey and get the palfrey ready; for it would be better for us to stay still, and let every whore spin her own flax, and let's eat."

God help me, how great the anger was that Don Quixote felt on hearing his squire's unseemly words! I say it was so great that with a stumbling voice and a stammering tongue, shooting live fire out of his eyes, he said:

"Oh, you villainous scoundrel, ill-mannered, unseemly, ignorant, ineloquent, foul-tongued, insolent, back-biting and slanderous creature! Have you dared to say such words in my presence and in that of these illustrious ladies, and dared to put such indecencies and impudences into your muddled imagination? Get out of my presence, monster of nature, treasury of lies, cupboard of falsehoods, granary of knaveries, inventor of wickednesses, publisher of stupidities, enemy of the respect due to royal persons! Go; do not appear before me, on pain of my anger!"

And saying this, he arched his eyebrows, blew out his cheeks, looked all round him and gave the ground a great stamp with his right foot — all signs of the anger shut up in his entrails. At which words and furious gestures Sancho was left so shrunken and frightened that he would have been glad if at that instant the earth had opened under his feet and swallowed him. And he did not know what to do with himself but to turn his back and get away from his master's angry presence.

But the quick-witted Dorotea, who by now understood Don Quixote's humour so well, said, to soften his anger:

"Do not be vexed, Sir Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, at the foolish things your good squire has said, because perhaps he must not say them without some occasion; nor can it be suspected of his good understanding and Christian conscience that he would bear false witness against anybody. And so it must be believed, without putting any doubt on it, that since in this castle, as you say yourself, sir knight, everything goes and happens by way of enchantment, it might be — I say — that Sancho saw by this devilish means what he says he saw, so much to the offence of my modesty."

"By omnipotent God I swear," said Don Quixote at this, "that your greatness has hit the point, and that some evil vision must have been put before this poor sinner Sancho, which made him see what it would have been impossible to see except by way of enchantments; for I know well from this unfortunate man's goodness and innocence that he does not know how to bear false witness against anybody."

"So it is and so it shall be," said Don Fernando; "for which reason your worship, Señor Don Quixote, ought to forgive him and bring him back into the fold of your favour, sicut erat in principio, before such visions took his wits away."

Don Quixote answered that he did forgive him; and the curate went for Sancho, who came very humbly, and, kneeling down, asked his master for his hand. And he gave it him, and after letting him kiss it he gave him his blessing, saying:

"Now you will finally recognise, Sancho my son, that what I have told you many other times is true — that everything in this castle is done by way of enchantment."

"That is what I believe," said Sancho, "except that business of the blanket, which really happened in the ordinary way."

"Do not believe it," answered Don Quixote; "for if it had been so, I would have avenged you then, and even now. But neither then nor now could I, or did I see, anybody on whom to take vengeance for your injury."

They all wanted to know what this business of the blanket was, and the innkeeper told them, point by point: the aerial flights of Sancho Panza, at which they all laughed not a little, and at which Sancho would have been no less mortified if his master had not assured him all over again that it was an enchantment — although Sancho's foolishness never went so far that he believed it was not the plain and settled truth, with no mixture of deception in it, that he had been tossed in a blanket by people of flesh and blood, and not by phantoms dreamed or imagined, as his master believed and maintained.

Two days had now gone by since that distinguished company had been at the inn; and thinking it was now time to leave, they made arrangements so that, without Dorotea and Don Fernando putting themselves to the trouble of going back with Don Quixote to his village on the pretext of Queen Micomicona's deliverance, the curate and the barber might take him away, as they wanted, and try to have his madness cured in his own country.

And what they arranged was that they came to terms with an ox-carter who happened to pass that way, so that he should carry him in this fashion. They made a kind of cage of barred timbers, big enough for Don Quixote to fit comfortably inside it; and then Don Fernando and his companions, with Don Luis's servants and the officers, together with the innkeeper, all by the curate's arrangement and advice, covered their faces and disguised themselves, some one way and some another, so that Don Quixote should think they were different people from the ones he had seen in that castle.

This done, with the greatest silence they went in to where he was sleeping and resting after the past scuffles. They came up to him, sleeping free and safe from any such event; and taking a firm hold on him, they tied his hands and feet very securely, so that when he woke with a start he could not stir, or do anything except be astonished and taken aback at seeing such strange faces in front of him.

And at once he fell into the notion his continual, deranged imagination presented him with, and believed that all those figures were phantoms of that enchanted castle, and that without any doubt he was now enchanted, since he could neither move nor defend himself — exactly as the curate, the contriver of this machine, had thought it would happen.

Sancho alone, of everybody present, was in his own right senses and in his own right figure; who, although he wanted very little of having the same disease as his master, did not fail to recognise who all those counterfeit figures were. But he did not dare unstitch his mouth until he saw what that assault on and imprisonment of his master would come to — and his master did not say a word either, waiting to see the end of his misfortune. Which was that, bringing the cage there, they shut him inside it and nailed the timbers so firmly that they could not have been broken with two good pulls.

They then took him on their shoulders; and as they went out of the room there was heard a fearful voice, as fearful as the barber knew how to make it — not the pack-saddle one but the other — which said:

"O Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance! Let not the imprisonment thou goest in cause thee any affliction, for so it behoveth, that thou mayest the sooner finish the adventure wherein thy great valour hath placed thee. Which shall be finished when the furious Manchegan lion and the white Tobosan dove shall lie together in one, after their high necks have been bowed to the soft matrimonical yoke; from which unheard-of union there shall come forth into the light of the world brave whelps, who shall imitate the rampant claws of their valiant father. And this shall be before the pursuer of the fleeing nymph shall twice make his visit to the shining signs in his swift and natural course.

"And thou, O most noble and obedient squire that ever had sword at his belt, beard on his face and smell in his nostrils, be not dismayed or discontented to see carried off thus before thine own eyes the flower of knight-errantry; for soon, if it please the fashioner of the world, thou shalt see thyself so lofty and so exalted that thou shalt not know thyself, and the promises thy good master hath made thee shall not go unfulfilled. And I assure thee, on the part of the wise Lady Liarina, that thy wages shall be paid thee, as thou shalt see by the deed. And follow the footsteps of the valiant and enchanted knight, for it is fitting that thou shouldst go where ye both shall stop. And since it is not lawful for me to say more, God be with you; for I return to where I myself know."

And on finishing the prophecy he raised his voice to a high pitch and then lowered it, with such a tender note that even those who were in on the joke came near to believing that what they heard was true.

Don Quixote was left comforted by the prophecy he had heard, because he immediately gathered its meaning entire; and he saw that they were promising him that he would be joined in holy and lawful matrimony with his beloved Dulcinea of El Toboso, from whose happy womb would come the whelps, who were his children, for the everlasting glory of La Mancha. And believing this thoroughly and firmly, he raised his voice, and, giving a great sigh, said:

"O you, whoever you may be, who have prophesied so much good to me! I beg you to ask on my behalf the wise enchanter who has charge of my affairs not to let me perish in this prison where they are now taking me, until I have seen fulfilled such glad and incomparable promises as the ones that have been made to me here. For once this is so, I shall count the pains of my prison a glory, and these chains that gird me a relief, and this bed they lay me on not a hard field of battle but a soft couch and a happy bridal bed.

"And as far as the comfort of Sancho Panza my squire goes, I trust in his goodness and good conduct that he will not leave me in good luck or in bad; because even if it should not come about, through his short fortune or mine, that I can give him the isle, or something equivalent that I have promised him, at least his wages cannot be lost, for in my will, which is already made, I have set down what is to be given him — not in proportion to his many good services but to my own means."

Sancho Panza bowed to him with great politeness and kissed both his hands — because he could not have kissed one, both being tied together.

Then those apparitions took the cage on their shoulders and settled it on the ox-cart.
