Chapter 47: Of the Strange Manner in Which Don Quixote of La Mancha Was Enchanted, with Other Famous Events

When Don Quixote saw himself caged in that fashion and up on the cart, he said:

"I have read many and very grave histories of knights errant, but I have never read, or seen, or heard that enchanted knights are carried off in this way and at the pace these lazy, slow animals promise. Because they generally carry them off through the air, with extraordinary speed, shut up in some grey dark cloud, or in some chariot of fire, or else on some hippogriff or other such beast. But that they should now be carrying me on an ox-cart — by the living God, it puzzles me!

"But perhaps the chivalry and the enchantments of these times of ours must follow a different road from the one the ancients followed. And it might also be that, as I am a new knight in the world and the first to have brought back to life the now forgotten calling of adventuring chivalry, other kinds of enchantment and other ways of carrying off the enchanted may also have been newly invented. What do you think of this, Sancho my son?"

"I don't know what I think," answered Sancho, "not being as well read as your worship in errant writings. But for all that, I'd dare to state and swear that these apparitions going about here are not altogether Catholic."

"Catholic? My father!" answered Don Quixote. "How can they be Catholic when they are all devils who have taken on phantom bodies in order to come and do this and put me in this state? And if you want to see the truth of it, touch them and feel them, and you will find that they have no body but of air, and that they consist of nothing but the appearance."

"By God, sir," replied Sancho, "I've touched them already; and this devil going about here so busily is plump with flesh, and has another property very different from the one I've heard say devils have. Because, according to what people say, they all smell of brimstone and other bad smells; but this one smells of amber half a league off."

Sancho said this about Don Fernando, who, being such a great lord, must have smelt of what Sancho said.

"Do not be surprised at that, friend Sancho," answered Don Quixote; "for I would have you know that devils know a great deal, and although they carry smells about with them, they themselves smell nothing, because they are spirits; and if they do smell, they cannot smell good things but only bad and stinking ones. And the reason is that, since wherever they are they carry hell with them, and cannot receive any kind of relief in their torments, and since a good smell is a thing that delights and pleases, it is not possible that they should smell anything good. And if it seems to you that this devil you speak of smells of amber, either you are deceiving yourself or he wants to deceive you by making you not take him for a devil."

All this conversation passed between master and man. And Don Fernando and Cardenio, afraid that Sancho might come to see all the way through their invention — which he was already very close on the heels of — decided to cut it short by leaving; and calling the innkeeper aside, they ordered him to saddle Rocinante and put the pack-saddle on Sancho's donkey, which he did very quickly.

By this time the curate had come to terms with the officers to accompany him as far as his village, giving them so much a day. Cardenio hung on the pommel of Rocinante's saddle the shield on one side and the basin on the other, and by signs ordered Sancho to get up on his ass and take Rocinante's reins, and stationed the two officers with their muskets on the two sides of the cart.

But before the cart moved, the innkeeper's wife, her daughter and Maritornes came out to say goodbye to Don Quixote, pretending that they were weeping with grief at his misfortune; to whom Don Quixote said:

"Do not weep, my good ladies, for all these misfortunes go with those who profess what I profess; and if these calamities did not happen to me, I should not count myself a famous knight errant. Because to knights of little name and fame such things never happen, since there is nobody in the world who remembers them. To the valorous, yes; for they have many princes and many other knights envying their virtue and their courage, who try by wicked means to destroy the good. But for all that, virtue is so powerful that by itself alone, in spite of all the necromancy known to its first inventor Zoroaster, it will come out victorious from every trial and will give light to the world, as the sun gives it in the sky.

"Forgive me, fair ladies, if through any carelessness of mine I have done you any wrong; for wilfully and knowingly I never did any to anybody. And pray to God to get me out of these prisons where some ill-intentioned enchanter has put me; for if I see myself free of them, the favours you have done me in this castle will not fall out of my memory, that I may repay them and serve them and reward them as they deserve."

While the ladies of the castle were doing this with Don Quixote, the curate and the barber took their leave of Don Fernando and his companions, and of the captain and his brother and all those contented ladies, especially Dorotea and Luscinda. They all embraced and agreed to send each other news of how they fared, Don Fernando telling the curate where he should write to him so as to let him know how Don Quixote ended, assuring him that there would be nothing that would give him more pleasure than to know it; and that he likewise would let him know about everything he saw might give him pleasure, both about his marriage and about Zoraida's baptism, and how Don Luis turned out, and Luscinda's return home. The curate promised to do everything he was asked, with complete punctuality. They embraced again, and again made fresh offers.

The innkeeper came up to the curate and gave him some papers, telling him he had found them in the lining of the portmanteau where the Tale of Reckless Curiosity had been found; and that since their owner had never come back that way, he should take the lot of them, for as he could not read he did not want them. The curate thanked him; and opening them at once, he saw that at the beginning of the writing it said: The Tale of Rinconete and Cortadillo — from which he understood it was some story, and gathered that since the Reckless Curiosity had been good, this one would be too, since they might all be by the same author. And so he kept it, meaning to read it when he had the chance.

He got on his horse, and his friend the barber too, with their masks on so that they should not be immediately recognised by Don Quixote, and they set off riding behind the cart. And the order they went in was this: the cart went first, driven by its owner; on the two sides went the officers, as has been said, with their muskets; then came Sancho Panza on his ass, leading Rocinante by the rein. Behind all this came the curate and the barber on their powerful mules, with their faces covered as has been said, with a grave, composed bearing, travelling no faster than the slow pace of the oxen allowed. Don Quixote went along seated in the cage, his hands tied, his feet stretched out and leaning against the bars, with as much silence and as much patience as though he had not been a man of flesh but a statue of stone.

And so, at that pace and in that silence, they travelled a good two leagues, until they came to a valley which seemed to the ox-driver a suitable place to rest and give the oxen some grazing. And discussing it with the curate, the barber was of the opinion that they should go on a little further, because he knew that behind a rise that showed close by there was a valley with more grass, and much better than the one where they wanted to stop. The barber's opinion was taken, and so they went on with their journey.

At this the curate turned his head and saw that behind them were coming some six or seven men on horseback, well turned out and equipped, by whom they were soon overtaken, because they were travelling not with the phlegm and calm of oxen but like men riding canons' mules and eager to get quickly to the inn for their midday rest, which showed less than a league from there. The busy men came up to the lazy ones and greeted each other courteously; and one of those who were coming — who was, in short, a canon of Toledo and master of the rest who were with him — seeing the orderly procession of cart, officers, Sancho, Rocinante, curate and barber, and above all Don Quixote caged and imprisoned, could not help asking what it meant to be taking that man along in that way; although he had already given himself to understand, seeing the officers' insignia, that he must be some villainous highwayman, or some other criminal whose punishment belonged to the Holy Brotherhood. One of the officers, to whom the question was put, answered like this:

"Sir, what it means for this gentleman to be going along in this fashion, let him say himself, because we do not know."

Don Quixote heard the conversation and said:

"Are your worships by any chance, sir knights, versed and expert in this matter of knight-errantry? Because if you are, I shall tell you my misfortunes; and if not, there is no reason for me to weary myself in telling them."

And by this time the curate and the barber had come up, seeing that the travellers were in conversation with Don Quixote of La Mancha, so as to answer in such a way that their contrivance should not be discovered.

The canon answered what Don Quixote had said:

"Truly, brother, I know more about books of chivalry than about Villalpando's Compendium of Logic. So that if it depends on nothing more than that, you may safely tell me whatever you like."

"In God's hands be it," replied Don Quixote. "Since that is so, I want you to know, sir knight, that I go enchanted in this cage through the envy and fraud of wicked enchanters; for virtue is more persecuted by the wicked than loved by the good. A knight errant I am, and not one of those whose names Fame never remembered to make everlasting in her memory, but one of those who, in spite and to the vexation of envy itself, and of all the magi Persia bred, the brahmins India and the gymnosophists Ethiopia, shall set his name in the temple of immortality, to serve as an example and a model in the ages to come, where knights errant may see the steps they must follow if they wish to reach the summit and honourable height of arms."

"Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha speaks the truth," said the curate at this point; "for he goes enchanted in this cart, not through his own faults and sins but through the ill will of those whom virtue annoys and courage angers. This, sir, is the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, if you have ever heard him named, whose valorous exploits and great deeds shall be written on hard bronze and in everlasting marble, however much envy may weary itself in darkening them and malice in hiding them."

When the canon heard the prisoner and the free man speak in such a style, he came near to crossing himself in astonishment, and could not make out what had happened to him; and all those who came with him fell into the same astonishment.

At this Sancho Panza, who had come close to hear the conversation, said, to patch everything up:

"Now, gentlemen, love me or hate me for what I say, the fact of the matter is that my master Don Quixote is as much enchanted as my mother is. He has his wits whole, he eats and drinks and does his necessities like other men, and as he did them yesterday, before they caged him. This being so, how do they want to make me understand that he goes enchanted? For I have heard a great many people say that the enchanted neither eat nor sleep nor talk, and my master, if nobody stops him, will talk more than thirty attorneys."

And turning to look at the curate, he went on to say:

"Ah, master curate, master curate! Did your worship think I don't know you, and do you suppose I don't fathom and guess what these new enchantments are aiming at? Well, let me tell you I know you, however much you cover your face, and let me tell you I understand you, however much you disguise your tricks. In the end, where envy reigns virtue cannot live, nor generosity where there is meanness.

"Devil take it! For if it hadn't been for your reverence, this would be the hour when my master was married to the Princess Micomicona and I was a count at the very least — for nothing else was to be expected, both from the goodness of my master, the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, and from the greatness of my services. But I see now that what they say is true: that the wheel of Fortune goes round faster than a millwheel, and that those who were riding high yesterday are on the floor today. It grieves me for my children and my wife, because when they could and should have expected to see their father come in at their door made a governor or viceroy of some isle or kingdom, they will see him come in made a stable-boy.

"All this I have said, master curate, is nothing more than to urge on your paternity to make a matter of conscience of the bad treatment my master is being given, and to look out that God does not call you to account in the next life for this imprisonment of my master, and charge you with all those rescues and good deeds my master Don Quixote is failing to do in this time he is a prisoner."

"Mend me those lamps!" said the barber at this point. "So you too, Sancho, are of your master's brotherhood? By the living Lord, I am beginning to see that you will have to keep him company in the cage, and that you will end as enchanted as he is, for as much as you have caught of his humour and his chivalry! In an evil hour you got yourself pregnant with his promises, and in an evil hour that isle you so much want got into your brainpan."

"I am not pregnant by anybody," answered Sancho, "nor am I a man to let myself be got pregnant, not by the king himself; and poor as I am, I am an Old Christian and I owe nothing to anybody. And if I want isles, other men want worse things; and every man is the son of his own deeds. And, being a man, I might come to be Pope, let alone governor of an isle — the more so as my master may win so many that he will be short of people to give them to.

"Let your worship look how you talk, master barber; for there is more to it than shaving beards, and there is a difference between one Peter and another. I say this because we all know one another, and no loaded dice are to be thrown at me. And as for this business of my master's enchantment, God knows the truth; and let it stay there, because stirring it only makes it worse."

The barber did not want to answer Sancho, in case with his simplicities he should reveal what he and the curate were so anxious to conceal. And for this same fear the curate had told the canon to ride on a little ahead, and he would tell him the mystery of the caged man, along with other things that would entertain him. The canon did so and went on ahead with his servants and with him; and he listened attentively to everything the curate chose to tell him about Don Quixote's character, life, madness and habits, telling him briefly the beginning and the cause of his derangement and the whole progress of his adventures, up to his having been put in that cage, and the plan they had of taking him to his own country to see whether by some means they could find a remedy for his madness.

The servants and the canon were astonished all over again at hearing Don Quixote's extraordinary history; and on finishing hearing it, he said:

"Truly, master curate, I find by my own reckoning that these things they call books of chivalry are harmful to the state. And although, carried away by an idle and false taste, I have read almost the beginning of most of those that are in print, I have never been able to bring myself to read a single one from beginning to end — because it seems to me that, more or less, they are all one and the same thing, and this one has no more in it than that, nor that one than the other.

"And as it seems to me, this kind of writing and composition comes under the head of those fables they call Milesian, which are nonsensical tales that aim only at giving pleasure and not at teaching: the opposite of what the apologue fables do, which give pleasure and teach at the same time. And granting that the chief purpose of such books is to give pleasure, I do not know how they can achieve it, being full of so many and such outrageous absurdities. For the pleasure the soul conceives must come from the beauty and harmony it sees or contemplates in the things that sight or imagination sets before it; and everything that has ugliness and disorder in it can cause us no contentment at all.

"Then what beauty can there be, or what proportion of the parts to the whole and of the whole to the parts, in a book or fable where a lad of sixteen deals a slash at a giant like a tower and divides him into two halves, as if he were made of sugar-paste? Or where, when they want to paint us a battle, after saying that on the enemy side there are a million combatants, so long as the hero of the book is against them we must of necessity, however it displeases us, understand that this knight won the victory by the valour of his strong arm alone?

"Then what shall we say of the readiness with which a queen or an heiress empress lets herself be carried off in the arms of a wandering and unknown knight? What mind, unless it is altogether barbarous and uncultivated, can be satisfied with reading that a great tower full of knights goes sailing over the sea like a ship with a favourable wind, and tonight is in Lombardy and tomorrow morning in the lands of Prester John of the Indies, or in others that neither Ptolemy discovered nor Marco Polo saw?

"And if it were answered to me that the men who compose such books write them as things of fiction, and that so they are not obliged to look at niceties or truths, I would answer them that a lie is the better the more it looks like truth, and pleases the more the more it has of the doubtful and the possible about it. Lying fables must be married to the understanding of those who read them, being written in such a way that, making impossibilities easy, levelling out great things, holding minds in suspense, they may astonish, hold, excite and entertain, so that wonder and delight go along at one and the same pace. And none of these things can be done by a man who runs away from likeness to truth and from imitation, in which the perfection of what is written consists.

"I have never seen any book of chivalry that makes a whole body of a fable with all its limbs, so that the middle corresponds to the beginning and the end to the beginning and the middle; instead they compose them with so many limbs that it looks more as if they meant to form a chimera or a monster than to make a well-proportioned figure. Besides this, they are harsh in style, incredible in their exploits, lascivious in their love affairs, ill-mannered in their courtesies, long in their battles, foolish in their arguments, absurd in their journeys; and finally, they are strangers to all judicious craft, and for this reason deserve to be banished from the Christian commonwealth as a useless people."

The curate listened to him with great attention, and thought him a man of good understanding and that he was right in everything he said; and so he told him that, being of the same opinion himself and having a grudge against books of chivalry, he had burnt all Don Quixote's, which were a great many. And he told him about the scrutiny he had made of them, and which he had condemned to the fire and which he had left alive — at which the canon laughed not a little, and said that for all the ill he had spoken of such books, he found one good thing in them: that they were a subject on which a good mind could show itself, because they gave a long, broad field over which the pen could run without any hindrance.

There it could describe shipwrecks, storms, encounters and battles; painting a valorous captain with all the qualities required to be one, showing himself prudent in forestalling the tricks of his enemies, and an eloquent orator in persuading or dissuading his soldiers, mature in counsel, quick in decision, as brave in waiting as in attacking; painting now a lamentable and tragic event, now a glad and unexpected happening; there a most beautiful lady, modest, clever and reserved; here a Christian knight, brave and courteous; over there an outrageous barbarian braggart; over here a courteous prince, valorous and well-mannered; representing the goodness and loyalty of vassals, the greatness and favours of lords.

Now he can show himself an astrologer, now an excellent cosmographer, now a musician, now well informed in matters of state, and sometimes the chance will come to him to show himself a necromancer, if he likes. He can show the cunning of Ulysses, the piety of Aeneas, the courage of Achilles, the misfortunes of Hector, the treacheries of Sinon, the friendship of Euryalus, the generosity of Alexander, the valour of Caesar, the clemency and truthfulness of Trajan, the fidelity of Zopyrus, the prudence of Cato; and, in the end, all those actions that can make an illustrious man perfect — now putting them in one man alone, now dividing them among many.

"And this being done with a pleasant style and with an ingenious invention that comes as close as possible to the truth, he will without doubt weave a web of various and beautiful threads which, once finished, will show such perfection and beauty that it will achieve the best end that is aimed at in writing, which is to teach and give pleasure at the same time, as I have said already. Because the loose form of writing in these books gives the author room to show himself epic, lyric, tragic, comic, with all those parts that the sweetest and most agreeable arts of poetry and rhetoric hold in themselves; for the epic can be written in prose as well as in verse."
