Chapter 48: In Which the Canon Continues the Subject of the Books of Chivalry, with Other Matters Worthy of His Wit

"It is exactly as your worship says, master canon," said the curate; "and for this reason those who up to now have composed such books deserve more blame, for having taken no notice of any good reasoning, or of the art and rules by which they might have guided themselves and become as famous in prose as the two princes of Greek and Latin poetry are in verse."

"I, at least," replied the canon, "have had a certain temptation to write a book of chivalry, keeping in it all the points I have mentioned. And if I am to confess the truth, I have more than a hundred pages written. And to make trial of whether they came up to my own estimate of them, I have shown them to men passionately fond of this kind of reading, learned and judicious, and to others who are ignorant and attend only to the pleasure of hearing absurdities; and from all of them I have found an agreeable approval.

"But for all that, I have not gone on with it, both because it seems to me I am doing a thing outside my profession and because I see that the number of the simple is greater than that of the prudent; and although it is better to be praised by the few who are wise than laughed at by the many who are fools, I do not want to submit myself to the muddled judgement of the conceited common crowd, whose business it is for the most part to read such books.

"But what most took it out of my hands, and even out of my thoughts, to finish it was an argument I made with myself, drawn from the plays that are performed nowadays, saying: 'If those that are in use now, both the invented ones and those from history, all or most of them are known absurdities and things without head or tail — and in spite of that the crowd hears them with pleasure and holds them and approves them as good, when they are so far from being so; and the authors who compose them and the actors who perform them say that they have to be so because that is how the crowd wants them and not otherwise; and that the ones which have a plan and follow the fable as art requires serve for nothing but four judicious men who understand them, while all the rest are left with no notion of their craftsmanship; and that it suits them better to earn a living from the many than a reputation from the few — in that case my book, after I have singed my eyebrows keeping the rules I have mentioned, will end by leaving me like the tailor on the corner, who sewed for nothing and found the thread himself.'

"And although I have sometimes tried to persuade the actors that they are deceived in the opinion they hold, and that they will draw more people and win more fame by performing plays that follow the art than with the absurd ones, they are so tied and welded to their own opinion that there is no argument or evidence that will get them out of it.

"I remember that one day I said to one of these obstinate men: 'Tell me, do you not remember that a few years ago three tragedies were performed in Spain, composed by a famous poet of these kingdoms, which were such that they astonished, delighted and held in suspense everybody who heard them, simple and prudent alike, the crowd and the select alike — and those three alone gave the players more money than thirty of the best that have been made since?'

"'No doubt,' answered the manager I speak of, 'your worship must mean La Isabela, La Filis and La Alejandra.'

"'Those are the ones I mean,' I replied; 'and see whether they kept the precepts of the art well, and whether by keeping them they failed to appear what they were and to please everybody. So the fault does not lie with the crowd, who ask for absurdities, but with those who do not know how to put anything else on. Why, La ingratitud vengada was no absurdity, nor did La Numancia have any in it, nor was any to be found in El mercader amante, nor in La enemiga favorable either, nor in certain others that have been composed by some poets of understanding, for their own fame and renown and for the profit of those who have performed them.'

"And I added other things to these, with which, in my opinion, I left him somewhat confused but neither satisfied nor convinced enough to be got out of his mistaken idea."

"Your worship has touched on a matter, master canon," said the curate at this point, "that has woken in me an old grudge I have against the plays that are in use now — such a grudge that it matches the one I have against the books of chivalry. Because, the play having to be, as Cicero thinks, a mirror of human life, an example of manners and an image of truth, the ones that are performed now are mirrors of absurdity, examples of foolishness and images of lasciviousness.

"For what greater absurdity can there be in the matter we are discussing than for a baby in swaddling clothes to come on in the first scene of the first act, and in the second to come on already a bearded man? And what greater than to paint us a brave old man and a cowardly young one, a rhetorical footman, a page giving counsel, a king turned porter and a princess turned scullery maid?

"What shall I say, then, of the care they take over the times in which the actions they perform can or could have happened, except that I have seen a play whose first act began in Europe, whose second was in Asia and whose third finished in Africa — and if it had been in four acts, the fourth would have finished in America, and so it would have been done in all four quarters of the world?

"And if imitation is the chief thing a play must have, how is it possible to satisfy any moderate understanding when, inventing an action that takes place in the time of King Pepin and Charlemagne, the very man who plays the leading part in it is said to have been the Emperor Heraclius who entered Jerusalem with the Cross, and the man who won the Holy Sepulchre like Godfrey of Bouillon, when there are endless years between the one and the other? And when, the play being founded on an invented thing, they attribute historical truths to it and mix in with it pieces of other events that happened to different people at different times — and this not with likely contrivances but with plain errors, altogether inexcusable?

"And the bad thing is that there are ignorant men who say that this is what perfection is, and that anything else is looking for dainties. And what if we come to religious plays? What false miracles they invent in them, what apocryphal and ill-understood things, attributing to one saint the miracles of another! And even in secular plays they dare to work miracles, with no more respect or consideration than their thinking that such a miracle and stage effect, as they call it, will go down well there, so that ignorant people may be astonished and come to the play. All of which is to the prejudice of truth and to the damage of history, and even to the disgrace of the Spanish wits; because foreigners, who keep the laws of drama with great exactness, take us for barbarians and ignoramuses when they see the absurdities and follies of the plays we make.

"And it would not be enough excuse for this to say that the chief purpose well-ordered states have in allowing public plays to be performed is to entertain the community with some honest recreation and to divert it at times from the bad humours that idleness generally breeds; and that since this is achieved with any play, good or bad, there is no need to lay down laws or to oblige those who compose and perform them to make them as they ought to be made, since, as I have said, what is aimed at in them is achieved with any of them.

"To which I would answer that this end would be achieved a great deal better, beyond all comparison, with good plays than with those that are not good. Because after hearing a play that is well made and well ordered, the listener would come away cheered by the comic parts, taught by the serious ones, astonished by the events, made wiser by the arguments, forewarned by the deceptions, made shrewd by the examples, angry against vice and in love with virtue; for all these effects a good play must wake in the mind of whoever listens to it, however rustic and dull he may be. And it is impossible with every impossibility that a play which has all these qualities should fail to cheer and entertain, satisfy and content, a great deal more than one which lacks them — as for the most part these do that are ordinarily performed nowadays.

"And the poets who compose them are not to blame for it, because there are some among them who know very well where they go wrong and know extremely well what they ought to do; but as plays have become a saleable commodity, they say, and they say truly, that the players would not buy them if they were not of that stamp. And so the poet tries to fall in with what the player who is to pay him for his work asks of him.

"And that this is true may be seen by the many and endless plays composed by a most fortunate wit of these kingdoms, with so much elegance, so much charm, such graceful verse, such good arguments, such weighty maxims, and, in the end, so full of eloquence and loftiness of style that his fame fills the world. And through his wanting to fit in with the players' taste, they have not all reached — as some of them have reached — the point of perfection they require.

"Others compose them with so little care for what they are doing that after they have been performed the players have to run away and go into hiding, afraid of being punished — as they often have been — for having performed things to the prejudice of certain kings and to the dishonour of certain families.

"And all these troubles would stop, and a great many more that I do not mention, if there were at Court some intelligent and judicious person to examine all plays before they were performed — not only those that were put on at Court but all that people wanted to perform in Spain — and without whose approval, seal and signature no magistrate in his own district would allow any play to be performed. And in this way the players would take care to send their plays to Court and could perform them in safety; and those who compose them would look at what they were doing with more care and study, being afraid of having to put their works through the strict examination of somebody who understands. And in this way good plays would be made and what is aimed at in them would be most happily achieved: the entertainment of the people, the reputation of the wits of Spain, the profit and safety of the players and the saving of the trouble of punishing them.

"And if the same man, or another, were given the charge of examining the books of chivalry that were newly composed, without doubt some might come out with the perfection your worship has described, enriching our language with the agreeable and precious treasure of eloquence, and giving occasion for the old books to be darkened by the light of the new ones that came out, for the honest pastime not only of the idle but of the busiest people; for it is not possible for the bow to be always bent, nor can human nature and weakness keep going without some lawful recreation."

The canon and the curate had got to this point in their conversation when the barber, riding ahead, came up to them and said to the curate:

"Here, sir licentiate, is the place I said would be a good one for us to take our midday rest while the oxen have fresh and plentiful grazing."

"So it seems to me too," answered the curate.

And on telling the canon what he meant to do, he too wanted to stay with them, invited by the site of a beautiful valley that offered itself to their sight. And both to enjoy it and to enjoy the curate's conversation, of whom he had by now grown fond, and to learn in more detail about Don Quixote's exploits, he ordered some of his servants to go to the inn, which was not far from there, and to bring from it whatever there was to eat, for all of them, because he had decided to take his midday rest in that place that afternoon. To which one of his servants answered that the pack-mule with the supplies, which must be at the inn by now, was carrying provisions enough to make it unnecessary to take anything from the inn but barley.

"Well, if that is so," said the canon, "let all the mounts be taken over there, and have the pack-mule brought back."

While this was going on, Sancho, seeing that he could speak to his master without the constant attendance of the curate and the barber, whom he regarded as suspect, came up to the cage where his master was and said to him:

"Sir, to unburden my conscience I want to tell you how things stand about this enchantment of yours; and it is that these two who are coming along here with their faces covered are the curate of our village and the barber. And I imagine they have hit on this plan of carrying you off like this out of pure envy at your worship's getting ahead of them in doing famous deeds. This truth being granted, it follows that you do not go enchanted but hoodwinked and made a fool of. As proof of which I want to ask you one thing; and if you answer me as I believe you are bound to answer, you will touch this trick with your hand and will see that you do not go enchanted but with your judgement upside down."

"Ask what you like, Sancho my son," answered Don Quixote, "and I shall satisfy you and answer entirely as you wish. And as for your saying that those men who are coming and going with us are the curate and the barber, our fellow-countrymen and acquaintances, it may well be that they seem to be the very men; but that they really and in fact are, do not believe that on any account.

"What you have to believe and understand is that if they look like them, as you say, it must be that those who have enchanted me will have taken that appearance and likeness; because it is easy for enchanters to take whatever shape they fancy, and they will have taken those of these friends of ours to give you occasion to think what you are thinking and to put you in a labyrinth of fancies from which you could not manage to get out, even if you had Theseus's thread.

"And they will also have done it so that I should waver in my understanding and not be able to make out where this injury comes to me from. Because if on the one hand you tell me that the barber and the curate of our village are with me, and on the other I see myself caged, and know of myself that human strength, unless it were supernatural, would not be enough to cage me — what do you want me to say or think, except that the manner of my enchantment goes beyond every one I have read of in all the histories that treat of knights errant who have been enchanted? So you may set your mind at peace and rest about believing that they are the men you say, because they are as much those men as I am a Turk. And as for your wanting to ask me something, say on, and I shall answer you even if you go on asking me from now till tomorrow."

"Our Lady help me!" answered Sancho, giving a great shout. "And is it possible that your worship is so thick in the skull and so short of brains that you do not see that what I am telling you is the plain truth, and that in this imprisonment and misfortune of yours malice has a larger part than enchantment? But since it is so, I mean to prove to you plainly that you do not go enchanted. If not, tell me — and so may God get you out of this storm, and so may you find yourself in my lady Dulcinea's arms when you least expect it —"

"Have done with conjuring me," said Don Quixote, "and ask what you like; for I have told you already that I shall answer you with complete punctuality."

"That is what I ask," replied Sancho; "and what I want to know is that you should tell me, without adding or taking away anything at all but with the whole truth, as it is expected that all those who profess arms should tell it and do tell it — as your worship professes them, under the title of knights errant —"

"I say that I shall not lie in anything," answered Don Quixote. "Do finish asking, for truly you weary me with so many safeguards, entreaties and preambles, Sancho."

"I say that I am sure of my master's goodness and truthfulness; and so, because it bears on our case, I ask, speaking with all respect, whether by any chance since your worship has been caged and, in your own opinion, enchanted in this cage, you have felt the wish and the need to do the greater or the lesser waters, as they say."

"I do not understand that about doing waters, Sancho; make yourself clearer if you want me to answer you straight."

"Is it possible that your worship does not understand about doing the lesser or the greater waters? Why, at school they wean the boys on it. Well, let me tell you that what I mean is whether you have felt the need to do the thing that cannot be got out of."

"Ah, now, now I understand you, Sancho! And many times; and I have the need even now. Get me out of this danger, for things are not altogether clean here!"
