Chapter 49: Which Treats of the Judicious Conversation Sancho Panza Had with His Master Don Quixote

"Ah," said Sancho, "I have you now! This is what I wanted to know as I want my own soul and my own life. Come here, sir: could you deny what they commonly say hereabouts when a person is out of sorts — 'I don't know what is the matter with so-and-so, he neither eats nor drinks nor sleeps nor answers to the point what he is asked; you would think he was enchanted'? From which it comes out that those who do not eat or drink or sleep or do the natural acts I speak of are the ones who are enchanted — but not those who have the need your worship has, and who drinks when he is given drink, and eats when he has food, and answers everything he is asked."

"You speak the truth, Sancho," answered Don Quixote; "but I have told you already that there are many kinds of enchantment, and it might be that with time they have changed from one kind to another, and that the custom now is for the enchanted to do everything I do, although they did not do it before. So that against the custom of the times there is no arguing and no drawing conclusions. I know and am convinced that I go enchanted, and this is enough for the safety of my conscience — which I should burden very heavily if I thought I was not enchanted and let myself stay in this cage, idle and cowardly, cheating of my help all those needy and distressed people who at this very hour must have a pressing and extreme need of my aid and protection."

"For all that," replied Sancho, "I say that for greater abundance and satisfaction it would be as well if your worship tried to get out of this prison — which I undertake with all my power to make easy, and even to get you out of it — and tried once more to get up on your good Rocinante, who also seems to go enchanted, so melancholy and sad is he. And this done, let us try our luck again at looking for more adventures; and if it does not turn out well for us, we still have time to come back to the cage, in which I promise, on the word of a good and loyal squire, to shut myself up along with your worship, if by any chance your worship should be so unlucky, or I so simple, as not to manage to bring off what I say."

"I am content to do as you say, brother Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "and when you see an opening for putting my liberty into effect, I shall obey you in everything and through everything. But you, Sancho, will see how mistaken you are in your understanding of my misfortune."

In this talk the knight errant and the ill-erring squire entertained themselves until they arrived where the curate, the canon and the barber, already dismounted, were waiting for them.

The ox-driver at once unyoked the oxen from the cart and let them go at their ease about that green and pleasant spot, whose coolness invited people to enjoy it — not people as enchanted as Don Quixote but as alert and judicious as his squire; who begged the curate to allow his master to come out of the cage for a while, because if they did not let him come out, that prison would not travel as clean as the decency of such a knight as his master required.

The curate understood him and said he would very willingly do what he asked if he were not afraid that as soon as his master found himself at liberty he would be up to his old tricks and go off where nobody would ever see him again.

"I stand surety against his running away," answered Sancho.

"And I too," said the canon, "and the more so if he gives me his word as a knight not to leave us until it is our wish."

"I do give it," answered Don Quixote, who was listening to all of it; "the more so as a man who is enchanted, as I am, is not free to do with his person what he likes, because the one who enchanted him can make him not stir from one spot for three centuries; and if he should have run away, he will bring him back through the air."

And since this was so, they might very well let him loose, especially as it was so much to everybody's advantage; and if they would not let him loose, he warned them that he could not help troubling their sense of smell, unless they got out of the way.

The canon took him by the hand, although he had them tied, and on his good faith and word they let him out of the cage — at which he was infinitely and enormously glad to find himself outside it. And the first thing he did was to stretch his whole body, and then he went to where Rocinante was, and, giving him two pats on the hindquarters, said:

"I still hope in God and in his blessed Mother, flower and mirror of horses, that we shall soon see ourselves both as we would wish: you with your master on your back, and I on top of you, exercising the office God threw me into the world for."

And saying this, Don Quixote went off with Sancho to a remote place, from which he came back much relieved and with more eagerness to put into practice whatever his squire should decide.

The canon watched him, and marvelled at the strangeness of his great madness, and at the fact that in everything he said and answered he showed himself to have an excellent understanding, only losing his stirrups — as has been said other times — when he was talked to about chivalry. And so, moved by compassion, after they had all sat down on the green grass to wait for the canon's supplies, he said to him:

"Is it possible, sir gentleman, that the bitter and idle reading of books of chivalry can have had so much power over your worship as to turn your judgement in such a way that you come to believe that you go enchanted, along with other things of that stamp, as far from being true as lying itself is from the truth?

"And how is it possible that there should be a human understanding that gives itself to believe that there have been in the world that infinity of Amadises, and that mob of so many famous knights, so many emperors of Trebizond, so many Felixmartes of Hircania, so many palfreys, so many wandering damsels, so many serpents, so many dragons, so many giants, so many unheard-of adventures, so many kinds of enchantment, so many battles, so many outrageous encounters, so much splendour of costume, so many princesses in love, so many squires made counts, so many amusing dwarfs, so many love-notes, so much wooing, so many valiant women — and, in the end, so many and such nonsensical things as the books of chivalry contain?

"For my own part I can say that when I read them, so long as I do not set my imagination on thinking that they are all lies and frivolity, they give me some pleasure; but when I realise what they are, I throw the best of them against the wall, and would even throw it into the fire if I had one near or in front of me — as deserving such a punishment for being false and deceitful and outside the dealings common nature calls for, and as inventors of new sects and a new way of life, and as giving occasion for the ignorant crowd to come to believe and hold as true all the foolishness they contain.

"And they even have such daring that they dare to disturb the wits of judicious and well-born gentlemen, as may be plainly seen from what they have done with your worship, since they have brought you to such a pass that it is necessary to shut you in a cage and carry you about on an ox-cart, like a man who takes or carries a lion or a tiger from place to place to make money out of letting people see it.

"Come, Señor Don Quixote, have pity on yourself, and come back into the fold of good sense, and learn to use the great share of it heaven was pleased to give you, employing the most fortunate talent of your mind on some other reading that may work to the profit of your conscience and the increase of your honour!

"And if, still carried away by your natural inclination, you want to read books of exploits and of chivalry, read in Holy Scripture the book of Judges; for there you will find grand truths and deeds as true as they are brave. Lusitania had a Viriathus; Rome a Caesar; Carthage a Hannibal; Greece an Alexander; Castile a Count Fernán González; Valencia a Cid; Andalusia a Gonzalo Fernández; Extremadura a Diego García de Paredes; Jerez a Garci Pérez de Vargas; Toledo a Garcilaso; Seville a Don Manuel de León — the reading of whose valorous deeds can entertain, teach, delight and astonish the loftiest minds that read them.

"This indeed will be reading worthy of your worship's good understanding, my dear Señor Don Quixote; out of which you will come learned in history, in love with virtue, taught in goodness, improved in your habits, brave without rashness, bold without cowardice — and all this for the honour of God, your own profit and the fame of La Mancha, from where, as I have learnt, your worship takes your beginning and origin."

Don Quixote listened most attentively to the canon's arguments; and when he saw that he had made an end of them, after looking at him for a good while he said to him:

"It seems to me, sir gentleman, that your worship's talk has been aimed at wanting to give me to understand that there have been no knights errant in the world, and that all the books of chivalry are false, lying, harmful and useless to the state; and that I have done wrong in reading them, and worse in believing them, and worse still in imitating them, having set myself to follow the very hard profession of knight-errantry that they teach — denying to me that there have been in the world any Amadises, of Gaul or of Greece, or any of the other knights the writings are full of."

"It is all exactly to the letter as your worship goes on relating it," said the canon at this.

To which Don Quixote answered:

"Your worship added too, saying that such books had done me a great deal of harm, since they had turned my judgement and put me in a cage, and that it would be better for me to mend my ways and change my reading, reading other books that are truer and that give more pleasure and teach better."

"That is so," said the canon.

"Then I," replied Don Quixote, "find by my own reckoning that the man out of his senses and enchanted is your worship, since you have set yourself to speak so many blasphemies against a thing so accepted in the world and held to be so true that whoever denied it, as your worship denies it, would deserve the same punishment your worship says you give the books when you read them and they annoy you.

"Because to try to give anybody to understand that Amadis never existed in the world, or any of the other adventuring knights the histories are packed with, will be to try to persuade them that the sun does not give light, or ice cold, or the earth support. For what mind can there be in the world that could persuade another that the business of the princess Floripes and Guy of Burgundy was not true, and the business of Fierabrás at the bridge of Mantible, which happened in the time of Charlemagne — which I swear is as true as it is now daylight?

"And if that is a lie, then it must be a lie too that there was ever a Hector, or an Achilles, or the war of Troy, or the Twelve Peers of France, or King Arthur of England, who to this day goes about turned into a crow and is expected back in his kingdom at any moment. And they will also make bold to say that the history of Guarino Mezquino is a lie, and that of the quest of the Holy Grail, and that the loves of Sir Tristram and Queen Iseult are apocryphal, like those of Guinevere and Lancelot — when there are people who can almost remember having seen the duenna Quintañona, who was the best pourer of wine that Great Britain ever had.

"And this is so much the case that I remember a grandmother of mine on my father's side saying to me, when she saw some duenna in a venerable headdress: 'That one, grandson, is like the duenna Quintañona' — from which I argue that she must have known her, or at least must have managed to see some portrait of her.

"And who could deny that the history of Pierres and the fair Magalona is true, since even to this day one may see in the royal armoury the peg with which the valiant Pierres steered the wooden horse he rode through the air on, which is a little bigger than a cart shaft? And beside the peg is Babieca's saddle, and at Roncesvalles is Roland's horn, as big as a great beam; from which it is to be inferred that there were Twelve Peers, that there was a Pierres, that there were Cids and other such knights,

	the sort of men that people say
	go riding to their adventures.

"If not, let them also tell me that it is not true that the valiant Portuguese Juan de Merlo was a knight errant, who went to Burgundy and fought in the city of Arras with the famous lord of Charny, called Monsieur Pierres, and afterwards in the city of Basle with Monsieur Henri de Remestán, coming out of both enterprises victorious and full of honourable fame; and the adventures and challenges likewise carried through in Burgundy by the valiant Spaniards Pedro Barba and Gutierre Quijada — from whose family I descend in the direct male line — defeating the sons of the Count of St Pol.

"Let them deny me too that Don Fernando de Guevara did not go looking for adventures in Germany, where he fought Messer George, a knight of the house of the Duke of Austria. Let them say that the jousts of Suero de Quiñones at the Pass were a joke; and the enterprises of Monsieur Luis de Falces against Don Gonzalo de Guzmán, a Castilian knight — along with a great many other exploits performed by Christian knights, both of these kingdoms and of foreign ones, so authentic and true that I say again that whoever denied them would be wanting in all reason and good sense."

The canon was astonished to hear the mixture Don Quixote made of truths and lies, and to see the knowledge he had of all those things touching and concerning the deeds of his errant chivalry; and so he answered him:

"I cannot deny, Señor Don Quixote, that some of what your worship has said is true, especially as far as the Spanish knights errant go; and likewise I am willing to grant that there were Twelve Peers of France, but I am not willing to believe that they did all the things Archbishop Turpin writes of them. Because the truth of it is that they were knights chosen by the kings of France, whom they called peers because they were all equal in worth, in quality and in valour — at least, if they were not, it was reasonable that they should be; and it was like one of the religious orders in use now, of Santiago or of Calatrava, in which it is assumed that those who profess it must be, or ought to be, valorous, brave and well-born knights. And as they now say knight of St John, or of Alcántara, in those days they said knight of the Twelve Peers, because twelve equals were chosen for that military order.

"As for there having been a Cid there is no doubt, nor about Bernardo del Carpio either; but that they did the exploits people speak of, I believe there is a very great deal of doubt. As for that other matter of the peg your worship speaks of belonging to Count Pierres, and that it stands beside Babieca's saddle in the royal armoury, I confess my sin: I am so ignorant, or so short-sighted, that although I have seen the saddle I have not noticed the peg — and it being as big as your worship says."

"Well, it is there, without any doubt," replied Don Quixote; "and for a further mark of it, they say it is kept in a leather case so that it does not get rusty."

"That may all be," answered the canon; "but by the orders I have taken, I do not remember having seen it. Yet even granting that it is there, I do not for that undertake to believe the histories of so many Amadises, or those of that mob of knights people tell us about; nor is it right that a man like your worship, so honourable and of such good qualities and endowed with so good an understanding, should give himself to believe that so many and such strange follies as those written in the nonsensical books of chivalry are true."
