Chapter 50: Of the Shrewd Arguments Don Quixote Had with the Canon, and Other Events

"That is a fine thing!" answered Don Quixote. "Books that are printed with the licence of kings and with the approval of those they were submitted to, and that are read and celebrated with general pleasure by the great and the small, by the poor and the rich, by the learned and the ignorant, by commoners and gentlemen — in short, by every kind of person, of whatever rank and condition — are these to be lies? And especially when they carry so much appearance of truth, since they tell us the father, the mother, the country, the relatives, the age, the place and the exploits, point by point and day by day, that such a knight performed or such knights performed.

"Be quiet, your worship, do not say such a blasphemy — and believe me, in this I am advising you what you ought to do as a man of sense — but read them, and you will see the pleasure you get from that reading.

"If not, tell me: is there any greater delight than to see, as we might put it, a great lake of boiling pitch showing itself here in front of us now, bubbling away, with a great many serpents, snakes and lizards and many other kinds of fierce and appalling animals swimming and crossing about in it; and out of the middle of the lake there comes a most sorrowful voice, saying: 'Thou, knight, whoever thou art, who art looking on this fearful lake, if thou wouldst attain the treasure hidden beneath these black waters, show the valour of thy strong breast and throw thyself into the middle of its black and burning liquor; for if thou dost not so, thou shalt not be worthy to see the high marvels that are shut up and contained in the seven castles of the seven fays that lie beneath this blackness'?

"And that the knight has hardly finished hearing the fearful voice when, without going into any further reckoning with himself, without stopping to consider the danger he is putting himself in, and even without stripping off the weight of his heavy armour, commending himself to God and to his lady, he throws himself into the middle of the boiling lake; and when he least expects it and does not know where he is to stop, he finds himself among flowering fields, with which the Elysian ones have nothing to do at all?

"There it seems to him that the sky is more transparent, and that the sun shines with a newer brightness. There is offered to his eyes a pleasant wood made up of trees so green and leafy that their greenness gladdens the sight, while the sweet, unlearned song of the small, endless, painted birds that go crossing among the tangled branches entertains the ears. Here he discovers a little stream whose cool waters, which look like liquid crystal, run over fine sands and white pebbles that resemble sifted gold and pure pearls. Over there he sees a cunningly made fountain of variegated jasper and smooth marble; over here he sees another decorated in the grotesque style, where the small shells of mussels, with the twisted white and yellow houses of the snail, set in a disordered order with pieces of shining crystal and counterfeit emeralds mixed in among them, make a varied work, so that art, imitating nature, seems there to beat her.

"Over yonder there suddenly discovers itself to him a strong castle or splendid palace, whose walls are of solid gold, whose battlements are of diamonds, whose gates are of jacinth; in short, it is of such admirable workmanship that, the material it is made of being no less than diamonds, carbuncles, rubies, pearls, gold and emeralds, the making of it is worth still more.

"And is there anything more to see, after seeing this, than to see coming out of the castle gate a good number of maidens, whose elegant and splendid costumes, if I set myself now to describe them as the histories tell them to us, would be a never-ending business? And then to see the one who seemed the chief of them all take by the hand the daring knight who threw himself into the boiling lake, and lead him, without saying a word to him, into the rich palace or castle, and have him stripped as naked as his mother bore him, and bathed with warm waters, and then anointed all over with scented ointments, and dressed in a shirt of the finest silk, all scented and perfumed; and another maiden come and throw over his shoulders a cloak which, at the very least, they say is generally worth a city, and even more?

"What a thing it is, then, when they tell us that after all this they take him to another hall, where he finds the tables laid with such order that he is taken aback and astonished! What, to see them pour water on his hands, all of it distilled from amber and scented flowers! What, to have him seated on an ivory chair! What, to see all the maidens serve him, keeping a marvellous silence! What, to have brought to him such a variety of dishes, so tastily cooked that his appetite does not know which to stretch out a hand to! What must it be to hear the music that plays while he eats, without anybody's knowing who sings it or where it sounds from!

"And, the meal being over and the tables cleared, for the knight to be left leaning back in his chair, and perhaps picking his teeth as the custom is, and all at once there comes in at the door of the hall another maiden far more beautiful than any of the first ones, and sits down at the knight's side, and begins to give him an account of what castle that is, and how she is held enchanted in it, along with other things that hold the knight in suspense and astonish the readers who go on reading his history?

"I do not want to go on any longer about this, since it may be gathered from it that any part one reads, of any history of a knight errant, is bound to cause pleasure and wonder in anybody who reads it. And believe me, your worship, and, as I have told you before, read these books, and you will see how they banish whatever melancholy you have and improve your temper, if by any chance it is a bad one.

"For my own part I can say that since I have been a knight errant I have been brave, courteous, generous, well-bred, open-handed, polite, daring, gentle, patient, an endurer of hardships, of imprisonments, of enchantments. And although it is so short a time since I saw myself shut in a cage like a madman, I expect, by the valour of my arm, heaven favouring me and fortune not being against me, in a few days to see myself king of some kingdom, where I may show the gratitude and generosity my breast holds.

"For upon my word, sir, the poor man is incapable of showing the virtue of generosity to anybody, however completely he possesses it; and gratitude that consists only in the wish is a dead thing, as faith without works is dead. For this reason I could wish that fortune would soon offer me some occasion to make me an emperor, so as to show my heart by doing good to my friends — especially to this poor Sancho Panza, my squire, who is the best man in the world; and I should like to give him an earldom I have promised him this long while, except that I am afraid he will not have the ability to govern his estate."

Sancho heard almost these last words of his master's, and said to him:

"Do your best, Señor Don Quixote, to give me that earldom, as much promised by your worship as it is hoped for by me; for I promise you that I shall not be short of ability to govern it. And when I am short of it, I have heard it said that there are men in the world who take lords' estates on lease and give them so much a year, and they take care of the governing themselves, and the lord sits with his legs stretched out enjoying the income they give him without troubling about anything else. And that is what I shall do, and I shall not stick at so much more or so much less, but shall get out of the whole thing at once and enjoy my income like a duke, and let them settle it among themselves."

"That, brother Sancho," said the canon, "holds good as far as enjoying the income goes; but as for administering justice, the lord of the estate must attend to it, and here comes in ability and good judgement, and above all the honest intention of getting it right. If this is missing at the beginning, the middle and the end will always go wrong; and so God generally helps the good intention of the simple man as much as he withholds his favour from the bad intention of the clever one."

"I know nothing about those philosophies," answered Sancho Panza; "all I know is that I would know how to govern the earldom as soon as I had it. For I have as much soul as anybody else and as much body as the biggest, and I should be as much king of my estate as anybody else is of his. And being so, I should do what I liked; and doing what I liked, I should do as I pleased; and doing as I pleased, I should be contented; and when a man is contented, he has nothing more to want; and having nothing more to want, that is the end of it. So let the estate come, and God be with you and let us see each other, as one blind man said to another."

"Those are not bad philosophies, as you call them, Sancho; but for all that, there is a great deal to be said on this matter of earldoms."

To which Don Quixote replied:

"I do not know that there is any more to be said; I simply guide myself by the example the great Amadis of Gaul gives me, who made his squire count of the Firm Isle. And so I can, without any scruple of conscience, make Sancho Panza a count, who is one of the best squires any knight errant ever had."

The canon was astonished at the well-ordered absurdities Don Quixote had spoken, at the manner in which he had painted the adventure of the Knight of the Lake, at the impression the deliberate lies of the books he had read had made on him — and finally he was astonished at Sancho's foolishness, in wanting so eagerly to get the earldom his master had promised him.

By this time the canon's servants were coming back, having gone to the inn for the pack-mule with the supplies; and making a table of a carpet and of the green grass of the meadow, they sat down in the shade of some trees and ate there, so that the ox-driver should not lose the convenience of that spot, as has been said.

And while they were eating, they suddenly heard a loud crashing and the sound of a bell that came from among some brambles and thick bushes that were nearby; and at the same instant they saw coming out from among those thickets a beautiful goat, her whole coat mottled with black, white and brown. Behind her came a goatherd shouting at her and saying the words they use to her to make her stop or come back to the flock. The runaway goat, frightened and terrified, came to the company as though to take refuge with them, and stopped there. The goatherd came up, and taking her by the horns, said to her as though she were capable of reasoning and understanding:

"Ah, wanderer, wanderer, Spotty, Spotty, how lame you have been going these last few days! What wolves frighten you, my girl? Won't you tell me what this is, my beauty? But what can it be except that you are female and cannot keep still? A curse on your nature and on the nature of all those you take after! Come back, come back, my friend; for if not as contented, at least you will be safer in your own fold or with your companions. For if you, who are to guard them and lead them, go about so unguided and so far off the road, what will become of them?"

The goatherd's words gave pleasure to those who heard them, especially to the canon, who said to him:

"On your life, brother, take it easy for a while and do not be in such a hurry to get this goat back to her flock; for since she is female, as you say, she must follow her natural instinct, however much you set yourself to prevent it. Take this mouthful and have a drink, and you will cool your temper down, and meanwhile the goat can rest."

And to say this and to give him the loins of a cold rabbit on the point of his knife were all one. The goatherd took it and thanked him; he drank and calmed down, and then said:

"I should not like your worships to take me for a simpleton because I have talked to this animal so seriously; for truly the words I said to her are not without a meaning. A rustic I am, but not so much of one that I do not understand how a man must deal with men and with beasts."

"That I well believe," said the curate; "for I know by experience that the mountains breed scholars and the shepherds' huts hold philosophers."

"At least, sir," replied the goatherd, "they take in men who have learnt their lesson. And so that you may believe this truth and touch it with your hand — although it may look as if I were inviting myself without being asked — if you do not object to it and would like, gentlemen, to lend me an attentive ear for a short while, I shall tell you a true story that will bear out what that gentleman" — pointing to the curate — "has said, and what I have said."

To this Don Quixote answered:

"Since I see that this case has a certain something of the shadow of an adventure of chivalry about it, I for my part will listen to you very willingly, brother; and so will all these gentlemen, for as much as they are people of good sense and lovers of curious novelties that hold, gladden and entertain the senses — as I have no doubt your tale will do. Begin, then, my friend, and we shall all listen."

"I take mine out," said Sancho; "I am going off to that stream there with this pie, where I mean to stuff myself for three days. Because I have heard my master Don Quixote say that a knight errant's squire is to eat, when the chance offers, until he can eat no more, on the grounds that they are apt to happen into a wood so tangled that they cannot manage to get out of it in six days; and if a man does not go in full, or with his saddlebags well provided, he may stay there — as many a man does stay — turned into mummy-meat."

"You are quite right, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Go where you like and eat what you can; for I have had enough, and all I have left is to give my soul its refreshment, as I shall by listening to this good man's tale."

"So shall we all give ours theirs," said the canon.

And then he asked the goatherd to begin what he had promised. The goatherd gave two pats on the back to the goat, which he had by the horns, saying to her:

"Lie down beside me, Spotty; there is still time for us to get back to our fold."

It seems the goat understood him, because as soon as her master sat down she stretched herself out beside him very quietly, and, looking him in the face, gave him to understand that she was attending to what he was saying. And he began his history like this.
