Chapter 52: Of the Quarrel Don Quixote Had with the Goatherd, with the Rare Adventure of the Penitents, Which He Brought to a Happy Conclusion by the Sweat of His Brow

The goatherd's tale gave general pleasure to everybody who had listened to it; and it was particularly well received by the canon, who with unusual curiosity noted the manner in which he had told it — as far from seeming a rustic goatherd as it was close to showing him a well-bred courtier. And so he said the curate had spoken very well in saying that the mountains bred scholars.

They all made offers to Eugenio; but the one who showed himself most generous in this was Don Quixote, who said to him:

"Certainly, brother goatherd, if I found myself in a position to be able to begin any adventure, I would set out this very moment so that you might come well out of yours. For I would get Leandra out of the convent — where she must without any doubt be against her will — in spite of the abbess and of anybody who tried to prevent it, and would put her in your hands, so that you might do with her entirely as you liked and pleased, keeping, however, the laws of chivalry, which command that no wrong whatever shall be done to any maiden. Although I hope in God Our Lord that the power of a malicious enchanter will not be so great that the power of another better-intentioned enchanter cannot be greater; and for that time I promise you my favour and help, as my profession obliges me to — which is nothing else than to favour the helpless and the needy."

The goatherd looked at him; and seeing Don Quixote in such bad condition and of such an appearance, he was astonished and asked the barber, who was near him:

"Sir, who is this man, who has such a build and talks in such a way?"

"Who should he be," answered the barber, "but the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, undoer of injuries, righter of wrongs, the shelter of maidens, the terror of giants and the winner of battles?"

"That sounds to me," answered the goatherd, "like what one reads in the books of knights errant, who did all that your worship says of this man; though it is my opinion either that your worship is joking or that this fine gentleman must have the rooms of his head empty."

"You are an enormous scoundrel," said Don Quixote at this; "and it is you who are empty and short of brains, for I am fuller than the very great whore of a bitch who bore you ever was."

And saying and doing, he snatched up a loaf that was near him and hit the goatherd full in the face with it, with such fury that he flattened his nose. But the goatherd, who did not understand jokes, seeing how much in earnest they were ill-treating him, without any respect for the carpet or the cloths or all those who were eating, leapt on Don Quixote; and seizing him by the neck with both hands, he would not have hesitated to strangle him if Sancho Panza had not come up at that moment and taken hold of him by the shoulders and thrown him down on top of the table, breaking plates, smashing cups and spilling and scattering everything that was on it.

Don Quixote, finding himself free, ran to get on top of the goatherd; who, with his face covered in blood and pounded with Sancho's kicks, was going about on all fours looking for one of the knives from the table so as to take some bloody revenge — but the canon and the curate prevented him. The barber, however, so arranged it that the goatherd got Don Quixote underneath him, on whom he rained such a number of blows that as much blood rained from the poor knight's face as from his own.

The canon and the curate were bursting with laughter, the officers were leaping with joy, and both sides were egging them on as people do with dogs when they are locked in a fight. Only Sancho Panza was in despair, because he could not shake off one of the canon's servants, who was preventing him from helping his master.

In short, everybody being in merriment and festival except the two pounding men who were clawing at each other, they heard the sound of a trumpet so sad that it made them turn their faces towards where it seemed to be sounding. But the one who was most excited at hearing it was Don Quixote, who, although he was underneath the goatherd, very much against his will and rather more than moderately pounded, said to him:

"Brother devil — for it is not possible that you should not be one, since you have had the strength and the force to subdue mine — I beg you that we may make a truce, for no more than an hour; because the sorrowful sound of that trumpet that reaches our ears seems to me to be calling me to some new adventure."

The goatherd, who was tired by now of pounding and being pounded, let him go at once; and Don Quixote got to his feet, likewise turning his face to where the sound was heard, and suddenly saw coming down a slope a great many men dressed in white, in the manner of penitents.

The case was that that year the clouds had refused their dew to the earth, and in all the places of that district processions, prayers and penances were being made, asking God to open the hands of his mercy and send them rain. And to this end the people of a village that was nearby were coming in procession to a hermitage of devotion that stood on a rise in that valley.

Don Quixote, seeing the strange clothes of the penitents, without its crossing his mind how many times he must have seen them before, imagined that this was a matter of adventure and that it belonged to him alone, as a knight errant, to undertake it. And he was further confirmed in this fancy by thinking that an image they were carrying covered in mourning must be some great lady whom those villains and discourteous scoundrels were carrying off by force.

And as soon as this fell into his mind, he ran with great speed to Rocinante, who was grazing about, and took the bridle and the shield off the saddlebow, and bridled him in a moment; and asking Sancho for his sword, he mounted Rocinante and braced his shield and said in a loud voice to everybody who was present:

"Now, valorous company, you shall see how much it matters that there should be knights in the world who profess the order of knight-errantry. Now, I say, you shall see, in the setting free of that good lady who is being carried off captive there, whether knights errant are to be valued."

And on saying this he squeezed his thighs against Rocinante, because spurs he had none; and at full gallop — because a flat-out charge is not read of anywhere in this whole true history as ever having been made by Rocinante — he went to meet the penitents, although the curate and the canon and the barber went to stop him. But it was not possible for them, nor did the shouts Sancho gave him stop him either, saying:

"Where are you going, Señor Don Quixote? What devils have you in your breast, urging you to go against our Catholic faith? Take notice — bad luck to me — that that is a procession of penitents, and that the lady they are carrying on the platform is the most blessed image of the spotless Virgin. Look what you are doing, sir, for this once it may be said that it is not what you know about."

Sancho wearied himself in vain, because his master was so set on reaching the sheeted men and on freeing the mourning lady that he did not hear a word; and even if he had heard it, he would not have turned back if the king had ordered him to.

He got to the procession, then, and pulled up Rocinante, who by then was wanting to rest a little, and in a disturbed, hoarse voice said:

"You who, perhaps because you are not good men, hide your faces: attend and listen to what I want to say to you."

The first to stop were those who were carrying the image; and one of the four priests who were singing the litanies, seeing Don Quixote's strange appearance, Rocinante's thinness and other laughable details he noticed and made out in Don Quixote, answered him, saying:

"Brother, if you want to tell us anything, tell it quickly, because these brothers are opening their own flesh, and we cannot — nor is it reasonable that we should — stop to hear anything at all, unless it is so short that it can be said in two words."

"In one I shall say it," replied Don Quixote, "and it is this: that you should this instant set free that beautiful lady, whose tears and sad face give clear signs that you are carrying her off against her will and that you have done her some notorious wrong. And I, who was born into the world to undo such injuries, shall not allow her to go one step further without giving her the liberty she wants and deserves."

At these words, everybody who heard them realised that Don Quixote must be some madman, and they set to laughing very heartily — whose laughter was putting powder to Don Quixote's anger, for without saying another word he drew his sword and charged at the litter. One of those who were carrying it, leaving the load to his companions, came out to meet Don Quixote, brandishing a forked prop or stave with which he supported the litter while he rested; and taking on it a great slash Don Quixote dealt him, which cut it in two, with the last third that was left in his hand he gave Don Quixote such a blow on top of one shoulder, on the sword side, that his shield could not cover him against such peasant force, and poor Don Quixote came to the ground in a very bad way.

Sancho Panza, who was panting along at his heels, seeing him fallen, shouted to his pounder not to give him another blow, because he was a poor enchanted knight who had never done harm to anybody in all the days of his life. But what stopped the countryman was not Sancho's shouts but seeing that Don Quixote did not stir hand or foot; and so, believing that he had killed him, he quickly pulled his tunic up to his belt and set off running across the country like a fallow deer.

By this time everybody in Don Quixote's company had come up to where he was; and the people of the procession, who saw them coming at a run, and with them the officers with their crossbows, feared some evil turn, and they all made a ring round the image; and, with their hoods raised, gripping their scourges — and the priests their candlesticks — they waited for the assault, determined to defend themselves and even to attack their assailants if they could. But fortune managed it better than was expected, because Sancho did nothing but throw himself on his master's body, making over him the most sorrowful and the most laughable lament in the world, believing that he was dead.

The curate was recognised by another curate who was in the procession, whose recognition put the two squadrons' conceived fear to rest. The first curate gave the second, in a couple of sentences, an account of who Don Quixote was; and so both he and the whole crowd of penitents went to see whether the poor knight was dead, and they heard Sancho Panza saying with tears in his eyes:

"Oh flower of chivalry, who with one blow of a stave brought to an end the course of your so well-spent years! Oh honour of your family, honour and glory of all La Mancha and even of the whole world, which, with you gone out of it, will be left full of evildoers with no fear of being punished for their evil deeds! Oh generous beyond all the Alexanders, since for only eight months of service you had given me the best isle the sea girds and surrounds! Oh humble with the arrogant and arrogant with the humble, attempter of dangers, endurer of insults, in love without a cause, imitator of the good, scourge of the wicked, enemy of the base — in short, a knight errant, which is everything that can be said!"

At Sancho's shouts and groans, Don Quixote came back to life, and the first word he said was:

"The man who lives absent from you, sweetest Dulcinea, is subject to greater miseries than these. Help me, friend Sancho, to get onto the enchanted cart, for I am in no state to press Rocinante's saddle, since this whole shoulder of mine is smashed to pieces."

"That I shall do very willingly, my dear sir," answered Sancho; "and let us go back to my village in the company of these gentlemen, who wish you well, and there we shall arrange to make another sally that may bring us more profit and fame."

"You speak well, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "and it will be great prudence to let this evil influence of the stars that is now running blow itself out."

The canon, the curate and the barber told him he would do very well to do as he said; and so, having taken great pleasure in Sancho Panza's simplicities, they put Don Quixote on the cart as he had come before.

The procession formed up again and went on its way. The goatherd took his leave of everybody. The officers would not go any further, and the curate paid them what was owing to them. The canon asked the curate to let him know how Don Quixote turned out, whether he was cured of his madness or went on in it; and with this he took his leave to go on with his journey. In the end they all separated and parted, leaving alone the curate and the barber, Don Quixote and Panza, and the good Rocinante, who through everything he had seen had been as patient as his master.

The ox-driver yoked his oxen and settled Don Quixote on a bundle of hay, and with his usual phlegm followed the road the curate wanted; and at the end of six days they arrived at Don Quixote's village, which they entered in the middle of the day, which happened to be a Sunday, and the people were all in the square, through the middle of which Don Quixote's cart passed.

They all ran to see what was coming in the cart; and when they recognised their fellow-countryman they were amazed, and a boy ran off to give the news to his housekeeper and his niece that their uncle and master was coming thin and yellow, stretched out on a heap of hay on an ox-cart. It was a pitiful thing to hear the cries the two good women raised, the slaps they gave themselves, the curses they hurled all over again at the accursed books of chivalry — all of which broke out afresh when they saw Don Quixote come in at their doors.

At the news of Don Quixote's arrival, Sancho Panza's wife came running, who had already learnt that he had gone off with him serving as his squire; and as soon as she saw Sancho, the first thing she asked him was whether the ass had come back well. Sancho answered that he had come back better than his master.

"Thanks be to God," she replied, "who has done me so much good. But now tell me, my friend: what good have you got out of your squiring? What skirt do you bring me? What little shoes for your children?"

"I bring none of that, wife," said Sancho, "although I bring other things of more moment and consideration."

"That gives me a great deal of pleasure," answered his wife. "Show me those things of more consideration and more moment, my dear; I want to see them, so as to cheer up this heart of mine, which has been so sad and discontented in all the ages of your absence."

"I shall show you them at home, wife," said Panza; "and for now be content, for if God is pleased that we should go out on another journey to look for adventures, you will soon see me a count or governor of an isle — and not one of the ones about here, but the best that can be found."

"May heaven grant it, husband, for we have great need of it. But tell me: what is this about isles? I do not understand it."

"Honey is not for the ass's mouth," answered Sancho. "In due time you will see, wife, and you will even be astonished to hear yourself called Your Ladyship by all your vassals."

"What is this you are saying, Sancho, about ladyships and isles and vassals?" answered Juana Panza — for that was Sancho's wife's name, although they were not related, but because in La Mancha it is the custom for wives to take their husbands' surname.

"Do not be in such a hurry, Juana, to know all this so fast; it is enough that I am telling you the truth, and sew up your mouth. I shall only tell you, just in passing, that there is nothing more delightful in the world than for an honourable man to be squire to a knight errant who goes looking for adventures. It is quite true that most of the ones you find do not turn out as much to your liking as a man would want, because out of a hundred you meet, ninety-nine generally come out crooked and awry. I know it by experience, because out of some of them I have come blanketed and out of others pounded. But for all that, it is a fine thing to be waiting for what will happen, crossing mountains, searching woods, treading rocks, visiting castles, putting up at inns entirely as you please, without paying — the devil take it — a maravedi."

All this talk passed between Sancho Panza and Juana Panza his wife, while Don Quixote's housekeeper and niece received him and undressed him and stretched him out in his old bed. He looked at them with squinting eyes and could not manage to understand where he was.

The curate charged the niece to take great care to look after her uncle, and to be on the alert that he did not escape from them again, telling her what it had been necessary to do to bring him home. Here the two of them raised their cries to heaven again; there the curses on the books of chivalry broke out afresh; there they begged heaven to confound in the centre of the abyss the authors of so many lies and absurdities. Finally they were left bewildered and afraid that they would find themselves without their master and uncle the moment he had any improvement; and it turned out just as they imagined it.

But the author of this history, although he has searched with curiosity and diligence for the deeds Don Quixote performed on his third sally, has not been able to find any account of them, at least in authentic writings. Only fame has kept, in the memories of La Mancha, that Don Quixote, the third time he left his house, went to Saragossa, where he was present at some famous jousts that were held in that city, and that things happened to him there worthy of his valour and good understanding.

Nor could he learn anything at all about his end and death, nor would he have learnt it or known it if good luck had not sent him an ancient physician who had in his possession a leaden box which, as he said, had been found in the pulled-down foundations of an ancient hermitage that was being rebuilt. In which box some parchments had been found, written in Gothic letters but in Castilian verse, which contained many of his exploits and gave an account of the beauty of Dulcinea of El Toboso, of Rocinante's figure, of Sancho Panza's faithfulness and of the burial of Don Quixote himself, with various epitaphs and eulogies of his life and habits.

And the ones that could be read and made out clearly were those the trustworthy author of this new and never-before-seen history sets down here. Which author asks those who read it, as a reward for the immense labour it cost him to inquire and search all the archives of La Mancha in order to bring it to light, nothing except that they should give it the same credit that judicious people usually give to the books of chivalry that are so much in favour in the world; for with this he will count himself well paid and satisfied, and will be encouraged to bring out and look for others, if not as truthful, at least of as much invention and entertainment.

The first words written on the parchment that was found in the leaden box were these:

	The Academicians of Argamasilla,
	a Place in La Mancha,
	on the Life and Death of the Valorous
	Don Quixote of La Mancha,
	hoc scripserunt:

	Monicongo, Academician of Argamasilla,
	on the Tomb of Don Quixote

Epitaph

	The madcap who adorned La Mancha
	with more spoils than Jason of Crete;
	the judgement that had its weathervane
	sharp where it would have been better broad;

	the arm whose strength stretched so far
	that it reached from Cathay to Gaeta;
	the most appalling and most discerning muse
	that ever graved verses on a plate of bronze;

	the man who left the Amadises behind
	and thought very little of the Galaors,
	resting on his own love and gallantry;

	the man who silenced the Belianises,
	the man who went erring on Rocinante,
	lies beneath this cold stone.

	Paniaguado, Academician of Argamasilla,
	in laudem Dulcineae del Toboso

Sonnet

	This woman you see with the beefy face,
	high in the bosom and spirited in her bearing,
	is Dulcinea, queen of El Toboso,
	whom the great Quixote was in love with.

	For her he trod the one side and the other
	of the great Black Sierra, and the famous
	field of Montiel, as far as the grassy
	plain of Aranjuez, on foot and weary.

	Rocinante's fault — oh, hard star! — that this
	Manchegan lady and this unconquered
	knight errant, in their tender years:

	she, by dying, left off being beautiful,
	and he, though he stands written in marble,
	could not escape love, angers and deceits.

	Capricioso, Most Judicious Academician of Argamasilla,
	in Praise of Rocinante, Don Quixote of La Mancha's Horse

Sonnet

	On the proud diamond throne
	that Mars treads with bloody feet,
	the frenzied Manchegan flies his standard
	with an unheard-of effort.

	He hangs up his arms and the fine steel
	with which he wrecks, levels, splits and cleaves:
	new exploits! But art invents
	a new style for the new paladin.

	And if Gaul prides itself on its Amadis,
	by whose brave descendants Greece
	triumphed a thousand times and spreads her fame,

	today the hall where Bellona presides
	crowns Quixote; and lofty La Mancha prides itself
	on him more than Greece or Gaul on theirs.

	Never does oblivion stain his glories,
	since even Rocinante, in being gallant,
	surpasses Brigliadoro and Bayard.

	Burlador, Academician of Argamasilla,
	to Sancho Panza

Sonnet

	Sancho Panza is this man, small in body
	but great in worth: a strange miracle!
	The simplest and most guileless squire
	the world ever had, I swear and certify.

	He was within a hair's breadth of being a count,
	if there had not conspired to do him harm
	the insolence and the injuries of this stingy
	age, which does not spare even a donkey.

	On one of those he rode — begging pardon for the word —
	this meek squire, behind the meek
	horse Rocinante and behind his master.

	Oh, empty hopes of mankind!
	How you go past with your promise of rest,
	and end at last in shadow, in smoke, in a dream!

	Cachidiablo, Academician of Argamasilla,
	on the Tomb of Don Quixote

Epitaph

	Here lies the knight,
	well pounded and ill-erring,
	whom Rocinante carried
	along one road and another.

	Sancho Panza the blockhead
	lies beside him too,
	the most faithful squire
	that the squire's trade ever saw.

	Tiquitoc, Academician of Argamasilla,
	on the Tomb of Dulcinea of El Toboso

Epitaph

	Here rests Dulcinea;
	and although she was plump of flesh,
	she was turned to dust and ashes
	by appalling and ugly death.

	She was of pure-bred stock,
	and had some hints of a lady about her;
	she was the great Quixote's flame,
	and she was the glory of her village.

These were the verses that could be read; the rest, the lettering being worm-eaten, were handed to an academician so that he might make them out by guesswork. It is understood that he has done it, at the cost of many sleepless nights and a great deal of labour, and that he means to bring them out, in hopes of Don Quixote's third sally.

Forsi altro canterà con miglior plettro.

The End
