Prologue to the Reader

God help me, how eagerly you must be waiting now, illustrious reader — or common reader, whichever you are — for this prologue, believing you will find in it revenges, quarrels and abuse of the author of the second Don Quixote; I mean the man they say was begotten at Tordesillas and born at Tarragona.

Well, in truth I am not going to give you that satisfaction; for although injuries wake anger in the humblest breasts, in mine this rule shall have its exception. You would like me to call him an ass, an idiot and an impudent fellow, but it does not cross my mind: let his own sin punish him, let him eat it with his own bread, and let him settle it himself.

What I have not been able to help feeling is that he marks me down as old and one-handed — as though it had been in my power to hold back time so that it should not pass over me, or as though my maiming had been got in some tavern, and not on the highest occasion that past ages ever saw, or present ages see, or ages to come can hope to see.

If my wounds do not shine in the eyes of whoever looks at them, they are valued at least in the esteem of those who know where they were got; for a soldier looks better dead in the battle than free in flight. And this is so much the case with me that if they were to put an impossibility before me now and make it easy for me, I would rather have been in that prodigious action than be whole of my wounds now without having been in it. The wounds a soldier shows in his face and on his breast are stars that guide others to the heaven of honour and to the wish for a just praise. And it must be noted that a man does not write with his grey hairs but with his understanding, which generally improves with the years.

I have also felt his calling me envious, and describing to me, as though I were ignorant, what a thing envy is; when in plain fact, of the two kinds there are, I know only the holy kind, the noble and well-intentioned one. And this being so, as it is, I am not likely to persecute any priest, and the more so if he has in addition the rank of familiar of the Holy Office. And if he said it on behalf of the man he seems to have said it for, he was mistaken from beginning to end; for I worship that man's genius, and admire his works and his continual and virtuous industry.

But in fact I am grateful to this gentleman the author for saying that my Exemplary Novels are more satirical than exemplary — but that they are good; and they could not be good if they did not have a bit of everything in them.

It seems to me you are telling me that I am keeping myself very much in bounds and holding myself well within the limits of my own modesty, knowing that affliction should not be added to the afflicted, and that the affliction this gentleman must be feeling is certainly great, since he does not dare to appear in the open field and under a clear sky, hiding his name and inventing his birthplace, as though he had committed some treason against his sovereign.

If by any chance you should come to know him, tell him from me that I do not count myself injured; for I know very well what the devil's temptations are, and that one of the greatest of them is to put it into a man's understanding that he can compose and print a book, and get as much fame by it as money, and as much money as fame. And in confirmation of this, I want you, with your good humour and charm, to tell him this story:

There was in Seville a madman who fell into the most amusing absurdity and obsession that any madman in the world ever fell into. And it was that he made a tube out of a cane, sharpened at the end; and on catching some dog in the street, or anywhere else, he would hold one of its hind feet down with one of his own and lift the other with his hand, and as best he could he would fit the tube into the place where, by blowing into it, he made the dog round as a ball. And when he had it in that state he would give it two little pats on the belly and let it go, saying to the bystanders, who were always many: "Do your worships suppose it is a small labour to blow up a dog?"

Does your worship suppose now that it is a small labour to make a book?

And if this story does not fit him, you may tell him this one, my friend the reader, which is also about a madman and a dog:

There was in Córdoba another madman, who had the habit of carrying on top of his head a piece of marble slab, or a stone that was not very light; and on coming upon some dog that was off its guard, he would go up close to it and drop the weight plumb down on it. The dog would be furious, and, barking and howling, would not stop for three streets.

Now it happened that among the dogs he let the load down on was a dog belonging to a cap-maker, whom his master was very fond of. The stone came down, hit him on the head, the pounded dog set up a howl, his master saw it and felt it, seized a measuring rod and came out at the madman and did not leave a whole bone in him. And at every blow he gave him he said: "You thieving dog — my pointer? Didn't you see, you cruel man, that my dog was a pointer?" And repeating the word "pointer" over and over, he sent the madman away beaten to a pulp.

The madman took the lesson to heart and withdrew, and for more than a month he did not come out into the square. At the end of which time he came back with his invention and with a heavier load. He would go up to where a dog was and, looking at it very carefully and fixedly, and without wanting or daring to let the stone down, he would say: "This is a pointer — look out!" In fact every dog he came upon, even if they were mastiffs or lapdogs, he said was a pointer; and so he never let the stone go again.

Perhaps something of the sort may happen to this historian: that he will not dare to let the weight of his wit down again on books which, when they are bad, are harder than rocks.

Tell him too that as for the threat he makes me, that his book is going to take my profits away, I do not care a farthing; and, borrowing from the famous interlude of La Perendenga, I answer him: long live my lord the Alderman, and Christ be with us all.

Long live the great Count of Lemos, whose Christian spirit and generosity, well known as they are, keep me on my feet against all the blows of my short fortune; and long live the supreme charity of the most illustrious Archbishop of Toledo, Don Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas — and let there be no printing presses in the world for all I care, and let them print more books against me than there are letters in the Coplas de Mingo Revulgo.

These two princes, without any flattery of mine or any other kind of applause soliciting them, out of their goodness alone have taken it on themselves to do me kindness and favour me; and in this I count myself happier and richer than if fortune had set me on its summit by the ordinary road. A poor man may have honour, but not a vicious man; poverty may cloud nobility over, but it cannot darken it altogether; and since virtue gives off some light of itself, even through the obstacles and the chinks of straitened means, it comes to be valued by lofty and noble spirits, and consequently favoured.

And say no more to him — nor do I want to say any more to you, except to warn you to consider that this second part of Don Quixote which I am offering you is cut by the same craftsman and out of the same cloth as the first, and that in it I give you Don Quixote at greater length, and, in the end, dead and buried, so that nobody may dare to bring fresh testimonies against him — for those we have are enough, and it is enough too that an honourable man should have given an account of these judicious follies without wanting to go into them all over again. For the abundance of things, even good ones, makes them cease to be valued, and their scarcity, even of bad ones, counts for something.

I was forgetting to tell you to expect the Persiles, which I am now finishing, and the second part of the Galatea.
