Dedication: To the Count of Lemos

When I sent Your Excellency my plays some days ago, printed before they were performed, if I remember rightly I said that Don Quixote was standing with his spurs on, ready to go and kiss Your Excellency's hands. And now I say that he has put them on and set off; and if he gets there, it seems to me I shall have done Your Excellency some service, because I am being pressed very hard from endless quarters to send him, so as to take away the queasiness and the nausea that another Don Quixote has caused, who under the name of a second part has gone about the world in disguise.

And the man who has shown most eagerness for him has been the great emperor of China; for a month ago he wrote me a letter in the Chinese language by a special courier, asking me — or rather begging me — to send him one, because he wanted to found a college where the Castilian language should be taught, and he wanted the book they read to be the history of Don Quixote. And along with this he told me that I should come and be the rector of that college.

I asked the messenger whether His Majesty had given him any money towards my expenses for me. He answered that it had not so much as crossed his mind. "Well then, brother," I answered him, "you may go back to your China at your ten leagues a day, or your twenty, or whatever rate you were dispatched at; for I am not in health to set out on so long a journey, and besides being ill I am very short of money. And emperor for emperor and monarch for monarch, in Naples I have the great Count of Lemos, who, without so many little titles of colleges and rectorships, keeps me, protects me and does me more kindness than I can manage to wish for."

With this I sent him off, and with this I take my leave, offering Your Excellency The Labours of Persiles and Sigismunda, a book I shall finish within four months, Deo volente; and which must be either the worst or the best that has been composed in our language — I mean of the books of entertainment. And I say that I repent of having said the worst, because according to my friends' opinion it is bound to reach the highest degree of goodness possible.

May Your Excellency come back in the health that is wished for you; for Persiles will by then be ready to kiss your hands, and I your feet, as the servant I am of Your Excellency's. From Madrid, the last day of October of sixteen hundred and fifteen.

Your Excellency's servant,

Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra
