Chapter 1: Of What the Curate and the Barber Discussed with Don Quixote About His Illness

Cide Hamete Benengeli relates, in the second part of this history and the third sally of Don Quixote, that the curate and the barber went almost a month without seeing him, so as not to bring back and put into his mind the things that had happened. But they did not for that leave off visiting his niece and his housekeeper, charging them to take care to look after him, giving him comforting things to eat that were suitable for the heart and the brain, from which, by all good reasoning, his whole misfortune proceeded.

The women said that this was what they were doing, and what they would go on doing with all possible goodwill and care, because they could see that from moment to moment their master was giving signs of being in his full senses; at which the two men were greatly pleased, since it seemed to them they had done right in bringing him home enchanted on the ox-cart, as was told in the first part of this history — as great as it is exact — in its last chapter.

And so they decided to visit him and make trial of his improvement, although they held it almost impossible that he should have any; and they agreed not to touch him on any point of knight-errantry, so as not to run the risk of unstitching the stitches of the wound, which were still so tender.

They visited him, then, and found him sitting up in bed dressed in a green baize jacket, with a red Toledo cap; and he was so dried up and shrivelled that he looked like nothing but a thing made of mummy-flesh. He received them very well; they asked him about his health, and he gave an account of himself and of it with great good sense and in very elegant words.

And in the course of their talk they came to discuss this thing they call statecraft and forms of government, correcting this abuse and condemning that, reforming one custom and banishing another, each of the three of them making himself a new legislator, a modern Lycurgus or a brand-new Solon; and they so remade the state that it seemed as though they had put it in a forge and taken out a different one from the one they put in. And Don Quixote spoke with so much judgement on all the subjects that were touched on that the two examiners believed beyond any doubt that he was completely well and in his full senses.

The niece and the housekeeper were present at the conversation, and could not stop giving thanks to God at seeing their master with so good an understanding. But the curate, changing his first plan, which was not to touch him on anything to do with chivalry, wanted to make a complete trial of whether Don Quixote's soundness was false or true; and so, by one step and another, he came to relate some news that had come from the court. And among other things he said that it was held for certain that the Turk was coming down with a powerful fleet, and that his design was not known, nor where so great a storm-cloud would burst; and that with this fear, which almost every year sounds the alarm on us, the whole of Christendom was under arms, and His Majesty had had the coasts of Naples and Sicily and the island of Malta provided for. To this Don Quixote answered:

"His Majesty has acted like a most prudent warrior in providing for his states in time, so that the enemy should not find him unprepared. But if my advice were taken, I would advise him to use a precaution which His Majesty at this hour must be very far from thinking of."

The curate had hardly heard this when he said to himself:

"God hold you in his hand, poor Don Quixote; for it seems to me that you are hurling yourself down from the high summit of your madness into the deep abyss of your simplicity."

But the barber, who had already hit on the same thought as the curate, asked Don Quixote what this precaution was that he said it would be well to take; perhaps it might be such that it should go on the list of the many impertinent pieces of advice that are generally given to princes.

"Mine, master shaver," said Don Quixote, "will not be impertinent but pertinent."

"I do not say it in that sense," replied the barber, "but because experience has shown that all or most of the schemes that are put to His Majesty are either impossible, or absurd, or to the harm of the king or the kingdom."

"Well, mine," answered Don Quixote, "is neither impossible nor absurd, but the easiest, the justest and the handiest and quickest that could come into any schemer's head."

"Your worship is slow in telling it, Señor Don Quixote," said the curate.

"I should not like," said Don Quixote, "to tell it here now and have it in the ears of the gentlemen of the Council tomorrow morning, and somebody else carry off the thanks and the reward for my labour."

"For my part," said the barber, "I give my word, here and before God, not to say what your worship may tell us to king or knave or any earthly man — an oath I learnt from the ballad about the curate who in the preamble told the king about the thief who had stolen his hundred doubloons and his fast-trotting mule."

"I know no stories," said Don Quixote, "but I know that this is a good oath, on the strength of my knowing that master barber is a decent man."

"And even if he were not," said the curate, "I stand security and answer for him that in this case he will say no more than a dumb man, on pain of paying whatever is judged and sentenced against him."

"And who stands security for your worship, master curate?" said Don Quixote.

"My profession," answered the curate, "which is to keep secrets."

"Body of me!" said Don Quixote at this. "Is there anything more to it than for His Majesty to order by public proclamation that all the knights errant who are wandering about Spain should gather at the court on a set day? For even if no more than half a dozen came, there might come among them one who would be enough on his own to destroy the whole power of the Turk.

"Give me your attention, your worships, and follow me. Is it by any chance a new thing for a single knight errant to undo an army of two hundred thousand men, as though they all together had one single throat, or were made of sugar-paste? If not, tell me: how many histories are full of these marvels? If only — in an unlucky hour for me, I will not say for anybody else — the famous Don Belianis were alive today, or one of the countless line of Amadis of Gaul! For if any one of these were alive today and came face to face with the Turk, upon my word I would not want to be the Turk. But God will look after his people, and will provide somebody who, if not as fierce as the knights errant of the past, at least will not be inferior to them in spirit. And God understands me, and I say no more."

"Oh!" said the niece at this point. "Kill me if my master does not want to be a knight errant again!"

To which Don Quixote said:

"A knight errant I shall die; and let the Turk come down or go up when he pleases and with as much power as he can muster. I say again that God understands me."

At this point the barber said:

"I beg your worships to give me leave to tell a short story that happened in Seville, which fits so exactly here that it makes me want to tell it."

Don Quixote gave him leave, and the curate and the rest gave him their attention, and he began in this way:

"In the madhouse at Seville there was a man whom his relatives had put there for want of wits. He was a graduate in canon law from Osuna; but even if he had been one from Salamanca, in many people's opinion he would still have been mad.

"This graduate, after some years of confinement, gave himself to understand that he was sane and in his full senses; and with this notion he wrote to the archbishop, begging him earnestly and in very well-ordered terms to order him to be got out of the misery he was living in, since by God's mercy he had now recovered his lost wits — but that his relatives, so as to enjoy their share of his property, were keeping him there, and in spite of the truth wanted him to be mad until his death.

"The archbishop, persuaded by many well-ordered and judicious notes, ordered a chaplain of his to find out from the warden of the house whether what that licentiate wrote him was true, and likewise to talk with the madman, and if he thought he had his wits, to take him out and set him at liberty.

"The chaplain did so; and the warden told him that the man was still mad — that although he often talked like a person of great understanding, in the end he would let fly with so many foolish things that in number and in size they matched his earlier displays of good sense, as could be tested by talking to him. The chaplain wanted to test it; and being put with the madman, he talked with him for an hour and more, and in all that time the madman never said a crooked or absurd word. On the contrary, he spoke so carefully that the chaplain was obliged to believe that the madman was sane.

"And among other things the madman told him was that the warden had a grudge against him, so as not to lose the presents his relatives made him for saying that he was still mad and had only lucid intervals; and that the greatest enemy he had in his misfortune was his own large property, since his enemies, so as to enjoy it, played false and cast doubt on the favour Our Lord had done him in turning him from a beast back into a man.

"In the end he spoke in such a way that he made the warden suspect, his relatives greedy and heartless, and himself so sensible that the chaplain determined to take him away with him so that the archbishop might see him and touch with his hand the truth of that business.

"With this good faith the good chaplain asked the warden to have the clothes the licentiate had come in given back to him. The warden said again that he should consider what he was doing, because without any doubt the licentiate was still mad. The warden's warnings and cautions were of no use at all in stopping the chaplain from taking him away; the warden obeyed, seeing that it was the archbishop's order.

"They put the licentiate's own clothes on him, which were new and decent; and when he saw himself dressed like a sane man and stripped of the madman's dress, he begged the chaplain out of charity to give him leave to go and say goodbye to his companions the madmen. The chaplain said he wanted to go with him and see the madmen who were in the house.

"They went up, in fact, along with some others who happened to be there; and the licentiate, coming to a cage where there was a furious madman — though at that moment quiet and calm — said to him: 'My brother, see whether you have any commands for me, because I am going home; for God has been pleased, out of his infinite goodness and mercy and without my deserving it, to give me back my wits. I am well now and sane; for with regard to God's power nothing is impossible. Have great hope and trust in Him; for since He has brought me back to my former state, He will bring you back to yours too if you trust in Him. I shall take care to send you some good things to eat, and eat them in any case; because I would have you know that it is my belief, as a man who has been through it, that all our madness comes from having empty stomachs and brains full of air. Take heart, take heart; for weakening under misfortunes wears down the health and brings on death.'

"All these words of the licentiate's were heard by another madman who was in another cage opposite the furious one's; and getting up from an old rush mat where he was lying stark naked, he asked at the top of his voice who it was that was going away well and sane. The licentiate answered: 'It is I, brother, who am going; for I have no need to stay here any longer, for which I give endless thanks to heaven, that has done me so great a favour.'

"'Look what you say, licentiate; do not let the devil deceive you,' replied the madman. 'Rest your feet and stay quietly at home, and you will save yourself the journey back.'

"'I know I am well,' replied the licentiate, 'and there will be no need to go round the stations again.'

"'You well?' said the madman. 'Very good, we shall see; go with God. But I swear to you by Jupiter, whose majesty I represent on earth, that for this sin alone which Seville is committing today, in taking you out of this house and holding you for sane, I mean to inflict such a punishment on it that the memory of it shall last for ever and ever, amen. Do you not know, you wretched little licentiate, that I can do it — since, as I say, I am Jupiter the Thunderer, and hold in my hands the burning bolts with which I can and do threaten and destroy the world? But with one thing only do I mean to punish this ignorant town, and that is by not raining on it or on its whole district and neighbourhood for three whole years, which are to be counted from the day and moment this threat has been made. You free, you well, you sane — and I mad, and I sick, and I tied up? I shall think of raining about as soon as I think of hanging myself.'

"The bystanders were attentive to the madman's shouts and words; but our licentiate, turning to our chaplain and taking him by the hands, said to him: 'Do not distress yourself, my dear sir, or take any notice of what this madman has said; for if he is Jupiter and will not rain, I, who am Neptune, the father and god of the waters, will rain as often as I take a fancy to and as often as it is needed.'

"To which the chaplain answered: 'For all that, Señor Neptune, it will not be well to annoy Señor Jupiter. Let your worship stay at home, and another day, when there is more convenience and more time, we shall come back for your worship.'

"The warden and the bystanders laughed, at whose laughter the chaplain was half mortified; they took the licentiate's clothes off him, he stayed in the house, and that is the end of the story."

"So this is the story, master barber," said Don Quixote, "that fitted so exactly here that you could not help telling it? Ah, master shaver, master shaver, how blind is the man who cannot see through a sieve! And is it possible that your worship does not know that comparisons made between one wit and another, one valour and another, one beauty and another and one family and another are always odious and badly received?

"I, master barber, am not Neptune the god of the waters, nor do I try to get anybody to hold me for sensible when I am not. I only weary myself with giving the world to understand the error it is in in not bringing back to itself that most happy time when the order of knight-errantry was in the field. But our depraved age is not worthy to enjoy so great a good as the ages enjoyed when the knights errant took on themselves and threw on their own shoulders the defence of kingdoms, the protection of maidens, the succouring of orphans and wards, the punishment of the arrogant and the reward of the humble.

"Most of the knights who are in use now hear the rustle of the damasks, the brocades and the other rich stuffs they dress in sooner than the mail they arm themselves with. There is no knight now who sleeps in the open fields, exposed to the severity of the sky, armed at all points from feet to head. There is nobody now who, without taking his feet out of the stirrups and leaning on his lance, merely tries to snatch a little sleep, as the knights errant did.

"There is nobody now who, coming out of this wood, goes into that mountain, and from there treads a barren, deserted seashore, most often stormy and rough; and, finding on it and at its edge a small boat with no oars, sail, mast or rigging at all, throws himself into it with an intrepid heart, giving himself up to the merciless waves of the deep sea, which now carry him up to the sky and now bring him down to the abyss; and he, setting his breast against the irresistible storm, when he least expects it finds himself three thousand leagues and more from the place where he embarked; and, leaping onto a remote and unknown shore, things happen to him worthy of being written not on parchment but on bronze.

"But now idleness triumphs over diligence, laziness over labour, vice over virtue, arrogance over courage, and the theory of arms over the practice of them — which lived and shone only in the ages of gold and in the knights errant.

"If not, tell me: who more virtuous and more valiant than the famous Amadis of Gaul? Who more judicious than Palmerin of England? Who more accommodating and handy than Tirant lo Blanc? Who more elegant than Lisuarte of Greece? Who more slashed and more slashing than Don Belianis? Who more intrepid than Perion of Gaul, or who more given to attempting dangers than Felixmarte of Hircania, or who more sincere than Esplandián? Who more headlong than Don Cirongilio of Thrace? Who fiercer than Rodomonte? Who more prudent than King Sobrino? Who more daring than Rinaldo? Who more unconquerable than Roland? And who more gallant and more courteous than Ruggiero, from whom the dukes of Ferrara are descended today, according to Turpin in his Cosmography?

"All these knights, and a great many others I could name, master curate, were knights errant, the light and glory of chivalry. It is of these, or of such men as these, that I could have wished the men of my scheme to be; and if they were, His Majesty would find himself well served and would save a great deal of expense, and the Turk would be left tearing his beard. And so I do not want to stay at home, since the chaplain does not take me out of it; and if his Jupiter, as the barber has said, will not rain, here am I, who will rain whenever I take a fancy to. I say this so that Master Basin may know that I understand him."

"Truly, Señor Don Quixote," said the barber, "I did not mean it in that sense; and so God help me as my intention was a good one, and your worship ought not to take offence."

"Whether I can take offence or not," answered Don Quixote, "I know myself."

To this the curate said:

"Well, I have hardly said a word so far, and I should not like to be left with a scruple that gnaws and scratches at my conscience, arising from what Señor Don Quixote has said here."

"For greater things than that," answered Don Quixote, "master curate has leave; and so he may say his scruple, because it is no pleasure to go about with a scrupulous conscience."

"Then with that permission," answered the curate, "I say that my scruple is that I cannot on any account persuade myself that the whole crowd of knights errant your worship has mentioned, Señor Don Quixote, were really and truly people of flesh and blood in the world; on the contrary, I imagine that the whole of it is fiction, fable and lies, and dreams told by men who are awake — or rather half asleep."

"That is another error," answered Don Quixote, "that many people have fallen into, who do not believe there were ever such knights in the world; and many times, with different people and on different occasions, I have tried to bring this almost universal delusion into the light of truth. Sometimes I have not succeeded in my purpose and other times I have, supporting it on the shoulders of truth — which truth is so certain that I am ready to say that with my own eyes I saw Amadis of Gaul, who was a tall man, white in the face, with a well-set beard, though a black one, with a look between mild and severe, short in speech, slow to anger and quick to put anger aside.

"And in the way I have outlined Amadis I could, in my opinion, paint and describe every knight errant who goes about the histories in the world; for from the notion I have that they were as their histories relate, and from the exploits they performed and the dispositions they had, their features, colouring and heights can be worked out by good philosophy."

"How big does your worship think, my dear Señor Don Quixote," asked the barber, "the giant Morgante must have been?"

"On this matter of giants," answered Don Quixote, "there are different opinions as to whether there have been any in the world or not; but Holy Scripture, which cannot fail by an atom in the truth, shows us that there were, telling us the history of that great Philistine Goliath, who was seven and a half cubits high, which is an outrageous size. Also in the island of Sicily leg-bones and shoulder-blades have been found so large that their size shows that their owners were giants, and as big as great towers; geometry puts this truth beyond doubt.

"But for all that, I could not say with certainty what size Morgante was, although I imagine he cannot have been very tall. And what moves me to be of this opinion is finding in the history where his exploits are particularly mentioned that he often slept under a roof; and since he found a house he could fit into, it is clear that his size was not outrageous."

"That is so," said the curate.

And, enjoying hearing him say such great absurdities, he asked him what he thought about the faces of Rinaldo of Montalban and of Roland and of the other Twelve Peers of France, since they had all been knights errant.

"Of Rinaldo," answered Don Quixote, "I dare to say that he was broad in the face, ruddy in colour, with dancing and somewhat prominent eyes, touchy and excessively hot-tempered, a friend of thieves and of lost characters. Of Roland — or Rotolando, or Orlando, for the histories call him by all these names — I am of the opinion, and I maintain, that he was of middling height, broad-shouldered, somewhat bow-legged, dark in the face and red-bearded, hairy in the body and threatening in his look; short of speech, but very polite and well-bred."

"If Roland was no more of a gentleman than your worship has said," replied the curate, "it is no wonder that the lady Angelica the Fair scorned him and left him for the elegance, spirit and charm the downy-bearded young Moor must have had that she gave herself to; and she was judicious in loving Medoro's softness rather than Roland's roughness."

"That Angelica, master curate," answered Don Quixote, "was a girl who went astray, a wanderer and something of a capricious creature, and she left the world as full of her improprieties as of the fame of her beauty. She despised a thousand lords, a thousand brave men and a thousand men of sense, and was satisfied with a smooth-faced little page with no property or name except what the friendship he kept for his friend could give him as a grateful man.

"The great singer of her beauty, the famous Ariosto, either not daring or not wanting to sing what happened to that lady after her base surrender — which cannot have been things overly virtuous — left her where he said:

	And how she received the sceptre of Cathay,
	perhaps another will sing with a better plectrum.

"And no doubt this was like a prophecy; for poets are also called vates, which means prophets. This truth is seen clearly, because since then a famous Andalusian poet has wept and sung her tears, and another famous and unique Castilian poet has sung her beauty."

"Tell me, Señor Don Quixote," said the barber at this point, "has there been no poet who has written a satire on that lady Angelica, among so many as have praised her?"

"I well believe," answered Don Quixote, "that if Sacripante or Roland had been poets, they would have given the girl a soaping by now; because it is proper and natural to poets who are scorned and not accepted by their ladies — invented ladies, or ladies invented after all by the men who chose them as the mistresses of their thoughts — to revenge themselves with satires and libels: a revenge, certainly, unworthy of generous hearts. But up to now no defamatory verse against the lady Angelica, who turned the world upside down, has come to my notice."

"A miracle!" said the curate.

And at this they heard the housekeeper and the niece, who had left the conversation by now, giving great shouts in the yard, and they all hurried to the noise.
