Chapter 3: Of the Ridiculous Conversation That Passed Between Don Quixote, Sancho Panza and the Bachelor Sansón Carrasco

Don Quixote was left extremely thoughtful, waiting for the bachelor Carrasco, from whom he expected to hear the news of himself put into a book, as Sancho had said. And he could not persuade himself that such a history existed, since the blood of the enemies he had killed was not yet dry on the blade of his sword, and already they wanted his lofty chivalries to be going about in print.

For all that, he imagined that some sage, either friend or enemy, must have put them into print by art of enchantment: if a friend, to magnify them and set them above the most distinguished deeds of any knight errant; if an enemy, to annihilate them and put them below the vilest ever written of any vile squire — although, he said to himself, squires' exploits were never written. And if it were true that such a history existed, it being of a knight errant, it must of necessity be grandiloquent, lofty, distinguished, magnificent and true.

With this he comforted himself somewhat; but he was discomforted by thinking that its author was a Moor, judging by that name of Cide; and from the Moors no truth at all was to be expected, because they are all cheats, forgers and fantasists. He was afraid the man might have treated his love affairs with some indecency that would work to the discredit and injury of his lady Dulcinea of El Toboso's modesty; he wished he had declared his faithfulness and the respect he had always kept for her, scorning queens, empresses and maidens of every quality and holding in check the impulses of natural movements.

And so, wrapped and rewrapped in these and a great many other fancies, Sancho and Carrasco found him, and Don Quixote received them with great courtesy.

The bachelor, although he was called Sansón, was not very big in body, though a very great joker; sallow in colour but of very good understanding. He must have been about twenty-four, round-faced, with a flat nose and a big mouth — all signs of his being of a mischievous disposition and a lover of jokes and fun, as he showed on seeing Don Quixote by putting himself on his knees in front of him and saying:

"Give me your greatness's hands, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha; for by the habit of St Peter that I wear — although I have taken no orders but the first four — your worship is one of the most famous knights errant that there has been, or ever will be, in the whole round world. A blessing on Cide Hamete Benengeli, who left the history of your great deeds written; and a double blessing on the man of curiosity who took care to have them translated from Arabic into our common Castilian, for the universal entertainment of the people."

Don Quixote made him get up and said:

"So it is true that there is a history of me, and that the man who composed it was a Moor and a sage?"

"It is so true, sir," said Sansón, "that it is my belief that more than twelve thousand copies of this history are in print today. And if not, let Portugal, Barcelona and Valencia say so, where they have been printed; and there is even a report that it is being printed at Antwerp, and I have an inkling that there is not going to be a nation or a language it will not be translated into."

"One of the things," said Don Quixote at this, "that must most content a virtuous and eminent man is to see himself, while still alive, going about on people's tongues with a good name, printed and in type. I said with a good name, because if it were the other way about, no death would come up to it."

"If it is a question of a good reputation and a good name," said the bachelor, "your worship alone carries off the palm from all knights errant; because the Moor in his language and the Christian in his took care to paint us to the life your worship's gallantry, your great spirit in facing dangers, your patience in adversities and your endurance both of misfortunes and of wounds, and the modesty and continence of the so platonic love between your worship and my lady Doña Dulcinea of El Toboso."

"I have never," said Sancho Panza at this point, "heard my lady Dulcinea called Doña, but only the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso; and so the history is already wrong in this."

"That is not an objection of any importance," answered Carrasco.

"Certainly not," answered Don Quixote. "But tell me, master bachelor: which of my exploits are the most valued in this history?"

"On that," answered the bachelor, "there are different opinions, as there are different tastes. Some stick to the adventure of the windmills, which seemed to your worship to be Briareuses and giants; others to the fulling mills; this man to the description of the two armies, which afterwards turned out to be two flocks of sheep; that man makes much of the one about the dead man they were taking to be buried at Segovia; one says that the freeing of the galley slaves is better than all of them; another that none comes up to the one about the two Benedictine giants, along with the quarrel with the valorous Basque."

"Tell me, master bachelor," said Sancho at this point: "does the adventure of the Yangüesans come into it, when our good Rocinante took it into his head to ask for truffles in the middle of the sea?"

"The sage left nothing in the inkwell," answered Sansón. "He says everything and notes everything, down to the capers good Sancho cut in the blanket."

"I cut no capers in the blanket," answered Sancho; "in the air, yes — and more of them than I would have liked."

"As far as I can imagine," said Don Quixote, "there is no human history in the world that does not have its ups and downs, especially those that treat of chivalry, which can never be full of prosperous events."

"For all that," answered the bachelor, "some who have read the history say they would have been glad if the authors of it had forgotten a few of the endless beatings that Señor Don Quixote was given in various encounters."

"That is where the truth of the history comes in," said Sancho.

"They could also have kept quiet about them in fairness," said Don Quixote; "since the actions that neither change nor alter the truth of the history there is no reason to write, if they are bound to work to the contempt of the hero of the history. Upon my word, Aeneas was not as pious as Virgil paints him, nor Ulysses as prudent as Homer describes him."

"That is so," replied Sansón, "but it is one thing to write as a poet and another as a historian: the poet may tell or sing things not as they were but as they ought to have been, and the historian must write them not as they ought to have been but as they were, without adding to the truth or taking anything from it."

"Well, if that Moorish gentleman is going in for telling truths," said Sancho, "then among my master's beatings mine are sure to be found; because they never took the measure of his worship's shoulders without taking mine of my whole body. But there is nothing to wonder at in that, since, as my master himself says, the limbs must share in the head's pain."

"You are a sly one, Sancho," answered Don Quixote. "Upon my word, you are not short of memory when you choose to have it."

"Even if I wanted to forget the blows they have given me," said Sancho, "the bruises would not allow it, and they are still fresh on my ribs."

"Be quiet, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and do not interrupt master bachelor, whom I beg to go on telling me what is said about me in the history you speak of."

"And about me," said Sancho, "for they say too that I am one of the chief carackters in it."

"Characters, not carackters, friend Sancho," said Sansón.

"Have we got another reprover of vokibles here?" said Sancho. "Well, if they take to that, we shall never finish in our whole lives."

"God give me a bad one, Sancho," answered the bachelor, "if you are not the second person in the history; and there are people who would rather hear you talk than the finest-drawn character in the whole of it — although there are also those who say you were excessively credulous in believing that the government of that isle offered you by Señor Don Quixote, who is here present, could be real."

"There is still sun on the wall," said Don Quixote; "and the further Sancho goes on in years, the fitter and abler he will be to be a governor, with the experience the years bring, than he is now."

"By God, sir," said Sancho, "the isle I would not govern at the age I am now, I shall not govern at the age of Methuselah. The trouble is that the said isle is hanging about somewhere or other, and not that I am short of the wits to govern it."

"Commend it to God, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and it will all turn out well, and perhaps better than you think; for the leaf does not stir on the tree without God's will."

"That is true," said Sansón; "for if God wills it, Sancho shall not be short of a thousand isles to govern, let alone one."

"I have seen governors about," said Sancho, "who to my mind do not come up to the sole of my shoe, and for all that they are called Your Lordship and are served on silver."

"Those are not governors of isles," replied Sansón, "but of other and easier governments; for those who govern isles must at the very least know grammar."

"I could deal with the gram well enough," said Sancho, "but as for the mar, I neither draw nor pay, because I do not understand it. But leaving this business of the government in God's hands, to send me wherever he can best be served by me, I say, master bachelor Sansón Carrasco, that it has given me endless pleasure that the author of the history has spoken of me in such a way that the things told of me are not annoying. For on the word of a good squire, if he had said things about me that were not very much those of an Old Christian, as I am, the deaf would have heard us."

"That would be working miracles," answered Sansón.

"Miracles or no miracles," said Sancho, "let every man look how he talks or how he writes about persons, and not set down at random the first thing that comes into his head."

"One of the faults they find with this history," said the bachelor, "is that its author put into it a tale called The Reckless Curiosity — not for being bad or badly reasoned, but for not belonging in that place, and having nothing to do with the history of his worship Señor Don Quixote."

"I would bet," replied Sancho, "that the son of a dog has mixed cabbages with baskets."

"Now I say," said Don Quixote, "that the author of my history has not been a sage but some ignorant chatterer who set himself to write it at random and with no reasoning at all, come what may — like Orbaneja, the painter of Úbeda, who, on being asked what he was painting, answered: 'Whatever comes out.' Once he painted a cock in such a fashion and so ill-favoured that it was necessary to write beside it in Gothic letters: 'This is a cock.' And so it must be with my history, which will need a commentary to be understood."

"Not at all," answered Sansón, "because it is so clear that there is nothing in it to puzzle over. Children handle it, young men read it, grown men understand it and old men praise it. And, in short, it is so thumbed and so read and so well known to every kind of person that people have hardly seen a thin hack before they say: 'There goes Rocinante.'

"And those who have taken most to reading it are the pages: there is no lord's antechamber where a Don Quixote is not to be found; some pick it up as others put it down; these pounce on it and those ask for it. In short, this history is the most enjoyable and least harmful entertainment that has been seen up to now, because in the whole of it there is not to be discovered, even by a hint, one immodest word or one thought that is less than Catholic."

"To write in any other way," said Don Quixote, "would not be writing truths but lies; and historians who make use of lies ought to be burnt like men who make counterfeit money. And I do not know what moved the author to make use of other people's tales and stories when there was so much to write about in mine: no doubt he must have gone by the proverb, 'With straw or with hay —' and so on.

"For truly, in setting out my thoughts alone, my sighs, my tears, my good desires and my undertakings, he could have made a volume bigger than, or as big as, all El Tostado's works put together. In fact, what I make out, master bachelor, is that to compose histories and books, of whatever sort they may be, a great judgement and a mature understanding are needed. To say witty things and to write amusing ones is the work of great minds: the most judicious character in a play is the fool, because the man who wants to give people to understand that he is simple must not be so. History is like a sacred thing, because it must be true; and where truth is, God is, in so far as truth goes. But in spite of this there are some who compose and hurl books out of themselves as if they were fritters."

"There is no book so bad," said the bachelor, "that it has not something good in it."

"There is no doubt of that," replied Don Quixote; "but it often happens that men who had deservedly earned and won great fame by their writings lost it altogether, or diminished it somewhat, on giving them to the press."

"The cause of that," said Sansón, "is that as printed works are looked at slowly, their faults are easily seen, and they are scrutinised the more closely the greater the fame of the man who composed them. Men famous for their wits, the great poets, the illustrious historians, are always — or most often — envied by those whose pleasure and particular entertainment is to judge other people's writings without having given any of their own to the light of the world."

"That is nothing to wonder at," said Don Quixote, "because there are many theologians who are no good for the pulpit and are extremely good at seeing the faults or the excesses of those who preach."

"All this is so, Señor Don Quixote," said Carrasco; "but I could wish that such censurers were more merciful and less scrupulous, and did not fix on the specks in the very bright sun of the work they are finding fault with. For if aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus, let them consider how much he was awake, so as to give his work its light with the least shadow he could. And perhaps it might be that what looks bad to them are beauty-spots, which sometimes increase the beauty of the face that has them. And so I say that the risk a man runs who prints a book is enormous, since it is impossible with every impossibility to compose one such that it will satisfy and content everybody who reads it."

"The one that treats of me," said Don Quixote, "must have contented very few."

"On the contrary; since stultorum infinitus est numerus, endless are those who have enjoyed that history. And some have found fault and dishonesty in the author's memory, since he forgets to tell who the thief was who stole Sancho's grey — for it is not stated there, and it is only to be inferred from what is written that he was stolen, and shortly afterwards we see Sancho on horseback on the same donkey, without its having turned up.

"They also say he forgot to put in what Sancho did with those hundred crowns he found in the portmanteau in the Sierra Morena, which are never mentioned again; and there are many who want to know what he did with them, or what he spent them on, which is one of the substantial points missing from the work."

Sancho answered:

"I, Señor Sansón, am in no state at the moment to get into accounts or stories; for I have been taken with a faintness of the stomach which, if I do not repair it with two swallows of the old stuff, will put me on Saint Lucy's thorn. I have it at home; my missus is waiting for me; when I have finished eating I shall come back and satisfy your worship and the whole world about anything they want to ask, both about the loss of the donkey and about the spending of the hundred crowns."

And without waiting for an answer or saying another word, he went off home.

Don Quixote asked and begged the bachelor to stay and take pot luck with him. The bachelor took up the invitation; he stayed, a couple of pigeons were added to the ordinary fare, chivalry was discussed at table, Carrasco fell in with his humour, the banquet ended, they slept through the afternoon heat, Sancho came back and the earlier talk was taken up again.
