Chapter 4: In Which Sancho Panza Satisfies the Bachelor Sansón Carrasco on His Doubts and Questions, with Other Events Worth Knowing and Telling

Sancho came back to Don Quixote's house, and going back to the earlier discussion, said:

"As for what Señor Sansón said about wanting to know who, or how, or when my donkey was stolen from me, in answer I say that the very night when, running away from the Holy Brotherhood, we went into the Sierra Morena — after the luckless adventure of the galley slaves and the one about the dead man they were taking to Segovia — my master and I got into a thicket, where my master, leaning on his lance, and I on my grey, pounded and worn out from the past scuffles, set ourselves to sleep as though it had been on four feather mattresses.

"I especially slept with such a heavy sleep that whoever it was had time to come up and prop me on four stakes he set at the four corners of the pack-saddle, so that he left me sitting on it as though on horseback and got the grey out from under me without my feeling it."

"That is an easy thing, and no new occurrence; for the same thing happened to Sacripante when, at the siege of Albracca, that famous thief called Brunello got his horse out from between his legs by that very same device," said Don Quixote.

"Day came," Sancho went on, "and I had hardly given a shiver when, the stakes going, I came down on the ground with a great fall. I looked for the donkey and did not see him; tears came into my eyes, and I made such a lamentation that if the author of our history did not put it in, he may reckon he put in nothing good. At the end of I do not know how many days, as we were coming along with the lady Princess Micomicona, I recognised my ass, and that riding on him in gypsy dress was that Ginés de Pasamonte, that trickster and enormous scoundrel that my master and I got off the chain."

"That is not where the mistake lies," replied Sansón, "but in the fact that before the donkey had turned up, the author says that Sancho was riding on the same grey."

"To that," said Sancho, "I do not know what to answer, except that the historian was mistaken, or it must have been the printer's carelessness."

"That is certainly it," said Sansón; "but what became of the hundred crowns? Did they melt away?"

Sancho answered:

"I spent them for the good of my own person and my wife's and my children's, and they have been the reason my wife bears patiently with the roads and highways I have gone along serving my master Don Quixote. Because if at the end of all this time I had come home without a farthing and without the donkey, a black fortune would have been waiting for me.

"And if there is anything more to know about me, here I am, and I shall answer the king himself in person; and nobody has any business meddling in whether I brought them or did not bring them, whether I spent them or did not spend them. For if the beatings they gave me on those journeys were to be paid for in money, even if they were only valued at four maravedis apiece, another hundred crowns would not be enough to pay me half of it. And let every man put his hand on his own breast and not set himself to judge white for black and black for white; for every man is as God made him, and often a good deal worse."

"I shall take care," said Carrasco, "to charge the author of the history that if he prints it again he must not forget this that good Sancho has said, which will raise it a good span higher than it stands."

"Is there anything else to correct in this book, master bachelor?" asked Don Quixote.

"There must be," he answered, "but none of it can be of the importance of the ones already mentioned."

"And by any chance," said Don Quixote, "does the author promise a second part?"

"He does promise one," answered Sansón; "but he says he has not found it and does not know who has it, and so we are in doubt whether it will come out or not. And both for this reason and because some say, 'Second parts were never any good,' and others, 'What is written about Don Quixote's affairs is enough,' it is doubted that there is to be a second part — although some who are more jovial than saturnine say: 'Let us have more Quixotries: let Don Quixote charge and Sancho Panza talk, and be it what it may, we shall be satisfied with that.'"

"And what is the author's intention?"

"That," answered Sansón, "as soon as he finds the history he is looking for with extraordinary diligence, he will put it in print at once, moved more by the profit that will come to him from giving it out than by any other praise."

To which Sancho said:

"Money and profit is what the author has his eye on? It will be a marvel if he gets it right, because he will do nothing but botch and botch, like a tailor on the eve of Easter; and works that are done in a hurry are never finished with the perfection they require. Let that Moorish gentleman, or whatever he is, mind what he is doing; for my master and I will give him so much rubble to hand in the matter of adventures and different happenings that he will be able to put together not only a second part but a hundred.

"The good man must think, no doubt, that we are asleep here on the straw; but let him hold our foot while he shoes us and he will see which one we limp on. What I can say is that if my master would take my advice, we should be out in those fields by now undoing injuries and putting wrongs right, as is the use and custom of good knights errant."

Sancho had hardly finished saying this when there came to their ears the neighing of Rocinante; which neighing Don Quixote took for a most fortunate omen, and he decided to make another sally three or four days from then. And declaring his intention to the bachelor, he asked his advice as to which quarter he should begin his journey in.

The bachelor answered that it was his opinion he should go to the kingdom of Aragon and to the city of Saragossa, where in a few days' time some most solemn jousts were to be held for the feast of St George, in which he could win fame above all the knights of Aragon — which would be to win it above all the knights in the world. He praised his decision as most honourable and most valiant, and warned him to go more cautiously in facing dangers, on the grounds that his life was not his own but belonged to all those who needed him to protect them and rescue them in their misfortunes.

"That is the very thing I complain about, Señor Sansón," said Sancho at this point; "for my master goes at a hundred armed men the way a greedy boy goes at half a dozen melons. Body of the world, master bachelor! Surely there are times to attack and times to retreat; surely it cannot all be 'St James, and at them, Spain!'

"And what is more, I have heard it said — and I believe by my master himself, if I remember rightly — that between the extremes of cowardice and rashness lies the middle point of courage. And if this is so, I do not want him to run away when there is no reason to, or to attack when going too far calls for something else.

"But above all, I warn my master that if he is to take me with him, it must be on condition that he does all the fighting himself, and that I am not to be obliged to anything except looking after his person in what concerns his cleanness and his comfort. In that I shall dance attendance on him; but to suppose that I am going to put a hand to my sword, even against low scoundrels with axe and helmet, is to think of what will not happen.

"I, Señor Sansón, do not mean to win a reputation for bravery, but for being the best and most loyal squire that ever served a knight errant. And if my master Don Quixote, obliged by my many good services, should want to give me some isle out of the many his worship says he is bound to come across, I shall receive a great favour in it; and if he does not give me one, I was born anyway, and a man must not live in dependence on anybody but God. And what is more, bread will taste as good to me, and perhaps better, out of a government as in it.

"And how do I know but that in these governments the devil has got some trip-up prepared for me, where I may stumble and fall and knock my teeth out? Sancho I was born and Sancho I mean to die. But if for all that, quietly and easily, without much trouble and without much risk, heaven should send me some isle or something of the sort, I am not such a fool as to throw it away; for they also say: 'When they give you the heifer, run with the halter'; and 'When good fortune comes, get it into your house.'"

"Brother Sancho," said Carrasco, "you have spoken like a professor; but for all that, trust in God and in Señor Don Quixote, who is bound to give you a kingdom, let alone an isle."

"The more is the same as the less," answered Sancho; "although I can tell Señor Carrasco that my master would not be throwing the kingdom he gave me into a torn sack, for I have taken my own pulse and I find myself in health to rule kingdoms and govern isles; and I have told my master this other times already."

"Take care, Sancho," said Sansón, "for office changes manners, and it might be that on seeing yourself a governor you would not know the mother that bore you."

"That is to be understood," answered Sancho, "of those who were born in the mallows, and not of those who have four fingers of Old Christian fat on their souls, as I have. Just come and try my disposition, and see whether it will use ingratitude to anybody!"

"God grant it," said Don Quixote, "and it will show itself when the government comes; for I fancy I have it in front of my eyes already."

This said, he begged the bachelor that if he were a poet he would do him the kindness of composing him some verses that should treat of the leave-taking he meant to make of his lady Dulcinea of El Toboso; and that he should note that at the beginning of each line he was to put a letter of her name, so that at the end of the verses, putting the first letters together, one should read: Dulcinea of El Toboso.

The bachelor answered that although he was not one of the famous poets of Spain — of whom, they said, there were no more than three and a half — he would not fail to compose such verses, although he found a great difficulty in composing them, because the letters that made up the name were seventeen. And that if he made four Castilian stanzas of four lines each, there would be one letter left over; and if of five lines each, which they call ten-liners or roundels, three letters would be missing. But that for all that he would try to swallow one letter as best he could, so that in the four Castilian stanzas the name of Dulcinea of El Toboso should be included.

"It must be so in any case," said Don Quixote; "for if the name is not there plain and manifest, there is no woman who would believe that the verses were made for her."

They settled on this, and that the departure should be a week from then. Don Quixote charged the bachelor to keep it secret, especially from the curate and from Master Nicolás, and from his niece and the housekeeper, so that they should not hinder his honourable and valorous decision. Carrasco promised it all.

With this he took his leave, charging Don Quixote to let him know of all his good or bad fortunes when there was an opportunity. And so they parted, and Sancho went to put in order what was needed for their journey.
