Chapter 5: Of the Judicious and Amusing Conversation That Passed Between Sancho Panza and Teresa Panza His Wife, and Other Events Worthy of Happy Memory

(On coming to write this fifth chapter, the translator of this history says that he holds it to be apocryphal, because in it Sancho Panza talks in a different style from the one that could be expected of his short wit, and says things so subtle that he does not think it possible he could have known them. But that he did not want to leave off translating it, so as to fulfil what he owed to his office; and so he went on, saying:)

Sancho reached his house so delighted and cheerful that his wife saw his cheerfulness a crossbow shot away — so much so that it obliged her to ask him:

"What have you got, Sancho my friend, that you come so cheerful?"

To which he answered:

"Wife, if God had willed it, I should be very glad not to be as pleased as I look."

"I do not understand you, husband," she replied, "and I do not know what you mean by that about your being glad, if God had willed it, not to be pleased; for silly as I am, I do not know who takes pleasure in not having any."

"Look, Teresa," answered Sancho, "I am cheerful because I have decided to go back to serving my master Don Quixote, who means to go out for the third time to look for adventures; and I am going out with him again, because my need requires it, along with the hope — which cheers me — of thinking that I may find another hundred crowns like the ones already spent. Although it makes me sad to have to part from you and my children.

"And if God would give me my food dry-shod and at home, without dragging me over rough ground and crossroads — for he could do it at little cost and by no more than wanting to — it is clear that my cheerfulness would be firmer and sounder, since the cheerfulness I have goes mixed with the sadness of leaving you. So I was right to say I would be glad, if God had willed it, not to be pleased."

"Look, Sancho," replied Teresa, "ever since you made yourself a limb of a knight errant you talk in such a roundabout way that nobody can understand you."

"It is enough that God understands me, wife," answered Sancho, "for He is the understander of all things; and let this stop here. And note, my dear, that you must take care over these three days with the grey, so that he is fit to take up arms: double his feed, see to the pack-saddle and the rest of the tackle, because we are not going to a wedding but to go round the world and to have givings and takings with giants, with dragons and with monsters, and to hear hissings, roarings, bellowings and howlings — and even all this would be lavender-water if we did not have to deal with Yangüesans and enchanted Moors."

"I well believe, husband," replied Teresa, "that squires errant do not eat their bread for nothing; and so I shall stay behind praying to Our Lord to get you out of so much bad fortune soon."

"I tell you, wife," answered Sancho, "that if I did not expect before very long to see myself governor of an isle, I should drop down dead here."

"Not that, my husband," said Teresa; "let the hen live, even with her pip. Live you, and let the devil take all the governments there are in the world. Without a government you came out of your mother's belly, without a government you have lived till now, and without a government you will go — or they will carry you — to the grave when God is pleased. There are plenty of people in the world like that who live without a government, and they do not for that stop living and being counted in the number of the people. The best sauce in the world is hunger; and as the poor are never short of that, they always eat with pleasure.

"But look, Sancho: if by any chance you find yourself with some government, do not forget me and your children. Note that Sanchico is a full fifteen now, and it is right that he should go to school, if his uncle the abbot is to make a churchman of him. Note too that Mari Sancha your daughter will not die if we marry her off; for she is giving me hints that she wants a husband as much as you want to find yourself with a government. And after all, a badly married daughter looks better than a well-kept mistress."

"Upon my word," answered Sancho, "if God brings me to have anything in the way of a government, I mean to marry Mari Sancha off so high, wife, that they will not be able to reach her without calling her My Lady."

"Not that, Sancho," answered Teresa. "Marry her to her equal, which is the soundest thing; because if you take her out of clogs and into high shoes, and out of a brown fourteen-thread skirt into a hooped one and silk gowns, and out of a 'Marica' and a plain 'you' into a 'Doña So-and-so' and a 'Your Ladyship', the girl will not know herself, and at every turn she will fall into a thousand blunders, showing the yarn of her coarse, common cloth."

"Be quiet, you fool," said Sancho; "it will only be a matter of getting used to it for two or three years, and after that the ladyship and the dignity will fit her as though they were moulded. And if not, what does it matter? Let her be Your Ladyship, and come what may."

"Measure yourself by your own condition, Sancho," answered Teresa; "do not try to raise yourself higher, and note the proverb that says: 'Wipe your neighbour's son's nose and take him into your house.' Certainly it would be a fine thing to marry our María to some great count or lordly gentleman who, whenever the fancy took him, would give her a fresh coat of paint, calling her a peasant girl, the daughter of a clod-splitter and a distaff-scraper! Not in my lifetime, husband! Is that, indeed, what I have brought up my daughter for?

"You bring the money, Sancho, and leave the marrying of her to me. For there is Lope Tocho, Juan Tocho's son, a plump, healthy lad, and we know him, and I know he does not look on the girl with a bad eye. And with him, who is our equal, she will be well married, and we shall always have her under our eyes, and we shall all be one — parents and children, grandchildren and sons-in-law — and God's peace and blessing will go about among us all. And do not you go marrying her off now in those courts and those great palaces, where they will neither understand her nor she understand herself."

"Come here, you beast and wife of Barabbas," replied Sancho. "Why do you want now, without rhyme or reason, to stop me marrying my daughter to somebody who will give me grandchildren that are called Your Lordship? Look, Teresa: I have always heard my elders say that the man who does not know how to enjoy good luck when it comes to him ought not to complain when it passes him by. And it would not be right that now, when it is knocking at our door, we should shut it in its face. Let us let ourselves be carried by this favourable wind that is blowing for us."

(It is by this way of talking, and by what Sancho says further on, that the translator of this history said he held this chapter to be apocryphal.)

"Does it not seem to you, you animal," Sancho went on, "that it will be a good thing to drop my body into some profitable government that will get our foot out of the mud? And let Mari Sancha be married to whoever I like, and you will see how they call you Doña Teresa Panza, and how you sit in church on a carpet and cushions and hangings, in spite and to the annoyance of the gentlewomen of the village! And if not, stay always in the same state, without growing or shrinking, like a figure in a tapestry! And let us say no more about this, for Sanchica is to be a countess whatever you may say to me."

"Do you see all you are saying, husband?" answered Teresa. "Well, for all that, I am afraid that this earldom of my daughter's is going to be her ruin. You do what you like, whether you make her a duchess or a princess, but I can tell you that it will not be with my will or my consent.

"I was always a friend to equality, brother, and I cannot bear to see people give themselves airs with no grounds for it. Teresa they put on me at my baptism, a plain, bare name, with no additions or trimmings or the fringes of Dons and Doñas. Cascajo my father was called; and me, for being your wife, they call Teresa Panza, when by good reason they ought to call me Teresa Cascajo. But there, laws go where kings will; and I am content with this name without their putting a Don on top of it that weighs so much I cannot carry it.

"And I do not want to give people anything to talk about when they see me go about dressed like a countess or a governor's wife, for they will say at once: 'Just look how airily the slattern goes! Yesterday she could not get her fill of pulling at a tuft of tow, and went to Mass with her head covered by the tail of her skirt instead of a mantle, and today she goes with a hooped skirt and brooches and airs, as though we did not know her.'

"If God keeps me my seven — or my five — senses, or whichever ones I have, I do not mean to give anybody the chance to see me in such a fix. You go off, brother, and be a government or an isle, and give yourself airs to your heart's content; but my daughter and I, by my mother's memory, are not going to move a step out of our village. The honourable woman has a broken leg and stays at home; and for the modest girl, doing something is her holiday.

"Go off with your Don Quixote to your adventures, and leave us to our misfortunes, for God will improve them for us if we are good. And I certainly do not know who put a Don on him, when neither his parents nor his grandparents had one."

"Now I say," replied Sancho, "that you have some familiar spirit in that body of yours. God help you, woman, and what a lot of things you have strung together, one on another, with neither head nor tail! What have Cascajo and the brooches and the proverbs and the airs to do with what I am saying?

"Come here, you idiot and ignorant woman — for I can call you that, since you do not understand my arguments and go running away from good luck. If I were saying that my daughter should throw herself down from a tower, or go wandering about the world as the princess Doña Urraca wanted to do, you would be right not to fall in with my wishes. But if in two shakes, and in less than the opening and shutting of an eye, I clap a Don and a Ladyship on her back, and take her out of the stubble and put her under a canopy and on a dais, on a platform with more velvet cushions on it than the Almohads of Morocco had Moors in their line — why should you not consent and want what I want?"

"Do you know why, husband?" answered Teresa. "Because of the proverb that says: 'The man who covers you uncovers you.' People run their eyes over the poor man as though in passing, and rest them on the rich one; and if that rich man was once poor, that is where the muttering and the ill-speaking begins, and worse still the persevering of the ill-speakers, who are about these streets in heaps, like swarms of bees."

"Look, Teresa," answered Sancho, "and listen to what I want to tell you now; perhaps you will never have heard it in all the days of your life, and I am not now speaking off my own bat, for everything I mean to say is maxims from the preaching father who preached in this village last Lent — who, if I remember rightly, said that all present things the eyes are looking at present themselves and stand and remain in our memory far better and with more force than things past."

(All these arguments that Sancho goes on making here are the second reason the translator gives for holding this chapter to be apocryphal, since they go beyond Sancho's capacity. And he went on to say:)

"From which it comes about that when we see some person well turned out and dressed in rich clothes and with a train of servants, it seems that it forces us and invites us to have respect for that person, even though our memory at that instant may present to us some low condition we once saw that same person in. Which shame, whether it was of poverty or of birth, since it has passed, is not; and only what we see before us is.

"And if this man, whom fortune has taken out of the rough draft of his low condition — for it was in these very words that the father said it — to the height of his prosperity, is well-bred, generous and courteous with everybody, and does not set himself up in competition with those who are noble by long descent, take it as certain, Teresa, that there will be nobody who remembers what he was, but they will reverence what he is — unless it is the envious, from whom no prosperous fortune is safe."

"I do not understand you, husband," replied Teresa. "Do what you like, and do not break my head any more with your harangues and rhetorics. And if you are revolved on doing what you say —"

"Resolved you should say, wife," said Sancho, "and not revolved."

"Do not set yourself to argue with me, husband," answered Teresa. "I speak as God is pleased to have me, and I do not go into any finer drawing. And I say that if you are persisting in having a government, take your son Sancho with you, so that you may teach him from now on how to have a government; for it is right that children should inherit and learn their fathers' trades."

"As soon as I have a government," said Sancho, "I shall send for him by the post, and I shall send you money, which I shall not be short of; for there is never any lack of people to lend it to governors when they have none. And dress him so as to hide what he is and make him look like what he is going to be."

"You send the money," said Teresa, "and I shall dress him up like a palm-shoot."

"So we are agreed, then," said Sancho, "that our daughter is to be a countess."

"The day I see her a countess," answered Teresa, "that is the day I shall reckon I am burying her. But I tell you again to do what pleases you, for we women are born with this burden of being obedient to our husbands, even if they are blockheads."

And at this she began to weep as truly as though she already saw Sanchica dead and buried. Sancho comforted her by telling her that although he would have to make her a countess, he would make her one as late as he possibly could. With this their talk came to an end, and Sancho went back to see Don Quixote to make arrangements for their departure.
