Chapter 6: Of What Passed Between Don Quixote and His Niece and Housekeeper, Which Is One of the Most Important Chapters in the Whole History

While Sancho Panza and his wife Teresa Cascajo were having the irrelevant conversation just related, Don Quixote's niece and housekeeper were not idle; for by a thousand signs they were gathering that their uncle and master meant to break out for the third time and go back to the practice of his — as they saw it — ill-erring chivalry. They tried by every possible means to turn him away from so bad an idea, but it was all preaching in the desert and hammering cold iron.

For all that, among many other things they said to him, the housekeeper said:

"Truly, my dear sir, if your worship does not plant your feet flat and stay quietly at home, and leave off going about the mountains and the valleys like a soul in torment looking for those things they call adventures — which I call disasters — I shall have to complain aloud and at the top of my voice to God and to the king, so that they may put a stop to it."

To which Don Quixote answered:

"Housekeeper, what God will answer to your complaints I do not know, nor what His Majesty will answer either. I only know that if I were king I would excuse myself from answering the endless infinity of impertinent petitions that are given him every day; for one of the greatest labours kings have, among many others, is being obliged to listen to everybody and answer everybody. And so I would not want affairs of mine to give him any trouble."

To which the housekeeper said:

"Tell us, sir: are there no knights at His Majesty's court?"

"Yes," answered Don Quixote, "and a great many; and it is right that there should be, to adorn the greatness of princes and to display the royal majesty."

"Then would your worship not be one of those," she replied, "who serve their king and lord standing still, staying at court?"

"Look, my friend," answered Don Quixote: "not all knights can be courtiers, nor can or should all courtiers be knights errant. There have to be all kinds in the world; and although we are all knights, there is a great deal of difference between the one sort and the other. Because courtiers, without going out of their rooms or over the threshold of the court, travel all over the world by looking at a map, without its costing them a farthing or their suffering heat or cold, hunger or thirst.

"But we, the true knights errant, in the sun, in the cold, in the wind, in the inclemencies of the sky, by night and by day, on foot and on horseback, measure the whole earth with our own feet. And we know our enemies not only in paintings but in their own being, and we attack them at every pass and on every occasion, without looking at trifles or at the laws of duelling: whether or not the other man's lance or sword is shorter; whether he carries relics on him, or some hidden trick; whether or not the sun is to be divided and shared out, along with other ceremonies of that stamp that are used in private duels between one man and another, which you do not know about and I do.

"And you must know something more: that the good knight errant, even if he sees ten giants whose heads not only touch but go past the clouds, and each of whom has two enormous towers for legs, and whose arms are like the masts of great, powerful ships, and each eye like a great millwheel and burning hotter than a glass furnace, must not be frightened by them in any way at all. On the contrary, with a fine bearing and an intrepid heart he must go at them and charge them, and if it is possible defeat and rout them in a small instant, even if they came armed in the shells of a certain fish which they say are harder than if they were of diamond, and carried instead of swords sharp knives of Damascus steel, or iron-shod clubs with points of steel on them too, as I have seen more than twice.

"All this I have said, my good housekeeper, so that you may see the difference there is between one kind of knight and another. And it would be reasonable that there should be no prince who did not value more highly this second — or rather this first — species of knights errant; for, as we read in their histories, there have been men among them who have been the salvation not of one kingdom only but of many."

"Ah, my dear sir!" said the niece at this point. "Let your worship note that everything you say about knights errant is fable and lies, and their histories, if they were not to be burnt, deserve to have a penitent's smock put on each of them, or some mark by which it would be known as infamous and as a destroyer of good morals."

"By the God who sustains me," said Don Quixote, "if you were not directly my niece, as my own sister's daughter, I would inflict such a punishment on you for the blasphemy you have spoken that it would ring through the whole world. How is it possible that a chit of a girl who hardly knows how to work a dozen lace bobbins should dare to set her tongue to censuring the histories of knights errant?

"What would Señor Amadis say if he heard such a thing? But I am quite sure he would forgive you, because he was the humblest and most courteous knight of his time, and moreover a great protector of maidens. But somebody else might have heard you who would have done you no good by it; for they are not all courteous or well-mannered: there are some villains and boors among them.

"Nor are all those who call themselves knights knights through and through: some are of gold and others of alchemy, and they all look like knights, but not all of them can stand the touchstone of truth. There are low men who burst themselves trying to look like knights, and there are lofty knights who seem to be dying on purpose to look like low men; the first raise themselves either by ambition or by virtue, the second lower themselves either by slackness or by vice. And we need to make use of a discerning judgement to tell apart these two kinds of knights, so alike in their names and so far apart in their actions."

"God help me!" said the niece. "That your worship should know so much, uncle, that if it were needed at a pinch you could get up in a pulpit and go and preach in the streets — and that with all this you should fall into so great a blindness and so plain a foolishness that you give yourself to understand that you are brave when you are old, that you have strength when you are ill, and that you set wrongs right when you are bowed down by age; and, above all, that you are a knight when you are not — because although gentlefolk may be knights, poor men are not!"

"You are quite right, niece, in what you say," answered Don Quixote, "and I could tell you things about lineages that would astonish you; but so as not to mix the divine with the human, I shall not say them.

"Look, my friends: all the lineages there are in the world — and listen to me carefully — can be reduced to four kinds, which are these. Some had humble beginnings and went on spreading and extending until they reached the greatest greatness. Others had great beginnings and went on preserving them, and preserve and maintain them in the condition they began in. Others, although they had great beginnings, ended in a point like a pyramid, having diminished and annihilated their beginning until it stopped at nothing at all — as the point of a pyramid is, which compared with its base or foundation is nothing. And there are others, and these are the most numerous, who neither had a good beginning nor a reasonable middle, and so will have an end without a name, like the lineage of the common and ordinary people.

"Of the first, who had a humble beginning and rose to the greatness they now preserve, let the Ottoman house serve you as an example, which from a humble and lowly shepherd who gave it its beginning stands at the height where we see it. Of the second lineage, which had its beginning in greatness and preserves it without increasing it, many princes will be an example who are princes by inheritance and keep themselves so without increasing or diminishing it, holding themselves peacefully within the limits of their states.

"Of those who began great and ended in a point there are thousands of examples; for all the Pharaohs and Ptolemies of Egypt, the Caesars of Rome, along with the whole crowd — if one may give them that name — of endless princes, monarchs and lords, Medes, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks and barbarians, all these lineages and lordships have ended in a point and in nothing at all, both they and those who gave them their beginning; since it would not be possible now to find any of their descendants, and if we did find one, it would be in a low and humble condition.

"Of the plebeian lineage I have nothing to say, except that it serves only to increase the number of those who are alive, without their greatness deserving any other fame or any other praise.

"From all I have said I want you to gather, my silly girls, that there is great confusion among lineages, and that only those seem great and illustrious that show it in the virtue and in the riches and generosity of their owners. I said virtues, riches and generosity, because the great man who is vicious will be a great vicious man, and the rich man who is not generous will be a miserly beggar; for it is not the having of riches that makes their owner happy but the spending of them — and not the spending of them anyhow, but knowing how to spend them well.

"To the poor knight no other road is left for showing that he is a knight but the road of virtue: being affable, well-bred, courteous, polite and obliging; not proud, not arrogant, not a back-biter, and above all charitable. For with two maravedis that he gives a poor man with a cheerful heart he will show himself as generous as the man who gives alms to the ringing of a bell; and there will be nobody who sees him adorned with the virtues I have mentioned who, even without knowing him, will not judge him and hold him to be of good stock — and his not being so would be a miracle. And praise was always the reward of virtue, and the virtuous cannot fail to be praised.

"There are two roads, my daughters, by which men can go to come to be rich and honoured: one is that of letters, the other that of arms. I have more of arms than of letters, and I was born, judging by my inclination to arms, under the influence of the planet Mars; so that I am almost forced to follow its road, and along it I must go in spite of the whole world. And it will be useless to weary yourselves in persuading me not to want what the heavens want, fortune ordains, reason requires and, above all, my own will desires.

"For knowing as I do the countless labours that go with knight-errantry, I also know the endless goods that are attained by it; and I know that the path of virtue is very narrow and the road of vice broad and spacious; and I know that their ends and destinations are different, because the road of vice, wide and spacious, ends in death, and the road of virtue, narrow and laborious, ends in life — and not in a life that comes to an end but in the one that will have no end. And I know, as our great Castilian poet says, that

	It is along these rough places that the road runs
	to the high seat of immortality,
	which nobody reaches who turns aside from it."

"Oh, unlucky me!" said the niece. "So my master is a poet as well! He knows everything, he can do everything: I would bet that if he wanted to be a bricklayer he would know how to build a house as well as he would build a cage."

"I promise you, niece," answered Don Quixote, "that if these chivalric thoughts did not carry all my senses along with them, there would be nothing I could not do, and no piece of craftsmanship that would not come out of my hands — especially cages and toothpicks."

At this moment there was a knock at the door; and on their asking who was knocking, Sancho Panza answered that it was he. And the housekeeper had hardly recognised him when she ran off to hide so as not to see him, so much did she loathe him. The niece opened the door, his master Don Quixote came out to receive him with open arms, and the two of them shut themselves up in his room, where they had another conversation that the last one does not surpass.
