Chapter 7: Of What Passed Between Don Quixote and His Squire, with Other Most Famous Events

The housekeeper had hardly seen Sancho Panza shutting himself up with her master when she realised what they were up to; and imagining that out of that consultation would come the decision on his third sally, she took her cloak and, full of distress and grief, went to look for the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, thinking that as he was well spoken and a new friend of her master's he might persuade him to give up so deranged a plan.

She found him walking about the courtyard of his house; and on seeing him she let herself drop at his feet, sweating and distressed. When Carrasco saw her with such signs of grief and alarm, he said to her:

"What is this, mistress housekeeper? What has happened to you, that it looks as though your soul were being torn out of you?"

"It is nothing, my dear Señor Sansón, except that my master is coming out — he is coming out, and no doubt about it!"

"And where is he coming out at, madam?" asked Sansón. "Has some part of his body burst?"

"He is not coming out anywhere," she answered, "except at the door of his madness. I mean, master bachelor of my soul, that he wants to go out again — and with this it will be the third time — to look about the world for what he calls good fortunes, when I cannot understand how he gives them that name.

"The first time they brought him back to us slung across a donkey, pounded with blows. The second he came on an ox-cart, put away and shut up in a cage, where he gave himself to understand that he was enchanted; and the poor creature came in such a state that the mother who bore him would not have known him: thin, yellow, his eyes sunk into the topmost garrets of his brain — so that to bring him round somewhat I got through more than six hundred eggs, as God knows and everybody knows, and my hens, who will not let me lie."

"That I well believe," answered the bachelor; "for they are so good, so fat and so well brought up that they would not say one thing for another if they burst. In fact, mistress housekeeper: is there nothing else, and has no other mishap happened, but this that is feared Señor Don Quixote wants to do?"

"No, sir," she answered.

"Then do not distress yourself," answered the bachelor; "but go home and good luck to you, and have something hot ready for my breakfast, and on the way go and say the prayer of St Apollonia, if you know it; for I shall come along presently and you shall see marvels."

"Wretched me!" replied the housekeeper. "Your worship says I am to say the prayer of St Apollonia? That would be if my master had it in his teeth, but he has it in nothing but his skull."

"I know what I am saying, mistress housekeeper. Go, and do not set yourself to argue with me; for you know I am a bachelor of Salamanca, and there is no more bachelling to be done," answered Carrasco.

And with this the housekeeper went off, and the bachelor went straight away to look for the curate, to discuss with him what will be told in its own time.

During the time Don Quixote and Sancho were shut up together, there passed the words that the history relates with great exactness and truthful report.

Sancho said to his master:

"Sir, I have got my wife reclined to letting me go with your worship wherever you like to take me."

"Reconciled you should say, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "not reclined."

"Once or twice," answered Sancho, "if I remember rightly, I have begged your worship not to correct my words, so long as you understand what I mean by them; and that when you do not understand them you should say, 'Sancho, or devil, I do not understand you'; and if I do not make myself clear, then you may correct me. For I am so fossil —"

"I do not understand you, Sancho," said Don Quixote at once, "since I do not know what 'I am so fossil' means."

"'So fossil' means," answered Sancho, "I am so like that."

"I understand you less than ever now," replied Don Quixote.

"Well, if you cannot understand me," answered Sancho, "I do not know how to put it: I know no more, and God be with me."

"Ah, now, now I see it," answered Don Quixote: "you mean to say that you are so docile, mild and manageable that you will take whatever I tell you and go along with whatever I teach you."

"I would bet," said Sancho, "that from the very beginning you fathomed me and understood me, and only wanted to muddle me so as to hear me say another two hundred blunders."

"That may be," replied Don Quixote. "And in fact, what does Teresa say?"

"Teresa says," said Sancho, "that I should tie my finger tight to your worship, and that papers should speak and beards keep quiet; because whoever cuts does not shuffle, and one 'take this' is worth more than two 'I'll give you'. And I say that a woman's advice is little, and the man who does not take it is mad."

"And I say so too," answered Don Quixote. "Speak on, friend Sancho; go ahead, for you are talking pearls today."

"The case is," replied Sancho, "that, as your worship knows better than I do, we are all subject to death, and today we are and tomorrow we are not, and the lamb goes as quickly as the sheep, and nobody can promise himself in this world more hours of life than God chooses to give him — because death is deaf, and when she comes to knock at the doors of our life she is always in a hurry, and neither prayers nor force nor sceptres nor mitres will make her stop, according to common report and fame and according to what they tell us from those pulpits."

"All that is true," said Don Quixote, "but I do not know where you are getting to."

"I am getting to this," said Sancho: "that your worship should fix me a set wage of what you are to give me each month for the time I serve you, and that the said wage should be paid me out of your property. For I do not want to be at the mercy of favours, which come late, or badly, or never; God help me with what is my own.

"In short, I want to know what I am earning, be it little or much; for the hen lays on one egg, and many littles make a much, and while something is being earned nothing is being lost. It is true that if it should happen — which I neither believe nor expect — that your worship gave me the isle you have promised me, I am not so ungrateful, nor do I take things so to the last hair, as not to want the income of that isle to be valued and deducted from my wages pro cat-a."

"Friend Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "sometimes a cat may serve as well as a rat."

"I understand," said Sancho: "I would bet you were going to say rata and not cata; but it does not matter at all, since your worship has understood me."

"And so well understood," answered Don Quixote, "that I have penetrated to the bottom of your thoughts, and I know the target you are shooting at with the innumerable arrows of your proverbs.

"Look, Sancho: I would readily fix you a wage if I had found in any of the histories of the knights errant an example that revealed and showed me, through some small chink, what they used to earn each month or each year. But I have read all, or most, of their histories, and I do not remember having read that any knight errant ever fixed a set wage for his squire. I only know that they all served on favour, and that when they least expected it, if their lords' luck had run well, they found themselves rewarded with an isle or with something equivalent, and at the very least were left with a title and a lordship.

"If on these hopes and terms you, Sancho, care to come back and serve me, so be it and good luck to you; for to think that I am going to take the ancient usage of knight-errantry off its hinges and out of its bounds is to think of what will not happen. So, my Sancho, go back to your house and declare my intention to your Teresa; and if she is willing and you are willing to be on favour with me, bene quidem; and if not, we are as good friends as before. For if the dovecote is not short of food, it will not be short of doves.

"And note, my son, that a good hope is worth more than a poor possession, and a good grievance than a bad payment. I speak in this way, Sancho, to give you to understand that I too, like you, know how to hurl proverbs as though they rained.

"And, in short, I mean to say, and I do say, that if you do not want to come on favour with me and run the same luck as I run, God be with you and make a saint of you; for I shall not be short of squires who are more obedient, more attentive and not as awkward or as talkative as you."

When Sancho heard his master's firm resolution, the sky clouded over for him and the wings fell off his heart, because he had believed that his master would not go without him for all the wealth in the world. And so, while he was standing there in suspense and thoughtful, Sansón Carrasco came in with the niece, eager to hear with what arguments he would persuade his master not to go back to looking for adventures.

Sansón came up, that famous joker; and embracing him as he had the first time, he said to him in a raised voice:

"O flower of knight-errantry! O shining light of arms! O honour and mirror of the Spanish nation! May it please God Almighty, where it is more fully set down, that whatever person or persons put an obstacle in the way of and hinder your third sally may never find their way out of the labyrinth of their own desires, and may never have their wicked wishes fulfilled."

And turning to the housekeeper, he said:

"Mistress housekeeper may perfectly well leave off saying the prayer of St Apollonia; for I know that it is a settled decision of the spheres that Señor Don Quixote should go back to carrying out his lofty new intentions. And I should be greatly burdening my own conscience if I did not urge and persuade this knight not to keep the strength of his valorous arm and the goodness of his most valiant spirit any longer shrunk up and held back — because by his delay he is cheating the righting of wrongs, the protection of orphans, the honour of maidens, the support of widows and the prop of married women, along with other things of that stamp that touch, concern, depend on and belong to the order of knight-errantry.

"Come, my dear Señor Don Quixote, handsome and brave: let your worship and your greatness set out today rather than tomorrow; and if anything is lacking for putting it into effect, here am I to supply it with my person and my property. And if it should be necessary to serve your magnificence as a squire, I shall count it the greatest good fortune!"

At this Don Quixote said, turning to Sancho:

"Did I not tell you, Sancho, that I should have squires to spare? See who offers himself to be one: none other than the unheard-of bachelor Sansón Carrasco, perpetual jester and merrymaker of the courtyards of the Salamanca schools, sound in his person, agile in his limbs, silent, an endurer of heat as well as of cold, of hunger as well as of thirst, with all those qualities that are required for being a knight errant's squire.

"But heaven forbid that, to follow my own pleasure, I should hamstring and break the pillar of letters and the vessel of the sciences, and cut down the eminent palm of the good and liberal arts. Let the new Samson stay in his own country and, honouring it, honour along with it the grey hairs of his aged parents; for I shall be content with any squire at all, since Sancho does not deign to come with me."

"I do deign," answered Sancho, softened and with his eyes full of tears; and he went on: "It shall not be said of me, my dear sir, 'the bread eaten and the company broken up.' No, I do not come of any ungrateful stock; for the whole world knows, and especially my village, who the Panzas were that I descend from. And what is more, I have recognised and fathomed by many good deeds, and by more good words, the wish your worship has to do me favours.

"And if I have got into reckonings of so much more and so much less about my wages, it has been to please my wife; who, when she takes it into her head to press for a thing, there is no mallet that tightens the hoops of a cask as hard as she presses for what she wants to be done. But in the end a man must be a man and a woman a woman; and since I am a man wherever I am, which I cannot deny, I mean to be one in my own house too, whoever it may displease.

"And so there is nothing more to do but for your worship to draw up your will with its codicil, in such a way that it cannot be revolted, and let us set off at once, so that Señor Sansón's soul may not suffer, since he says his conscience diktates him to persuade your worship to go out into the world a third time. And I offer myself afresh to serve your worship faithfully and loyally, as well as and better than all the squires who have served knights errant in past and present times."

The bachelor was astonished to hear Sancho Panza's manner and way of talking; for although he had read the first history of his master, he had never believed he was as amusing as they paint him there. But hearing him now say "a will and codicil that cannot be revolted", instead of "a will and codicil that cannot be revoked", he believed everything he had read about him, and confirmed him as one of the most solemn idiots of our times; and he said to himself that two such madmen as master and man had never been seen in the world.

Finally Don Quixote and Sancho embraced and stayed friends; and with the advice and approval of the great Carrasco, who was for the time being their oracle, it was arranged that their departure should be three days from then, in which time there would be room to get ready what was needed for the journey and to look for a close helmet, which Don Quixote said he must in any case take with him. Sansón offered him one, because he knew a friend of his who had one would not refuse it him — although it was darker with rust and mould than it was bright and clean with polished steel.

The curses the two women, housekeeper and niece, hurled at the bachelor were beyond counting: they tore their hair, they scratched their faces, and in the manner of the hired mourners of those days they lamented the departure as though it were their master's death. The design Sansón had in persuading him to go out again was to do what the history relates further on, all on the advice of the curate and the barber, with whom he had discussed it beforehand.

In short, in those three days Don Quixote and Sancho provided themselves with what they thought suited them; and Sancho having pacified his wife and Don Quixote his niece and his housekeeper, at nightfall, without anybody's seeing them except the bachelor, who wanted to go half a league out of the village with them, they set out on the road to El Toboso: Don Quixote on his good Rocinante and Sancho on his old grey, his saddlebags provided with things belonging to the commissariat and his purse with money that Don Quixote gave him for whatever might come up.

Sansón embraced him and begged him to send him news of his good or bad luck, so as to be glad at the one or sorry at the other, as the laws of their friendship required. Don Quixote promised it him, Sansón turned back to his village, and the two of them took the road to the great city of El Toboso.
