Chapter 8: Which Relates What Happened to Don Quixote on His Way to See His Lady Dulcinea of El Toboso

"Blessed be the mighty Allah!" says Hamete Benengeli at the beginning of this eighth chapter. "Blessed be Allah!" he repeats three times; and he says that he gives these blessings because he sees that he now has Don Quixote and Sancho out in the field, and that the readers of his agreeable history may reckon that from this point Don Quixote's exploits and pleasantries and his squire's begin.

He urges them to forget the ingenious gentleman's past chivalries and set their eyes on the ones that are to come, which now begin on the road to El Toboso as the others began on the plains of Montiel; and it is not much that he asks for so much as he promises. And so he goes on, saying:

Don Quixote and Sancho were left alone; and Sansón had hardly gone off when Rocinante began to neigh and the grey to sigh, which was taken by both of them, knight and squire, for a good sign and a most fortunate omen — although, if the truth is to be told, the grey's sighs and brayings were more numerous than the hack's neighing, from which Sancho gathered that his own fortune was bound to overtop his master's and set itself above it. He founded this on I do not know what judicial astrology he happened to know, although the history does not explain it; they only heard him say that when he stumbled or fell he was glad he had not come out of the house, because from stumbling or falling nothing came but a torn shoe or broken ribs. And, fool though he was, he was not very far off the road in this.

Don Quixote said to him:

"Friend Sancho, night is coming down on us fast, and with more darkness than we needed to be able to see El Toboso by daylight — where I have decided to go before I put myself into any other adventure; and there I shall receive the blessing and the kind leave of the peerless Dulcinea, with which leave I expect and hold it certain that I shall finish and bring to a happy end every dangerous adventure. Because nothing in this life makes knights errant braver than seeing themselves favoured by their ladies."

"So I believe," answered Sancho; "but I think it will be difficult for your worship to speak to her or be with her in any place, at least, where you can receive her blessing — unless she throws it down to you from the wall of the yard, which is where I saw her the first time, when I took her the letter with the news of the follies and mad things your worship was doing in the heart of the Sierra Morena."

"Was it the wall of a yard that you took that for, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "where or through which you saw that never sufficiently praised gentility and beauty? It cannot have been anything but the galleries or corridors, or the arcades, or whatever they call them, of rich and royal palaces."

"It might all have been so," answered Sancho, "but it looked like a wall to me — unless I am short of memory."

"For all that, let us go there, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "for so long as I see her, it makes no difference to me whether it is over a wall or through windows, or through chinks or garden railings; for any ray from the sun of her beauty that reaches my eyes will light my understanding and strengthen my heart, so that I shall be left unique and unequalled in good sense and in courage."

"Well, truly, sir," answered Sancho, "when I saw that sun of the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, it was not so bright that it could throw off any rays at all; and it must have been that, as her worship was winnowing that wheat I mentioned, the great deal of dust she was raising settled like a cloud in front of her face and darkened it."

"Do you still persist, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "in saying, in thinking, in believing and in insisting that my lady Dulcinea was winnowing wheat — when that is a task and an occupation far removed from everything that people of standing do and ought to do, who are set up and kept for other occupations and pastimes that show their standing from a crossbow shot away?

"How badly you remember, Sancho, those verses of our poet where he paints for us the work those four nymphs were doing in their dwellings of crystal, who put their heads out of the beloved Tagus and sat down in the green meadow to work those rich webs the ingenious poet describes to us there, which were all of gold and silk and pearls woven and worked in together. And in this way my lady's work must have been when you saw her; except that the envy some wicked enchanter must have for my affairs changes and turns everything that is to give me pleasure into shapes different from their own.

"And so I am afraid that in that history of my exploits they say is going about in print, if by any chance its author has been some sage who is an enemy of mine, he will have put one thing for another, mixing a thousand lies with one truth and amusing himself with telling other actions outside what the continuity of a true history requires. Oh envy, root of endless evils and canker of the virtues! All the other vices, Sancho, bring a certain something of pleasure with them, but envy brings nothing but disgusts, bitternesses and rages."

"That is what I say too," answered Sancho; "and I think that in that book or history the bachelor Carrasco told us he had seen about us, my honour must be going about dragged this way and that, all over the place, sweeping the streets. Well, on the word of a good man, I have never spoken ill of any enchanter, nor have I so many good things that I could be envied.

"It is quite true that I am somewhat malicious and that I have my certain hints of a rogue about me; but it is all covered and hidden by the great cloak of my simplicity, which is always natural and never contrived. And even if I had nothing else but believing, as I always do believe, firmly and truly in God and in everything the Holy Roman Catholic Church holds and believes, and being, as I am, a mortal enemy of the Jews, the historians ought to have mercy on me and treat me well in their writings. But let them say what they like; for naked I was born and naked I find myself: I neither lose nor gain. Though, seeing myself put into books and going about the world from hand to hand, I do not care a fig what they say about me."

"That seems to me, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "like what happened to a famous poet of these times, who, having written a malicious satire against all the ladies of the court, did not put in or name one lady about whom it might be doubted whether she was one or not. And she, seeing that she was not on the list with the rest, complained to the poet, asking him what he had seen in her that he had not put her in the number of the others, and telling him to lengthen the satire and put her in the enlargement — and if not, to look out for what he was born for. The poet did it, and put her in in terms not fit for duennas to repeat; and she was satisfied at finding herself with a reputation, even an infamous one.

"With this too goes what they tell of that shepherd who set fire to and burnt down the famous temple of Diana, counted one of the seven wonders of the world, only so that his name should stay alive in the ages to come. And although it was ordered that nobody should name him or make mention of his name by word or in writing, so that he should not achieve the end of his desire, still it came to be known that his name was Herostratus.

"To this also belongs what happened to the great Emperor Charles the Fifth with a gentleman in Rome. The emperor wanted to see that famous temple of the Rotunda, which in ancient times was called the temple of all the gods and now, with a better dedication, is called the temple of all the saints; and it is the building that has been left most entire of those the heathen raised in Rome, and the one that best preserves the fame of the grandeur and magnificence of its founders. It is made in the shape of half an orange, enormously great, and is very light, with no other light coming into it than what is allowed by one window — or rather a round skylight — that stands at its top.

"And the emperor was looking at the building from there, and with him and at his side was a Roman gentleman, explaining to him the beauties and subtleties of that great machine and memorable architecture. And when they had come away from the skylight, he said to the emperor: 'A thousand times, Sacred Majesty, the wish came to me to take hold of your Majesty and throw myself down from that skylight, so as to leave an eternal fame of myself in the world.'

"'I thank you,' answered the emperor, 'for not having put so wicked a thought into effect; and from now on I shall not put you in the way of testing your loyalty again. And so I order you never to speak to me, or to be anywhere where I am.' And after these words he did him a great favour.

"I mean, Sancho, that the desire to attain fame is extremely active. Who do you suppose it was that threw Horatius down from the bridge, armed at all points, into the depths of the Tiber? Who burnt Mucius's arm and hand? Who drove Curtius to hurl himself into the deep burning chasm that opened in the middle of Rome? Who, against all the omens that had been shown against it, made Caesar cross the Rubicon? And, with more modern examples, who scuttled the ships and left high and dry and cut off the valorous Spaniards led by that most courteous Cortés in the New World?

"All these and other great and various exploits are, were and shall be the works of fame, which mortals desire as rewards and as part of the immortality their famous deeds deserve — although we Christians, Catholics and knights errant must attend more to the glory of the ages to come, which is everlasting in the ethereal and heavenly regions, than to the vanity of the fame that is won in this present and perishable age; which fame, however long it lasts, must in the end come to an end with the world itself, which has its own appointed end.

"So, Sancho, our works must not go outside the limit the Christian religion we profess has set for us. We have to kill pride in the giants; envy, by generosity and a good heart; anger, by a calm bearing and quietness of mind; gluttony and sleep, by the little we eat and the long watches we keep; lust and lasciviousness, by the loyalty we keep to those we have made the ladies of our thoughts; sloth, by going about all the parts of the world looking for the occasions that may make us, and do make us, famous knights as well as Christians. See here, Sancho, the means by which are reached the highest praises that a good name brings with it."

"Everything your worship has told me up to now," said Sancho, "I have understood very well; but for all that, I should like your worship to absorb me a doubt that has just come into my memory at this moment."

"Absolve, you mean, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Say on and welcome, and I shall answer what I know."

"Tell me, sir," Sancho went on: "those Julys or Augusts, and all those valiant knights you have mentioned, who are dead by now — where are they now?"

"The heathen," answered Don Quixote, "are without doubt in hell; the Christians, if they were good Christians, are either in purgatory or in heaven."

"Very good," said Sancho; "but let us know now: those graves where the bodies of those great gentlemen lie — have they silver lamps in front of them, or are the walls of their chapels hung with crutches, with shrouds, with wigs, with legs and eyes of wax? And if not with that, what are they hung with?"

To which Don Quixote answered:

"The tombs of the heathen were for the most part sumptuous temples: the ashes of Julius Caesar's body were set on a stone pyramid of outrageous size, which today in Rome they call St Peter's Needle. The emperor Hadrian had for his tomb a castle as big as a good-sized village, which they called Moles Hadriani, and which is now the castle of Sant' Angelo in Rome. Queen Artemisia buried her husband Mausolus in a tomb that was held to be one of the seven wonders of the world. But none of these tombs, nor many others the heathen had, was hung with shrouds or with other offerings and signs that showed those buried in them to be saints."

"That is what I am coming to," replied Sancho. "And tell me now: which is more — to raise a dead man, or to kill a giant?"

"The answer is at hand," answered Don Quixote: "raising a dead man is more."

"I have you now," said Sancho. "Then the fame of the man who raises the dead, gives sight to the blind, straightens the lame and gives health to the sick — and in front of whose tombs lamps burn, and whose chapels are full of devout people who kneel and worship his relics — will be a better fame, for this world and for the next, than the fame all the heathen emperors and knights errant there have ever been in the world left or ever shall leave."

"I confess that truth too," answered Don Quixote.

"Well, this fame, these graces, these prerogatives — as they call this," answered Sancho, "belong to the bodies and the relics of the saints, who, with the approval and licence of our holy mother the Church, have lamps, candles, shrouds, crutches, paintings, wigs, eyes and legs, by which they increase devotion and enlarge their Christian fame. Kings carry the bodies of the saints, or their relics, on their own shoulders; they kiss the pieces of their bones; they adorn and enrich their oratories and their most treasured altars with them —"

"What do you want me to infer, Sancho, from all you have said?" said Don Quixote.

"I mean," said Sancho, "that we should set about being saints, and we shall get the good fame we are after a great deal sooner. And note, sir, that yesterday or the day before — for one may put it that way, it is so short a time ago — they canonised or beatified two little barefoot friars, whose iron chains that they used to gird and torment their bodies with people now count it a great piece of luck to kiss and touch; and they are held in more veneration than, as I said, Roland's sword in the armoury of the king our lord, whom God keep.

"So, my dear sir, it is better to be a humble little friar of whatever order it may be than a valiant knight errant; two dozen scourgings do more with God than two thousand lance-thrusts, whether they give them to giants or to monsters or to drakins."

"All that is so," answered Don Quixote, "but we cannot all be friars, and many are the roads by which God takes his own to heaven: chivalry is a religion, and there are knights who are saints in glory."

"Yes," answered Sancho, "but I have heard it said that there are more friars in heaven than knights errant."

"That is," answered Don Quixote, "because the number of religious is greater than that of knights."

"There are many knights errant," said Sancho.

"Many," answered Don Quixote, "but few who deserve the name of knights."

In these and other such talk that night and the following day went by for them, without anything happening to them worth telling, which grieved Don Quixote not a little.

At last, the next day at nightfall, they made out the great city of El Toboso, at whose sight Don Quixote's spirits were gladdened and Sancho's saddened — because he did not know Dulcinea's house, nor had he ever in his life seen her, any more than his master had seen her. So that the one because he wanted to see her, and the other because he had never seen her, were both agitated; and Sancho could not imagine what he was to do when his master sent him to El Toboso.

Finally Don Quixote arranged to go into the city after nightfall; and while the hour was coming on they stayed among some oak trees that stood near El Toboso. And when the appointed moment came they went into the city, where things happened to them that come to something indeed.
