Chapter 9: Which Relates What Will Be Seen There

It was exactly midnight, more or less, when Don Quixote and Sancho left the hill and went into El Toboso. The town was in a peaceful silence, because all its inhabitants were asleep and resting with their legs stretched out, as they say. The night was half clear, although Sancho would have liked it to be altogether dark, so as to find in its darkness an excuse for his own foolishness.

Nothing was to be heard in the whole place but the barking of dogs, which thundered in Don Quixote's ears and troubled Sancho's heart. From time to time a donkey brayed, pigs grunted, cats miaowed; and these voices of different sounds were made louder by the silence of the night — all of which the enamoured knight took for a bad omen. But for all that, he said to Sancho:

"Sancho my son, lead the way to Dulcinea's palace: it might be that we shall find her awake."

"To what palace am I to lead the way, body of the sun," answered Sancho, "when the one I saw her greatness in was nothing but a very small house?"

"She must have withdrawn at the time," answered Don Quixote, "into some small apartment of her castle, taking her pleasure alone with her maidens, as is the use and custom of great ladies and princesses."

"Sir," said Sancho, "since your worship insists, in spite of me, that my lady Dulcinea's house is a castle, is this by any chance an hour to find the door open? And will it be right for us to give great knocks so that they may hear us and open to us, throwing all the people into an uproar and a commotion? Are we by any chance going to knock at the door of our kept women, as men do who keep mistresses, who come and knock and go in at whatever hour it may be, however late?"

"Let us first of all find the castle once and for all," replied Don Quixote, "and then I shall tell you, Sancho, what it will be well for us to do. And note, Sancho, that either I see badly or that great bulk and shadow that shows from here must be Dulcinea's palace."

"Then let your worship lead the way," answered Sancho: "perhaps it is so — although I shall see it with my eyes and touch it with my hands, and then I shall believe it as much as I believe it is now daylight."

Don Quixote led the way; and having gone about two hundred paces, he came upon the bulk that was casting the shadow, and saw a great tower, and then recognised that this building was no castle but the chief church of the town. And he said:

"We have come upon the church, Sancho."

"So I see," answered Sancho; "and please God we do not come upon our own graves, for it is no good sign to be going about among cemeteries at such hours — and the more so as I told your worship, if I remember rightly, that this lady's house must be up a little blind alley."

"God's curse on you, you idiot!" said Don Quixote. "Where have you found it laid down that castles and royal palaces are built up blind alleys?"

"Sir," answered Sancho, "every country has its own custom: perhaps here in El Toboso it is the custom to build palaces and great buildings up alleys. And so I beg your worship to let me look about these streets or alleys that offer themselves: it might be that in some corner I should come across this castle — and may I see it eaten by dogs, for it has us running about and worn out like this."

"Speak with respect, Sancho, of my lady's affairs," said Don Quixote; "and let us keep the peace and not throw the rope after the bucket."

"I shall restrain myself," answered Sancho; "but with what patience can I bear it that your worship should expect me, from one single time when I saw our mistress's house, to know it for ever and to find it at midnight — when your worship cannot find it, and must have seen it thousands of times?"

"You will drive me to despair, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Come here, you heretic: have I not told you a thousand times that in all the days of my life I have never seen the peerless Dulcinea, nor ever crossed the threshold of her palace, and that I am in love only by hearsay and by the great reputation she has for beauty and good sense?"

"Now I hear it," answered Sancho; "and I say that since your worship has never seen her, neither have I —"

"That cannot be," replied Don Quixote; "for at the very least you have told me yourself that you saw her winnowing wheat, when you brought me the answer to the letter I sent her by you."

"Do not go by that, sir," answered Sancho, "for I would have you know that the sight of her and the answer I brought you were by hearsay too; because I know who the lady Dulcinea is about as well as I could hit the sky with my fist."

"Sancho, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "there are times for joking and times when jokes fall flat and look bad. Just because I say that I have neither seen nor spoken to the lady of my soul, you are not to say too that you have neither spoken to her nor seen her, when it is quite the other way about, as you know."

While the two of them were in this conversation, they saw a man coming past where they were with two mules; and from the noise the plough made as it dragged along the ground they judged he must be a labourer who had got up before daylight to go to his ploughing — and so it turned out. The labourer came along singing that ballad that goes:

	It went ill with you, Frenchmen,
	in that hunt at Roncesvalles.

"May they kill me, Sancho," said Don Quixote on hearing it, "if anything good is going to happen to us tonight. Do you not hear what that countryman is singing?"

"I do hear it," answered Sancho; "but what has the hunt at Roncesvalles to do with our business? He might just as well have been singing the ballad of Calaínos, for all the difference it would make to whether things go well or badly for us in our affair."

At this the labourer came up, and Don Quixote asked him:

"Could you tell me, my good friend — and may God give you good fortune — whereabouts here are the palaces of the peerless princess Doña Dulcinea of El Toboso?"

"Sir," answered the lad, "I am a stranger here and have only been a few days in this town, working for a rich farmer at the field labour. In that house opposite live the curate and the sacristan of the place; either of them, or both, will be able to give your worship an account of this lady princess, because they have the list of all the inhabitants of El Toboso — although it is my belief that there is no princess at all living in the whole of it. A great many ladies of standing, yes; and each of them may be a princess in her own house."

"Then among those, my friend," said Don Quixote, "must be the one I am asking you about."

"That may be," answered the lad; "and goodbye, for the dawn is coming."

And whipping up his mules, he waited for no more questions.

Sancho, who saw his master in suspense and thoroughly discontented, said to him:

"Sir, the day is coming on fast, and it would not be sensible to let the sun find us in the street. It will be better for us to get outside the city, and for your worship to hide in some wood near here; and I shall come back by day, and shall not leave a nook in this whole place where I do not look for my lady's house, castle or palace — and I should be unlucky indeed if I did not find it. And when I have found it, I shall speak to her worship and tell her where and how your worship is left waiting for her to give you an arrangement and a plan for seeing her, without any damage to her honour and reputation."

"You have spoken, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "a thousand maxims shut up in the circle of a few words: the advice you have now given me I like and receive most willingly. Come, my son, and let us go and look for somewhere for me to hide; and you shall come back, as you say, to look for, to see and to speak to my lady, from whose good sense and courtesy I expect more than miraculous favours."

Sancho was frantic to get his master out of the town, so that he should not find out the lie about the answer he had taken him from Dulcinea in the Sierra Morena; and so he hurried their going, which took place at once. And two miles from the place they found a wood or grove, where Don Quixote hid himself while Sancho went back to the city to speak to Dulcinea — on which embassy things happened to him that call for fresh attention and fresh belief.
