Chapter 10: Which Relates the Trick Sancho Used in Enchanting the Lady Dulcinea, and Other Events as Ridiculous as They Are True

On coming to relate what he relates in this chapter, the author of this great history says that he would have liked to pass it over in silence, for fear it would not be believed; because Don Quixote's mad acts here reached the limit and boundary of the greatest that can be imagined, and even went two crossbow shots beyond the greatest. Finally, although with this fear and misgiving, he wrote them exactly as Don Quixote did them, without adding to the history or taking from it one atom of the truth, and without caring at all about the objections that might be raised against him as a liar. And he was right, because truth may be worn thin but does not break, and always floats on top of lies as oil does on water.

And so, going on with his history, he says that as soon as Don Quixote had hidden himself in the grove, oak wood or forest beside the great El Toboso, he ordered Sancho to go back to the city, and not to come back into his presence without having first spoken to his lady on his behalf, begging her that she would be pleased to let herself be seen by her captive knight and would deign to give him her blessing, so that he might hope through it for the most fortunate outcomes to all his undertakings and difficult enterprises. Sancho undertook to do it exactly as he was ordered and to bring him back as good an answer as he had brought him the first time.

"Go, my son," replied Don Quixote, "and do not be alarmed when you find yourself before the light of the sun of beauty you are going to look for. Happy you, above all the squires in the world!

"Have your memory ready, and do not let it slip how she receives you: whether she changes colour while you are giving her my message; whether she becomes uneasy and agitated on hearing my name; whether she cannot keep still on her cushion, if you happen to find her seated on the rich dais of her authority. And if she is standing, watch whether she shifts now onto one foot and now onto the other; whether she repeats the answer she gives you two or three times; whether she changes it from mild to harsh, from sour to loving; whether she raises a hand to her hair to tidy it even when it is not untidy.

"In short, my son, watch all her actions and movements; because if you report them to me as they were, I shall work out what she has hidden in the secret of her heart about the matter of my love. For you must know, Sancho, if you do not know it, that among lovers the outward actions and movements they show, when their love affairs are in question, are the most certain couriers, bringing the news of what is going on inside the soul. Go, my friend, and may a better fortune than mine guide you, and may a better outcome bring you back than the one I am left fearing and hoping for in this bitter solitude where you leave me."

"I shall go and come back quickly," said Sancho; "and let your worship widen out that little heart of yours, my dear sir, for it must be no bigger than a hazelnut just now. And consider that they say a stout heart breaks bad luck, and that where there is no bacon there are no hooks; and they also say: the hare jumps up where nobody expects it. I say this because if we did not find my lady's palaces or castles last night, now that it is daylight I mean to find them when I least expect it — and once they are found, leave me alone with her."

"Truly, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "you always bring in your proverbs as much to the point of what we are discussing as God may give me better luck in what I want."

This said, Sancho turned his back and switched up his grey; and Don Quixote stayed on horseback, resting on his stirrups and on the support of his lance, full of sad and confused fancies. And there we shall leave him and go with Sancho Panza, who left his master no less confused and thoughtful than his master was left — so much so that he had hardly got out of the wood when, turning his head and seeing that Don Quixote was out of sight, he got down off the donkey and, sitting at the foot of a tree, began to talk to himself and to say:

"Now let us know, brother Sancho, where your worship is going. Are you going to look for some donkey that has got lost? 'Certainly not.' Then what are you going to look for? 'I am going to look for — as though it were nothing at all — a princess, and in her the sun of beauty and the whole sky put together.' And where do you expect to find this thing you speak of, Sancho? 'Where? In the great city of El Toboso.'

"Very well: and on whose behalf are you going to look for her? 'On behalf of the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, who rights wrongs, and gives food to the man who is thirsty and drink to the man who is hungry.' All that is very well. And do you know her house, Sancho? 'My master says it must be royal palaces or splendid castles.' And have you by any chance ever seen it? 'Neither I nor my master have ever seen it.'

"And does it seem to you that it would be sensible and well done if the people of El Toboso, learning that you were here meaning to coax their princesses away and unsettle their ladies, were to come and pound your ribs with sticks and not leave a whole bone in you? 'Truly they would be quite right, unless they considered that I am under orders, and that "a messenger you are, my friend, no blame belongs to you, not you."'

"Do not rely on that, Sancho, because the people of La Mancha are as hot-tempered as they are honourable, and they will not stand being tickled by anybody. By the living God, if they get wind of you I promise you bad luck. 'Get away, you rogue! Strike somewhere else, lightning! No, indeed — am I to go looking for three feet on a cat for somebody else's pleasure? And what is more, looking for Dulcinea in El Toboso will be like looking for Marica in Ravenna, or for the bachelor in Salamanca. The devil, the devil has got me into this, and nobody else!'"

This soliloquy Sancho had with himself, and what he got out of it was that he went on to say to himself:

"Very well: everything has a remedy except death, under whose yoke we must all pass, however it displeases us, at the end of our lives. This master of mine, by a thousand signs, I have seen is a madman fit to be tied — and I am not far behind him either, since I am more of an idiot than he is, seeing that I follow him and serve him, if the proverb is true that says: 'Tell me who you go about with and I shall tell you who you are,' and the other one: 'Not who you are born with but who you graze with.'

"Well, he being mad as he is, and with a madness that most often takes one thing for another and judges white for black and black for white — as appeared when he said the windmills were giants, and the friars' mules dromedaries, and the flocks of sheep armies of enemies, and a great many other things in the same key — it will not be very difficult to make him believe that a country girl, the first I come across here, is the lady Dulcinea. And if he does not believe it, I shall swear to it; and if he swears, I shall swear back; and if he insists, I shall insist harder, in such a way that I shall always have my end of the plank on top, come what may.

"Perhaps with this insisting I shall get him to stop sending me on such errands again, seeing how badly I come back from them; or perhaps he will think, as I imagine, that some wicked enchanter of the ones he says wish him harm will have changed her shape so as to do him harm and injury."

With this thought Sancho Panza's spirit was calmed, and he counted his business well finished; and he stayed there until the afternoon, so as to give Don Quixote time to think he had taken it to go to El Toboso and back. And it all turned out so well for him that when he got up to mount the grey, he saw three country girls coming from El Toboso towards where he was, on three young asses — or she-asses, for the author does not state it, although it is more to be believed that they were she-asses, that being the usual mount of village women. But as not much depends on it, there is no need for us to stop and settle it.

In short: as soon as Sancho saw the country girls, he went off at a smart pace to look for his master Don Quixote, and found him sighing and making a thousand loving laments. As soon as Don Quixote saw him, he said:

"What is it, friend Sancho? Am I to mark this day with a white stone or a black one?"

"It will be better," answered Sancho, "for your worship to mark it with red ochre, like the notices on professors' chairs, so that people who see it may see it plainly."

"In that case," replied Don Quixote, "you bring good news."

"So good," answered Sancho, "that your worship has nothing more to do than to spur Rocinante and come out into the open to see the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, who with two other maidens of hers is coming to see your worship."

"Holy God! What is this you are saying, friend Sancho?" said Don Quixote. "Take care not to deceive me, and do not try with false joys to cheer my genuine sorrows."

"What should I get out of deceiving your worship," answered Sancho, "especially when you are so near discovering my truth? Spur on, sir, and come, and you will see our mistress the princess coming, dressed and adorned — in short, as befits who she is. Her maidens and she are all one blaze of gold, all clusters of pearls, all diamonds, all rubies, all cloth of brocade more than ten thicknesses deep; their hair loose over their shoulders, which are so many rays of the sun playing with the wind; and, above all, they come riding on three dappled canaanies, which are a thing to see."

"Hackneys you mean, Sancho."

"There is little difference," answered Sancho, "between canaanies and hackneys; but let them come on what they may, they come the most splendid ladies anybody could wish for — especially the princess Dulcinea, my lady, who stuns the senses."

"Let us go, Sancho my son," answered Don Quixote; "and as a reward for this news, as unexpected as it is good, I give you the best spoils I win in the first adventure I have. And if this does not satisfy you, I give you the foals my three mares are to give me this year, which as you know are out in the common meadow of our village waiting to foal."

"I shall stick to the foals," answered Sancho, "because it is not very certain that the spoils of the first adventure will be good ones."

By this time they came out of the wood and made out the three village women close by. Don Quixote ran his eyes all along the road to El Toboso, and as he saw nothing but the three country girls, he was thoroughly upset and asked Sancho whether he had left them outside the city.

"Outside the city?" he answered. "Has your worship got eyes in the back of your head, that you do not see that these women coming here are the ones, shining like the sun itself at midday?"

"I see nothing, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "but three country girls on three donkeys."

"Now God deliver me from the devil!" answered Sancho. "And is it possible that three hackneys — or whatever they are called — as white as driven snow should look like donkeys to your worship? By the living Lord, may they pull this beard off me if that were true!"

"Well, I tell you, friend Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that it is as true that they are donkeys, or she-donkeys, as that I am Don Quixote and you Sancho Panza — at least, they look so to me."

"Be quiet, sir," said Sancho; "do not say such a thing, but wipe those eyes of yours and come and pay your respects to the lady of your thoughts, who is coming close now."

And saying this, he went forward to receive the three village women; and getting down off the grey, he took the halter of one of the three country girls' donkeys, and, going down on both knees, said:

"Queen and princess and duchess of beauty, may your loftiness and greatness be pleased to receive into your favour and good graces your captive knight, who stands there turned to marble, thoroughly disturbed and pulseless at finding himself in your magnificent presence. I am Sancho Panza, his squire, and he is the much-harried knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, called by another name the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance."

By this time Don Quixote had gone down on his knees beside Sancho, and was looking with starting eyes and a troubled gaze at the woman Sancho was calling queen and lady. And as he could make out nothing in her but a village girl, and not one with a very good face — because she was round-faced and flat-nosed — he was taken aback and astonished, and did not dare to unstitch his lips.

The country women were likewise astonished at seeing those two men, so different from each other, kneeling down and not letting their companion go past. But the one who was being held up broke the silence, and, thoroughly graceless and cross, said:

"Get out of the way, bad luck to you, and let us pass; we are in a hurry."

To which Sancho answered:

"O princess and universal lady of El Toboso! How is it that your magnanimous heart is not softened at seeing kneeling before your exalted presence the pillar and support of knight-errantry?"

Hearing which, another of the two said:

"Whoa there, I'm currying you down, my father-in-law's donkey! Just look at these young gentlemen coming to make fun of village girls, as though we didn't know how to fling taunts as well as they do! Go your way, and let us go ours, and it will be healthier for you."

"Get up, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this point; "for I see now that Fortune, not satisfied with the harm she has done me, has taken possession of all the roads by which any contentment might come to this wretched soul I have in my flesh.

"And you, O highest worth that can be desired, limit of human gentility, sole remedy of this afflicted heart that adores you: now that the malignant enchanter persecutes me and has put clouds and cataracts on my eyes, and for them alone and for no others has changed and transformed your unequalled beauty and face into that of a poor country girl — if he has not also changed mine into that of some monster, so as to make it loathsome in your eyes — do not fail to look at me mildly and lovingly, seeing in this submission and kneeling that I make to your counterfeited beauty the humility with which my soul adores you."

"Take that, grandad!" answered the village girl. "I'm a fine one for listening to flatterations! Get out of the way and let us go, and we shall be grateful to you."

Sancho got out of the way and let her go, extremely pleased at having come well out of his entanglement.

The village girl who had played the part of Dulcinea had hardly found herself free when, spurring her canaany with a goad she carried on a stick, she set off at a run across the meadow. And as the she-ass felt the point of the goad, which hurt her more than usual, she began to buck, so that she brought the lady Dulcinea to the ground. Which Don Quixote seeing, he ran to lift her up, and Sancho to straighten and tighten the pack-saddle, which had also slipped under the donkey's belly.

The pack-saddle being settled, then, and Don Quixote wanting to lift his enchanted lady in his arms onto the she-ass, the lady got up off the ground and saved him the trouble; because, drawing back a little, she took a short run and, putting both hands on the she-ass's hindquarters, dropped her body, lighter than a falcon, onto the pack-saddle and sat astride like a man. And then Sancho said:

"By St Roque, our mistress is lighter than a hobby-hawk, and she could teach the most skilful Cordoban or Mexican rider how to mount short-stirruped! She cleared the back of the saddle in one jump, and without spurs she makes the hackney run like a zebra. And her maidens are not far behind her: they all run like the wind."

And it was the truth, because as soon as Dulcinea was on horseback they all whipped up after her and set off at a run, without turning their heads back for more than half a league. Don Quixote followed them with his eyes; and when he saw they were out of sight, he turned to Sancho and said:

"Sancho, what do you think — how much am I hated by enchanters? And see how far their malice goes and the grudge they have against me, since they have wanted to deprive me of the pleasure it would have given me to see my lady in her own being. In fact I was born to be an example of the unfortunate, and to be the target and the butt at which the arrows of bad fortune take aim and are levelled.

"And you must also note, Sancho, that these traitors were not content with having turned and transformed my Dulcinea, but they transformed and turned her into a shape as low and as ugly as that village girl's; and along with it they took from her what is so much a mark of great ladies, which is a good smell, since they go about always among ambergris and among flowers. Because I would have you know, Sancho, that when I came to help Dulcinea up onto her hackney — as you say it was, though it seemed a she-ass to me — she gave off a smell of raw garlic that turned my head and poisoned my soul."

"Oh, the rabble!" shouted Sancho at this. "Oh, you ill-starred and ill-meaning enchanters, and if only somebody could see the lot of you strung up by the gills like sardines on a string! You know a great deal, you can do a great deal and you do a great deal more.

"It should have been enough for you, you scoundrels, to have changed the pearls of my lady's eyes into cork-oak galls and her hair of the purest gold into the bristles of a red ox's tail, and, in short, all her features from good to bad, without touching her smell; for by that at least we might have made out what was hidden under that ugly rind — although, to tell the truth, I never saw her ugliness but her beauty, which was raised to a higher point and a higher carat by a mole she had over her right lip, in the manner of a moustache, with seven or eight fair hairs like threads of gold and more than a hand's breadth long."

"As for that mole," said Don Quixote, "considering the correspondence there is between the moles of the face and those of the body, Dulcinea must have another on the flat of the thigh on the side that corresponds to where she has the one on her face. But hairs of the size you have described are very long for moles."

"Well, I can tell your worship," answered Sancho, "that they looked as though they had been born there."

"I believe it, my friend," replied Don Quixote, "because nature put nothing in Dulcinea that was not perfect and well finished; and so, if she had a hundred moles like the one you speak of, in her they would not be moles but shining moons and stars. But tell me, Sancho: that thing that looked to me like a pack-saddle, which you were straightening — was it a plain saddle or a lady's saddle?"

"It was neither," answered Sancho, "but a short-stirruped saddle, with a field-covering worth half a kingdom, so rich is it."

"And that I should not have seen all that, Sancho!" said Don Quixote. "Now I say again, and I shall say it a thousand times, that I am the unluckiest of men."

That sly fellow Sancho had all he could do to hide his laughter, hearing the foolish things his master said, so delicately deceived. Finally, after many other things had passed between the two of them, they got back on their beasts and followed the road to Saragossa, where they expected to arrive in time to be present at some solemn festivals that are held every year in that distinguished city. But before they got there, things happened to them which, for being many, great and new, deserve to be written and read, as will be seen further on.
