Chapter 11: Of the Strange Adventure That Befell the Valorous Don Quixote with the Cart or Wagon of the Parliament of Death

Don Quixote went along the road extremely thoughtful, considering the wicked trick the enchanters had played on him in turning his lady Dulcinea into the bad shape of the village girl, and he could not imagine what remedy he could find for turning her back into her first being. And these thoughts carried him so far out of himself that without noticing it he let go of Rocinante's reins; who, feeling the freedom he was given, stopped at every step to graze the green grass those fields were full of. Sancho Panza brought him back from his trance, saying to him:

"Sir, sorrows were not made for beasts but for men; but if men feel them too much they turn into beasts. Let your worship pull yourself together and come to yourself, and take up Rocinante's reins, and liven up and wake up, and show that gallantry that it is proper for knights errant to have. What the devil is this? What kind of collapse is this? Are we here, or in France? May Satan carry off all the Dulcineas there are in the world, for the health of one single knight errant is worth more than all the enchantments and transformations on earth."

"Be quiet, Sancho," answered Don Quixote in a voice that was not very faint; "be quiet, I say, and do not speak blasphemies against that enchanted lady, for I alone am to blame for her misfortune and ill luck: her bad fortune has been born of the envy the wicked have for me."

"That is what I say," answered Sancho: "whoever saw her then and sees her now — what heart would not weep?"

"You may well say that, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "since you saw her in the whole entirety of her beauty; for the enchantment did not go so far as to disturb your sight or to hide her beauty from you: it is against me alone and against my eyes that the force of its poison is aimed.

"But for all that, Sancho, I have noticed one thing, which is that you described her beauty badly to me; because, if I remember rightly, you said she had eyes like pearls, and eyes that look like pearls belong more to a sea-bream than to a lady. And to my belief Dulcinea's must be of green emeralds, wide-set, with two heavenly arches serving them as eyebrows. And take those pearls away from her eyes and move them to her teeth; for you certainly got it the wrong way about, Sancho, taking the eyes for the teeth."

"It might all be so," answered Sancho, "because her beauty confused me as much as her ugliness did your worship. But let us commend it all to God, who is the knower of the things that are to happen in this valley of tears, in this wicked world of ours, where hardly anything is to be found that is without a mixture of wickedness, trickery and knavery.

"One thing grieves me, my dear sir, more than others, and that is thinking what plan is to be adopted when your worship defeats some giant or some other knight and orders him to go and present himself before the beauty of the lady Dulcinea: where is this poor giant, or this poor wretched defeated knight, to find her? I fancy I can see them going about El Toboso like a lot of dummies looking for my lady Dulcinea; and even if they meet her in the middle of the street they will know her no better than they know my father."

"Perhaps, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "the enchantment will not go so far as to take away the recognition of Dulcinea from the defeated giants and knights I send to present themselves. And with one or two of the first I defeat and send to her we shall make the experiment of whether they see her or not, ordering them to come back and give me an account of what has happened to them about it."

"I say, sir," replied Sancho, "that what your worship has said seems good to me, and that by this device we shall come to know what we want to know. And if it is the case that she is hidden from your worship alone, the misfortune will be your worship's rather than hers. But so long as the lady Dulcinea has health and contentment, we shall manage here and get through it as best we can, looking for our adventures and leaving time to do its own work; for time is the best doctor for these and for greater illnesses."

Don Quixote was about to answer Sancho Panza, but he was prevented by a cart that came out across the road, loaded with the most various and strange characters and figures that could be imagined. The man who was driving the mules and serving as carter was an ugly devil. The cart came uncovered to the open sky, without any awning or hurdle.

The first figure that offered itself to Don Quixote's eyes was that of Death herself, with a human face; next to her came an angel with great painted wings; on one side there was an emperor with a crown, apparently of gold, on his head; at Death's feet was the god they call Cupid, without a bandage over his eyes but with his bow, quiver and arrows. There came too a knight armed at all points, except that he wore no morion or close helmet but a hat full of feathers of various colours; and with these came other people in different dress and with different faces.

All of which, seen suddenly, somewhat startled Don Quixote and put fear into Sancho's heart. But Don Quixote was soon delighted, believing that some new and dangerous adventure was offering itself; and with this thought, and with a mind prepared to face any danger, he placed himself in front of the cart and said in a loud, threatening voice:

"Carter, coachman, or devil, or whatever you are, do not delay in telling me who you are, where you are going and who the people are you are carrying in your wagon, which looks more like Charon's boat than the carts that are in use."

To which the Devil answered mildly, stopping the cart:

"Sir, we are players of Angulo the Bad's company. This morning, which is the octave of Corpus Christi, we performed in a village behind that hill the mystery play of The Parliament of Death, and we are to perform it this afternoon in that village you can see from here. And as it is so close, and to save ourselves the trouble of undressing and dressing again, we are travelling in the very clothes we perform in.

"That lad goes as Death; the other as the Angel; that woman, who is the manager's wife, goes as the Queen; the other as the Soldier; that one as the Emperor; and I as the Devil, and I am one of the chief figures in the play, because in this company I take the leading parts. If your worship wants to know anything else about us, ask me and I shall be able to answer you with complete exactness; for, being a devil, I know everything."

"On the faith of a knight errant," answered Don Quixote, "as soon as I saw this cart I imagined that some great adventure was offering itself to me; and now I say that one must touch appearances with the hand to give room for undeceiving. Go with God, good people, and put on your festival; and see whether you have any commands in which I can be of use to you, for I shall carry them out with a good will and a good heart, because from a boy I was fond of the mask, and in my youth my eyes ran after the strolling players."

While they were in this talk, luck willed that one of the company should come up who was dressed as a mummer, with a great many little bells, and who carried on the end of a stick three inflated cow-bladders. This clown, coming up to Don Quixote, began to fence with the stick and to beat the ground with the bladders and to take great leaps, ringing his bells; whose ugly appearance so startled Rocinante that, without Don Quixote's being able to hold him in, he took the bit between his teeth and set off running across the field with more lightness than the bones of his skeleton had ever promised.

Sancho, who considered the danger his master was in of being thrown, jumped off the grey and hurried at full speed to help him; but when he got to him he was already on the ground, and beside him Rocinante, who had come down with his master — the usual end and finish of Rocinante's high spirits and his boldness.

But Sancho had hardly left his own mount to go to Don Quixote when the dancing devil with the bladders jumped onto the grey and thumped him with them; and the fear and the noise, more than the pain of the blows, made him fly across the country towards the village where they were going to hold the festival.

Sancho watched his grey's flight and his master's fall, and did not know which of the two needs to attend to first. But in fact, as a good squire and a good servant, love for his master weighed more with him than fondness for his donkey — although every time he saw the bladders rise in the air and come down on his grey's hindquarters they were agonies and mortal frights to him, and he would sooner have had those blows given him on the apples of his eyes than on the smallest hair of his ass's tail.

In this perplexed distress he came to where Don Quixote was, a great deal more knocked about than he would have liked; and helping him up onto Rocinante, he said to him:

"Sir, the Devil has carried off the grey."

"What devil?" asked Don Quixote.

"The one with the bladders," answered Sancho.

"Then I shall get him back," replied Don Quixote, "even if he shuts himself up with him in the deepest and darkest dungeons of hell. Follow me, Sancho, for the cart goes slowly, and with its mules I shall make good the loss of the grey."

"There is no need to take that trouble, sir," answered Sancho. "Let your worship cool your anger, for by the look of it the Devil has left the grey already and is coming back to his home ground."

And so it was; because the Devil had come down with the grey, in imitation of Don Quixote and Rocinante, and had gone off to the village on foot, while the donkey came back to his master.

"For all that," said Don Quixote, "it will be as well to punish that devil's rudeness on one of the people in the cart, even if it is the emperor himself."

"Let your worship get that out of your head," replied Sancho, "and take my advice, which is never to meddle with players, for they are a favoured sort of people. I have seen a player in prison for two murders and come out free and without costs. Let your worship know that as they are cheerful people who give pleasure, everybody favours them, everybody protects them, helps them and thinks well of them — and the more so if they belong to one of the royal or licensed companies, all or most of whom, in their dress and get-up, look like princes."

"For all that," answered Don Quixote, "that play-acting devil shall not get away boasting, even if the whole human race favours him."

And saying this he turned back to the cart, which by now was close to the village. He went along shouting:

"Stop, wait, you merry and rejoicing crowd; for I want to give you to understand how the donkeys and beasts that serve as mounts for the squires of knights errant are to be treated."

So loud were Don Quixote's shouts that the people in the cart heard and understood them; and judging by his words the intention of the man who was saying them, in an instant Death jumped down out of the cart, and after her the Emperor, the Devil-carter and the Angel — nor did the Queen or the god Cupid stay behind. And they all loaded themselves with stones and drew up in a line, waiting to receive Don Quixote on the points of their pebbles.

Don Quixote, seeing them drawn up in so gallant a squadron with their arms raised in the attitude of letting fly their stones with force, reined in Rocinante and set himself to think in what way he could attack them with least danger to his person. While he was pausing, Sancho came up; and seeing him in the posture of attacking that well-formed squadron, said to him:

"It would be plain madness to attempt such an enterprise. Consider, my dear sir, that against brook-soup and hold-your-hat there is no defensive armour in the world, unless it is to stuff yourself and shut yourself into a bronze bell.

"And it must also be considered that it is more rashness than courage for one man alone to attack an army where Death is, and where emperors fight in person, and which is helped by the good angels and the bad. And if this consideration does not move you to keep still, let it move you to know for certain that among all those people standing there, although they look like kings, princes and emperors, there is not one knight errant."

"Now indeed," said Don Quixote, "you have hit, Sancho, on the point that can and ought to change me from my settled intention. I neither can nor ought to draw my sword, as I have told you many other times, against anybody who is not a dubbed knight. It is for you, Sancho, if you want to take vengeance for the injury done to your grey; and I shall help you from here with shouts and salutary advice."

"There is no need, sir," answered Sancho, "to take vengeance on anybody, since it is not the part of good Christians to take it for injuries. What is more, I shall settle it with my ass to put his grievance in the hands of my will, which is to live peacefully the days heaven may give me of life."

"Since that is your decision," replied Don Quixote, "good Sancho, judicious Sancho, Christian Sancho and sincere Sancho, let us leave these phantoms and go back to looking for better and more distinguished adventures; for I see this country is of a sort where there cannot fail to be many, and very miraculous ones."

He turned his reins at once, Sancho went to get his grey, Death with her whole flying squadron went back to their cart and went on with their journey; and this was the happy end of the fearful adventure of the Cart of Death, thanks be given to the salutary advice Sancho Panza gave his master — to whom, the next day, another adventure happened with a lovesick knight errant, of no less suspense than the last.
